ANONYMOUS MARKET AND GROUP TIES
IN INTERNATIONAL TRADE

Alessandra Casella
James E. Rauch

Working Paper 6186

NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ANONYMOUS MARKET AND GROUP TIES
IN INTERNATIONAL TRADE

Alessandra Casella
James E. Rauch

Working Paper 6186
http://www.nber.org/papers/w6186

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02 13 8
September 1997

Our special thanks to Daron Acemoglu, Daniel Cohen, Harl Ryder, and Joel Sobel for their very
helpful suggestions. Casella thanks seminar participants at EUI in Florence, Paris, GREQAM in
Marseille, Brown, the NBER, Columbia, UCSD, and the CEPR. Financial support was provided by
NSF grant #SBR-9709237 to the National Bureau of Economic Research. This paper is part of
NBER’s research program in International Trade and Investment. Any opinions expressed are those
of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
0 1997 by Alessandra Casella and James E. Rauch. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including 0 notice, is given to the source.

Anonymous Market and Group Ties in
International Trade
Alessandra Casella and James E. Rauch
NBER Working Paper No. 6186
September 1997
JEL No. FlO
International Trade and Investment

ABSTRACT
When trade involves differentiated products, preferential ties to a group settled abroad
facilitate an exporter’s entry into the foreign market by providing information and access to
distribution channels. This contrasts with the difficulties experienced by an unattached producer
unfamiliar with the foreign environment. Inspired by the role of coethnic ties and business groups
in East Asia, we build a simple general equilibrium model of trade that formalizes this observation.
Output is generated through bilateral matching of agents spanning a spectrum of types. Domestic
matching is perfect--every trader knows the type of all others and can approach whomever he
chooses, but international matching is random--every trader lacks the information to choose his
partner’s type. However, group ties allow perfect matching abroad to a minority of individuals who
have access to them and can decide whether or not to exploit them. We show that in the absence of
ties the existence of informational barriers reduces the volume of trade. By increasing trade, group
ties are beneficial to the economy as a whole, but have significant distributional effects. On average,
group members benefit, but some may lose; non-members lose almost without exception, with the
largest losses concentrated among those with the poorest domestic market niches.

Alessandra Casella
Department of Economics
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
ac 186@columbia.edu

James E. Rauch
Department of Economics
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093
and NBER
jrauch@weber.ucsd.edu

I. Introduction
In this paper we develop a model of trade that reflects the difficulty of placing one’s
product in its correct international market niche. Access to a group that provides preferential
information about the foreign market facilitates this placement. In our set-up, a minority of
individuals is provided with the option of using this channel, reflecting for example the existence
of coethnic ties or membership in a business group. Using this simple framework, we analyze the
aggregate volume of trade without ties, the use of ties versus the anonymous market by group
members, the value of the ties to the overall economy and to the group, and the consequences of
the ties for non-members.
The economic boom in Southeast Asia has called attention to the role of coethnic ties in
international trade and investment (see, e.g., Redding 1995). Studies show that not only the
Overseas Chinese but also many other ethnic groups living outside their countries of origin create
formal or informal “societies” to which coethnic businesspeople from both the host countries and
the mother country have access. Kotkin (1992) states that “Chinese entrepreneurs remain, in
essence, arbitrageurs, their widespread dispersion a critical means of identifying prime business
opportunities” (p. 169) and “most of Hong Kong’s Indian businesses--from the tiny two-man
operation to the giant conglomerate--fit the classical mold, with extended families providing the
linkages between various national markets” (p. 219).’
The operation and economic importance of coethnic societies has been especially well
documented for the special case of trade between countries hosting recent immigrants and these

‘Rauch (1996) studies a formal society of English-speaking Caribbean-American businesspeople. Unfortunately, the
reasons why some ethnic groups form suceessll societies and others do not are still a mystery.

2
immigrants’ countries of origin. Gould (1994) finds that immigration to the United States
increases U. S. bilateral trade with the immigrants’ countries of origin and that this “immigrantlink effect” is stronger for U. S. exports than for U.S. imports, indicating that the effect works
primarily through the establishment of business contacts rather than through increased U. S.
preferences for goods produced in the country of origin. Chin, Yoon , and Smith (1996, p. 498)
give an example of how these business contacts worked to promote Korean wig exports to the
United States:2
Korean wig importers’ contribution to the Korean wig import business was far
greater than their numbers. From these immigrant wig importers, South Korea
wig manufacturers could obtain information on new styles and market trends.
Since they were not able to develop new styles of their own (prominent U.S. hair
designers continuously developed innovative styles), South Korean wig
manufacturers had to depend entirely on Korean immigrant wig importers for
information on trends in U.S. wig fashion.
As a second example of the type of mechanisms we have in mind, consider the role played
in international transactions by business groups. Business groups are “sets of firms that are
integrated neither completely nor barely at all” (Granovetter 1994, p. 453, and where the lineages
of the members can often be traced back to a founding family or small number of allied families.
Typical mechanisms serving to integrate the firms include mutual stockholdings and frequent
meetings of top executives. 3 Recent research (see, e.g., Dobson and Chia 1997) has found that
business groups that have expanded outside their mother countries play a role similar to coethnic
ties in facilitating international transactions. Member firms operating abroad have been found to

2Wigs were one of the major items in Korea’s initial drive to break into world markets for manufactures in the 1960s and
early 1970s. They were her third largest export item in 1970, accounting for 11.2 percent of total exports.
business groups are common throughout Asia, continental Europe, and Latin America, but are rare to non-existent in
Great Britain and the United States.

3
preferentially trade intermediate goods (in particular) with domestic group members. The best
documented cases are of Japanese keiretm operating in the United States and in Southeast Asia.
Although in this paper we draw inspiration from these two examples, we think they should
be seen as only the most empirically visible representatives of a much longer list of preferential
networks.
The empirical success of the East Asian coethnic societies and business groups highlights
the shortcoming of the assumption of perfect information embedded in the standard approach to
trade in differentiated products (e.g., Helpman and Krugman 1985). It is reasonable to imagine
that within a country buyers are informed at nominal cost of all available varieties and their
characteristics, and sellers are well aware of how to reach the buyers that form their particular
market niches. We argue that these presumptions are much less plausible for the international
market, where buying agents for consumer goods distributors and firms seeking inputs to
production processes incur considerable costs in discovering the foreign varieties available and
their characteristics, as well as the capabilities of the suppliers of these varieties, and sellers incur
considerable costs in finding buying agents or intermediate goods demanders that are good
matches for the variety they have to offer. As Swedish Trade Council export consultant Kent
Goldmann (quoted in Nothdurft 1992, p. 32) stated of his clients that are marginal or failed
exporters, “Sometimes their product isn’t right for the market, or the country they chose was not a
good fit, or their approach or agents are not right.” Preferential group ties operating across
markets are effective exactly because they overcome these information problems.
The adverse consequences of ignoring informational barriers become clear in the standard
model’s prediction that in any differentiated product sector a country exports a share of its output

4

equal to the rest of the world’s share of world spending. The usual remedy for this empirically
false prediction is to assume “home preference” on the part of domestic consumers (see, e.g.,
Harrigan 1994). However, it does not make sense to suppose that domestic consumers prefer
products made at home unless home products were produced with domestic consumers in mind.
Yet in the standard model firms treat all of the world’s consumers symmetrically when choosing
which varieties to produce. There is no reason for Austrian firms, say, to tailor their products to
the small Austrian market rather than the large German market.
In our opinion, the fact that this supposition nevertheless seems natural reflects the basic
difference in information availability in the domestic market compared to the international market.
In trying to formalize this intuition, we must first address the question of what a model of
international trade in differentiated products with imperfect information should look like. We
conceive of trade as a process of matching among distributors and producers, with consumers
strictly in the background. A successful match is interpreted as a joint venture between two
distributors, two producers, or one distributor and one producer.4 We then assume that an actor
matching in the domestic market has complete information about others’ types, and can approach
whichever partner he chooses. When matching in the international market, on the other hand, a
trader is unable to verify ex ante how suitable his partner is, and matching is random.5 The group
4We believe this to be a more accurate description of the nature of trade in differentiated products. On the basis of their
interviews with mid-level and senior managers responsible for international sourcing and investment decisions, Egan
and Mody (1992, p. 325) state that, “Most U.S. buyers [of manufactures] interviewed for this study preferred long-term,
stable and direct relationships with both developed and developing country suppliers.”
‘In this respect we have maintained continuity with more traditional models of international trade: Jones (1995) argues
that international trade is the study of economies where some markets are integrated and others are not. This assumption
may nevertheless seem extreme, and especially inappropriate for large, regionally diverse countries. We feel, however,
that it is a justifiable stylization given results such as those of McCallum (1995, p. 6 16), who found that, controlling for
distance and GDP, “trade between two [Canadian] provinces is more than 20 times larger than trade between a province
and a P.S.] state.”

is able to extend to the international market the benefit of complete information that for
non-members prevails only in domestic transactions.
Choosing this modelling strategy has two important advantages. First, it leads us naturally
to investigate economy-wide implications. Thus our approach is different but complementary to
the study of transmission of information within the group, a question whose focus is primarily
microeconomic Taking complete information within the group as our point of departure, we can
go further in studying the general equilibrium effects stemming from the interaction of the group
and the anonymous market. Since the existence and functioning of the ties we have described is
very well documented empirically, we see our attention to aggregate and measurable economic
variables as a step forward.
Second, by applying our analysis to groups whose membership is effectively inherited
rather than actively pursued, we side-step the question of when and how the provision of
information can be organized by market forces. This is an important issue: consultants that help
firms to enter a foreign market are becoming increasingly common.’ We hope to address this
question in future research. For now, a simpler approach that takes the group as given is faithful
to important empirical examples and in our view yields high returns.
In sections II-V below we develop and solve a simple, tractable matching model that
embodies the difference in information availability between the domestic and international
markets. We obtain the expected results that the volume of international trade is reduced by the

%otice that the canonical assumption in this literature is that the information transmittfA concerns past actions (see, e.g.,
Kandori 1992).
7See Miller (1997) for a story of how a former Chase Manhattan executive parlayed his experience in the bank’s Hong
Kong-based mergers and acquisitions department into such a consultant group.

6
informational barriers and that an information-sharing group is valuable for the economy as a
whole--in fact its value can be computed in a straightforward fashion. More surprising are the
distributional implications generated by the model. In particular, some group members choose
not to use their ties, and their decision to enter the anonymous market instead always reduces per
capita income of non-members, with the largest losses concentrated among those with the poorest
domestic market alternatives. We derive these results and give intuition for them in sections VVI. In section VII we examine what happens if non-members can distinguish in advance of
matching those traders who have access to the group, and we show how our model can be applied
to the trade effects of migration. Suggestions for further research are presented in section VIII.

II. The model
The world is composed of two countries, each formed by a continuum of types, uniformly
distributed along a line that extends from -1 to 1. The distance between two types on the line is a
measure of their diversity and an index of the gains from trade that matching of those two types
would generate.
Output is indeed generated through bilateral matching. When an individual chooses to
match domestically, he has complete information about all other domestic types, and can approach
whomever he chooses. The total output from the match, to be divided between the two partners,
is given by zP the Euclidean distance between them. With complete information, before matches
are concluded traders compete for the most desirable partners, and in equilibrium this determines
the share of output that in each match goes to each partner.
International matches can be more productive: total output is given by hzii, where h is a

7
parameter larger than 1 capturing sources of gains From trade that are outside our model
(comparative advantage, spreading out of fixed costs, or exchange of technical information). For
simplicity, we assume h E (1,2]. However, individuals are less adept at finding the correct
distribution channel for their product in the foreign market, and face higher uncertainty than they
do at home. To capture this lack of information, we assume that matching among international
traders is random: when matching abroad, a trader cannot recognize ex ante the identity of his
partner but has an equal probability of matching with any type.
In addition to larger uncertainty in the marketing of the product, traders entering a foreign
market may also face uncertainty as to the strength of demand for the good they are offering. I f
the foreign country is similar to their domestic country, then they may safely assume that the
market niche abroad will be similar to the one to which they have access at home. But if the two
countries are substantially different, this second source of uncertainty adds itself to the difficulty
of finding the right distribution channel. Pakistani machine-made rugs do not have a large market
in Pakistan, where the middle class is small, the masses are too poor to buy them, and the upper
class considers them in bad taste; but they sell extremely well in the United States, where the
middle class is large and both less able and less inclined to distinguish machine-made from
hand-made rugs. On the other hand, Egyptian candy-coated chickpeas are one of the most
popular snack foods in Egypt, but have barely penetrated the U.S. market. Absent trade barriers,
we could expect Pakistani machine-made rugs to fare poorly in Iran and Egyptian candy-coated
chickpeas to sell well in the rest of the Arab world.
We can model trade between similar countries by assuming that while matching abroad is
random, each trader maintains his location on the line. We call this the fixed location case. If the

S
countries are dissimilar, on the other hand, we assume not only an equal probability of matching
with any foreign trader, but also an equal probability of occupying any position on the line when
engaging in foreign trade.’ An agent learns his type abroad only after having entered the
international market. We call this the random location case.
Traders can return at no cost to the domestic market if their international match is
unsatisfactory. Thus an international partnership is accepted only if it yields a higher total return
than the sum of what the two partners are sure to obtain in their domestic markets. With the lack
of information preventing bidding for desirable partners, the net gains from trade are then
assumed to be shared equally. In other words, we assume that the total return from international
transactions is divided between the two partners according to the Nash bargaining solution where
each trader uses his domestic return as threat point.’
We complete the model by introducing the role of group ties. Suppose that in each
country a minority of types of mass M belongs to a specific group. This minority is distributed
uniformly along the whole support of the line. To capture the information advantage provided by
group ties, we assume that when a minority agent chooses to match internationally within the
group, he has complete information about the location of all other types in the group, and can
approach and bid for whomever he chooses.” As before, the total output from this transaction is

hz, but now, in the presence of complete information, the share that each partner receives is

‘These assumptions can be seen as the extremes of a continuum in which traders’ international market locations range
corn perfectly correlated to uncorrelated with their domestic market locations.
‘Once matching has occurred, individuals’ types are revealed: each agent “opens the other’s books”. In the case of
random location abroad the partners’ types in their own domestic markets are also learned upon matching.
“It has been stated of the overseas Chinese in Asia (Ziesemer 1996, p. 29), “Every key individual among them knows
every other key figure.”

9
determined in equilibrium by competing offers for desirable partners. Alternatively, each member
of the minority group can choose to forgo use of his ties and enter the anonymous international
market where matching is random. The choice, however, must be made ex ante. In the fixed
location case, a minority trader knows both his own type abroad and that of every minority
member settled in the foreign country, but he must choose whether or not to use the ties before
knowing the identity of his potential partner in the anonymous international market. In the
random location case, the choice must be made before any type abroad is revealed. If trading
through the group, all types within it will be revealed upon entering. In all cases, a trader always
has the option of renouncing the international partnership, and returning home.
We assume that the minority is distributed uniformly because we want to concentrate on
the informational advantage provided by the group, and thus we want no difference in the
distribution of types. An implication of this assumption is that our results would be unaffected if
group members offered free “access” to domestic markets to their foreign counterparts, provided
that when indifferent a group member chooses to match with someone he knows rather than with
someone who knows someone he knows.
Our model can be read as an assignment problem: different traders must match, and they
are not all equally well-suited to one another. The equilibrium in the domestic market and
among group members abroad is equivalent to the complete information solution in assignment
models. The equilibrium in the anonymous international market then corresponds to the
incomplete information solution without resampling. In this latter case, the canonical assumption
in the literature is that all types face the same probability distribution of total match returns,
because each individual is identical ex ante (see for example the discussion in Mortensen, 1988).

10
In our model, this is equivalent to assuming that each individual trading abroad has the same
probability of occupying any location on the line, or that countries’ preferences are dissimilar--the
random location case. The alternative assumption is that different types face different
distributions of match returns. This more complex scenario that maintains ex ante heterogeneity
is equivalent to the fixed location case, where preferences are similar across countries and each
type preserves his location on the line when trading abroad. Some of our results will come from
the contrast between these two modeling strategies.

Ill. A preliminary remark
Individual returns from matching domestically provide the reference point against which
returns in the international market are evaluated. Thus we need to begin our analysis by
characterizing the equilibrium of the complete information game, where traders bid competitively
for desirable partners. The following proposition, established in a generic setting and proved in
the Appendix, gives us the answer.

Proposition 1. Consider a continuum of types distributed on a line. Call \\zJ type i ‘s distance
from the median and qj the Euclidean distance between types i andj. If the matching of i andj
results in total return qj, and each type isfiee to choose and bidfor his matching partner, then
in equilibrium fYPe i ‘s return r(i) will equal IlzJ.
The proposition establishes that individual returns in equilibrium are determined uniquely
for any distribution of types, as long as the support of the distribution is not discontinuous around
the median (i.e., as long as there exists a unique median). Although the total return from a match
depends on the distance between the two partners, competition for the most desirable types has
the final effect of equalizing for each individual the payoff from all equilibrium matches: all

11
extra-returns are competed away. Notice that the proposition cannot predict which matches will
take place, but only that all matches must be between two types on opposite sides of the median
(generating total returns equal to (jz,ll +Uzjll)). Because individual returns are determined
uniquely, the indeterminacy of the matches is irrelevant.
The result is consistent with the properties of the general assignment problem. As is well
known, with complete information competitive bidding for partners yields efficient pairing, and
efficient pairing requires assortative matching (higher types with higher types) if each type’s
marginal contribution to total match output is increasing in the partner’s type (and vice-versa in
the opposite case).” In our case, each type’s marginal contribution to total output is independent
of the partner’s type, as long as the two partners are on opposite sides of the median. Thus, not
surprisingly, any match between two types on opposite sides of the median is efficient (and total
output is invariant to the specific matches).
A general feature of the assignment problem is that efficient pairing pins down relative
returns for different types within each group, but usually an external “anchor” is required to
determine relative returns between the two groups (firms and workers, for example, or males and
females). The external anchor is given by some measure of reservation utility. In our case,
however, because matching is not between two predetermined groups, the median of the
distribution provides the anchor. Because a priori any type can always match with the median, it
is not possible for all types on one side of the median to earn extra returns over all types on the
opposite side. Thus, as long as the support of the distribution of types is continuous around the

“See, for example, Becker (1973), Mortensen (1988), and Sattinger (1993). For a recent analysis, see Legros and
Newman (1997).

12
median, the multiple equilibria problem that usually plagues the determination of individual returns
disappears. When the support is not continuous around the median, the indeterminacy surfaces
again. A simple way of thinking about this case is noticing that any point in the “gap” of the
support can be identified as a median; thus 11~~11 in the Proposition is not unique, but each
equilibrium corresponds to a different median, and the measure of the “gap” in the support
corresponds to the measure of the set of possible equilibria. However, for any point identified as
the median, all equilibrium returns are determined uniquely, and we obtain a standard result in the
literature on matching first proved by Gale and Shapley (1962): all individuals on a given side of
the market agree on the welfare ranking of the different equilibria, and what is best for one side is
worst for the other.
For our purposes, a strong but plausible requirement of symmetry is sufficient to rule out
this source of indeterminacy. This is particularly important because Proposition 1 then guarantees
that returns are determined uniquely for any distribution of types. Because expected returns in the
domestic markets are the threat points used in bargaining in international transactions,
expectations over these returns determine the distribution of types that choose to return home.
Insuring the domestic returns are invariant to the distribution of returning types thus greatly
simplifies the problem. We show in the Appendix that Proposition 1 allows us to establish the
following:

Corollary 1. In any equilibrium in which the distribution of types in the markets is symmetrical
around zero, if any domestic trade takes place type i ‘s return in the domestic market must equal
IzJ, his distance@om zero.
From now on, we concentrate on equilibria where the distribution of types in the markets
is symmetrical around zero, and therefore we have lIzill = IzJ. Because in equilibrium lzil represents

13
type i’s profitability in domestic trade, the arbitrary types space over which a distribution is
assumed has immediate empirical counterpart in the different types’ opportunities in the domestic
market.
Finally, notice that as these preliminary results make clear, matching with complete
information does not guarantee high returns. Your perfect match may be a very small market
niche.

IV. Trade without group ties

A. Equilibrium
To evaluate the impact of group ties, we must first derive the expected values of individual
returns and of aggregate economic variables in their absence.
Define the expected volume of trade E(T) as the expected mass of successful international
matches for each country:

(1)
wherep(i) is the probability that trader i concludes a successful match abroad. The match is
successful if its total return is higher than the sum of the returns that the two partners can obtain
domestically. l2
In the fixed location case, if zi is positive (the opposite case is just the mirror image), agent

i’s return from matching with agent j is [h((z,- 31) - (zi + ]zi()]/2 + zi. A successful match
between types i and j requires:

12With a continuum of types, we can consider the probability of success for each trader as independent of other traders’
matches.

14
h( IZi - Zjl) 2 zi + 1 zj 1

W-0

or, since h is larger than 1:
Zj E [-l,[(h-l)/(h+ l)]zJ

ifz, 2 (h-l)/(h+ 1)

Zjg [-l,C(h-l)/(h+ 1)lzJ U [[(h+ l)/(h-l)lz~~ll

ifz, E [O,(h-l)/(h+l)].

W)

Recalling that the distribution of types is uniform, if we define S(i) (illustrated in Figure 1)
as the set of successful partners of i, then:

p(i) = probe E S(Q =

I

1 + [(h-l)/(h+l)]zi
l- 2h :

if zi ;r ( h - l ) / ( h + l )
Pa)
i f zi E [O,(h-l)/(h+l)].

h2-1 ’

The probability of concluding a successful match in the international market is not the
same for everyone: it is exactly 1 at zi = 0, reaches a minimum at zi = (h-l)/(h+ 1) and then rises
again to 2h/[2(h+ l)] at zi = 1. It embodies two different factors: the desirability of any given
type, according to his position on the line; and the bargaining power that each type has and that
therefore reduces the net return for his partner. For example, zi = 0 is not a very desirable
partner, but he is always an acceptable one because he lays no claims on the partnership’s return
prior to the equal partition of net gains.13
In the random location case, denote agent i’s location in the international market by yi,
while his original location in the domestic market is denoted by zj. His return from matching with
agent j is [h(ki - y# - ( Izi] + ]zJ)]/2 + /zil. Suppose yi > yj (again, the opposite case is just the
mirror image). This match is successful if

‘3Notice that although 2, = 0 never returns to the domestic market, some individuals in his immediate neighborhood
always do.

15
W
or:

uj E [-I, Yi - (l’il + I3l)/hl.

WI

An agent’s location in the international market will now be either more or less favorable
than his location in the domestic market. As we see from (2b), this implies that gains Corn trade
are possible even when h = 1, so that matching internationally is no more productive than
matching domestically. As in the case of the Pakistani rug makers, it may simply occur that a
trader’s market niche abroad is more favorable than at home.
Exploiting symmetry, the probability of a successful match in the random location case is:

p(i) = probe E S(f)) = jprobfii - u,l > (\zJ + zj))/hJhj
0

(W

whereI

prob[lv, -

Y)

’ (IZiI + Z,)/hl =

(l/2)

j Lv, - (lzjl + zj)/h + l]&.

(lzJ +z,)/h - 1

Again exploiting uniformity, we have:

p(i) = probQ E S(i)) = [l -6h+ 12h2+(3 - 12h)lzJ +3zf]/12h2

W)

As expected, p(i) is now declining monotonically in lzil, the original location in the
domestic market. With random location and random matching in the international market, net
expected returns abroad must differ among traders only because their opportunities at home
differ: the more profitable is domestic trade, the higher the probability that an individual may

‘kote that successfkl matches are only possible for y, E [ (lz,l + z,)/h - 1, I].

16
reject the international match.” (In the remainder of the paper, we will maintain the convention
of numbering equations as a or b depending on whether they refer to the fixed location or the
random location case.)
Substituting (3a) or (3 b’) in (1) and solving the integral, we obtain the expected volume of
trade:

E(T) = $
+

WI

E(T) = 2(1 - ; + 2).
24h 2

w

Over the interval h E (1,2], for example, the expected share of international matches that are
concluded successfully (i.e., E(T)/2) increases monotonically from 0.5 to 0.667, in the fixed
location case, and from 0.292 to 0.573 in the case of random location.
If we define the expected value of trade E(vT) in each country as the value accruing to its
citizens as result of their international transactions, then:

14 -E(1~~A~i EWOP

w

EO = (1/2)1-:p~){[hE(IYi-Y,I) + IZiI -EClZjIJlI j 6 VVW

PJ)

E(yT) = (1/2)1-:p~~([hE(lzi-Z,V +

in the two alternative specifications. Using (2a’) and (3a) (or (Zb’) and (3b’)) and solving the
integral, we obtain:

E-J/T) = 2h2(2+h)
3(1 +hj2

(w

Ev) = 2(h-7+1).

wo

3 24h 8h2

“In both the fixed and random location cases, p(i) is increasing in h, as expected.

17
Finally, we can calculate expected GDP in each country as the total value of all
transactions concluded by its citizens. This will differ from (6) because it will include the
domestic exchanges concluded by traders whose international matches have proven less
productive than their opportunities at home. For each individual i, total expected return equals:

Erfi. = (pO/2)([hECIz~-zjI) + IZiI -UIz$lI j E VV) + (1 -PO>IZiI

(w

Erfi) = (p(i)/2){[hEC\y~-y~I) + IZiI -JVIZ~I,JII i E W!J) + (1 -PO)IZ~I.

(W

Because the probability of matching with any partner is the same for all types, expected returns
must be increasing in jzj, the domestic fall-back option.
We define expected GDP (E(GDP)) as:

(8)

E(GDP) = [-:Er(i)di.
With the appropriate substitutions:

E(GDp) = 2(h3-1)
3(h2-1)

E(GDP) = $ + & - 1.
8h2

(94

(w

The ratio of expected trade to expected GDP is given by E(JT)/E(GDP). Over the
interval h E (1,2], this ratio increases from 0.5 to 0.762, in the fixed location case, and from 0.296
to 0.693 in the case of random location. In our model, both the expected volume of international
transactions and the ratio of the value of trade to GDP are higher in the case of countries with
similar preferences, i.e., in the fixed location case, because the probability of a successful match
abroad is higher (with the exception of types in the immediate neighborhood of lzil =

(h-l)/W+l)).

18

B. Discussion
We wish to highlight several features of the equilibrium of our model without group ties
that do not characterize equilibria in the standard model of trade in differentiated products (e.g.,
Helpman and Krugman 1985).
Informational barriers to trade. Consider the fixed location case. If agents were able to
match with complete information in the foreign as well as the home market, in the symmetrical
equilibrium the return to each agent will equal hjzil (see Corollary 2 below). Since international
matching is more productive than domestic matching (h > l), all international matches would be
successtil, and the ratio of expected trade to expected GDP would always be one. It follows that
in the fixed location case with h > 1 we can attribute the result that E(VT) is strictly less than

E(GDP) to the effects of random matching alone: the value of trade in our model is reduced by
informational barriers.
Home ureference.

In the random location case an agent who matches with complete

information in the international market may nevertheless do less well than matching domestically.
Specifically, these international matches fail if hjyjl < jzi]. We can interpret the domestic
matching that results as a pure “home preference” effect since it occurs only because one is
matching (trading) with a dissimilar country. We can thus think of E(GDP) - E(VT) > 0 in the
random location case as resulting from a combination of random matching and home preference
effects.
Anent heterogeneity. We have seen that agents differ in the probabilities with which they
match successfUlly abroad. In the fixed location case, although the probability of a success&l
international match is non-monotonic in the profitability jzil of an agent’s domestic market niche,

19
it is nevertheless the case that agents with the most favorable domestic market niches contribute
disproportionately both to the volume of trade E(T) and to its value E(YT).‘6 This result
exemplifies Linder’s (1961, p. 88) statement, “International trade is really nothing but an
extension across national frontiers of a country’s own web of economic activity.” In contrast, in
the random location case the probability of a successful international match declines
monotonically with lzil, so that agents with the Zeus~ favorable domestic market niches participate
disproportionately in the volume of international trade E(T). Linder’s insight no longer holds.
The greater participation of the low /zJ agents, however, does not carry over entirely to their
share of the value of trade because of their weak bargaining power: the lower half of agents only
accounts for about half of Em). l7
The ratio of trade to GDP with countries of uneaual size. In the standard model of trade
in differentiated products, the ratio of trade to GDP for a country approaches one as its trading
partner grows large. This is unfortunate because it prevents the use of the “small country”
assumption that has proved so useful in traditional trade theory, and because it is empirically
inaccurate.” Since our work is partially motivated by overpredictions of the volume of trade by

‘% the fixed location case, the share of E(YT) accounted for by agents located between ] l/21 and 111 goes from 75 to 68
per cent as h increases Corn 1 to 2.
171n the random location case the share of E(W) accounted for by agents located between 0 and II/21 declines
monotonically from 57 to 48 percent as h increases from 1 to 2. An alternative way to think about agents’ heterogeneity
is to ask what would happen in the presence of a fixed cost to enter the international market. In the fixed location case,
as the cost of going abroad increases the first types to choose to trade exclusively in the domestic market are those in the
neighborhood of (h-l)/(h+l); the types who still expect to gain from going abroad are those concentrated around zero
and those at the high end of the distribution. In the case of random location, types near 111 are the first to drop out of the
international market.
“The ratio of trade to GDP approaches one because the number of varieties of diierentiated product made by the
trading partner grows large relative to the number produced domestically, causing the ratio of imports to domestic
consumption to approach one given the symmetric treatment of home and foreign consumers mentioned in the
Introduction. Documenting this inaccuracy is not as straightforward as one would wish. Typically one cannot observe

20
the standard model, it is useful to see how our model behaves in the “small country” setting.
Let us suppose that for every domestic agent there are N corresponding foreign agents
(we have fixed Nat one until now). Since all agents attempt to match in the international market
and rationing will be random with respect to location on the line, any foreign agent matches with a
domestic agent with probability l/N. Denoting the large foreign country with an asterisk, it
follows that ET-*(~) = (l/N)Erdj) + [(N-l)/Njlzjj, where En’j) is given by equation (7a) or (7b)
for the fixed or random location cases, respectively. Integrating yields E(GDP*) = E(GDP) +
N-l, where E(GDP) is given by equation (9a) or (9b). Note that E(GDP*) reduces to E(GDP)
for N = 1. Since E(KP) = E(VT), where E(VT) is given by equation (6a) or (6b), the ratio of
trade to GDP for the large country E(yT*)/E(GDP*) = E(yT)/[E(GDP) + N-l], which declines
monotonically with country size and approaches zero as N grows large. Thus as the foreign
country comes to approximate the “rest of the world” it becomes a closed economy. In contrast,
the openness of the smaller (home) country does not change.

V. Trade with group ties
What are traders’ returns in equilibrium, when matching within the group? There are two
reasons why Proposition 1 does not apply automatically to the new problem. First, contrary to
consumption of tradeables directly but must instead compute “apparent consumption”, defined as production plus
imports minus exports. This computation in turn runs into difficulties because trade data are categorized differently than
production data. The Compatible Trade and Production Database (see Berthet-Bondet et al., 1988, for a description)
converts 1970- 1985 trade data for 22 OECD countries to an International Standard Industrial Classification basis for
manufacturing industries. In 1985,14 of these countries had manufacturing production equal to less than two percent of
the OECD total. 10 of these countries were parties to major multilateral trading agreements that should have made them
quite open to international trade. Their ratios of manufacturing imports to apparent consumption were: Austria 0.36,
Belgium-Luxembourg 0.99, Denmark 0.52, Finland 0.28, Greece 0.30, Ireland 0.7 1, Netherlands 0.75, Norway 0.46,
Portugal 0.32, and Sweden 0.41. Only Belgium-Luxembourg appears close to cotiormance with the predictions of the
standard model, but it also shows ratios in excess of 100 percent for 10 of the 28 3 digit industries for which these ratios
are reported, casting some doubt on the reliability of the results for this country.

21
the case of domestic transactions, traders matching within the group now have an outside option
(they can return home if unsatisfied with the deal they are able to conclude abroad). Second,
international trade must take place between citizens of the two countries. Thus the set of agents
is divided into two subsets whose members are restricted to trading with each other. As we
discussed in Section 3, this is the origin of a standard indeterminacy in the solution to the
assignment problem.
Nevertheless, we show in the Appendix that restricting our focus to symmetrical equilibria
is sufficient to yield an intuitive generalization of Corollary 1. We can establish:

Corollary 2. An equilibrium is JymmetricaI if the distribution of ypes in the markets is
symmetrical around zero, and identical types in the two countries make the same decision with
respect to participation in the group. In the symmetrical equilibrium, if any trade takes place in
the group, the equilibrium return in the group for a trader at location yi must equal hjy&
We can now investigate which members of the minority group will exploit their ties.
Imagine an equilibrium where all members choose to use the ties. This reduces the density of
potential partners in any given interval for any trader entering the anonymous international
market. However, because the distribution of minority agents is uniform, the probability of a
partner belonging to the “successful” interval is unchanged, and because the mass of traders
entering the market is reduced by an equal proportion in both countries, the matching is
unchanged. Thus, if all members use the group, expected returns for non-members continue to be
defined by (7) and the probabilities of success by (3). By Corollary 2, returns to members are
given by hlzj in the fixed location case, and hlY,l in the random location case. In this latter case,
the group trade may fail because returns at home may be higher,
These observations alone are enough to suggest where the problem may lie. In the fixed

22
location case, consider zi = 0. The complete information existing within the group reveals his low
productivity and insures a zero return; in the anonymous market, on the other hand, his lack of
bargaining power makes him an acceptable partner, and he benefits from the higher gains
associated with international trade. l9 He will always prefer the market. In the random location
case, consider zi = 1. With probability 1, he will have a worse location abroad than he does at
home. If h is low, his return in the group is unlikely to dominate his domestic return; in the
anonymous market, however, he benefits from his high bargaining power and the chances to do
better than at home may well be higher, Thus he may prefer the market. In other words we
expect that there will be self-selection in the use of the group ties, and that the types preferring the
market will be different in the two cases of fixed and random location, their identities determined
by the interplay between the gains from trade, as summarized by h, and their bargaining power.
The following proposition makes this intuition precise:

Proposition 2. In both the fixed and random location cases the symmetrical equilibrium with
group ties is unique:
(i) In theJixed location case, there exists a positive number a(h,m) such that all members in
[O,la(h,m)]] prefer the market, andall members in (la(h,m)[,l] prefer the ties.
(ii) In the random location case, there exists a value h > 1 such that for all h 2 h all
members participate in the group, while for all h -C 6 there exists a positive number Q(h,m) such
that all members in [O,@(h,m)j] prefer the ties, and all members in (Ip(h,m)j, l] prefer the
market.
The proposition is proved in the Appendix. When countries are similar, the complete
information existing within the group leads producers with relatively unprofitable market niches to
attempt the anonymous market. But when the foreign market is different from the domestic one,

‘kquation (7a) implies Et-(o) = (h-1)/4.

23
if international trade is sufficiently productive the information provided by the ties is of sufficient
value to all agents that all of them choose to exploit it. Otherwise it is the types with higher
expected returns at home who prefer the market, because the market and not the group will
acknowledge and reward their privileged standing at home. Notice that this occurs although both
the market and the group allow a trader to return to his domestic option if he so desires.
The formal derivation of the interval of minority traders foregoing the group is somewhat
involved because, in the market, the density of potential partners is no longer uniform over the
entire support, but is higher in the intervals that include minority traders. If we let C = (2 - the
total length of these intervals), i.e., C = 2( 1 -a) in the fixed location case, and 2p if location is
random, it is not difficult to verify that:

v-s
2 - (m/2)C
prob(zj E [s,vl, =
(v-s)(2 -m)
I [2 - (m/WI2

in the high density intervals

(10)
in the low density intervals.

It follows from Corollary 2 that in the symmetrical equilibrium returns in the group are
determined uniquely. Thus the two variables a and p must satisfy:

E?‘(a) = h(al

Wa)

E?@j = h/2 + p*/(2h),

Wb)

where the superscript Mindicates that expected market returns must be calculated taking into
account the existence and composition of the subset of minority traders that avoids the market.
The right-hand side of (11) is the expected return from using the ties. In (1 lb), this equals h times
the expected location if successful plus the fall-back domestic return if unsuccessful. Expected
returns in the anonymous market can be obtained from equations (7a) and (7b), but with

24
probabilities and expected values now reflecting the different densities, as described in (lo).*’ The
comparative statics properties of a and p are summarized by the following Proposition:

Proposition 3. An increase in the profitability of trade leads to a decline in the share of
members who rely on the ties in the fixed location case, but to an increase in case of random
location (and h < G). An increase in the percentage of the population belonging to the minority
group always lea& to an increase in the percentage of members relying on the ties (unless all of
them already do so). I.e. :
da/dh > 0,

da/dm < 0

v'hc WI,
h E (1,T;)
h E [T;,2].

In the fixed location case, an increase in h increases market returns through two channels.
For any given partnership, it increases the return from the match; but in addition, a higher h also
increases the ex ante probability of a successi% partnership, and particularly so for those types
close enough to zero to have potentially successI partners on their two sides. The effect of
higher h on returns within the group, on the other hand, is linear in zi. Thus we expect the relative
attractiveness of the market to increase for low types, and decrease for high ones. Proposition 3
states that a, the marginal type indifferent between market and group, is always low enough to fall
in the first set. In the representative case m = 0.4 (i.e., when the minority is 20 per cent of the
population), the share of minority traders who forgo the ties goes from 16 to 19 per cent as h
moves from 1 to 2.
In the random location case, on the contrary, an increase in h decreases the relative
profitability of the market, and thus the share of minority traders who forgo their ties. The
*?he procedure is straightforward but a bit cumbersome, and we report the details and the explicit equations in the
Appendix.

25
difference stems from the fact that in the fixed location case all matches within the group are
accepted for h > 1 (prob(hlzi\ > Izip = 1) while in the random location case the probability of
acceptance (prob@[v,l > Izip) is strictly increasing in h. As h increases from 1 to z (= 1.36) with

m = 0.4, the share of minority members entering the market declines from 20 percent to zero.
Changes in m, the proportion of the population that belongs to the minority, may also
affect the choice of market versus group. If all members match in the group, m has no impact on
expected returns because, as we have argued above, the probabilities of different matches in the
market are unaffected. When some minority traders from a specific segment of the economy enter
the market, however, a higher m increases the relative probability of matches with types drawn
from that segment. As shown in Proposition 4 below, in equilibrium this decreases expected
market returns for individuals located within or in the proximity of that segment in both the fixed
and random location cases. Because m does not affect returns within the group, it follows that,
ceteris paribus, a higher m decreases the attractiveness of the market for the marginal member and
increases the share of members relying on the ties. In all our numerical examples, however, we
found the magnitude of the effect to be small. For example, in the fixed location case with h = 2,
if the share of the population belonging to the minority group goes from 10 to 50 per cent, the
share of members relying on the ties increases from 80.5 per cent to 82 per cent; in the random
location case with h = 1, the same change in m increases the share of members relying on the ties
from 79 to 81 per cent.

VI. The welfare effects of group ties
In many countries substantial income differentials exist between ethnic minorities

26
acknowledged to have access to international trading “societies” and the majority populations.*’
It is also true that most governments run trade promotion organizations with the professed intent
to achieve the results we ascribe here to the group.= In this section we investigate the welfare
effects of the preferential ties on the economy as a whole, and on those traders who have, or have
not, access to them.
If all members prefer to match within the group, we can easily see that in our model the
existence of group ties is Pareto improving. Expected returns for traders in the anonymous
market are unchanged; each minority trader has the option of earning the same return he would
earn in the absence of the ties, but finds the group superior. Thus the equilibrium with group ties
is Pareto superior: all members do strictly better and all non-members are unaffected. This is in
fact what happens in the case of random location and sufficiently high h.
However, when some members prefer the market, the answer is less straightforward
because the entry of some, but not all, minority traders in the market distorts expected returns.
The change in the relative frequency of different types in the market tends to hurt at least some of
the other market participants, either because their type has now become relatively more abundant
(in the fixed location case), or because of the disproportionate presence of types with strong
bargaining positions but no greater productivity on average (in the random location case). The

*‘Good examples are ethnic Chinese in Southeast Asia and ethnic Indians in East Africa. Of course these income
differentials cannot be attributed entirely to superior international trade opportunities for the minorities, but it appears
that these contribute significantly,
“The Hong Kong Trade Development Council is widely regarded as one of the most successful examples. According to
Keesing (1988, p. 20), “HKTDC sees its central task as ‘matchmaking’ between foreign buyers and Hong Kong firms
wishing to export.” Since this policy allows all foreign agents potential access to the “group,” while in practice not all
domestic firms are represented due to limited administrative capacity, the HKTDC and similar trade promotion
organizations are actually more closely analogous to the immigrant societies studied in section VI1.B below.

27
following Proposition, proved in the Appendix, provides the general answer:

Proposition 4. I. The existence of ties among a minority group always increases expected GDP
in the economy.
2. When all members use the ties, expected returns for non-members are not aflected;

expected returns for all members rise.
3. When some members choose to enter the market:
i) Expectedper capita GDP always rises for members, but falls for non-members.
ii) Within each set, different types fare differently:
(a) All members who join the market are worse-offthan in the absence of the ties. All
members who use the ties except those near a (p) are better-off: For all members, the
percentage change in expected returns is monotonica& increasing in IzJ in the fixed location
case. In the random location case the percentage change in expected returns is monotonically
decreasing in 1z.J for all members who use the ties and monotonically increasing in 131 for all
members who join the market.
(b) In the random location case, all non-members are worse-off than in the absence of
the ties. In the$xed location case, there exists an i(m) such that for all h < &III> all
non-members are worse off than in the absence of the ties; for h 2 c(m) all 131 ‘s < i+(h)\ are
worse-off and all lzJ ‘s > 15i(h)l are better off than in the absence of the ties, where
l$(h)l E (a,l]. In a11 cases, low types are hurt most: the percentage loss in expected return is
monotonically declining in IzJ.
Proposition 4 states that the existence of the group is always beneficial to the economy as
a whole, but causes systematic distributional effects. Figure 2 summarizes these findings. There
are types who gain and types who may lose, with the gains concentrated in the group, whose
members have access to the ties, and the losses concentrated among non-members, shunned from
the preferential information channels. For example, if the mass of members is 20 percent of the
population, as h increases from 1 to 2 the existence of the group increases expected GDP for the
economy as a whole from 0 to 6 percent above the no-ties reference values in the fixed location
case, and from 3 to 7 percent in the random location case. However, among members alone,

28
expected per capita income rises from 0 to 3 1 percent over the no-ties values in the fixed location
case, and from 19 to 36 percent in the case of random location. Among non-members, the
maximum percentage loss in expected per capita income reaches half a percent in the fixed
location case when h = 2, and 0.4 percent when h equals 1 in the random location case.
The change in expected per capita income is the result of the change in trade flows caused
by the ties. Proposition 4 can be reinterpreted as stating that the existence of a group sharing
preferential information abroad increases the ratio of trade over GDP for the group in particular,
and for the economy as a whole, but decreases it for those traders who are not members whenever
members self-select in using their ties. Notice that this conclusion holds whether trade is between
similar or between different countries (i.e., in both the fixed and the random location cases). The
injury to market traders is the result of the reliance on the group of the more desirable trading
partners.
Not only are distributional effects present between the two sets of agents, but different
types within each set also fare differently. Among non-members, whenever there is a loss, the loss
is greater the smaller is an agent’s domestic market niche, since low lzil types both rely more
heavily on the international market and have lower bargaining power. For example, in the fixed
location case with m = 0.4 and h = 2, the expected loss to zi = 0 (compared to the no-ties
equilibrium) is of the order of 3.7 percent, while IzJ = 1 experiences a very slight expected gain
(0.1 per cent). In the case of random location, if h = 1, the expected loss to zi = 0 is roughly 3
percent but only 0.05 percent for IziI = 1.
Among members, on the other hand, gains from the existence of the group ties result from
the combination of two opposing effects: the ability to match with complete information abroad

29
is tempered by the loss of the bargaining power that can be exploited in the imperfect market. In
the fixed location case, the first effect always dominates: the group ties favor high types. With m
= 0.4 and h = 2, the expected return to a minority trader of type lzJ = 1 rises by more than 40
percent; the marginal member, just indifferent between market and ties, suffers a loss of 1.4
percent. In the random location case, the ex ante value of the appropriate niche abroad is the
same for all types, while the renounced bargaining power is greater the larger is IzJ. Thus the
group ties favor low lzil types. For example, with m = 0.4 and h = 1, the expected return to a
minority trader of type zi = 0 rises by 220 percent while the trader of type $31 (= 0.8) suffers a loss
of just over 0.1 percent.
In summary, our analysis supports the view that coethnic societies, business groups
operating across international borders, or institutions devoted to the creation of better information
channels in foreign markets, are valuable. It stresses, however, that under most circumstances
those excluded from these channels, or somehow less able to exploit them, will be hurt. Since
those most hurt are the agents with the poorest domestic market niches, measures to redress this
grievance can be easily rationalized as instruments for redistribution. It is thus not surprising to
find de jure or de facto requirements imposing partnerships with ethnic nationals in countries
where coethnic societies are important.23

VII. Extensions
In sections 5 and 6 we have studied the consequences of the presence of a minority of

%I the case of the Overseas Chinese, we find de jure requirements in Malaysia (Jesudason 1989) and de facto
requirements in Indonesia (Robison 1986), for example.

30
traders within which every agent knows the type of every other agent. This description of the
group was a stylization of abundant evidence, some of which was cited in the Introduction. In the
next two subsections, we make assumptions that extend beyond the existence of complete
information within the group to non-random interactions between members and non-members. In
contrast to intra-group relations, systematic evidence on this subject is scarce, and our modeling
choices should be seen as suggestive but tentative.

A. Discrimination
We have shown in the previous section that the existence of group ties lowers per capita
expected returns for non-members whenever it modifies the composition of the market. But
suppose that agents can distinguish group members from non-members in advance of matching, so
that the international market is no longer completely anonymous. Would not non-members simply
refrain from partnerships with minority traders? Whether this requirement is met in reality has not
been adequately studied. While coethnicity or business group membership may be transparent to
home country nationals, it may often not be for foreigners. A Thai national may recognize that
another Thai businessman is of ethnic Chinese origin, but an Indonesian national (not of ethnic
Chinese origin) may not be able to. Encaoua and Jacquemin (1982, p. 26) note that business
groups in France “have no legal existence and are not identified in official censuses. Each
subsidiary maintains its legal autonomy and keeps separate accounts.”
A natural question is whether an equilibrium could emerge where there is “complete
segregation”: only non-members match in the market. We can prove that this outcome is

31
possible, in both the fixed and the random location cases.24 With complete segregation,
non-members fare as in the no-ties equilibrium and the distributional implications can be easily
deduced fi-om the previous section. On average, non-members are always better off, but the gains
fall mostly on the least profitable types located around zero. *’ As for members, per capita income
for the group must fall, with all losses concentrated on those types that would prefer to match in
the market but are now prevented from doing so. The aggregate welfare results are less obvious:
although we have refined the information set of all agents, our model its too distant from a firstbest solution to allow the deduction that economy-wide GDP must rise. In fact, we find that it
rises in the random location case, but falls in the case of fixed location.
It would be misleading to conclude, however, that whenever group members can be
distinguished from non-members in advance of matching, segregation will result. In the fixed
location case we can demonstrate that other equilibria are possible. Given our discussion of
Proposition 4, the following equilibrium with “mixed” market partnerships seems especially
plausible. A mass of members close to zero enters the market, gambling that they will be matched
with high IzJ’s. At low h, most will fail and return home (the mass of members in the market is
much larger than the mass of non-members willing to match with them), but some will succeed,
justifying the initial gamble. As h increases, the probability of being rationed decreases rapidly.

*‘To support the segregated equilibrium all members must believe that they would be shunned, if they tried to match in
the market, and all non-members must believe that any member present in the market would be a worse partner than the
average non-member. It is not diEcult to find beliefs for non-members that do indeed support segregation as a
sequential equilibrium. For example, in the fixed location case, the belief that only members located at -l/2 + e and
l/2 - e would enter the market (e > 0 but close to zero) supports segregation, since all non-members would then prefer
to match only among themselves, in the random location case, the belief that only members characterized by b,l r p, as
in the previous section, would enter the market yields the same implication.
251.n the fixed location case, if h is sufhcicntly high, the more profitable non-members located near 111 are actually
harmed.

32
Thus in this equilibrium some mixed partnerships will be observed, and the more so the higher is
h.
An interesting feature of this equilibrium is the reversal of the welfare effect of
discrimination on the two sets of agents as h increases. At low h, members on average are hurt,
with the decline in expected returns concentrated on the low types that are constrained in their
desire to enter the market. At the same time, expected per capita GDP for non-members rises,
with the gains concentrated on low types who can now refrain from any match with members. At
high h, however, as minority members near zero match with high ]zjj non-members, the latter
effectively exit the non-member market. The final result is that discrimination hurts the
non-members who actively discriminate, while being beneficial to those who do not, and to the
minority. For all h, we find that aggregate welfare rises.

B. The trade effects of migration
Often immigrants come to constitute a coethnic society in their host country, facilitating
international trade between that country and their country of origin. Indeed, as mentioned in the
Introduction, this is one of the most important and well-documented instances of the use of
coethnic ties in international trade.
Consider an ethnically homogeneous country and suppose that a uniformly distributed
subset of its population has migrated to a second country. For simplicity let us also suppose that
the two countries are of equal size (post-migration): thus the country of origin is of size 2 and
consists of a single ethnic group; the host country has an ethnic minority of size m and a mass of
natives of size (2 - m).

33
Assume now that when traders from the country of origin are rationed in their attempt to
match within the coethnic group, they can match randomly in the anonymous international market.
We can then make two preliminary observations. First, there is an equilibrium where all traders
from the country of origin have the same probability of being rationed when trying to use the ties.
It follows, and this is the second observation, that if in the absence of rationing expected returns
within the coethnic group are higher than in the market, it is still an equilibrium to (attempt to)
use the ties.
It is not difficult to see that in this example the analysis is exactly identical to what we
presented before. Consider any interval of the support such that coethnics from that interval
prefer to use the ties. In the country of origin it is still the case that a fraction m/2 of traders in
that interval will be able to exploit the coethnic group, and that this fraction will be distributed
uniformly; the remaining fraction (2 - m)/2, again distributed uniformly, will enter the market.
Given the assumption we have maintained all through the paper that coethnics meeting in the
market are unable to rely on the coethnic ties (i.e., do not have complete information) everything
follows as in the preceding sections.26
We can reinterpret the effect of the ties in increasing trade as the trade effect of migration.
For example, using the equations of sections 4 and 5, if h equals 1.5, migration of 1 per cent of
the population raises the value of trade by 0.85 percent in the fixed location case, and by 0.8
percent in the case of random location.

26Notice that this remains true for any example where the masses of coethnics & and & in country 1 and country 2,
respectively, are different and VZ’ >m*. However, although aggregate values are unchanged, we should note that the
expected per capita income of coethnics in country 1 is lower than that of coethnics in country 2: the larger is the mass
of country 1 coethnics relative to country 2 coethnics, the less they benefit Corn the coethnic society.

34
Although our model can easily handle this example, the example itself is probably not the
best way to represent migration. For one thing, we would want to treat the decision to migrate as
endogenous. The incentive to migrate is the ability, once in the host country, to exploit one’s
coethnic ties to the country of origin. From our results above it is clear that this incentive will
vary across types. Thus, we should not assume that the migrants who constitute the coethnic
society are uniformly distributed on the line. Second, in our example most coethnics in the
country of origin are rationed in their attempts to match abroad within the coethnic group. This
lends increased importance to a question that can be set aside when the minority masses are equal
(see page 9 above): to what extent are domestic group members able and willing to introduce
foreign members to their non-member compatriots, about whom they (by assumption) have full
information? Little is known about this, in any systematic manner, and it seems prudent to await
more information before proceeding further.

VIII. Suggestions for future research
In order to focus on what is new in our approach we have omitted any role for prices. Yet
some of the most interesting results of our approach should come from the interaction of the
matching process we have described with market prices. For example, suppose that production
and marketing required not only the matching of two (appropriate) types, but also the use of a
non-produced input (labor), in different abundance in the two countries. To what extent will the
existence of the ties affect the pressure towards factor-price equalization? Or suppose that group
members, while benefiting from superior information, had higher costs than non-members. Under
what conditions would they still choose to match within the group?

35
We have already mentioned the possible application of our model to government trade
promotion organizations, so widely observed yet so little studied. A more speculative application,
which would require considerable modification of the model, is to the alleged benefit from
government coordination of complementary domestic investments in less developed countries
given the difficulty of finding the inputs that match domestic needs in the international market
(Murphy, Shleifer, and Vishny 1989; Rodrik 1995).
While our motivation has been trade in differentiated products, we hope to have
contributed to a wider literature on the effects of a group that shares superior information within a
larger anonymous market. In this respect our paper reaches similar results to Montgomery
(1991). Studying firms’ hiring through personal referrals, Montgomery finds that the existence of
referrals depresses market wages because it distorts the composition of the anonymous market
towards lower ability workers. As in our case, the existence of an alternative channel for
allocations, chosen selectively by the more desirable individuals, has negative effects for those
agents who are limited to the market. Investigating the extent to which these findings generalize
is another promising avenue for future research.

36
References
Becker, Gary. 1973. “A Theory of Marriage: Part 1.” Journal of Political Economy 8 1:
813-46.
Berthet-Bondet, Claude, Derek Blades, and Annie Pin. 1988. The OECD Compatible Trade and
Production Data Base 1970-1985. OECD Department of Economics and Statistics
Working Paper No. 60 (November).
Chin, Ku-Sup, In-Jin Yoon, and David A. Smith. 1996. “Immigrant Small Business and
International Economic Linkage: A Case of the Korean Wig Business in Los Angeles,
1968-1977.” International Migration Review 30 (Summer): 485-5 10.
Dobson, Wendy, and Chia Siow Yue, eds. 1997. Multinationals and East Asian Integration
(Singapore: IDRC Books and ISEAS).
Egan, Mary Lou, and Ashoka Mody. 1992. “Buyer-Seller Links in Export Development.”
World Development 20 (March): 321-334.
Encaoua, David, and Alexis Jacquemin. 1982. “Organizational Efficiency and Monopoly Power:
The Case of French Industrial Groups.” European Economic Review 19: 25-5 1.
Gale, David, and Lloyd Shapley. 1962. “College Admissions and the Stability of Marriage.”

American Mathematical Monthly 69: 9- 15.
Gould, David M. 1994. “Immigrant Links to the Home Country: Empirical Implications for
U.S. Bilateral Trade Flows.” Review of Economics and Statistics 76 (May): 302-3 16.
Granovetter, Mark. 1994. “Business Groups.” In Neil J. Smelser and Richard Swedberg, eds.,
The Handbook of Economic Sociology (Princeton, NJ: Princeton).
Harrigan, James. 1994. “Scale Economies and the Volume of Trade.” Review of Economics and
Statistics 76 (May): 321-328.
Helpman, Elhanan, and Paul R. Krugman. 1985. Market Structure and Foreign Trade
(Cambridge, MA: MIT).
Jesudason, James V. 1989. Ethnicity and the Economy: The State, Chinese Business, and
Multinationals in Malaysia (New York: Oxford).
Jones, Ronald W. 1995. “The Discipline of International Trade.” Swiss Journal of Economics
and Statistics 13 1 (September): 273-288.

37
Kandori, Michihiro. 1992. “Social Norms and Community Enforcement.” Review of Economic
Studies 59 (January): 61-80.
Keesing, Donald B. 1988. “The Four Successful Exceptions: Official Export Promotion and
Support for Export Marketing in Korea, Hong Kong, Singapore, and Taiwan, China.”
UNDP-World Bank Trade Expansion Program Occasional Paper 2.
Kotkin, Joel. 1992. Tribes: How Race, Religion, and Identity Determine Success in the New
Global Economy (New York: Random House).
Legros, Patrick and Andrew Newman. 1997. “Matching in Perfect and Imperfect Worlds.”
Columbia University, mimeo (June).
Linder, Sttian Burenstam. 1961. An Essay on Trade and Transformation (Uppsala: Almqvist
and Wiksells).
McCallum, John. 1995. “National Borders Matter: Canada-U. S. Regional Trade Patterns.”
American Economic Review 85 (June): 615-623.
Miller, Matthew. 1997. “The Asian Connection.” San Diego Union-Tribune (June 17): Cl, C4.
Montgomery, James D. 199 1. “Social Networks and Labor-Market Outcomes: Towards an
Economic Analysis.” American Economic Review 8 1 (December): 1408- 14 18.
Mortensen, Dale T. 1988. “Matching: Finding a Partner for Life or Otherwise.” American

Journal of Sociology 94: S215-240.
Murphy, Kevin, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. 1989. “Industrialization and the Big Push.”
Journal of Political Economy 97 (October): 1003-1026.
Nothdurft, William E. 1992. Going Global: How Europe Helps Small Firms Export
(Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution).
Rauch, James E. 1996. “Trade and Networks: An Application to Minority Retail
Entrepreneurship.” Russell Sage Foundation Working Paper No. 100 (June).
Redding, Gordon. 1995. “Overseas Chinese Networks: Understanding the Enigma.” Long

Range Planning 28: 61-69.
Robison, Richard. 1986. Indonesia: The Rise of Capital (London: Allen & Unwin).
Rodrik, Dani. 1995. “Getting Interventions Right: How South Korea and Taiwan Grew Rich.”
Economic Policy 20 (April): 55-97.

38
Sattinger, Michael. 1993. “Assignment Models of the Distribution of Earnings.” Journal of
Economic Literature 3 1 (June): 83 l-880.
Ziesemer, Bemd. 1996. “The Overseas Chinese Empire.” World Press Review 43 (June): 29.

I*+------- accept zj ------+*I +--- reject zj -> I f accept zj *I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
, I
I
I I
I

-1

0

h-1,. zj
h+l ’

h+l =.
h-l I

1

Z.E
I (0 h-‘)
‘h+l

Figure la: Determination of S(i) in fixed location case

Ml----- accept Yj -----+I 4+--- reject yj ----+>,
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
1
1
I
I

-1

Yj 4IZi I+1 zjl)/h

0

Yi

Yi ‘Yj

Figure lb: Determination of S(i) in random location case

1

market
without

Figure 2a: Expected returns in fixed location case

Figure 2b: Expected returns in random location case

Appendix
Proof of Proposition 1. We begin by establishing the following Lemma:

Lemma 1. In equilibrium there can be no set of types ofpositive measure who match with
partners located on the same side of the median.
Proof of Lemma 1. Suppose this were the case. Then there must be a set of types of equal
measure on the opposite side of the median who match among themselves. But then it is always
possible to create new partnerships with each member located on a different side of the median
such that both partners are at least as well-off. Suppose that typesj and s, on the same side of the
median, were matched with each other. Then the maximum possible return toj is zjs when he
appropriates the entire return from the partnership, with z,~ < 11zJ. Similarly, if i and v, on the
opposite side of the median fromj and s, match among themselves, i can obtain at most z, < llz,ll.
By matching among themselvesj can earn lIzill and i can earn lIzill; each type’s return is strictly
higher than in the original scenario unless his previous partner was located at the median, in which
case the return is unchanged. n
Thus in what follows we will ignore the possibility of equilibrium matches occurring
between partners on the same side of the median.
We proceed with the proof of Proposition 1.
Suppose first that the the support of the distribution is continuous around the median.
Consider types i and j, on opposite sides of the median. They can always match, produce zij and
share it as lIzill to i and ~~z,~~ toj. Thus in equilibrium they cannot both earn less. Can at least one
of them earn more (for example, can j earn llz,ll + k, with k > O)? Only ifj matches with IV (on the
opposite side of the median) who accepts llz,,,ll - k (llz,J 2 k). But this can only occur if all types v
on w’s side of the median are receiving ~~z,~~ - k. (Suppose that there exists a v who is matched
with s and receives ~~z,~~ - d, d < k. Then there exists an e > 0 such that w can undercut v, offer s
llz,II+d+E: and be better off.)
But all v receiving JJz,ll - k cannot occur in equilibrium because any v can then match with a
type on the same side of the median, but arbitrarily close to it and make both better off. Thus, if
the support of the distribution is continuous around the median, the return to j must equal ~~z~~~ and
the return to i lIzill.
Suppose now that there exists a discrete interval of length 2A in the immediate
neighborhood of the median over which the mass of types equals zero. Call (zi> type i’s distance
from the mid point of the interval. Each type i on one side of the interval earns individual return
<zi> - k (k 2 0), and each type j on the opposite side earns (3) + k. Following the logic detailed
above, the parameter k must be the same for every type and k must be smaller than A (since
underbidding would otherwise be possible), but no profitable deviation exists for all k 5 A.

ii
Similarly the mirror image of this equilibrium (k < 0) is also an equilibrium as long as k E [-A,O].
We can interpret this multiplicity as arising because any point in the interval can be identified as a
median. The choice of a median then determines uniquely the entire distribution of returns. n
Proof of Corollary 1. Consider a symmetrical equilibrium and suppose that in the domestic
market all zi < 0 receive l.zil - k and all zi > 0 lz,l + k (k > 0). By Proposition 1 this can occur only if
all types in [-~,a] (a L k) are absent from the domestic market, i.e., if they are successful with
probability 1 in the international market. Consider traders -a and a. Since they have the same
probability of matching with any foreign type in the international market, and different expected
returns in the domestic market, their probabilities of success cannot be equal. If the probability of
success is 1 for zi = -a, it must be less than 1 for zi = u. This establishes the Corollary.
Proof of Corollary 2. Although the two groups of traders restricted to matching with each other
are not on opposite sides of the median by assumption (contrary to most standard models), the
first part of Proposition 1 remains unchanged: all equilibrium matches must be between
individuals on opposite sides of the median. (The argument in Proposition 1 easily generalizes).
We analyze separately the two cases of fixed and random location.
(a) Fixed location case. Suppose that in the group all traders from country 1 located to
the left of the median receive @,I + k (k r 0) when matched with members from country 2 located
to the right of the median (k must be the same for all types to prevent underbidding). In any
equilibrium where the distribution of types in the markets (and hence in the group) is symmetrical
around the median, it must then be the case that members from country 2 located to the left of the
median receive hlzil - k when matched with members from country 1. Any k can now be
supported without underbidding, but participation in the group requires that all members be better
off than in the domestic equilibrium (notice that in the fixed location case there is no uncertainty).
Thus we require hlz,J - k r Jzi( or k 5 Izil(h-1) for any z, in the group. If zi = 0 is among those who
use the ties, k must equal zero. Suppose now that individuals in [-a,~] do not use their group ties.
Then in a symmetrical equilibrium a must be the same in both countries, and, for a given type, the
expected return from entering the international market is equal in both countries. But if k differs
from zero, participation in the group is more advantageous for citizens of country 1 than for
citizens of country 2 and the threshold a cannot be the same in both countries. It follows that in
any symmetrical equilibrium k must equal zero.
(b) Random location case. Suppose that in the group all traders from country 1 who turn
out to be to the left of the median receive hkil + k (k 2 0). All left-hand traders from country 1
attempt to match with right-hand traders from country 2. For each left-hand individual from
country 1 the probability of a lower return than in the domestic market equals the probability that
the realized Iv,l is smaller than (1~~1 - k)/h; while for a right-hand individual from country 2 the
probability of the same event equals the probability that the realized Iv,1 is smaller than (jzj + k)/h.
It follows that the expected and realized mass of traders who do worse than in the domestic
market is larger on the right-hand side for country 2 than on the left-hand side for country 1. But
since the matches have to be pair-wise, in country 1 some of the agents who turn out to be on the

...

111

left-hand side will be rationed out of the group. It is to their advantage to offer to match for hlY,l
+ k - e (e in (O,k]). Underbidding would continue until the masses of traders who do worse than
in the domestic market on the left-hand side of country 1 and the right-hand side of country 2 are
equalized, i.e. until e = k, or equivalently until the return to eachy, equals hbil, But now the same
argument must also apply to the right-hand side of country 1 and the left-hand side of country 2,
so returns there must be driven to hlyil as wel1.m
Proof of Proposition 2. Observe first that there is always an equilibrium where no-one uses the
group ties (since an individual cannot deviate alone). Let us focus instead on the equilibrium with
an active group.
(a) Fixed location cm. We proceed by steps:
(i) For any h > 1, all members using their ties is not an equilibrium. Suppose that all members use
the ties. Then expected returns in the market are unchanged and are given by equation (7a).
Consider zi= 0. His return in the group equals 0 while his expected return in the market equals
(h-1)/4. Thus zi = 0 would deviate to the market.
(ii) For any h > 1, in any rational expectations equilibrium with an active group, IzJ = 1 prefers to
use his ties. Consider two types, z, and z,, such that z, > ziand zi> 0. It is not difficult to verify
that for any zj (and h > l), (rfi,jj - hzi) > (r(s,$ - hz,), where r(ijj is the realized return to z,from
matching with zj in the market, and where we need to consider the four possible cases: zj E S(i),
S(S); zj E S(i), B S(S); 3 $ S(i), E S(s); zj B So,), 4 S(s). Because the inequality holds for any zP it
must hold in expected values for any distribution of types in the market. Thus if zi prefers the ties
to the market, so does z,. By symmetry, the argument can be applied to z,<O; thus more generally
if JzJ prefers the ties to the market, so does IzJ > ]zd. It follows that if any Iz,l matches within the
group, so does IziJ = 1. To conclude this step of the argument, suppose now that no IzA < 1 were
to use the ties. It is easy to verify that given the expectation that the group is not void (and h >
l), ]z,l = 1 will indeed still prefer to trade through the group, i.e., h > Er(l), where Er(1) is given
by equation (7a) evaluated at zi= 1. (Notice that since both ]zJ = 1 at the two edges of the
distribution would prefer the ties, their expectation would be verified.) We can conclude that
there cannot be an equilibrium with an active group and lz,l = 1 preferring the market.
(iii) Points (i) and (ii) above establish that in any equilibrium with an active group: a) not every
member relies on the group; b) JzJ = 1 certainly does; c) if lzil prefers the ties to the market, so
does lz,l> lzil. Hence there must exist a positive number afi,m) such that all members in [0,
Ia@,m)I] prefer the market, and all members in (]c#,m)l,l] prefer the ties. The equilibrium
configuration is unique. We show below, when we derive the explicit solution for a@,m), that
a(h,m) itself is unique, concluding the proof of the proposition.
(b) Random location case. It is convenient to begin with the following:

Remark. We first restate the definition of first order stochastic dominance: p.d.Ef’jj f o.

iv
stochastically dominates go) iff $L fci)dj < sk g@dj. Consider a i?mction F(i,j), aF/aj < 0 V i, j
E [a,!~]. Let g@, g ‘0) be p.d.f.s defined over support [a,b], and suppose that gQ) f, o.
stochastically dominates g 0). It is easily shown that Q(i) = J~(i,j)g@.$ < Q ‘(i) = Jp(i,j)g $‘j)@
V i E [a,b]. Next, consider a p.d.ffo) of traders in the international market in zj space, i.e.,
defined by their identity in the domestic market.. Since we consider only symmetric equilibria, we
deflneffi) over the support [O,l] without loss of generality. Now suppose that in our model
group members in one or more intervals enter the market. The resulting p.d.f. will f. o.
stochastically dominate (be f. o. stochastically dominated by) the p.d.f. in which an equal total
mass of coethnics enters the market from the lower (upper) bound of the support. But note that
the former (latter) p.d.f. is given by equation (10) for the correct value of U. (p), where we reserve
the notation a&m) and Q&m) for the equilibrium values of c1 and p. Finally, it is clear from (10)
that for given c1 (p) m > m ’ impliesf’j) is f. o. stochastically dominated by (f. o. stochastically
dominates )f’i$. It will thus prove useful to definef”@ andffl@ as the sets of p.d.fs given by
(10) and m = 1 (its maximum value), where (x, p E (0,l). Note that these p.d.f.s respectively are f
o. stochastically dominated by and f. o. stochastically dominate the uniform p.d.f. on [O,l].
We continue with the proof
Define G(ij) e ErG(i) - Er(iJ, where ErG(i) equals agent i’s expected return to matching
in the group and is given by (A5b) and Er@) equals expected market return to agent i from a
match with agent j and is computed in (A3b). It is easily shown that for h 2 h, 1 < h < z, G&) is
monotonically declining in zi E [O,l] for all zj E [O,l J. Now define Er”“‘(i) = J$r(ijlf’@dj to be
the expected market return to agent i given p.d.f.f’@ for market traders. For anyf’@, Ef(i) EP’(i) inherits the monotonicity of G(i,j) in zi E [O,l]. Thus we have shown that, for h 2 E, in
equilibrium if any coethnic agent i chooses to enter the market, so must all agents k, lzkl > lz,l.
We next show that some members always choose to use their ties for h r 1. First, it is
easily shown that aEr(iJ/azj < 0 for all z, zj E [O,l]. The intuition is that zj is the threat point of
your match partner. Now define E?(i) = J@r(i,j)~@:)dj. It follows from results 2 and 3 above
that E?(i) gives the best possible expected market returns to agent i, parameterized by o! (and
h). It is then straightforward to show that there exists a zi > 0 such that all member agents lz,l < zj
always choose to use their ties; i.e., that ErG(g - EF($ > 0 for h 2 1, CI E (0,l).
It follows from the results in the preceding two paragraphs that when h 2 h, if some
member agents choose to enter the market the p.d.f.f’o) f. o. stochastically dominates the
uniform p.d.f. on [O,l], and therefore E?‘(o < Er(i) for all lzil E [O,l]. Hence ifEf(i) - Er(i) > 0
member agent i uses the ties. Next, it is easily shown that d[ErG(i) - Er(i)]/ah > 0 for all h > b, b
< h. Now define 5 implicitly by Er’(1) - Er(1) = 0. It follows that for h r % the unique
equilibrium is for all members to use their ties. It also follows that for h < h < ‘i; the unique
equilibrium is for all members lzil E [Pfi,m),l] to enter the market and all other members to use
their ties, where /3(&m) is determined by equation (11 b). We know that p(h,m) < 1 because as p
-, 1, EIM(i) y Et@), hence ErG(p) - EI”“@) < 0 for /3 = 1, contradicting the definition of p&m).

We now complete the proof for the case h < h. It can be shown that the demonstration
that G&j) is monotonically declining fails for zi E [zifi), 11, where zip) is strictly increasing, z&j =
1, and ~~(1) > gi. It is thus sufficient to show that all member agents lzj E [zip), l] always prefer
the market. But this only requires ErG(d - E+(i) < 0 , where E@(i) = J$r(i,$fb@dj and we
can restrict p to the interval [zi,l]. It is straightfonvard to verify that this inequality holds for zi E
[ziFI, ll.
We show that P@,m) is uniquely determined in the proof of Proposition 3, where this
property is needed to establish comparative statics results.~
Explicit equations. We report here for completeness the explicit equations for expected returns,
in the two cases of trade without group ties and in the presence of ties.
(a) Trade without group ties. Using the notation f = (h-l)/(h+l), in the fixed location
case, given (2a’) and the uniform distribution, equation (7a) becomes:

Er(i) = l/2 [-3zi+l,2) + zi] + l/2/$( +pj,2)

+ l/2(1 -j&)(Y) [l/2(1 +zJ)-zi] + 1/2(llf-j) z;
for Z~E [O,jj, and

Er(i) = l/2 [y (5+1/2) + zi] + I/z[fj;( 31 -f/2) + l/2(1 -4 zi

(A24

for zi > f.
The first term in (Ala) is the expected return from matching with zj < 0; the second term
refers to matches with zj E [0, fzi] ; the third term to matches with z. E [zi/’ 11, and the final
term to the failed partnerships with .zj E (f zi, zi/f) . Equation (A2a I reflects the fact that for
zi > f, all matches with zj > fii fall.
Equations (Ala) and (A2a) simplie to:

Er(i) = $

Er(i) = ?[I +2zr(3

(Ala’)

+z;(g]

Zi>f

(A2a’)

vi
Integrating (Ala’) and (A2a’) over the appropriate intervals (and multiplying by two), we obtain
the expression for expected GDP in the text (equation 9a).
In the random location case, it proves useful to rederive equation (3b’) forp(i) before
deriving the explicit equation for Et-(i). Recall that we have four random variables, yi, yp z, and zj,
i.i.d. uniformly on [-l,l]. We wish to compute the probability of the event hlv, - y,l 2 lzij + IzjI, h
r 1, for a given realization of zi. Our solution strategy is to consider only the case yi > yp and
multiply by 2, and then let zj vary only over [O,l], and multiply by 2 again. We have

PO

= (l121). j Iv, - (l’jl + zj)/h + l]~&,&~
0 (RI +z,Vh - 1

@lb)

Evaluation of equation (Alb) yields equation (3b’).
Continuing to consider only the case yi > yj and letting zj vary only over [O, 11, we compute
the expected return to agent i, where he receives [hcV, - yj) + lzil - zj]/2 if the above event occurs
and lzil otherwise. Our solution strategy is to compute the expected return over the range of
realizations for which the event occurs, and then add to it [ 1 -p(i)] ]ziJ . We have
vi - (lz,l + z,m

Erfij

= (l/4)). i

0 (Iz,l +z,Vh - 1

[

IhCYj - Yj) + l’,l - zJ@,@jhj + [l - POllziJ’

WV

-1

Evaluation of equation (A2b), easily done using Mathematics, yields a cubic in lzi\ that is
available on request.
(b) Trade with group ties
i) Fixed location case. In the fixed location case, Proposition 2 establishes that the
distribution of traders in the anonymous international market is not uniform any longer: because
only member traders in the interval [ -a,cr] enter the market, the density of types must be higher
in that interval. Equation (10) reports the two densities. In writing expected returns, we must
divide the support so that for all types in a given subinterval the lowest successfbl partner falls in
an interval of equal density (and similarly for the largest one). Consider zi > 0. Call zJ) < zi
the partner type such that all matches with zi S- zJj> are successful, and Z,(j) the type such that
all matches !j 2 Z(i) are successful. Both s(z) and Z(i) can be larger or smaller than cl; in
addition Zj(z) cou 1d be larger than 1 (if all matches wit-h zj > zi fail). Thus there are five possible
combinatrons, identifying five relevant segments. A segment will include all zi’s such that
(1) z.(i) 5 a, Z(i) 5 a; (2) 2 .(i) 5 01, Z.(i) ~5 [a, 11; (3) z(i) S c1, Z.(i) > 1;
(4) z(i) E (a, I), Z.(i) > 1; fs) z.(i) G lcx, 11, Z(i) E [a,?]. Which’of these five
combinations are pos!sible at the saze time depends/on the relationship between 01 andfin
equilibrium. There are three different regimes, as shown in Figure A:

vii
a) a>f.
The condition. zJi) E (a, l] identifies a segment where all zi ‘s satisfjr: fzi > a, or
zj > cl/” If a > f, tins requires zi > 1, which is outside the support. Thus in this regime there
are only three segments, defined by conditions (1) to (3) above. Respectively: (1) zi E [O, ajj;
C2) ‘i ’ Caf, .#I; C3) ‘i ’ v1 ‘1’

The condition Z,(i) E [a, I] requires zi/f < 1 or zi < f, while s(i) E (a, l] requires
zi > a/’ Together they imply f > a/‘, or a < $, impossible in this regime. Thus condition
(5) above is impossible here, and four segments are relevant, defined by conditions (1) to (4).
Respectively: (1) zi E [0, af3; (2) zi E (af, fl; (3) zi E V; a/A; (4) zi G (a/f, 11.

c) a<$.
The condition zJi) I a requires zi < a/’ while Z,(i) > 1 requires zi > j Together
they imply a > $, impossible in this regime. Thus condition (3) above is impossible here and
four segments are relevant, defined by conditions (l), (2) (5) and (4). Respectively:
(1) Zi E CO, Ul; ( 2 ) ‘i E (af, wYl; (5) ‘i E (4.. A; ( 4 ) ‘i E V; 11.
Call Erl”(i) the expected return of a trader belonging to segment (1) (and similarly below
for segments (2), (3), (4) and (5)). Then, taking into account equation (10) and using the
notation 2 -m( 1 -a) = d, we obtain:

Erl”(i) =

1I
1 i
1

h[zi+(1+a)/2]+zi-(l-a)/2
2

+a)/2

d

2

1

+

-zjl +‘i-(l +a)/2 + 3 (h+1)[zi-(fiJ/21 + (A3a)
2

h[@+zi/fi/2-z,.]
2
for zi E [0, afl.

+ 5 h(zi+a/2)+zi-a/2

+zi

d

-(a+~~&!)/2 +

2

I

z,?(I/'-~)

d

The first line refers to matches with zj < 0, in the two cases of.zj < -a (hence zj in a low
density interval)-- the first term-- and zj E [-a, 0), or zj in a hrgh density interval-- the second
term. Similarly, the third term captures the expected return from matches with zj > a (low
density); the fourth term, matches with.zj E [0, fzi] (high density); the fifth term, matches with
zj E [zi/Jr a] (high density); and the srxth term, matches with zj G vii, zi/A (high density).
Only in this last case does a match fail, Although cumbersome, the equation is straightfonvard.
For the other segments,

Er2”(i)

1
1
i
+1 fi [ Ch + ‘)lI’j - Vzi)/2] 1 +
+ a

h[z,+U +a)/21 +zi - (1 -a)/2

= (1 -a)(2-m)

2d

2

(1 -z#‘)(2-m)

(h-l)[(l

2d

+z,./J3/2 -zi]

h(zi+a/2) +zi - a/2 +

d

2

d

2

a -fzi z, + Wf- @(2-m) z
I
2d
d ’

vlll

Wa)

2

for zi E kf, mW Ml).

Er3”()

1
i
WO(2-m)Z,

+ 2 h(zi+a/2)+zi-a/2

= (1-a)(2-m) h[zi+(l+a)/2]+zi-(l-a)/2
I
2
2d

fdzi [ (h+l)[Zi-(fi )/2] 1
2

a -fzi

+ dZi +

d

2d

2

1

+

Wa)

’

for zi C VJ min[a/f, 11.

1

h(z, + a/2) + zi - a/2 +

h[zi + (1 +a)/21 + zi - ( 1 -a)/2
Er4”(i) = (1 -a)(2 -m)
2d
2

2

(h+l)[z, -(fzi+a)/2]
2

] +

VW

(I1 -fzj>(2-m)
26

zi

for zi E

ErS”(i) = (1 -a)@-m)

h[z, + (1 +a)/21 +zi - (1 -a)/2
2

+ zl.- a /2)] + Cfii-a)(2-m)
; i,,“,,,
2
2d

1[

1

+ 2 h[z, + a/2) +zi - a/2 +
2
d
+

Wa)

(I-ziL’fi(2-m) (h-l)[(zi/f+1)/2-zJ
2
2d
for zi E (a/ffJ, when a < f, in regime (c).
The equilibrium condition defining a differs in the different regimes. If a is larger thanj
(regime (a)), then a solves Er3”(a) = ha. If a instead is smaller than f (regimes (b) and (c)),
then a solves Erp(a) = ha. Manipulating the relevant equations, we find:

ix

aj =

!

ifm =

l/6

(h+1)(2-m)(5+4h-m(h+l))
-3(l+h)(2-m) + 2{
5m(h+l) -2(h-1)

2(h-1)
5(h+l)

(ASa)
otherwise

if 2h(3 +h*) = m(3+3h3-h-h*)

(2-m)(h+1)(2h-1) -d(h+1)(2-m)[2+(h2-2)(6h-m(h+l))]
2h(3+h2) -m(3+3h*-h-h*)

ww
otherwise

where the subscript indicates the segment in whicha falls.
Both expressions are roots of quadratic equations, but in both cases the root to be chosen
is determined uniquely given the requirements: a E (0, l), aJ > f, aq < f, and h E (1,2].
Notice that a, is defined only for values of h and m such that the argument of the square root is
positive -- however, as shown below, this constraint is never binding.
When is a given by a*, and when by a3 ? The following Proposition answers the question.

Proposition Al. For e<ch m E (0, 11, there exists a v$ue h(m) strictly decreasing in m, such
that a = a, for all h < h(m), and a = aI for all h r h(m).
Proof of Proposition Al. We need to begin by establishing the following lemma:
Lemma 2. For all values of h E (1,2] and m E (0,2] such that they are well defined, a, and

aj are declining in m..
Proof of Lemma 2. We need to find the appropriate sufficient conditions that allow us to sign the
derivatives of (ASa) and (A9a) with respect to m. The details are available upon request, but the
logical steps are the following: 1. In the case of a, it is possible to show d*a,/dmdh > 0 over
the relevant range of parameters (unless a3 = l/6). Hence da,/dm reaches a maximum at h = 2.
The sign of da,ldm evaluated at h = 2 depends on the sign of an expression that has a unique
maximum, in the relevant range, at m = 2/15, where it equals zero. Thus da,/dm < 0 for all
values of a,. 2. In the case of a,, it is convenient to rewrite a, as a function of (2-m). It is then
possible to show that the sign of da,/d(2-m) depends on the sign of an expression that reaches a
maximum when the denominator of (A9a) reaches 1. Evaluated at the appropriate value of m, the
expression is negative, guaranteeing that da,/d(2-m) is negative and hence da,/dm is positive
over the entire admissible range of parameters. n

X

Consider now the condition a = f, where a* and a1 are equal. By solving
E13”fij = hz, at zi = f we find that indifference requires:

(3+h-2h*)m = 3+6h-3h2-2h3

(AlOa)

where (AlOa) is meaningful only for m E (0,2]. When the LHS is larger than the RHS, zi =f
prefers the ties. Call G the value of m that solves (AlOa). It is easy to verify that for all
h E (1, 1.351), fi falls monotonically from 2 to 1. With m 5 1, Lemma 2 implies that both a,
and a, (if defined) must be larger thanf, it follows that in this range of h values, for any m, a is
given by a,. At h = 1.4023, the RHS of (AlOa) equals zero, and is negative for larger values of
h; at h = 1.5 the LHS of (Al Oa) equals zero, and is negative for larger values of h. Finally, for h
larger than 1.5, there is no solution with rir < 2. Thus for h E: (1.4023, 21, zi = f always prefers
the ties to the market. By the proof of Proposition 2 above, this implies a < f, or a given by a,.
For h E [ 1.3 5 1, 1.40231, fi is a declining function of h: the higher is h, the smaller is fi, and the
larger the set of m values_ for which m is greater than 6 and a is giyen by a,. Equivalently, for
given y, there exists an h(m) puch that a = as for all h G [1.35 1, h(m)], and a = a2 for all
h E (h(m), 1.40231, where h(m) is declining in m. Finally, note that at h 2 1.35 1, the smallest
value of h for which a2 could be relevant, a, is always well-defined.m
Indeed it is easy to verify from (ASa) and (A9a) that h”(m) equals 1.3 5 1 when m = 1;
equals 1.382 when m = 0.4 (the representative value of m used in the numerical examples
reported in the text) and approaches 1.4023 when m approaches 0.
ii) Random location case. In the random location case, equation (A2b) is still correct
when h 2 %. For h < z, the density of zi is no longer uniform but is instead described by equation
(10). The task of computing the expected return to agent i is greatly simplified, however, by the
fact that zj is still distributed independently ofy, and x. Note also that the distribution of zj is still
symmetric about zero.
It is helpful to begin by substituting (Alb) into (A2b) and rearranging to get the following
expression:
Yj

w9

- (Izil + zjwJ

= j [(l/4) j

1

-1

&I ‘q/h - 1

0

-

(l/2)

j

&I +zp - 1

[NY, - r,> + lzil - Zjlldy,dyi

J

Iv,

-

&I

1

Wb)

+ zJ/h + l]& Jz,lJdzj.

Let Eroj equal the expression that we integrate over zY Now, instead of integrating over zj from
0 to 1 in (A3b), we employ the low density in (10) for the interval [O,p] and the high density in
(10) for the interval (p, 11, multiplying each expression in (10) by 2:

xi
1

P

Er”(i)=

2-m [ Erfij)dj

2 - rnp

0

[ Er fij)dz,.
+ 2
2-P p

(A4 W

Again, evaluation of equation (A4b), easily done using Mathematics, yields a cubic in ]zil that is
available on request.
To compute the expected return to an agent i who matches within the group, we begin by
computing the probability of the event hlv,\ 2 ]zi\, h 2 1, for a given realization of zi. This is
easily shown to equal 1 - Izij/h. We then compute the expected return over the range of
realizations for which this event occurs, and add to it [l - (1 - jzil/h)]lzil = (zi)2/h. We have
1
s

hypv, + (zi)*,‘h = h/2 + (z,)*,‘(2h).

Wb)

Irp
Equation (1 lb) is obtained by substituting p for jzil in both (A4b) and (ASb). In the
proofs of Propositions 2 and 3, respectively, it is shown that there is no p E [O,l] that solves this
equation for h > x and a unique p E [0, l] that solves this equation for h s x.
Proof of Proposition 3. (a) Fixed location case. i) To establish daldh > 0, we need to vet-i@
both da,/dh > 0 and da,/dh > 0 over the relevant range of parameters. The details are
available upon request, but the logical steps are the following: in the case of a3 it is easier to
write a3 as a function of J Hence daj/dh = (da,/df)(df/dh), or
sign(da,/dh) = sign(da,/dJ. It is then easy to show that a sufficient condition for
sign(da,/dfl > 0 is: (18-2$13m) > 0, which is always satisfied if h E (1,2], m E (O,l]. In the
case of a*, it is convenient to recall that a, solves Er2”(aJ = ha,. Thus daJdh = (a, dEr2M(crJ/dh)/(dEr2”(aJ/da2 - h); The denominator is increasing in a,; because it is easily
shown to be negative when evaluated at the upper bound a, =f, it must be negative for all
possible values of a2. The numerator is also increasing in a,. Call a* the value of a that solves
a* = dEr2”(a*)/dh; because a * > a2 in the admissible range of parameters, the numerator must
also be negative for all a,. Hence da,/dh > 0. ii) daldm < 0 is established in Lemma 2 above.
(b) Random location case Define G(P;h,m) = Er’(p;h) - Ep(p;h,m). We begin by
demonstrating that there exists a unique p E (0,l) that solves G(P;h,m) = 0 for given h E (1,x)
and m E (O,l]. Note that from the proof of Proposition 2 we have G(O;h,m) > 0 and G(l;h,m) <
0. Given continuity, it is then sufficient to show that a’G(P;h,m)/$” > 0 V h E (l,z) and m E
(O,l], so that the plot of G@;h,m) against p must cross the horizontal axis once and only once. It
is straightforward to compute this second derivative and verify that it is always positive.
To establish the comprative static result for m, it is sufficient to show that
aG@;h,m)/am > 0 V h E (1, h) and m E (O,l]. In the proof of Proposition 2, we noted that for
given j3 (and h) m > m ’ implies the p.d.f.fCi) for market traders f. o. stochastically dominates
f’Ci). It follows that Ey(p;h,m) < Ep’@;h,m) and therefore G(P;h,m) > G(P;h,m 3.

Xi1

To establish the comparative static result for h, it would be suffkient to show that
dG@;h,m)/ah > 0 V h E (1,z) and m E (O,l]. However, we can only show that aG@;h,m)/ah >
0 for h E (i,x), h^ > 1. For h E (1, fi] we can show that aG(P;h,m)/% > 0 V p < D. Finally, we
can demonstrate that p(h,m) < 8, so that dG(P;h,m)/ah > 0 at the equilibrium P.m
Proof of Proposition 4. (a) Fixed location case. To calculate expected GDP, we need to
integrate individual expected returns for both members and non-members, but to do so we need
first to establish for which parameter values each of the three possible regimes (a, b or c,
described above) is relevant. Since da,/dm < 0 by Proposition 3, for any h, a, is at a minimum
at m = 1. But a, (m= 1) >f2 for all h e (1,2]; it follows that regime (c) is never realized in the
relevant range of parameters. Proposition Al then establishes that for any m, the equilibrium
regime is (a) for h < h(m) (where a >j), and (b) for h 2 L(m) (where a <A. Thus:
EGDP, = (2 -m)(Io’@ Erl”(i) dzi +[a; Er2”(i) dz,+[; Er3”(i) hi)

if h < i(m)
(Alla)

EGDP, = (2 -m)(rfEr l”(i) hi+[F(o dzi +JfdfEr3 M(i) dz, +[ifEr4M(i) dzi) if h 2 L(m)
and

EGDP, = m( afErlM(i) Liri+[ fEr2”(i) hi+[ aEr3Mfi) di+[ ‘hz, dzi)
I0
a
f
af

if h < i(m)
(A12a)

EGDP, = m( $Erl”(i) dzi+[aEr2M(g dzi+[‘hzi dzj)
s0
a
af

if h 2 L(m)

where the subscript iV (G) stands for non-members (group members), and expected returns
Erl”(i), Erp(i), Er3”(i) and Er4”(i) are given by equations (A3a), (A4a), (A5a) and (A6a).
Expected GDP for the economy as a whole is the sum of expected GDP for the two groups.
We can then establish: 1. Expected GDP for group members must increase. Since each
member has the option of using the ties:

EGDP, > m ( o1 hz,dzi) = m(h/2) > m h 3-1
s
3(h*-1)
where the last term is expected GDP for the group in the absence of ties (equation 9a in the text,
corrected for mass).
2. Expected GDP for non-members must fall. We have calculated the integrals and
studied the properties of the resulting function with the help of Mathematics. As expected,
EGDP, simplifies to equation 9a in the text if m = 0 (for any h), or if a = 1 (for h < h”(m)). We

...

Xl11

can establish sufficient conditions guaranteeing that (A12a) is everywhere below (9a) (corrected
for mass) for all m > 0, a E (0, 1). The details are available upon request, but the logical steps
are the following: a) When h < h(m), (A12a) is everywhere convex in a ; at a =f (the lower
bound of the relevant interval for a), it is strictly declining in m, and thus smalier than (9a) for all
m>O. Hence for all m > 0, a < 1, it must be smaller than (9a). b) When h 2 h(m), (A12a) is
strictly decreasing in a, for alla E p, fl, m E (0, 11, and is smaller than (9a) at a = $.
3. Expected GDP for the economy as a whole must rise. a) When h < i(m), it is possible
to find sufficient conditions guaranteeing that EGDP is strictly decreasing in a, for all
a E V; 11, m E (0, 11. Hence it has a minimum at a = 1, where it equals (9a). b) When h 2
L(m), EGDP is strictly concave in a over the relevant range of parameter values. For all
m E (0, 11, it is larger than (9a) when evaluated at either extreme (a = $, a = f), hence it
must be larger than (9a) everywhere.
To evaluate the welfare effect of the ties on individual types, we must study expected
returns for each type in each segment. Manipulating the relevant equations, we can establish:
i) Erl”(i) - Et+)) is increasing in zi, but always negative at zi = af, the upper bound of the
interval. Hence every market trader in [0, aJ1 is hurt by the ties; because Erfi) is increasing in zi,
the percentage loss is smaller the higher the type. ii) (Er2”fi) - Er(i)) is concave in zi for all
zi E (af, jj, given a > f* . Because the expression is increasing at the upper bound of the
interval (zi = fi, it must be increasing everywhere. And because the expression is negative at
zi = f, it must be negative everywhere. Hence every market trader in (af, fl is hurt by the ties,
and the percentage loss is smaller the higher the type. iii) (Er3”(i) - E&f)) is increasing in zi. If
h < h(m) (and thus a >f>, the expression is negative at zi = 1, and hence negative everywhere.
If h = h”(m), the expression is zero at zi = 1, and negative everywhere else. If h > h”(m), the
upper bound of the interval is zi = a/f, where the expression is always negative. Thus, every
trader in cf, min[l, a/“] is hurt by the ties unless a/f = 1, in which case zi = 1 is just
indifferent. The percentage loss is smaller the higher is the type. iv) (Er4”(i) - Er(i)) is of interest
only if h > A(m). The expression is always increasing in zi, and for all h > I&m), equals zero at
i;(h) E (a/f, 1). Once again the percentage loss is smaller the higher the type. All together
these observations establish the pattern of individual losses for non-members described in the
Proposition.
In the group, all zi 5 a enter the market. The results above show>hat all of them,
including a, must be worse-off (recall that a belongs to segment 3 if h < h(m), and segment 2 if
h 2 G(m)), and that their percentage loss must be declining in zi . Among members choosing the
group, by continuity types close to a must lose, although a majority must gain given the
aggregate gain for the group. It is not difficult to verify that ( hzi-Er(i))/(Er(i)) is increasing in
zi (for both zi larger and smaller thana. This establishes the remaining part of the Proposition in
the fixed location case.
(b) Random location case. 1. First consider the case h 2 z. The argument in the text
demonstrates that expected returns to non-members are unaffected. It is then sufficient to
demonstrate that expected per capita GDP rises for members: using (A5b) and (9b), we have

?CiV

J$F(i)di - E(GDP)/2 =-h/2 + 1/6h - (h/3 + 7/24h - l/16h2) = h/6 - 3/24h + 1/16h2 > 0.
Turning to the case h < h, expected GDP = mJ@rG(i)di + (2-m)j$FIM()di + 2Jpp(gdi.
Subtracting E(GDP), given by (9b), yields a relatively simple expression in h, m, and p, which is
easily shown to be positive V h E [1,x], m E (O,l], and p E (O,l], and is therefore positive for the
equilibrium P(h,m).
3.i) For the group, since each member has the option of using the ties the result follows
from the preceding paragraph. For non-members, in the proof of Proposition 2 we noted that the
p.d.f. described by (10) f. o. stochastically dominates the uniform p.d.f. on [O,l], and therefore
ETM(i) < Et-(i) for all lzi[ E [0, 11.
3.ii)(a) It was shown in the proof of Proposition 2 that the gain in expected returns to
members who use the ties is monotonically declining in lzil. Since Er(i) is increasing in ]z,l the
percentage gain declines even more steeply. Since EuM(i) <Et-(i), by continuity members near p
who use the ties must be worse-off. The result for members who join the market follows from the
proof of point 3ii)(b) below.
3.ii)(b) In the proof of point 3.i) we showed that all non-members are worse-off than in
the absence of the ties. This resulted from the fact that it is the members with high bargaining
power who enter the market, It is easily shown that a’El(ij)/az,aZ, > 0 for all zi, Z~ E [O,l]: the
degree to which you are hurt by your partner’s bargaining power decreases with IzJ. It is then
straightforward to demonstrate that the extent to which Ep(i) is reduced relative to Er(i) as a
result of integrating over a p.d.f. for zj that f o. stochastically dominates the uniform p.d.f. on
[O,l] is decreasing in Izi], i.e., the change in E+(i) - Er(i) w.r.t. lz,l is positive. Since Et-(j) is
increasing in lzil the percentage loss declines even more steep1y.a

00

0

alf

i

j 0;
a>h-l
h+l

w
1+1-)1+----2-----+f-----------33+--441
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
,
t
,
I
/
I
I
1
0
a/f
af
a
f

w

i

Figure A

