PROJECTED RETIREMENT WEALTH AND
SAVINGS ADEQUACY IN THE HEALTH
AND RETIREMENT STUDY

James F. Moore
Olivia S. Mitchell

Working Paper 6240

NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PROJECTED RETIREMENT WEALTH AND
SAVINGS ADEQUACY IN THE HEALTH
AND RETIREMENT STUDY

James F. Moore
Olivia S. Mitchell

Working Paper 6240
http://www.nber.org/papers/w6240

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02 13 8
October 1997

Research support for this study was provided by the Wharton School, the Penn Aging Research
Center, and the Boettner Center of Financial Gerontology. The authors remain solely responsible
for opinions contained herein. This paper is part of NBER’s research program in Aging. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
0 1997 by James F. Moore and Olivia S. Mitchell. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including 0 notice, is given to the source.

Projected Retirement Wealth and Savings
Adequacy in the Health and Retirement Study
James F. Moore and Olivia S. Mitchell
NBER Working Paper No. 6240
October 1997
JEL Nos. 514, G23, H55
Aging
ABSTRACT

Low saving rates raise questions about Americans’ ability to maintain consumption levels
in old age. Using the Health and Retirement Study, this paper explores asset holdings among a
nationally representative sample of people on the verge of retirement. Making reasonable
projections about asset growth, we assess how much more people would need to save in order to
preserve consumption levels after retirement. We find that the median older household has current
wealth of approximately $325,000 including pensions, social security, housing, and other financial
wealth, an amount projected to grow to about $380,000 by retirement at age 62. Nevertheless, our
model suggests that this median household will still need to save 16% of annual earnings to preserve
pre-retirement consumption. For retirement at age 65, assets are expected to be about $420,000 and
required additional saving totals 7% of earnings per year. These summary statistics conceal
extraordinary heterogeneity in both assets and saving needs in the older population. Older high
wealth households have 45 times more assets than the poorest decile and this disparity increases with
age. There are also large differences in prescribed saving targets, ranging from 38% of annual
earnings for those in the lowest wealth decile to negative rates for the wealthiest decile.

James F. Moore
Department of Insurance
and Risk Management
The Wharton School
3641 Locust Walk, 304 CPC
Philadelphia, PA 19 104-62 18
moore86@wharton.upenn.edu

Olivia S. Mitchell
Department of Insurance
and Risk Management
The Wharton School
3641 Locust Walk, 304 CPC
Philadelphia, PA 19 104-62 18
and NBER
mitchelo@wharton.upenn.edu

Projected Retirement Wealth and Savings Adequacy
in the Health and Retirement Study
James F. Moore and Olivia S. Mitchell

Future retirees will bear a larger responsibility for ensuring their own wellbeing in retirement, judging horn projected social security system insolvency and
the national shift from defined benefit to defined contribution private pension
plans. Yet household saving rates in the United States have dropped from over
10% in

the 1950’s to around 3% in the first half of the 1990’s (Gokhale et al. 1996).

This discouraging pattern raises serious concerns about Americans’ ability to
maintain consumption levels in old age. They are underscored by a recent research
controversy over whether workers are adequately prepared for retirement. A
comparison of baby boomers’ assets to those of their parents recently argued that
saving for retirement is on track (CBO 1993). But using a different benchmark, a
recent study concluded that US households were saving at only one-third the rate
needed to fund a comfortable retirement (Bernheim 1992, 1994). The present paper
contributesto this debate by using a rich new dataset, the Health and Retirement
Study, to explore patterns of asset accumulation and saving shortfall among a
cohort of older Americans. Our goals are to determine (1) how much retirement
wealth older people on the verge of retirement actually have, and (2) how much
more they would need to save if they wished to preserve consumption levels after
retirement. Our research will show that the median older household is projected to

Svg.doc - OWOW97 - Moore/Mitchell

2

have retirement wealth of approximately $400,000, yet will still need to save 16% of
annual income to preserve pre-retirement consumption. This summary statistic
conceals extraordinary heterogeneity in both assets and saving needs in the older
population.
In what follows we first discuss the rationale for the replacement rate model
and prior studies examinin g saving behavior. Next we describe wealth levels and
composition for HRS households in 1992, and show how those wealth patterns
would be expected to change at retirement ages of 62 and 65. These wealth
measures are then converted to saving rates, which are then compared to optimal
saving rates required to smooth lifetime consumption. A final section spells out
implications.

I. Saving Patterns and Replacement Rates in a Life Cycle Model

Economic models of saving behavior rely on a life cycle model in which
individuals are posited to maxim& e utility by smoothing consumption through
time. In this f&mework, people are predicted to save when they have periods of
relatively high
income, and dip into accumulated savings or borrow when income is
.
relatively low, including in retirement .I One recent study implementing an
augmented life cycle model derived optimal saving rate paths using dynamic
programming, in which the optimal saving path proves to increase in age up to

1 Franc0 Modigliani was a believer in this model that garnered him the Nobel prize. When asked
what he would do with his prize money, he is alleged to have responded that he would spend l/T of
it where T represented the remaining (and assumed known) years of life remaining.

Svg.doc - 08/05/97 - Moore/Mitchell

3

retirement (Bemheim 1992). 2 Predicted saving rates are then compared with
actual rates derived in empirical analysis of respondents. Bernheim concluded that
workers in his sample saved at only one-third (35%) the prescribed rate that they
should have been saving, if they sought to meet target consumption goals. However
this estimated shortfall omitted from peoples’ wealth levels the value of their net
housing wealth, on the argument that relatively few people liquidate their housing
on retirement.3 His calculations of saving shortfalls if housing assets are included
in retirement wealth is somewhat lower - on the order of about 16% per year. The
extent to which Bernheim’s results are generalizable is unclear, however, because
his sample is relatively small and better off than the average population. In
addition he focuses on the typical saving pattern rather than examining the
dispersion in saving shortfall, a topic of central interest below.
A different approach to the retirement saving question relies on a
“replacement rate” approach. As we describe below, this methodology evaluates the
ratio of household income needed to finance desired retirement consumption
relative to annual pre-retirement income. The object here is to equate pre2 Bernheim sblves backward from the household’s last possible period, T, in which all wealth and
income is assumed to be exhausted. Then the household is posited to maximize utility in period T- 1
given uncertainty of living to period T. Actual consumption (and hence saving) is determined by
solving for CT-I given U(CT), the utility of consumption; p,the rate of pure time preference (discount);
PT.1, the probability of surviving from time T-l to time T ; and the objective function max U(CT.I)+PT.
1 PU(C’T). The process is then resolved for periods back to the starting point, and under a range of
assumptions regarding other variables.
3 Whether housing wealth should be included in a tally of retirement assets is a hotly debated issue.
Retirees are often reluctant to move from the houses they lived in while working, in which case they
see their housing wealth as an emergency contingency fund (and possibly serves as a bequest). In
addition, moving costs can make accessing housing equity expensive. However we note that
housing wealth may be used to increase consumption through mechanisms such as second

Svg.doc - 08/05/97 - Moore/Mitchell

4

retirement and post-retirement consumption on an expected value basis4 Recent
work by Palmer (1988, 1991, 1993) uses several cross-section Consumer
Expenditure Surveys to examine this issue, and concludes that gross replacement
rates have varied over time depending on tax changes and household saving rates.
An invaluable dataset with which to explore older Americans’ wealth
positions as they near retirement is the Health and Retirement Study (HRS). This
extensive questionnaire on wealth and income was addressed to a nationally
representative sample of 7607 households in 1992, where at least one respondent
was age 51 to 61 and their spouses.5 Under certain restricted conditions,
researchers may also access special files needed for measuring pension and social
security wealth (described in more detail below). One previous study using these
data by Mitchell, Olson, and Steinmeier (hereafter MOS 1996), explored expected
present values of social security benefits for HRS respondents. A second analysis,
by Gustman, Mitchell, Samwick, and Steinmeier (hereafter GMSS 1997) examined
both pension and social security wealth for these same households, using actual
pension information and imputed or estimated social security data.

home equity loans, and reverse mortgages, so in this paper we include housing wealth in
the set of assets that could finance retirement.

mortgages,

4 From a theoretical economic perspective, this is less appealing than a true life cycle-dynamic
programmin g approach as it ignores utility theory and behavioral responses to uncertainty.
However, it is a popular model among retirement planning practitioners and can be seen as a
relatively tractable approximation or rule of thumb to the life cycle model.
5 The HRS is structured as a longitudinal or panel data set with households re-sampled every two
years, and should prove a fertile source for researchers in the future. Currently only the first wave
is available in public release, and only public release data can be merged with the pension and
social security data to be described below. Further information on the HRS is available by Internet
at http://www.umich,edu/-hrswww.
Svgdoc - 05/05/97 - Moore/Mitchell

These two studies show that estimated median total household wealth for
HRS respondents on the verge of retirement totaled approsimately $340,000 in
1992 (mean values were approximately half a million dollars). Total wealth
depends on four components: net financial wealth, net housing equity, and the
present value of expected pension and social security benefits. At face value, these
wealth amounts would seem to indicate that the “average” HRS household is in
relatively good shape for retirement. But in a follow-up study, Mitchell and Moore
(hereafter MM, 1997) assess the adequacy of these asset accumulations, and
suggest that the median older American family faces a substantial saving shortfall.
Specifically, n/n/r project anticipated wealth as of age 65 for a hypothetical median
couple, and then compare this with the level of wealth needed to sustain the
family’s pre-retirement consumption derived from targets offered by Palmer (1994).
The required saving rate needed to build assets to desired levels for this
representative HRS household is quite high - between 13% - 23% of gross income
per year in the decade leading up to retirement. In the next section we will explore
whether this conclusion - derived for a representative couple - is informative for
the older population
as a whole.
‘\

II. Initial and Projected Wealth in the Health and Retirement Study

The present study improves on previous analyses in three ways. First, we
evaluate retirement wealth and saving needs for the entire nationally
representative sample of HRS households. This is important since focusing on a
median family conceals wide differences across the population, and asset levels are
S\*g.doc - OWOW97 - MoordMitchcll

quite disperse across older households. Second, our approach determines
replacement and saving rates jointly given the households earnings level and
projected assets to age 62 and 65. Third, we assess saving needs in the older
population as a whole, and describe these patterns by income and wealth level.
The starting point for our analysis is an examination of HRS households’ net
wealth levels. The primary components of this wealth can be broadly categorized
into four groups?
1) net financial wealth, including saving, investments, business assets, and
non-residential real estate less outstanding debt not related to housing;
2) net housing wealth, or the current market value of residential housing
less outstanding mortgage debt;
3) pension wealth, or the present value of employer-sponsored retirement
benefits; and
4) the present value of social security benefits.
“Current” values for net financial wealth and net housing wealth are those
reported by-respondents in the HRS 1992 survey. Values for pension and social
security wealth
reflect actuarial present values of these contingent income sources
.
based on service and salary through 1992 (see the Appendix). Pension wealth for
respondents with employer-provided pensions is calculated using software
developed at the Institute for Social Research at the University of Michigan This
software uses information collected f%om employers of HRS participants to calculate

ti All wealth values reported in this
Svgdoc - OWOY97 - Moore/Mitchell

paper are weighted by I-IRS sample weights.

7

benefit streams based on workers’ salary and service. Social security wealth is
calculated using administrative records on covered earnings and benefit formulas
available from the Social Security Administration as described in Mitchell, Olson
and Steinmeier (1996).
Values of current wealth by deciles are reported in Table 1. One result that
will not be surprising to many is the wide disparity of wealth across the population,
even though it is on the verge of retirement. The mean value in the tenth, or
wealthiest decile, is $1.8 million, or 45 times that of the mean value for the poorest
decile. The composition of this wealth also differs dramatically across wealth
deciles. For the poorest decile, the value of anticipated social security benefits is
greater than total wealth (107%), as a result of negative net housing wealth. At the
other end of the wealth distribution, expected social security benefits comprise less
than one-tenth of household wealth.
Graphical representations of the data are also useful. Dollar estimates of
total wealth appear in Figure 1, and wealth sources by percentage are given in
Figure 2. I&III values for almost all sources monotonically increase in total
wealth, but the relative importance of the individual components varies across
group. For example, to focus first on social security payments, the present value of
these benefits falls as a fraction of total wealth as wealth levels rise, because of the
plan’s redistributive benefit formulas. Net housing wealth is negative for the
lowest decile, indicating that these households have over-levered their housing
stock. Beyond the poorest group, housing assets rise as a fraction of wealth,
attaining almost one-fifth of wealth for households in the middle of the total wealth
Svgdoc - OS/O5/97 - Moore/Mitchell

8

distribution, and then fall in relative importance for the wealthiest households.
Net financial wealth is rare among the poorer half of the wealth distribution:
households in the bottom two-fifths have less than $50,000 in assets of this sort.
Only the top two-fifths of the population have more than $100,000 in net financial
assets.
Looking across the entire HRS sample, we see that the median household
group holds slightly over $325,000 in total wealth, while the mean household has
almost $480,000. Not only do levels differ; composition also varies across the mean
and median household. At the median, the split can be characterized as a “rule of
fifths.” Social security constitutes two-fifths of total wealth, and the other three
asset categories each comprise a fifth. This balance is shifted for the mean, since
net financial wealth plays a much more prominent role for wealthier households (it
comprises as much as two-thirds of wealth for the wealthiest group represented).
It is interesting to compare our results to those reported by GMSS (1997),
who obtained a mean value of almost $500,000 in total net wealth, and $340,000
for the median 10% of households.7 These are very close to our estimated values of
$478,000 a,nd
\ $325,000, respectively. Our figures differ because, first, GMSS
calculate a value for retirement health insurance ($7600 at the mean) which we do
not include; and second, our analysis uses social security wealth using actual
administrative earnings records. By contrast, GMSS did not use the restricted

7 The value for the median 10% is the mean value for those households falling between the 45th and
55th percentile of the wealth distribution. This value is presented instead of the true median to
allow for representative disaggregation.
Svg.doc - OWOY97 - Moore/Mitchell

administrative records data, but instead estimate it from self reported earnings
data. Their estimated figures of $134,000 and $145,000 for the mean and median
values are slightly higher - around 10% -- than our mean and median of $120,000
and $134,000 calculated using actual Social Security Administration records. 8
Our estimates for pension wealth are very close to theirs, differing by less than 10%
($l,OOO)at the mean, ($117,000 versus $116,000).
Having established current wealth levels and distributions for the HRS, the
nest step is to project existing assets to an assumed retirement age. We do this
because two households holding the same initial wealth in different forms could
prove to be in quite different circumstances a decade later, even assuming no
additional saving out of earnings. To examine this possibility we project assets to
two assumed retirement dates, the early and normal retirement ages for

social

security. Age 62 is the age of earliest entitlement for early social security
retirement benefits and also corresponds to the modal retirement age in the United
States. The social security normal retirement age, historically 65, is the age at
which an individual is eligible for full, unreduced Social Security benefits and is a
traditionaL.,benchmark age.9
\
While it is easy to specify an assumed retirement age for an individual, it is
more problematic for a married couple. Spouses do not necessarily retire at the
same time and even when they do, it is not clear which partner’s age keys the

d ChL‘3S recognize the upward bias of their numbers but were not permitted
1997) to combine pension with social security administrative data.

St.g.doc - OS/OS/97 - MoordMitcl~cll

at that time (February

10

decision. In the present study we follow HRS practice where the survey interviewer
designated as the primary respondent the household member with the greatest
knowledge of the household’s hancial matters. Usually this respondent was ageeligible for the HRS survey; in this case we assume the retirement assumption is
triggered on this person’s attainment of age 62 or 65. If the primary respondent
was not HRS age eligible, this guarantees that the secondary respondent is age
eligible. In this instance, we assume that the retirement age is keyed off the
attainment of 62 or 65 by this household member.
Asset values for each of these classes are projected to these retirement dates
using a range of projection technologies and assumptions.10 Net fLnancial wealth is
projected forward using averages of market returns based on historical rates.
Historical return rates are drawn from Ibbotson (1996). Housing wealth is projected
forward using survey data on the purchase price of the respondent’s house, year of
purchase, outstanding debt owed on homes, and mortgage payment amount and
frequency. The process consists of increasing the market value of the house into the
future, andalso reducing the debt outstanding on the house. We assume that the
market value
. of the house grows in line with the general inflation rate so there is
no real appreciation in housing values; rather what does change is the amount
owed on the house for those with outstanding mortgage values. Each mortgage
payment decreases the remaining principal on the mortgage. Respondents’ pension

9 Legislation is increasing the normal retirement age to 67 over a period of several years, and for a
few HRS respondents the normal retirement age will be age 66.
10 hIore discussion of projection methodology and rates of growth are given in the Appendix.
Svg.doc - OWOY97 - Moore/Mitchell

11

and social securitv wealth values are projected assuming workers remain employed
to their respective retirement ages. Pension benefits are derived based on the plan
provisions of employer provided pensions and respondents’ answers to salary and
years of service (where appropriate). Social security projected amounts are
computed as described in MOS (1996). Present values of benefits are calculated
using mortality, interest rate, inflation, and wage growth assumptions as described
in the Appendix; all values are in 1992 dollars.
Initial and projected wealth values for HRS respondents are reported in
Table 2. Median household wealth is anticipated to grow by almost 20% in real
terms by age 62, to slightly over $383,000. If retirement were postponed until 65,
the median household wealth value rises by approximately 30%, or $421,000. Mean
increases are similar in percentage terms and translate to wealth figures of
approsimately $566,000 and $625,000 at ages 62 and 65 respectively.
While percentage changes are similar by decile, those in the top two wealth
deciles are projected to have amassed considerable additional net worth. The
second wealthiest decile has more than $1 million dollars on average, and the
wealthiest has more than $2.3 million. For the wealthiest decile, this is largely due
to financial and business assets which make up some 60% of assets ($1.4 million).
Pension assets make up 23% ($535,000 on average), leaving social security and,
surprisingly, net housing wealth as relatively unimportant 8% each. Yet this is still
almost $200,000 for both. Pension wealth plays a larger role for the ninth decile
comprising some 38% of total wealth

Svgdoc - OS/O5/97 - MoorcIMitchell

12

The most dramatic change in projected benefits is attributable to increases in
pension wealth, which is found to rise by one-third by age 62, and by one-h&by
age 65 for the mean household. For the median respondent family, pension present
value figures rise by nearly one-half and three-quarters for the same ages. By
contrast, social security wealth increases only 743% by age 62, and by about 20% by
age 65. Much of this difference is attributable to the well-known nonlinear accrual
pattern common to employer pensions, rewarding additional service at older ages.
A smoother pattern characterizes social security benefits, since most HRS
households have already reached entitlement and additional service changes their
.
benefits by relatively little .11 About the mean and median, the different rate of
growth of these asset classes has relative little impact in changing the composition
of projected wealth. Pension wealth does play a slightly larger role at the assumed
retirement ages, mostly gaining a few percentage points from net housing wealth
and social security.
As social security plays a much greater role for the poorest decile, their
wealth gains to age 62 and 65 are relatively modest. The value of their social
security we,alth rises by about $6,000 to age 65, matched by gains in housing
wealth. Unfortunately, about half of these gains are offset by declines in the
average value of their fkancial and other assets, mainly due to decreases in vehicle

*I In other words the payroll tax at older ages is more of a true tax than at younger ages where
additional benefits may be accrued by extra years of contribution to social security.
Svgdoc - 08/05/97 - Moore/Mitchell

13 -

value . 12 At 65 this poorest decile still has total wealth of under $50,000, the vast
majority of which (98%) is comprised of future social security benefits.
It is important to note that averaging may mask significant differences at the
household level. For example, a household with $100,000 in pension wealth and
no housing assets at 55 looks very different at 62, than would an equivalent
household with a $100,000 house that is completely paid for. Both households will
look different than a household with the same $100,000 in net housing wealth but
with a substantial mortgage outstanding. Nonetheless, as we shall show below,
prospects are slim for projected movement across wealth deciles with age. Most of
those households that are projected to change deciles either move up or down a only
single decile. In other words, initial wealth is the best predictor of projected
retirement wealth: our estimated correlation between initial and projected wealth
to age 62 is 0.9’7. There is a much weaker correlation between initial earnings and
initial wealth, of 0.44, and a nearly identical correlation between earnings and
projected wealth.

III. Saving Needs, Replacement Rates, Wealth, and Income
,

Having established that asset holdings are quite disperse in the HRS, the
question remains as to what this implies about saving needs and replacement rates
for retirement. In this section we assess target replacement and saving rates

12 l\‘c assume vehicles depreciate over a lo-year period.
Svg,.doc - OS/O5/97 - Moore/Mitchell

14

jointly, given initial earnings levels and the households’ projected assets at age 62
and 65.
To solve for saving and replacement rate targets simultaneously, we begin
with the basic replacement rate concept. This equates net income pre-retirement to
net income post-retirement: l3

YP - G

- S = Y, - TF

0)

where YP is pre-retirement income, TP is pre-retirement taxes, S is saving,

YF

is

post-retirement income, and TF is pre-retirement taxes. Rearranging (l), dividing
through by YP, and expressing saving as a percent of income, S= s YP , gives the
formula for replacement rate, RR.
RR=

Yp ( l - s ) - Tp +TF
YP

Y,
=YP

(2)

The replacement rate gives a target income level such that a household may smooth
consumption before and after retirement.
The future income stream, YF , may then be converted to a level of wealth
needed to sustain that income level in retirement by multiplying by an appropriate
annuity factor,
AF .I1 Thus the wealth level required to maintain a smooth
.
consumption profile in retirement is:

13 One could estend the analysis by allowing for changes in specific consumption prior to and after
retirement and Palmer (1994) does this. In this paper we do not model this possibility and note that
consumption choices are a decision variable rather than an exogenous variable, dependent on assets
and income.
14 Annuity factors are calculated with the same assumptions used for valuing pension and social
security wealth, a real interest rate of 2.3%, and the moderate assumptions used in the long range
projections of the Social Security Administration. Annuity factors employ the SSA mortality tables
Svgdoc - OWOY97 - Moo&Mitchell

15

AF*Y,=AF”RR*Y, = AF[Y,(l-s)- Tp -I- TF]

.

(3)

The difference between this need level and the projected value of assets already
held by any given household, PROJ, is the amount that must be saved between now
and retirement, or the shortfall in projected retirement assets. This wealth shortfall
may be defined as:
AF*Y,-PROJ = AF[Y,(bs)-T,+T,]- PROJ

(4

The wealth shortfall may f5nally be used to determine a prescribed saving
rate. This rate represents what the households would need to save as a percent of
income each year until retirement to achieve the projected consumption standard.
Assuming that a wealth shortfall is met by saving some level percent of earnings
per year, the amount saved at retirement would be:
T

T

C Y,(l+JVg)’ (l+rhz)T-f s =sYcC (l+wg)' (l+ral)‘-’ = s Y, z
t=I

f=I

(5)

where YC is the household’s current income, and wg and rtn are assumed rates of
wage growth and return on savings, respectively. Using (4) and (5) we can then
solve for a rate of saving s. Equating the two equations and solving for s gives
s=

‘AF[Y, (l+wgy -Tp+TF]-PROJ
YJz+AF(l+wg)T]

(6)

We note that it is not appropriate to simply pick a desired replacement rate
and solve for the resulting saving rate, or vice-versa. This is because a given
replacement rate might imply an infeasible saving rate given a household’s
earnings and projected assets. In addition, taxes depend on how much the
(see hIOS 1996). For married couples the annuity factor used was a Joint and Survivor annuity
Svgdoc - OS/W97 - Moorc/Mitchcll

16

household has saved .15 Thus replacement rates and saving rates are determined
jointly through an iterative process. We fkst select an arbitrary replacement rate
as a starting point and use this replacement rate to determine an initial level of
post retirement income and taxes. Then resulting taxes are substituted into
equation (6) to obtain an implied saving rate. This saving rate is then substituted
into equation (2) to determine a new replacement rate. The process is then iterated
until saving and replacement rates converge such that both equations (2) and (6)
hold. For our calculations, reported earnings are used to determine taxes using the
IRS regulations in place for the 1991 tax year. Taxes are calculated using the
standard deductions and married couples are assumed to f3e jointly.16

IV. Saving and Replacement Rate Results

Saving and replacement rates are reported for the 6306 HRS households who
reported positive earned income in 1991. For this group, the median prescribed
saving rate for retirement at age 62 in this sample is 16.1%, which corresponds to a
replacement rate of 69%. The saving rate drops to a more modest 7.3% if
retirementisI. delayed to age 65, with a replacement rate of 78.1%. In other words,

paying ‘is% to the surviving spouse.
15 Depending on how the saving is done, the rate of saving may effect either pre-retirement taxes,
post-retirement-taxes, or both. For our current calculations we assume saving out of earnings is
done on an after-tax basis so it only affects post-retirement taxes; all pension saving is assumed to
be pre- tax.
‘6We do not account for state and local taxes in this version of the paper. To the extent that these
differ pre- and post-retirement, this may bias calculated replacement rates. If pre-retirement state
and local taxes were higher than post-retirement taxes, this would lead to replacement rates being
overstated.
Svg.doc - 08/05/97 - Moore/Mitchell

17

the later the retirement date, the lower is the prescribed saving rate needed to
achieve consumption smoothing.
Figure 3 illustrates the distribution of prescribed saving rates across HRS
households, who are alternatively assumed to retire at either age 62 or 65. Vertical
lines represent, respectively, a zero prescribed saving level, and the median of the
distribution. Both distributions have large tails below zero, indicating that there is
a substantial segment of the population for whom additional savings is not
prescribed. For retirement at 62, almost a third (31%) of the population is in this
zero-or-negative saving category; for retirement at age 65, some 40% of the
population is estimated to not need any further saving out of earnings beyond
accumulation occuring “automatically” through asset appreciation. The peak of the
density functions lies to the right of the medians, indicating that the modal, or most
commonly prescribed, saving rate is in excess of the mean and median rates.
To further describe the heterogeneity of saving and replacement rate
patterns across the HRS sample, we report median values in Table 3 sorted by 1992
wealth and .earnings deciles .17 One conclusion is that saving rates fall
monotonically,
\ and replacement rates rise, with wealth. Another conclusion is that
many people are unlikely to be able to save signifkantly for retirement without
making drastic changes in their current consumption levels. For the poorest decile,

17 hIedians are presented instead of means as they give a more accurate representation of typical
values within decilcs. Means give curious results because of the presence of outliers; for example, a
saving rate value for a household where earnings are at the lower extreme for earnings within a
wealth dccile might indicate significant dissaving as optimal behavior, possibly to the tune of large
multiples of earnings. Averaging that value with others more representative of the subsample
mulct drastically understate the prescribed saving rate for the “typical” household.
Svg.doc - OS/O3/97 - MoorcIMitchell

18

retirement at age 62 would require saving nearly 40% of pretax earnings. Waiting
to retire until 65 would require a more modest, yet still substantial, 27% of

gross

earnings. The pattern of saving shortfall extends quite far up the wealth
distribution: for each of the first four wealth deciles, prescribed saving rates to age
62 are greater than 20% of earnings and rates to age 65 are 13% or higher. By
contrast, prescribed saving rates are quite small at the top of the wealth
distribution. Those in the wealthiest decile have more than s&Cent assets to fund
a comfortable retirement, and for some, negative rates indicate that they could dip
into their stock of assets to enhance current consumption.18
Another interesting result is that saving patterns switch sign for households
in the eighth and ninth wealth deciles, inasmuch as they have positive prescribed
saving rates to age 62, but negative ones to 65. This indicates that their “optimal”
retirement age assuming no further saving might lie somewhere between these two
ages. Households towards the middle of the wealth distribution have what are
substantial but perhaps not impossible savings targets if they want to retire at age
62, needing-to save ll- 18 % of income. This would yield replacement rates of about
two-thirds of. current earnings. If they continued to work to age 65, annual saving
needs would be cut in half, and replacement rates rise to approximately threequarters of current earnings.

1s Of course, it is possible that these households may have a strong bequest motive, in which case
the pure replacement model may understate their need and taste for saving. To the extent that
thcrc is heterogeneity in the desire to provide bequests, those with a stronger motive likely have
accumulatedgreater assets to date and appear here as “over-savers.”
Svg.doc - 08/05/97 - Moore/Mitchell

19

A more traditional way of examinin g replacement and saving rates is to tally
these by household income rather than by wealth. The data in Panel B of Table 3
indicate that saving rates are quite negative for the lowest earnings decile: these
households would most likely desire to consume out of wealth prior to retirement if
they could. In practice, however, such households probably face substantial
liquidity constraints in that their wealth is not immediately available for
consumption. This would be the case for workers anticipating social security or
pension benefits at some future age.19
The results in Table 3B also show that prescribed saving rates rise with
earnings. Those in the second pay decile need to save a little less than 6% of
income to achieve a replacement rate of 85% by age 62. Without additional savings,
they could achieve current living standards by retiring some time before reaching
65. For higher earner deciles, double-digit saving is required to retire at 62 with
the same relative standard of living. Delaying retirement to age 65 cuts required
saving by 7- 1 l%, depending on the family’s earnings decile. Similarly, replacement
rates fall with earnings but rise with retirement age.
A conclusion that our data on assets and pay highlights is that saving and
replacement rates obscures the intertwined relationship between income and
wealth. Of course, people with higher earnings also tend to have greater wealth,
but this relationship is far from perfect given that the correlation between earnings
and initial wealth is only 0.44. Figure 4 plots prescribed saving rates as a function

Svg.doc - OS/OS/97 - Moore/Mitchell

20

of both earnings and wealth. Median prescribed saving rate values by earningswealth decile pairs are presented for an assumed retirement age of 62.*O Figure 5
presents the same information in a contour plot with contour lines at 5% intervals.
These figures illustrate substantial heterogeneity in prescribed saving rates within
the same income decile: most households fall along the “diagonal” with wealth
increasing with earnings, but there are some households with substantial wealth
given their earnings, as well as others whose net wealth seems low in comparison to
earnings. The “diagonal” corresponds to the sloped region in Figure 4, running
from the bottom left corner to the top right corner of the figure. The closeness of the
contour lines in Figure 5 point out that the topology of the surface in Figure 4 is
rather steep. In other words, saving rates for households falling along the diagonal
are very sensitive to small changes in income or assets.
Descriptive regressions of prescribed saving rates in Table 4 summarize some
of the complex multivariate relationships. Coefficients are calculated using median
regressions to minimize the effects of extreme observations. For each retirement
age, we first relate saving rates as quadratic functions of income and earnings
alone, andthen
add age and other indicator variables indicating whether the
.
household is comprised of a single male or female (versus a married couple),
whether individuals in that household have pension wealth, and whether the
household owns its own home.

19 In addition, their “desire” to consume out of future income may be overstated, inasmuch as
earnings esclude non-cash transfers such as food stamps and housing subsidies to the very poor.
“0 Plots for age 65 retirement look qualitatively very similar.
Svgdoc - 08/03/97 - Moore/Mitchell

21

All estimated parameters are statistically s@if&nt at conventional levels.
The estimates suggest that, about the median earnings level of $33,000, the effect of
an extra $100 per year in earnings is to raise the prescribed saving rate by 0.095%
(for retirement by 62) or by 0.097% (at age 65). That is, given the median saving
rate of 16.1%, raising the rate to 16.195% implies that $47.5 of the additional $100
in income would be saved? The effect of $1000 more total wealth on prescribed
saving is about the same for the median household, but in the opposite direction,
causing the saving rate to 62 to fall 0.097%. This translates to approximately $32
less in saving in the f&t year. The coefficients for single men and women reflect
the impact of different mortality rates by sex; since women live longer than men,
they need to save at a greater rate, and this difference is rather substantial. For
esample if age 62 retirement is the target, a woman’s prescribed saving rate would
esceed the otherwise equivalent man’s by 9.1%. The results also show that owning
a home and having a employer sponsored pension affect prescribed saving
substantially. Since “current” pension wealth and net home values are captured in
the initial household wealth variable, these estimated coefficients reflect additions
to future w?alth - in pensions due to additional service, contributions, and portfolio
returns where applicable, and in housing stock due to the paying down of
outstanding mortgage debt and home appreciation. The regressions indicate that
the presence of a pension reduces prescribed saving by 34% per year, while saving

21 Additional savings equals savings on the additional dollars of income
previous income, i.c. 0. I6 195* 100 + 0.00095*33,000.
S\*g.doc - OS/O5/97 - Moorc/Mitchcll

plus increase in saving on

22

done through the home is equivalent to saving an additional 7.6% out of annual
earnings at the median.

V. Discussion

We have explored the adequacy of asset holdings in the Health and
Retirement Study, a nationally representative survey of older Americans on the
verge of retirement. One conclusion is that despite seemingly large accumulations
of total retirement wealth, the majority of older households will not be able to
maintain current levels of consumption into retirement without additional saving.
In particular, the median HRS household has more than $380,000 dollars in
projected wealth by age 62, but would still have to save an additional 16% of
earnings to smooth consumption for age 62 retirement.
Another lesson from our analysis is the importance of retirement decisions in
generating adequate retirement consumption. Delaying retirement by only three
years reduces the saving burden substantially, and allows for a sizable increase in
consumption both before and after retirement. In our sample, if retirement were
delayed to age 65, the asset base would total $421,000 and prescribed additional
saving would be a relatively manageable 7% of earnings at the median.
We also show that initial and projected assets are distributed quite unevenly
across the older population. Therefore conclusions about the median household will
conceal extraordinary heterogeneity in saving needs among these households.
Small changes in earnings or assets may lead to sizable differences in prescribed
saving rates near the median. Average current holdings of the wealthiest HRS
Svg.doc - 08/05/97 - Moore/Mitchell

23

decile are 45 times those of the poorest decile, and 48 times that of the poorest by
age 62. This dispersion arises mainly because of pension and financial wealth,
since social security wealth is relatively evenly distributed and housing wealth does
not comprise a large fraction of assets for the wealthiest. Assets are more evenly
distributed across the other deciles, with the second highest group having 8 times
more total wealth than households in the second lowest.
How do our conclusions square with other research on saving patterns? One
way to compare them is to see how well prescribed saving rates f?om our
methodoloav align with actual rates, as in Table 5. Here we tabulate our saving
rates for HRS married couples and actual saving rates derived fkom the 1990
Consumer Eqenditure Survey (CES) for the worker group age 50-64 (Palmer
1994). The evidence indicates that actual saving rates are only about a third of the
levels prescribed by our calculations. *2
Another approach is to compare our results to those of Bernheim (1994), who
presents after-tax “target” saving rates around twice as large as ours for similarly
aged households. For example, his target saving rates for a married couple age 5564 with

(without) a pension and earnings of $30,000 is 12.1% (18.1%); at $50,000 it

is 19.2% (24.3%); and at $75,000 it is 22.9% (28.1%). Adjusting these rates to
reflect saving as a percent of gross income reduces them by approximately 20-30%.
However as noted earlier, Bernheim’s target rate calculations omit housing wealth,

22 Palmer’s (1994) shows that the 1984 and 1988 CES saving rates are higher for certain
groups, .wt they still fall short of our median prescribed rates.

Svg.doc - 08/05/97 - Moorc/MitcMl

earnings

24

which if included would narrow the difference between our prescribed saving rates
substantially?
A third way to assess the comparability of our results with those in the
literature is to compare projected replacement rates. Figure 6 shows our HRS
target replacement rates with those generated using the 1990 CES (Palmer 1994),
and some differences emerge. The HRS profiles both fall with earnings, in contrast
to those derived from the CES data which are flatter and rise for higher incomes.
Part of the difference between our results and Palmer’s is that his method implicitly
assumes observed saving rates are optimal. To the extent that retirement income is
not provided by social security, pensions, or existing assets, and needs to be
provided by additional saving, this will lead to Palmer’s replacement rates
overstating actual replacement rates .*d Palmer’s research also assumes an age 65
retirement age . We also note that the age-65 replacement rate for the HRS sample
is substantially above the age 62 rate, illustrating the importance of retirement
ages in the methodology. If retirement occurs earlier, and empirical evidence
suggests it does, this is further cause to believe that average actual replacement
rates fall below those estimated by Palmer.

z3 Another way to think about housing wealth is that mortgage payments have both an investment
component and a consumption component. The investment component recognizes the purchase of
the house as an investment in a tangible asset. The consumption component represents what the
homeowner would pay for housing services, or for the non-homeowner, rent. Since shelter is a large
consumption expense, paying off the mortgage represents a substantial decrease in income required
to cover consumption needs or a prefunding of later housing consumption.
” Schieber (1996) offers additional criticism of Palmer’s methodology arguing that that are upwardly biased.
Svgdoc - 08/05/97 - Moore/Mitchell

25

One question we have not yet explored in any depth is why observed saving
patterns appear to fall short of target saving benchmarks, both ours and others
such as Bernheim’s. One possible answer is that some households are simply too
poor to defer consumption, but this appears unlikely for those other than the
poorest in our sample. Other possible explanations center around informational
issues, for example, households may simply underestimate their likely life
expectancy in retirement, though recent research by Hurd and McGarry ( 1995)
suggests that HRS respondents have quite reasonable forecasts of survival
probabilities into old age. An additional hypothesized explanation is that people
discount the future to varying degrees and some may do so very heavily. The rich
set of standard and experimental questions in the HRS and future information
provided by these households may provide clues to discovering the answers.

Svgdoc - 0,0/W/97 - Moore/Mitchell

26
Data Appendix: Wealth Projections Using the Health and Retirement Study
In this Appendi.-.- we describe briefly the methods used to project elements of retirement
wealth forward to age 62 and 65 for the HRS sample described in the text.
A. Social Security Wealth
Social security wealth measures are contained in the Earning and Benefits File (EBF), a
restricted dataset available under controlled access conditions and described in Mitchell, Olson and
Steinmeier (1996). This file reports covered earnings under the social security law and estimated
old-age and disability benefit amounts for HRS respondents who gave permission for administrative
data to be linked to their survey responses. Retirement benefits are calculated based on earnings
through 1991 and projected earnings to age 62 (the eligibility age for early retirement benefits), and
also to the social security normal retirement ages (65 for most HRS participants). In addition the
EBF file indicates household wealth figures which for married couples includes spouse and
survivor benefits.
Assumptions used to compute these benefit amounts are consistent with those used by the
Social Security Administration (SSA) under its “intermediate assumptions” scenario outlined by the
Social Security Trustees to forecast the system’s fiscal status. Details of the calculations of Social
Security benefit amounts, present values, and other available variables are described in Mitchell, et
al. (1996). Of the 7607 HRS households, 4334 had useable Social Security wealth from the EBF file.
For those households where earnings records were not available, values were imputed using
HRS dataset. Separate regression models were constructed for married couples and households
with single individuals. The coefficients of the prediction model were estimated using the sample
for which EBF social security wealth was available. Regressor variables used were those common
to all households in the HRS dataset and include male earnings, female earnings, financial net
wealth, net housing wealth, respondent age, spouse’s age, a dummy for white primary respondents,
and a dummy for single female, with the log of social security wealth as the dependent variable.
Estimated coefficients were used out of sample to estimate social security wealth for those
households not appearing in the EBF.
B. Pension Wealth
The Institute for Survey Research (ISR) at the University of Michigan asked HRS
respondents covered by employer-provided pensions for permission to contact their employers for
information about these pension plans. Having obtained the names and addresses of the employers,
ISR requested a pension plan Summary Plan Description (SPD) for each worker’s current and past
plans, and followed up with requests for the SPD at the US Department of Labor where employersupplied documents were not obtained. The SPDs were then coded using a format developed at ISR,
and combined with a special software program developed by Curtain and others (1997). The
software uses information collected from the SPDs to calculate benefit streams based on
respondents’salary profiles and service, at alternative retirement ages. Vested terminated benefits
as well as ben’efits available from current pension plans are included in the analysis in this paper.
The employer sponsored pension information and pension provider software are in the
developmental phase and can currently be accessed only under restricted conditions.
Mortality, interest rate, inflation, and wage growth valuation assumptions are consistent
with those used by the Social Security Administration in its annual reporting to Congress. For
defmed benefit plans, present values tire calculated assuming a 2.3% real interest rate and a 4.0%
inflation assumption (implying a 6.3% nominal discount rate). For defined contribution plans, real
returns on contribution balances are assumed to be 4.0% annually (8.0% nominal). The same
assumption is used for calculating present values. The pension provider software does not permit
different assumptions for contribution growth and discounting, but we feel it is appropriate to use
the higher discount rate in the defined contribution pensions plans due to the greater uncertainty of
future benefit levels. Defined benefit plans sponsored by HRS participants’ current employers are
assumed to pay cost of living adjustments of half the inflation rate, mirroring historical practice.
Benefits from previous employers and defmed contribution plans are assumed to have no cost of

Svgdoc - OWOY97 - Moore/Mitchell

27

living adjustment. The percentage of plans for which we were able to use the ISR software to
estimate the present value of plan benefits varied by plan type, but was generally between 60%70%.
For those households where pension plan data were not generated by the ISR software,
values were imputed using I-IRS dataset. Separate regression models were constructed for each
pension type. Regressor variables used were those common to all households in the I-IRS dataset
and include earnings, age, service in the plan, dummies industry, job description, race, sex, and
union status. The log of pension wealth is the dependent variable. Estimated coefficients were
used out of sample to estimate pension wealth for those households with missing pension data.
C. Housing Wealth
Net housing wealth reported in the HRS is the value of owner-occupied primary housing
less debt owed on the property. The projected net value we use in this study is derived as the
projected market value of the housing less projected debt. We assume that the market value of
housing assets is constant in real dollars, or in other words, the increase in home value is equal to
the assumed rate of inflation. Projecting debt is more complicated, as will be explained.
The I-IRS provides information on first mortgages, second mortgages, home equity loans,
and lines of credit against housing equity. To roll forward debt we need a) the outstanding balance
on the mortgage or other debt, b) the payments and frequency of payments on that debt, and c) the
interest rate on the debt. The HRS provides the fast two of these three which necessitates the use
of alternative sources for the mortgage rate.
Given the purchase date of the house, a datum reported by HRS respondents, we use
historical interest rates as prosies for current rates. However this ignores the possibility that the
homeowner refinanced his mortgage. We know that interest rates fluctuate over time, and a
common “rule of thumb” has the mortgage holder refinance when rates drop by more than 200 basis
points (2%). Therefore, for esample, using the blay 1980 average 30 year mortgage rate for a house
purchased in May 1980 would likely overstate the actual interest costs for many if not most
households. A different approach would be to take the purchase price of the house reported in the
HRS. the payment amount, and some assumption regarding the term of the mortgage (e.g.: assume
a 30 year fised-rate mortgage). This has the problem that many households’ mortgage payments
include their property tases, homeowners insurance premiums, or both. Imputing mortgage
interest rates from the raw payments would bias upward the derived mortgage interest rates.
Data from another survey mitigates some of these problems. The American Housing Survey
(AHS; 1993) provides interest rate data for houses in its sample. From this source, we calculate a
series of actual mortgage rates paid by averaging conditional on year of home purchase and use
these to roll forward first mortgage debt. Analysis of these rates as opposed to issue rates indicate
that they embed substantial refinancing for periods such. as the early 1980’s. For years prior to
1953 where data are thin, or where HRS households do not indicate a year of purchase, we use the
average mortgage interest rate for the sample, approximately 8.5%.
The &IS also has information on tax and insurance payments. These in addition to tax
payment information contained in the HRS are used to calculate an effective mortgage payment, or
the amount of the mortgage that actually services the debt. HRS households indicate whether
given payments include tases, insurance, both, or neither. When taxes are given, these are used to
reduce mortgage payments. When they are not the average rate of tax as a percent of payment as
calculated from the AI-IS is used instead. A similar procedure is used for insurance payments when
they are included in mortgage payments. The AI-IS derived values for taxes and insurance are
18.11% and 5.90% of mortgage payments, respectively.
For second mortgages and home equity loans the HRS does not contain information on year
of issue. These amounts are therefore projected forward using the average rate on such debt from
the AI-IS, approximately 9.5%.
Missing observations on mortgage payment amounts are imputed assuming a 30 year fL.ed
mortgage at the rate associated with the purchase year when purchase year and price are available.
When this information is unavailable, it is assumed that the payments are such that the mortgage

S\*g.doc - 05/05/97 - MoorcYMitcl~clI

28

is paid off at age 70. For missing secondary debt, a IO-year term is assumed to pay off the
remaining balance. There are 123, 47, and 36 missing payments that are imputed in this manner,
respectively
D. Other Financial Wealth
Other financial wealth includes such assets as savings, investments, business assets, and
non-residential real estate less outstanding debt not related to housing. Asset values in 1992 are
provided by HRS respondents. To obtain projected net financial assets, as noted in the text, we
project individual components of this asset category separately. That is, equity components of
assets are projected in line with historical equity returns, bond returns are used to project fixed
income holdings, and personal business assets are projected using the equity rate of return.
Assumed growth rates are geometric averages of real returns over the period 1926.‘95 as
calculated using the Stocks, Bonds, Bills, and Inflation series from Ibbotson Associates.
The components of net financial wealth as tabulated in the HRS and the rates used to
project them:
- Vehicle and RV Wealth - Depreciated over ten years using straight line depreciation.
- Checking, Savings, money market accounts - Real t -bill rate (0.5%)
- CD’s, savings bonds, T-bills - Real t-bill rate (0.5%)
- IRA’s and Keough Accts. - 50150 Corporate Bonds/Stocks (2.3%/7.2%)
- Stocks, Mutual Funds - Stocks (7.2%)
- Business Equity - Stocks (7.2%)
- Other Assets, Real Estate, Second Home - held constant in real terms
- less other debt, second home debt - held constant since we lack other information to estimate
changes in value

Svgdoc - OWOY97 - Moore/Mitchell

29

References
Bernheim, B. Douglas, 1992. “Is the Baby Boom Generation Preparing Adequately for Retirement?”
Technical Report. Princeton, N. J., Merrill Lynch.
Bernheim, B. Douglas, 1994. “The Merrill Lynch Baby Boom Retirement Index” Summary Report
Merrill Lynch, 1994.
Case, Karl E., 1994. “Land Prices and House Prices in the United States”. In Housing Markets in
the United States and Japan, Y. Noguchi and J.M. Poterba, eds., Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Curtin Richard T. 1997. “Employer Sponsored Pension Plan Documentation: Pension Estimation
Program Software Documentation”. University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. Updated April 1997.
Congressional Budget Office, 1993. “Baby Boomers in Retirement: An Early Perspective’.
Washington, D.C., U.S. Government Printing Office.
Gokhale, Jagadeesh, Laurence J. Kotlikoff, and John Sabelhaus, 1996. “Understanding the Postwar
Decline in U.S. Saving: A Cohort Analysis”, Brookings Papers on Economic Actibty 1, pp.315-407.
Gustman, Alan L., Olivia S. Mitchell, Andrew A. Samwick, and Thomas L. Steinmeier, 1997.
“Pension and Social Security Wealth in the Health and Retirement Study”. NBER Working Paper,
February.
Hurd, Michael D. and Kathleen McGarry. “Evaluation of the Subjective Probabilities of Survival in
the Health and Retirement Study,” Journal of Human Resources 30, Supplement 1995, pp. S268s292.
Ibbotson .\ssociates, 1996. Stocks, Bonds, Bills, and Inflation: 1996 Yearbook. Chicago, IL.
McGill, Dan M., Kyle N. Brown, John J. Haley, and Sylvester J. Schieber, 1996. Fundamentals
PGnte Pensions , Seventh Edition. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.

of

Mitchell, Olivia S. and James F. Moore, 1997. “Retirement Wealth Accumulation and
’
Decumulation:- New Developments and Outstanding Opportunities”. Wharton Financial
Institutions Center Working Paper, The Wharton School, Philadelphia, March.
Mitchell, Olivia S., Jan Olson, and Thomas Steinmeier, 1996. “Construction of the Earnings and
Benefits File @BF) for Use with the Health and Retirement Study’. NBER Working Paper 5707.
Cambridge, Mass.
Palmer, Bruce -4. 1988. The Impact of Tax Reform on Wage Replacement Ratios. Atlanta: Georgia
State University, Center for Risk Management and Insurance Research.
Palmer, Bruce A 1991. 1991 Georgia State University/Ah?xander & Alexander Consulting GFOU~
RETIRE Project Report. Atlanta: Georgia State University, Center for Risk Management and
Insurance Research.
Palmer, Bruce A 199% I993 Georgia State University/Alexander & Alexander Consulting Group
RETIRE Project Report. Atlanta: Georgia State University, Center for Risk Management and
Insurance Research.

Svg.doc - 03/03/97 - Moo&Mitchell

30

Palmer, Bruce ,4. 1994. “Retirement Income Replacement Ratios: An Update”. Benefits Quarterly.
Second Quarter: 59-69.
Schieber, Sylvester J. 1996. “Conceptual and PvIeasurement Problems in Contemporary h/leasures
of Income Needs in Retirement”. Benefits Quarterly. Second Quarter: 56-68.
Social Security Advisory Council (SSAC), Report of the 1994-l 996 Advisory Council on Social
Security, Volumes I and II, Washington, D.C.: Social Security Administration, 1996.
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, 1994. American Housing Survey, 1991:
National File, Washington, D.C.

Svg.doc - 08/05/97 - Moore/Mitchell

Table 1: Mean Value and Composition of HRS Wealth (1992) by Wealth Decile

Wealth
Decile

Total
Wealth

Net Housing
Wealth

1

$ 39,470 $

2

97,452

11,052
11%

3

156,288

4

Net Financial
Wealth

Social Security
Wealth

42,312 $
107%

1,356
3%

10,579
11%

69,239
71%

6,583
7%

24,951
16%

18,235
12%

93,920
60%

19,181
12%

219,797

37,095
17%

32,632
15%

115,224
52%

34,845
16%

5

287,692

53,787
19%

55,020
19%

128,377
45%

50,509
18%

6

364,802

68,637
19%

75,793
21%

136,116
37%

84,255
23%

7

459,858

81,432
18%

109,811
24%

142,981
31%

125,635
27%

8

590,079

95,414
16%

159,054
27%

149,310
25%

186,301
32%

9

804,934

112,039
14%

265,967
33%

158,976
20%

267,953
33%

1,764,414

180,894
10%

1,032,049
58%

161,605
9%

389,865
22%

478,313

65,940
14%

175,974
37%

119,793
25%

116,606
24%

325,157

59,746
18%

66,530
20%

133,606
41%

65,275
20%

10

\

Total Sample
Mean

Median 10%

(5,719) $
-14%

1,520 $
4%

Pension
Wealth

‘\

All values in 1992 dollars and calculated using HRS sampling weights.

Table 2: Mean Value of HRS Wealth (1992 and Projected) by Wealth Decile

Wealth
Decile

Current
Wealth

Projected
Wealth at
Ace 62

Projected
Wealth at
Ace 65

1

$ 39,470

$ 43,804

$ 49,031

2

97,452

109,578

121,123

3

156,288

182,494

202,946

4

219,797

256,636

283,184

5

287,692

338,153

372,701

6

364,802

429,253

471,308

7

459,858

543,397

595,408

8

590,079

699,681

763,756

9

804,934

944,894

1,030,054

1,764,414

2,117,052

2,362,963

Total Sample
Mean
-Housing
-Financial
-Social Security
-Pension
-

478,313
65,940
175,974
119,793
116,606

566,431
76,410
205,653
128,712
155,656

625,066
80,507
228,133
142,018
174,408

M e d i a n 1 0 % b.
,.
-Housing
-Financial
-Social Security
-Pension

325J 57
59,746
66,530
133,606
65,275

382,678
71,097
71,004
143,864
96,713

420,537
75,047
77,175
160,824
113,491

10

All values in 1992 dollars and calculated using HRS sampling weights.

Table 3: Median Prescribed Saving and Replacement Rates

A. By 1992 Wealth Decile
Saving to Age 62
Median
Household
Net Wealth

Wealth
Decile
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Replacement
Rate

Saving
Rate

Replacement
Rate

156,600
220,500
286,500
364,000
458,900
587,800
792,600
1,363,OOO

38.3%
32.7%
26.8%
24.0%
18.1%
17.0%
11.4%
7.0%
1 .O%
-25.4%

48.7%
52.5%
58.3%
60.3%
67.5%
67.0%
73.3%
78.9%
88.3%
126.8%

26.9%
21.3%
15.5%
13.6%
8.9%
8.5%
3.0%
-0.9%
-6.1%
-35.0%

58.8%
61.7%
67.7%
69.1%
76.1%
75.6%
81.4%
87.1%
96.6%
137.1%

325,000

16.1%

69.0%

7.3%

78.1%

43,900
97,600

Total
Sample

Saving
Rate

Saving to Age 65

B. By 1992 Earnings Decile

Saving to Age 62
Household
Earninqs

Earnings
Decile
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Total
Sample

.

Saving
Rate

Replacement
Rate

Saving to Age 65
Saving
Rate

Replacement
Rate

4,500
11,930
17,500
24,000
30,000
37,000
45,000
54,050
70,000
102,000

-122.5%
5.9%
13.5%
15.1%
18.0%
16.7%
17.0%
18.4%
20.3%
23.7%

218.8%
84.8%
75.1%
73.3%
68.6%
67.1%
64.3%
62.3%
60.2%
57.8%

-132.8%
-4.6%
2.2%
4.3%
7.3%
8.1%
9.8%
10.6%
12.6%
16.5%

227.8%
93.4%
84.6%
82.2%
77.8%
75.6%
73.6%
72.0%
69.8%
67.6%

33,000

16.1%

69.0%

7.3%

78.1%

All values in 1992 dollars and calculated using HRS sampling weights.

Table 4: Descriptive Regression of Prescribed Saving Rates

Prescribed Saving
Rate to Age 62
Household

Earnings

Prescribed Saving
Rate to Age 65

1 .Ol E-05
89.46

l.O3E-05
125.94

l.O9E-05
89.14

l.O5E-05
101.37

Earnings Squared
+ 10,000

-1 .18E-07
-66.24

-1.22E-07
-95.43

-1.35E-07
-69.76

-1.24E-07
-76.85

Total Household
Wealth

-9.93E-07
-93.44

-9.73E-07
-119.81

-1 .Ol E-06
-87.07

-9.60E-07
-93.79

Wealth Squared
+ 100,000

9.71 E-09
45.75

9.18E-09
57.93

9.12E-09
39.34

7.27E-09
36.29

Single Male

-0.0733
-9.06

-0.1304
-12.77

0.0181
3.02

-0.0458
-6.04

Primary Respondent
Age

0.00402
9.11

0.00152
2.72

Have Pension

-0.0341
-7.18

-0.0389
-6.49

Own Home

-0.0767
-13.08

-0.0764
-10.307

Single Female

Constant

-

i
Pseudo R2
N
Wtd. Sum of Absolute
Deviations

0.131
24.87

-0.0111
-0.442

0.0127
2.217

0.0415
1.3

0.0862
6306

0.0893
6306

0.0846
6306

0.0884
6306

7808.74

7782.49

7782.49

7978.5

Note: Coefficients estimated using median regressions to minimize
effects of extreme outliers. Coefficients calculated using HRS
household sampling weights. T-statistics appear below
estimated coefficient values.

Table 5: Comparison of Prescribed Saving Rates from HRS and Actual Rates from CES

HRS Prescribed Rates
Household
Earninas

6
Acre 2

Actual CES
Savina Rates

Aae 65

20,000

6.0%

-1.9%

?

2.3%

30,000

16.8%

8.5%

>

2.8%

40,000

17.7%

10.0%

>

3.3%

50,000

17.9%

11.1%

>

3.7%

60,000

20.2%

13.1%

>

4.1%

70,000

20.3%

13.5%

>

4.5%

80,000

21.1%

14.2%

>

5.0%

90,000

20.5%

13.3%

>

5.4%

Prescribed saving rates calculated using HRS (1992); Median values given
for married couples with earnings within t 5000 of reported earnings using
HRS household sampling weights.
CES Saving rates taken from Palmer’s (1994) calculations using the 1990
Consumer Expenditure Survey for respondents age 50-64. Rates are
adjusted to reflect saving asa percentage of total earnings.

,

:.

c

.

\

0

I I

5
.Y
.tn

I I

1 I

I t

I I

t

\ I t

Figure 3. Distribution of Prescribed Saving Rates
A. Retirement at age 62
2

1.5

.5

0
-1

d
saving rate to first ret (62) n

1

Kernel Density Estimate
6. Retiremc t at Age 65

.5

0
I

-1

I

0

saving rate to second ret (651

Kernel Density Estimate

I

1

FYgure 4. Prescribed Saving Rates by 1992 Earnings and Wealth

Plot of prescribed saving rates for retirement at age 62. Values are the median prescribed
saving rate for each earnings- wealth decile pair.

..

Figure 5. Contour Plot of Prescribed Saving Rates to Age 62

2

4

6

8

10

Contour plot of prescribed saving rates for retirement at age 62. X-axis is wealth decile. Y-axis is
earnings decile. Shading represents different prescribed levels of saving with the darkest representing
zero or negative prescribed saving, and ligher regions representing need for greater saving. Contour lines
are at intervals of 5.0%. Contour plot corresponds to figure 4.

