ARE ALCOHOLICS IN BAD JOBS?


         Don Kenkel
         Ping Wang


      Working Paper 6401
                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              ARE ALCOHOLICS IN BAD JOBS?




                                           Don Kenkel
                                           Ping Wang




                                       Working Paper 6401
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w6401


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 1998


This is a paper under preparation for an NBER Conference volume on The Economic Analysis of
Substance Use and Abuse: An Integration of Econometric and Behavioral Economic Research (held
March 27-28, 1997, Cambridge, MA). Part of this paper was completed while the second author was
visiting Rochester, Tilburg (The Netherlands) and Washington (Seattle). We would like to thank Eric
Bond, Frank Chaloupka, Mike Grossman, Sharon Hall, Mark Kleiman, John Mullahy, and seminar
participants at Cornell, Miami, Penn State and Syracuse, as well as at the 1996 Southern Economic
Association, the 1997 American Economic Association Meetings, and the NBER Conference for
useful comments and suggestions. The usual disclaimer applies. Any opinions expressed are those
of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 1998 by Don Kenkel and Ping Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Are Alcoholics in Bad Jobs?
Don Kenkel and Ping Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 6401
February 1998

                                            ABSTRACT

       Alcohol abuse has important implications for the productivity of the U.S. workforce. The lost
earnings of workers suffering from alcohol problems have been estimated at $36.6 billion in 1990.
After completing schooling, young workers face critical labor market choices with long-ranging
consequences for future jobs and lifetime earnings, while many of them also drink alcohol to excess.
In this paper, we provide evidence on whether the drinking choices of young adults also have long-
ranging consequences for future jobs and lifetime earnings. In doing so we extend previous research
on the productivity effects of alcohol to include non-wage job attributes as part of total employee
compensation. The goal of this research is to establish benchmark empirical patterns describing
relationships between alcoholism and job choice. Our empirical results based on the National
Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY) data show that male alcoholics are less likely to receive a
variety of fringe benefits, are more likely to be injured on the job, and work for smaller firms. When
the conventional methodology is extended to include non-wage job attributes, of an estimated total
loss of $2,380 per alcoholic, about $450, or almost 20% or the total, is the value of the lost fringe
benefits. The data also show that male alcoholics are less likely to be in a white collar occupation but
conditional upon being in a white collar occupation their earnings are similar to their non-alcoholic
peers. While alcoholics are more likely to be in a blue collar occupation, conditional upon being in
such an occupation they are estimated to earn 15 percent less than their non-alcoholic peers. These
findings can help evaluate more systematically and more accurately the potential effects and
interactions between alcohol, education, and income policies and health policy.




Don Kenkel                                                     Ping Wang
Department of Policy Analysis and Management                   Department of Economics
Cornell University                                             The Pennsylvania State University
120A MVR                                                       601 Kern Building
Ithaca, NY 14685                                               University Park, PA 16802
dsk10@cornell.edu                                              pxw4@psu.edu
