EMPLOYMENT AS A DRUG ABUSE
 TREATMENT INTERVENTION:
  A BEHAVIORAL ECONOMIC
         ANALYSIS


      Kenneth Silverman
        Elias Robles


      Working Paper 6402
                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             EMPLOYMENT AS A DRUG ABUSE
                              TREATMENT INTERVENTION:
                               A BEHAVIORAL ECONOMIC
                                      ANALYSIS




                                        Kenneth Silverman
                                          Elias Robles




                                        Working Paper 6402
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w6402



                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 1998


This paper was prepared for an NBER conference on The Economic Analysis of Substance Use and
Abuse: An Integration of Econometric and Behavioral Economic Research (held March 27-28, 1997,
Cambridge, MA). Supported by grants R01 DA09426 and P50 DA09258 from the National Institute
on Drug Abuse. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

© 1998 by Kenneth Silverman and Elias Robles. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Employment as a Drug Abuse Treatment Intervention:
A Behavioral Economic Analysis
Kenneth Silverman and Elias Robles
NBER Working Paper No. 6402
February 1998

                                           ABSTRACT

       Epidemiological data and experimental research in the fields of operant conditioning and
behavioral economics suggest that employment may be useful in the treatment of drug abuse. The
conditions under which employment should decrease drug use depends on a range of environmental
contextual factors, some of which have been classified or suggested by adapting the economic
concepts of income, substitutability and complementarity, and opportunity cost to the analysis of
behavior. A job can occupy a substantial portion of a person’s day with work, thereby reducing the
amount of time available for drug consumption (i.e., employment reduces behavioral income for drug
use). Because money buys drugs, monetary pay for work may increase or sustain drug use,
suggesting a potential undesirable by-product of employment (i.e., money and drugs appear to be
complementary reinforcers). Finally, employment may decrease drug use to the extent that drug use
results in loss of wages or job termination (i.e., employment may impose an opportunity cost of drug
use). This paper reviews research in these three areas with the goal of identifying an effective
employment-based treatment intervention for chronically unemployed methadone patients, a group
of individuals sorely in need of effective interventions to reduce their drug use and improve their
employment status. Research on behavioral income restrictions, reinforcer substitutability and
complementarity, and opportunity cost suggests that the utility of employment as a drug abuse
treatment intervention depends, in large part, on the extent to which employment is used to arrange
substantial monetary reinforcement for drug abstinence and opportunity cost for drug use. In this
capacity, employment could serve a valuable role in the treatment of hard-core drug abuse as a
vehicle for funding, implementing, and sustaining reinforcement contingencies for drug abstinence and
opportunity cost for drug use, procedures which have been shown in controlled clinical trials to be
among the more effective drug abuse treatments currently in use.


Kenneth Silverman                                     Elias Robles
Department of Psychiatry                              Department of Psychiatry
   and Behavioral Sciences                               and Behavioral Sciences
Johns Hopkins University                              Johns Hopkins University
   School of Medicine                                    School of Medicine
5510 Nathan Shock Drive                               5510 Nathan Shock Drive
Baltimore, MD 21224                                   Baltimore, MD 21224
