HUMAN CAPITAL AND PREDATION:
A POSITIVE THEORY OF
EDUCATIONAL POLICY

Herschel I. Grossman
Minseong Kim

Working Paper 6403

NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HUMAN CAPITAL AND PREDATION:
A POSITIVE THEORY OF
EDUCATIONAL POLICY

Herschel I. Grossman
Minseong Kim

Working Paper 6403
http://www.nber.org/papers/w6403

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 1998

We acknowledge helpful comments from Juan Mendoza and Suk Jae Noh. We also appreciate the
comments from the seminar participants at the Macroeconomic Workshop of the Korea Econometric
Society, at the Midwest Macroeconomics Conference, at Hong Kong University of Science and
Technology, and at Instituto Technologico Autonomo de Mexico. Any opinions expressed are those
of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 1998 by Herschel I. Grossman and Minseong Kim. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Human Capital and Predation: A Positive Theory
of Educational Policy
Herschel I. Grossman and Minseong Kim
NBER Working Paper No. 6403
February 1998
JEL Nos. D31, D74, H40, I28
ABSTRACT
This paper offers an explanation for observed differences across countries in educational
policies and in resulting interpersonal distributions of human capital. We analyze a generalequilibrium model in which, as a result of the apportionment of natural ability, nurturing, and publicly
financed education, some people can be well endowed with human capital, whereas other people are
poorly endowed with human capital. We assume that people can choose to be either producers or
predators. An increase in a person’s human capital makes predation a less attractive choice for that
person. As a result, it is possible that by using some of their human capital to educate the poorly
endowed people rather than to produce consumables the well endowed people can increase their own
consumption. We also find that the nature of the educational policy that maximizes the consumption
of the well endowed people depends on the ability of producers to enforce a collective choice of the
amount of resources to be allocated to guarding against predators. Our theory predicts that, if
producers collectively choose the amount of guarding against predators, then the well endowed
people prefer a relatively egalitarian educational policy that increases the human capital of all of the
poorly endowed people. Such an educational policy either decreases the cost of deterring predation
or makes deterrence possible. In contrast, if producers or small subsets of producers individually
choose the amount of their resources to allocate to guarding, taking the ratio of predators to
producers as given, then the well endowed people prefer a more elitist educational policy that
decreases the number of poorly endowed people, thereby decreasing the number of predators, without
increasing the human capital of the remaining poorly endowed people. These implications seem to
be consistent with the facts about differences across countries in educational policy.

Herschel I. Grossman
Department of Economics
Brown University
Box B
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
herschel@brownvm.brown.edu

Minseong Kim
Department of Economics
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA 15260

