DOES DRUG USE CAUSE POVERTY?


        Robert Kaestner


       Working Paper 6406
                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            DOES DRUG USE CAUSE POVERTY?




                                         Robert Kaestner




                                       Working Paper 6406
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w6406




                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 1998




This paper has been prepared for the National Bureau of Economic Research conference, The
Economic Analysis of Substance Use and Abuse: An Integration of Econometric and Behavioral
Economic Research, March 27 and 28, 1997, Cambridge, Massachusetts. The author thanks Chris
Ruhm for his helpful comments and Florence Kwan for her excellent research assistance. Any
opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

© 1998 by Robert Kaestner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Does Drug Use Cause Poverty?
Robert Kaestner
NBER Working Paper No. 6406
February 1998


                                             ABSTRACT


        In this study, I examine the effect of drug use on poverty. The main objective of the paper

is to provide descriptive empirical information about the relationship between drug use and poverty,

and to explore, in a preliminary fashion, the question of whether drug use causes poverty. Toward

this end, I present the results of both descriptive and multivariate analyses of the relationship between

drug use and poverty for two national samples of young adults. One sample is drawn from the

National Household Survey of Drug Abuse (NHSDA), and the other from the National Longitudinal

Survey of Youth (NLSY). The results of the analysis indicate that for both samples, drug use is

associated with greater poverty.



Robert Kaestner
National Bureau of Economic Research
50 East 42nd Street, 17th Floor
New York, NY 10017-5405
rjkbb@cunyvm.cuny.edu
