INCOME ALTERS THE RELATIVE
REINFORCING EFFECTS OF DRUG
AND NONDRUG REINFORCERS

Marilyn E. Carroll

Working Paper 6407

NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INCOME ALTERS THE RELATIVE
REINFORCING EFFECTS OF DRUG
AND NONDRUG REINFORCERS

Marilyn E. Carroll

Working Paper 6407
http://www.nber.org/papers/w6407

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 1998

The author would like to acknowledge Joshua S. Rodefer for collaboration on the experiments and
Dr. Steven R. Hursh for curve fitting and Pmax calculations. This work was supported by a grant
from the National Institute on Drug Abuse R01 DA02486. This paper has been prepared for the
National Bureau of Economic Research conference, The Economic Analysis of Substance Use and
Abuse: An Integration of Econometric and Behavioral Economic Research, March 27 and 28, 1997,
Cambridge, Massachusetts. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 1998 by Marilyn E. Carroll. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Income Alters the Relative Reinforcing Effects
of Drug and Nondrug Reinforcers
Marilyn E. Carroll
NBER Working Paper No. 6407
February 1998
ABSTRACT
Income is defined as the amount of funds, resources and/or time allowed to obtain goods over
a specified period of time. This review discusses laboratory studies of income using methods of
behavior analysis, behavioral pharmacology and behavioral economics. Initially, income was studied
with respect to consumption of two types of the same good (e.g., food or drug), and later
comparisons were made between food and nonfood rewards as well as drug and nondrug rewards.
A consistent finding in these studies is that preferences between two goods change and often reverse
as income is changed from low to high. Thus, reinforcing effects are not inherent in the goods, but
they depend on the economic context (income, price of good, availability of substitutes). Another
economic variable that has shown considerable impact on drug-reinforced behavior is the availability
of nondrug alternative reinforcers which seem to function as economic substitutes. The present
review also examines the interaction of income variables with price of drug (ethanol and
phencyclidine) and availability of nondrug alternatives. It was concluded that price and availability
of nondrug alternatives are major determinants of drug intake. Changes in income dramatically alter
preference between drug and nondrug items; however, income has a greater effect on consumption
of nondrug alternatives than on drug intake. It was concluded that the optimal formula for
reducing/preventing drug intake would be low income, high drug price and availability of inexpensive
alternative nondrug reinforcers.

Marilyn E. Carroll
Department of Psychiatry
Box 392 UMHC
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, MN 55455

