THE DEMAND FOR COCAINE
AND MARIJUANA BY YOUTH

Frank J. Chaloupka
Michael Grossman
John A. Tauras

Working Paper 6411

NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE DEMAND FOR COCAINE
AND MARIJUANA BY YOUTH

Frank J. Chaloupka
Michael Grossman
John A. Tauras

Working Paper 6411
http://www.nber.org/papers/w6411
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 1998
This paper was prepared for the National Bureau of Economic Research conference on the Economic
Analysis of Substance Use and Abuse, Cambridge, MA, March 27-28, 1997. Support for this
research was provided by grant 5 RO1 DA07533 from the National Institute on Drug Abuse to the
National Bureau of Economic Research. We are very grateful to Patrick O’Malley, Senior Research
Scientist at the University of Michigan’s Institute for Social Research, for enabling us to match drug
prices and drug related policy variables to the Monitoring the Future data. We also thank Timothy
J. Perry, Research Analyst at the Institute for Social Research, for his assistance in estimating the
drug demand equations and Sara Markowitz for her research assistance. We owe a special debt to
Carolyn G. Hoffman, Chief of the Statistical Analysis Unit of the U.S. Department of Justice’s Drug
Enforcement Administration, for providing us with data on cocaine prices from the System to
Retrieve Information from Drug Evidence (STRIDE). Finally, we thank Henry Saffer and Charles
C. Brown for helpful comments on this research. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 1998 by Frank J. Chaloupka, Michael Grossman and John A. Tauras. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Demand for Cocaine and Marijuana by Youth
Frank J. Chaloupka, Michael Grossman
and John A. Tauras
NBER Working Paper No. 6411
February 1998
ABSTRACT
In recent years, the debate over the costs and benefits of legalizing the use of currently illicit
drugs has been revived. This paper attempts to inform this debate by providing some evidence on
the effects of illicit drug prices and legal sanctions for drug possession and sale on youth drug use.
Data on cocaine and marijuana use by high school seniors are taken from the 1982 and 1989
Monitoring the Future surveys. Site-specific data on cocaine prices and legal sanctions for the
possession and sale, manufacture or distribution of cocaine and marijuana are added to the survey
data. The results indicate that youth cocaine demand is sensitive to price, with average past year and
past month cocaine demand elasticities of -1.28 and -1.43, respectively. In addition, the estimates
suggest that increased sanctions for the possession of cocaine and marijuana have a negative and
statistically significant impact on youth cocaine and marijuana use. However, the magnitude of these
estimates implies that very large increases in the monetary fines that can be imposed for first offense
possession would be necessary to achieve meaningful reductions in use. Finally, sanctions for the
sale, manufacture or distribution of cocaine and marijuana were found to have little impact on youth
cocaine and marijuana use.
Frank Chaloupka
Department of Economics (M/C 144)
University of Illinois at Chicago
601 South Morgan Street
Chicago, IL 60607-7121
and NBER
fjc@uic.edu
John A. Tauras
Department of Economics (M/C 144)
University of Illinois at Chicago
601 South Morgan Street
Chicago, IL 60607-7121

Michael Grossman
City University of New York Graduate School
33 West 42nd Street
New York, NY 10036
and NBER
MGROSSMA@EMAIL.GC.CUNY.EDU

