REGIONAL NONADJUSTMENT AND
FISCAL POLICY: LESSONS FOR EMU

Maurice Obstfeld
Giovanni Peri

Working Paper 6431

NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

REGIONAL NONADJUSTMENT AND
FISCAL POLICY: LESSONS FOR EMU

Maurice Obstfeld
Giovanni Peri

Working Paper 6431
http://www.nber.org/papers/w6431

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 1998
We thank Reza Baqir, Ryan Edwards, and Stefan Palmqvist for excellent research assistance. Tamim
Bayoumi, Giovanni Favara, Ingo Fender, Larry Katz, Paul Masson, Chris Salmon, and Till von
Wachter offered valuable help in locating and organizing data. Olivier Blanchard, David Card, Barry
Eichengreen, Antonio Fatás, Peter Kenen, Barry McCormick, Jacques Mélitz, Andrew Oswald,
Frédéric Zumer, and especially Jürgen von Hagen have made many very helpful suggestions, as did
participants in the October 1997 Economic Policy panel meeting in Bonn and the Berkeley Labor
Lunch. All errors and opinions are our own. Research support was provided by the National Science
Foundation (through a grant to the National Bureau of Economic Research), the Alfred P. Sloan
Foundation, and the Center for German and European Studies at the University of California,
Berkeley. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the Congressional
Budget Office or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 1998 by Maurice Obstfeld and Giovanni Peri. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Regional Nonadjustment and Fiscal Policy:
Lessons for EMU
Maurice Obstfeld and Giovanni Peri
NBER Working Paper No. 6431
February 1998
JEL Nos. F4, J61, H77, E44

ABSTRACT
How will countries handle idiosyncratic national macroeconomic shocks under the European
single currency? The ways in which European countries now react to internally asymmetric shocks
provide a better forecast than do the regional response patterns of the United States. In this paper
we compare the US with Germany, Italy, the United Kingdom, and also with Canada, which is closer
to Europe than the US is in its labor market and fiscal institutions. Europe’s (and to some extent
Canada’s) model of regional response differs from that of the US. Changes in relative regional real
exchange rates are generally small. Outside of the US, however, there is more reliance on
interregional transfer payments, less on labor migration, and the pace of regional adjustment appears
slower. The regional adjustment patterns currently prevailing within European currency unions-characterized by limited labor mobility and price inflexibility--seem likely to prevail at the national
level under the single currency. If EMU aims to attain the economic and social cohesion of its
constituent nations, it therefore may be hard to resist the eventual extension of existing EU
mechanisms of income redistribution--a transfer union. We propose an alternative strategy based on
a relaxed stability pact, further strictures against central EU borrowing, labor market and fiscal
reform, and the issuance by individual member states of debt indexed to nominal GDP.

Maurice Obstfeld
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
obstfeld@econ.berkeley.edu

Giovanni Peri
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
giovanni@econ.berkeley.edu

