DEMOGRAPHIC DIFFERENTIALS IN
THE DEMAND FOR ALCOHOL
AND ILLICIT DRUGS

Henry Saffer
Frank Chaloupka

Working Paper 6432

NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DEMOGRAPHIC DIFFERENTIALS IN
THE DEMAND FOR ALCOHOL
AND ILLICIT DRUGS

Henry Saffer
Frank Chaloupka

Working Paper 6432
http://www.nber.org/papers/w6432

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 1998

This project was supported by grant no. R01-AA-09435 from the National Institute on Alcohol
Abuse and Alcoholism to the National Bureau of Economic Research. The authors would like to
thank Michael Grossman for helpful comments and Esel Yazici for programming assistance. This
paper has been prepared for the National Bureau of Economic Research conference, The Economic
Analysis of Substance Use and Abuse: An Integration of Econometric and Behavioral Economic
Research, March 27 and 28, 1997, Cambridge, Massachusetts. Any opinions expressed are those of
the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 1998 by Henry Saffer and Frank Chaloupka. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Demographic Differentials in the Demand
for Alcohol and Illicit Drugs
Henry Saffer and Frank Chaloupka
NBER Working Paper No. 6432
February 1998

ABSTRACT

The purpose of this paper is to estimate demographic differentials in alcohol and illicit drug
use, participation, own price effects and cross price effects. This paper uses a data set of over 49,000
individuals from the National Household Survey of Drug Abuse and links drug and alcohol prices and
policies to the individual records. The size of this data set makes it possible to estimate use,
participation and demand curves for specific demographic groups. Public policies designed to reduce
substance abuse have been oriented towards increasing the price of alcohol and illicit drugs. Little,
however, is known about the relative responsiveness of various demographic groups to these policies.
The data show that racial and ethnic minorities consume more cocaine, but consume less or equal
amounts of alcohol, marijuana and heroin than the total population. The results also show a
consistent pattern of negative own price effects for alcohol and illicit drugs and complimentarity
between alcohol and illicit drugs. The own price effects did not differ substantially between
demographic groups suggesting that price policies have a similar effect on all demographic groups.
The pattern of complimentarity between alcohol and illicit drugs suggests that alcohol taxes also
reduce drug use.

Henry Saffer
National Bureau of Economic Research
50 East 42nd Street, 17th Floor
New York, NY 10017-5405
hsaffer@email.gc.cuny.edu

Frank Chaloupka
Department of Economics (M/C 144)
University of Illinois at Chicago
601 South Morgan
Chicago, IL 60607-7121
and NBER
fjc@uic.edu

