FUNDAMENTAL TAX REFORM
AND CORPORATE FINANCIAL
POLICY

William M. Gentry
R. Glenn Hubbard

Working Paper 6433

NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FUNDAMENTAL TAX REFORM
AND CORPORATE FINANCIAL
POLICY

Wiliam M. Gentry
R. Glenn Hubbard

Working Paper 6433
http://www.nber.org/papers/w6433

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 1998

We are grateful to David Bradford, Robert Hall, Laura Kalambokidis, and participants in the NBER
Conference on Asset Price and Transition Effects of Consumption Tax Reform and seminar
participants at Columbia, Georgetown Law School, Tufts, the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia,
and the American Enterprise Institute for helpful comments and suggestions, and to James Combs
for excellent research assistance. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 1998 by William M. Gentry and R. Glenn Hubbard. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Fundamental Tax Reform
and Corporate Financial Policy
William M. Gentry and R. Glenn Hubbard
NBER Working Paper No. 6433
February 1998
JEL No. H0
ABSTRACT
How tax reform affects corporate financial decisions helps determine whether reform will
increase capital formation and simplify the tax system. This paper describes the effects of
fundamental tax reform on corporate tax planning and summarizes economists’ knowledge of the
magnitude of these effects. We analyze income tax reform, consisting of integrating corporate and
personal income taxes, and moving to a broad-based consumption tax. As prototypes of reform, we
use the U.S. Treasury’s Comprehensive Business Income Tax proposal for income tax reform and
the Flat Tax for consumption tax reform. The critical difference between these reforms is that the
consumption tax gives firms immediate deductions for capital outlays instead of the depreciation
allowances of the income tax. Tax reform can affect organizational form, capital structure, and timing
decisions. Our major theme is that the two types of reform will have similar effects on business
financial decisions because they both integrate corporate and personal income taxes. Both reforms
eliminate the tax differentials between corporate and noncorporate businesses and between debt and
equity financing. Since both reforms eliminate investor-level taxes on financial assets, they reduce
the effects of taxes on timing decisions associated with financial assets, such as the timing of
corporate dividends. How taxes affect these financial decisions have important implications for the
incidence of the corporate tax. These reforms also greatly alter the current incentives for taxmotivated financial planning.
William M. Gentry
Graduate School of Business
602 Uris Hall
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
gentry@nber.org

R. Glenn Hubbard
Graduate School of Business
609 Uris Hall
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
ghubbard@hbs.edu

