THE EFFECTS OF PRICE CHANGES
  ON ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION
IN ALCOHOL-EXPERIENCED RATS


       Jeffrey K. Sarbaum
      Solomon W. Polachek
        Norman E. Spear


      Working Paper 6443
                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            THE EFFECTS OF PRICE CHANGES
                              ON ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION
                            IN ALCOHOL-EXPERIENCED RATS




                                      Jeffrey K. Sarbaum
                                     Solomon W. Polachek
                                       Norman E. Spear




                                       Working Paper 6443
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w6443


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 1998


This paper was presented at the National Bureau of Economic Research conference on The Economic
Analysis of Substance Use and Abuse: An Integration of Econometric and Behavioral Economic
Research, Cambridge, MA, March 27-28, 1997. We wish to thank Thomas Babor, Warren Bickel,
Michael Grossman, Michael Hilton, Clifford Kern, and John Robst for valuable comments and
suggestions. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

© 1998 by Jeffrey K. Sarbaum, Solomon Polachek, Norman E. Spear. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effects of Price Changes on Alcohol Consumption
in Alcohol-Experienced Rats
Jeffrey K. Sarbaum, Solomon W. Polachek
and Norman E. Spear
NBER Working Paper No. 6443
March 1998

                                           ABSTRACT

       This paper reports results of two experiments designed to measure how addicted rats (i.e.

laboratory rats with previous ethanol exposure via a variant of the Samson ethanol fading technique)

respond to changes in the price of ethanol. For both experiments, rats facing a budget constraint

choose between two alternative non-ethanol commodities in a morning control session and between

ethanol and a non-ethanol commodity in an afternoon session. The results from both experiments

shows that economic models of consumer choice are a useful tool to study ethanol and non-ethanol

consumption in rats, and that a history of ethanol exposure did not interfere with rats’ ability to

behave according to economic theory. In the first experiment, rats responded only moderately to a

100% price increase (especially when compared to the response for the non-ethanol commodity

during the control session), but more dramatically for a 400% ethanol price increase. However, going

back to baseline prices after a prolonged duration of high ethanol prices yields some evidence that

ethanol consumption declines below its original levels. In the second experiment rats responded to

increased ethanol prices but not to a cue signaling future price increases. Thus, the experiments

provide evidence supporting habit formation but not rational addiction as an explanation of ethanol

consumption in rats.



Jeffrey K. Sarbaum                                          Solomon W. Polachek
Department of Economics                                     Dean, Harper College
Willamette University                                State University of New York
Salem, OR 97301                                             Binghamton, NY 13902

Norman E. Spear
Department of Psychology
State University of New York
Binghamton, NY 13902
