THE BEHAVIORAL ECONOMICS
OF SMOKING

Warren K. Bickel
Gregory J. Madden

Working Paper 6444

NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE BEHAVIORAL ECONOMICS
OF SMOKING

Warren K. Bickel
Gregory J. Madden

Working Paper 6444
http://www.nber.org/papers/w6444

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 1998

The research was supported by National Institute on Drug Abuse grant DA06526 and T32 DA07242.
We wish to thank Gary Badger who assisted in data analysis, Rob McIntyre from the Vermont
Department of Health who provided data concerning demographics of US smokers and Brandi Smith
and Lisa Marsch, who provided useful comments on an earlier version of this paper. This paper was
prepared for the National Bureau of Economic Research conference on the Economic Analysis of
Substance Use and Abuse, Cambridge, MA, March 27-28, 1997. Any opinions expressed are those
of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 1998 by Warren K. Bickel and Gregory J. Madden. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Behavioral Economics of Smoking
Warren K. Bickel and Gregory J. Madden
NBER Working Paper No. 6444
March 1998
ABSTRACT
Evidence that economic principles may be employed to predict the rates at which cigarettes
are consumed is presented from several laboratory experiments. In these experiments, cigarettedeprived smokers were required to make a effortful response to earn cigarette puffs. Changing the
number of responses required per puff is conceptualized as a price manipulation. Our experiments
demonstrate that these price increases decrease cigarette consumption and that price elasticity of
demand increases with increases in price. When data from 74 different smokers, participating in 17
different experiments, in our laboratory were analyzed, five demographic variables were related to
rates of earning and smoking cigarettes in the lab: 1) males smoked more than females; 2) lesseducated individuals tended to smoke more than better-educated smokers; 3) higher rates of smoking
were observed in individuals with high Fagerström Tolerance Questionnaire scores; 4) light drinkers
were found to smoke more than heavy drinkers; and 5) unemployed subjects smoked more than
employed individuals.

Demographic effects on price elasticity did not accord as well with

econometric data. Finally, we discuss the ability of behavioral-economic laboratory experiments to
model cigarette smoking in the natural economy, and the validity of using these laboratory results as
a means of assessing the likely effects of public-policy initiatives. The results from one such
experiment are presented that suggest the economic concept of inferior goods may be informative in
understanding nicotine-replacement products and the likely effects of differential pricing of cigarettes
and these replacement products.

Warren K. Bickel
Department of Psychiatry
University of Vermont
Burlington, VT 05401-1419

Gregory J. Madden
Department of Psychiatry
University of Vermont
Burlington, VT 05401-1419

