TRANSPARENCY AND CREDIBILITY:
MONETARY POLICY WITH
UNOBSERVABLE GOALS

Jon Faust
Lars E. O. Svensson

Working Paper 6452

NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TRANSPARENCY AND CREDIBILITY:
MONETARY POLICY WITH
UNOBSERVABLE GOALS

Jon Faust
Lars E. O. Svensson

Working Paper 6452
http://www.nber.org/papers/w6452

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 1998

The authors thank participants in seminars at the Board of Governors, the Institute for International
Economic Studies, Reserve Bank of Australia, University of Canterbury and Victoria University of
Wellington, and especially David Bowman, Martin Flodén, Dale Henderson, Andy Levin, Bennett
McCallum, Stefan Palmqvist, Torsten Persson and Michael Woodford for helpful comments. They
also thank Christina Lönnblad for secretarial and editorial assistance. Part of the paper was written
when Lars Svensson visited the Reserve Bank of New Zealand and Victoria University of Wellington;
he thanks these institutions for their hospitality. Remaining errors are the authors’ own; the views
in this paper are solely the responsibility of the authors and should not be interpreted as reflecting the
views of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Reserve Bank of New Zealand,
other members of their staffs or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 1998 by Jon Faust and Lars E. O. Svensson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Transparency and Credibility: Monetary
Policy with Unobservable Goals
Jon Faust and Lars E. O. Svensson
NBER Working Paper No. 6452
March 1998
JEL Nos. E52, E58

ABSTRACT

We define and study transparency, credibility, and reputation in a model where the central
bank’s characteristics are unobservable to the private sector and are inferred from the policy outcome.
A low-credibility bank optimally conducts a more inflationary policy than a high-credibility bank, in
the sense that it induces higher inflation, but a less expansionary policy in the sense that it induces
lower inflation and employment than expected. Increased transparency makes the bank’s reputation
and credibility more sensitive to its actions. This has a moderating influence on the bank’s policy.
Full transparency of the central bank’s intentions is generally socially beneficial, but frequently not
in the interest of the bank. Somewhat paradoxically, direct observability of idiosyncratic central bank
goals removes the moderating incentive on the bank and leads to the worst equilibrium.

Jon Faust
Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System
20th and Constitution Avenues, NW
Washington, DC 20551
faustj@frb.gov

Lars E. O. Svensson
Institute for International Economic Studies
Stockholm University
S-10691 Stockholm
SWEDEN
and NBER
lars.svensson@iies.su.se

