                                          I. Introduction

       Should we raise environmental taxes? This question has been asked increasingly in the

face of widespread environmental problems including global warming, air and water pollution, and

a host of other environmental problems that we face today. A "textbook" answer to this question

would be yes, we certainly should raise taxes to the point where the tax equals the marginal social

damage from pollution. Unfortunately the real world is more complicated than a textbook world.

Measurement problems abound: how do we measure marginal social damages? Concerns about

economic efficiency intrude given the widespread prevalence of other taxes. Finally, distributional

concerns come into play. Environmental taxes tend to be regressive: poor people pay a

disproportionate share of their income in these taxes relative to rich people.

       This paper addresses how one could design an environmental tax reform such that it

reduces or even eliminates the regressive nature of the reform. It considers reforms that combine

environmental taxes with reductions in other taxes such that the increased regressivity of the

environmental taxes is offset by increased progressivity resulting from reductions in other taxes.

Using data from the 1994 Consumer Expenditure Survey and other sources, I show that a modest

tax reform in which environmental taxes equal to 10 percent of federal receipts are collected has a

negligible impact on the income distribution when the funds are rebated to households through

reductions in the payroll tax and personal income tax. The degree of income shifting can be

adjusted with changes in how the revenues are returned to households and it is possible to

increase the progressivity of the tax system with an environmental tax reform.

       I then compare these reforms to a reform that shifts the tax base from income to




                                                 -1-
consumption1. In this case, it is difficult to maintain the level of progressivity that exists under the

current income tax although ways exist by which the regressivity of the reform could be blunted.

Whether the long term growth gains from consumption tax reform would offset the initial increase

in regressivity remains to be determined. In addition to a wholesale replacement of the income

tax with a consumption tax, I also consider a partial shift.

        In sum, distributional concerns need not stand in the way of the increased use of

environmental taxes. Whether welfare is improved overall by such reforms is a question beyond

the scope of this paper but the results shown below suggest the value of continuing to study these

reforms and to begin consideration of their adoption.

        The next section provides some background on the issue of environmental (or green) tax

reforms. Next, I describe how I measure the distributional impact of tax reforms and describe the

data. Section IV provides results from the analysis and a concluding section follows.

                              II. Background on Green Tax Reforms

        There has been a great deal of interest in recent years in the use of environmental tax

revenues to substitute for some portion of existing tax collections. The issue of a substitution of

environmental for other taxes can be traced back to Tullock (1967) and more recently Terkla

(1984). This early literature focused on the efficiency implications of an environmental reform

and led to a debate over what has been dubbed the "Double Dividend Hypothesis."2 One strand

of this literature (as typified by Terkla) considers a reform in which environmental regulations are



        1
          Examples of a consumption tax reform include proposals to replace the income tax with
a Flat Tax, a Value Added Tax, and a National Retail Sales Tax.
        2
            See Fullerton and Metcalf (1998) for a survey of this literature.

                                                   -2-
replaced with tax instruments in such a fashion that pollution activities are unaffected. But the

switch from a regulatory to a taxation mechanism for limiting pollution raises revenue that can be

used to lower other distorting taxes. This shift has unambiguous welfare gains. Another strand of

the literature (typified by Pearce (1991) and Repetto (1992)) focuses on the use of environmental

taxes both to reduce pollution and to raise revenue to lower other taxes. While it is clear (see

Bovenberg and deMooij (1994) as well as Parry (1995)) that there are also efficiency costs with

environmental taxes (separate from the environmental benefits), it is also clear that efficiency

improvements are possible if tax reforms are designed carefully.

       The debate over a green tax shift and the Double Dividend Hypothesis has focused on

efficiency considerations. In addition, distributional considerations are clearly important and little

work has been done in this area. These concerns are relevant given the sense that most energy

and environmental taxes are regressive. While some authors have challenged this perception by

taking into account lifetime considerations (e.g. Bull, Hassett, and Metcalf (1994)), it is clear that

distributional concerns limit political support for the greater use of environmental taxes.

       Previous discussion of the distributional problem suffers by looking at the environmental

taxes in isolation. While it might be the case that the imposition of an environmental tax by itself

is regressive, it is quite possible that a revenue neutral tax reform where an environmental tax

replaces some other tax could be progressive.3 A recent study by Hamond et al. (1997)

emphasizes this point. Below, I will consider reforms (based on suggestions in Hamond et al.)

that are designed to maintain or perhaps increase the progressivity of the tax system. I will also



       3
          In economic terms, the former is an example of an "absolute" tax incidence analysis
while the latter is a differential tax incidence analysis.

                                                 -3-
compare the distributional impact of an environmental tax reform to a reform that shifts from

income to consumption taxation, a topic of some current policy interest.

                                         III. Methodology

                                    A. Incidence Assumptions

       An incidence analysis attempts to answer the question who bears the burden of a particular

tax. Any attempt to evaluate the "fairness" of a tax (or a change in the tax system) requires

knowing whose disposable income is changed and by how much in response to the tax.

Economists often refer to taxes as "regressive" or "progressive." There is often some confusion

as to the meaning of these terms and so it is worth defining them carefully. The definition that

most economists use relies on the average tax rate - the ratio of tax liabilities to income.4 A tax is

said to be regressive if the average tax rate falls with income. It is proportional if the average tax

rate is constant and it is progressive if the average tax rate rises with income. Low income people

pay a higher (lower) fraction of their income in taxes if the tax is regressive (progressive).

       Early tax incidence studies used the results of partial or general equilibrium models to

inform judgments about relevant incidence results. In effect, these studies used existing research

results to generate plausible assumptions about the incidence of specific taxes. Pechman (1985)

represents the classic example of this type of research.

       An alternative approach utilizes estimates of lifetime income as a measure of the taxpaying

unit's economic well-being. Invoking Friedman's (1957) permanent income hypothesis as well as



       4
        More precisely, the numerator is the change in real disposable income resulting from the
change in the tax law. If a new tax is imposed, the change in disposable income might occur
because prices have gone up so that a given income purchases fewer goods and services or it
might occur because wages or other sources of income have fallen.

                                                  -4-
life-cycle considerations, economists have long recognized that annual income may not be a very

good measure of an individual's potential to consume5. With perfect capital markets, individuals

should be grouped according to the present discounted value of earnings plus gifts received. This

theory makes the difficulties with the annual incidence approach readily apparent. People tend to

earn the highest incomes in their life around middle age and the lowest incomes in their youth and

old age. Consequently in a cross section (annual) analysis, lower income groups are likely to

include some young and elderly people (as well as some people with volatile incomes who have

obtained a low realization) who are not poor in a lifetime sense. Similarly, higher annual income

groups are likely to contain some people at the peak of their age earnings profile for whom peak

earnings are a poor measure of annual ability to consume.

       Relative to annual income, lifetime income is more difficult to measure. Poterba (1989,

1991) has proposed using consumption as a proxy for lifetime income, arguing that since

household consumption tends to be smoother than income, total annual consumption is likely to

be a better measure of household well-being than total annual income. Using data on total

expenditures from the Consumer Expenditure Survey, Poterba finds that excise taxes on alcohol,

tobacco, and gasoline are much less regressive than they appear when viewed in an annual income

framework. Metcalf (1993a) has used a similar approach to analyze state and local tax systems.

Like Poterba's findings for excise taxes, he finds that the system of state and local taxes is less

regressive when consumption is used to proxy for lifetime income. Feenberg, Mitrusi, and

Poterba (1996) also use the consumption proxy for lifetime income in a detailed analysis of a shift


       5
          The Permanent Income Hypothesis states that people make consumption decisions on
the basis of permanent (or lifetime average) income. Thus, temporary fluctuations in income
should not lead to large changes in current consumption.

                                                  -5-
from the current income tax system to a national sales tax.

       The advantage of the approach taken by Feenberg, Mitrusi, and Poterba is its simplicity.

Distributional tables can be constructed using data readily available in a single year. The

disadvantage is that current consumption may not be a very good proxy for lifetime income. In

previous work I have shown (Caspersen and Metcalf (1994)) that distributional tables for

consumption taxes using current consumption as a proxy for lifetime income underestimate the

regressivity of a consumption tax. This is because the current consumption approach assumes

that consumption is roughly constant over the lifetime. However, consumption exhibits the same

kind of "hump" that income does over the lifetime (though not as pronounced). The same kinds

of errors that occur when ranking people by annual income persist to an extent when people are

ranked by consumption. Thus we should view the Feenberg, Mitrusi, and Poterba results as upper

bounds on the progressivity of a shift from income to consumption taxation.

       One approach to resolving this problem is to use an explicit computable general

equilibrium lifecycle model to investigate the incidence of tax reforms. The work by Fullerton and

Rogers (1993) is perhaps the best work in this area. Note that there are different "lifetime"

experiments that one can analyze. As Poterba (1993) points out, one can look at lifetime tax

burdens and/or lifetime income. Fullerton and Rogers look at the lifetime tax burden relative to

lifetime income whereas Poterba (1989, 1991) and Metcalf (1993a, 1993b) look at annual tax

burdens relative to lifetime income. The latter approach addresses the question of the burden of a

particular year's taxes when households are classified by a measure of economic well-being that is

less prone to measurement error than annual income. The annual tax/lifetime income approach is




                                                 -6-
taken in this paper6. Strictly speaking, one cannot compare the results from a lifetime tax/lifetime

income analysis (e.g. Fullerton and Rogers) to an annual tax/lifetime income analysis such as this

one.

       Despite the attraction of lifetime income, it is difficult to measure and whatever measure is

employed rests on strong assumptions. An alternative approach is to employ a cohort analysis.

Gale, Houser, and Scholz (1997), for example, consider the impact of tax changes on married

families in the age range of 40 to 50. By restricting the analysis to households who are likely to

be at the same stage of their earnings profile, they avoid mixing people from different stages of

the lifecycle. The approach is conceptually appealing and does reduce the measurement problem

described above. It does not, however, address the problem of transitory income shocks.

Households with a one time negative income shock may maintain previous consumption levels

under the assumption that the poor income realization is a temporary setback that is likely to be

offset by a positive income shocks in the future. Hence, consumption to income ratios will be

high for this group and any tax that approximates a consumption tax in its effect will look more

regressive than it would if transitory income shocks were taken into account. Taking a multi-year

window, as for example the Joint Committee on Taxation (1993) has in a number of studies

addresses this problem to some extent. Unfortunately, our dataset does not provide multiple

observations on the same household's income and consumption patterns with which we could

smooth our income measure. Below, we will report a cohort distribution of taxes as an

alternative measure to our lifetime income measure.



       6
         See Caspersen and Metcalf (1994) For a detailed description of my measure of
annualized lifetime income.

                                                -7-
        I distribute taxes using conventional assumptions about incidence derived from previous

economic incidence studies. Individual taxes on wages and factor payments are assumed to be

borne by the individual. Corporate taxes are assumed to be borne by owners of capital and are

distributed to households in my data set using a methodology developed by Feldstein (1988).

Finally, taxes on products are passed forward to consumers in the form of higher product prices

and taxes on intermediate inputs flow through to consumers in the form of higher consumer

prices. This assumption is valid for industries composed of identical firms with free entry and exit

in which the supply of factors is perfectly elastic. In this case, factor prices are fixed and the

supply of consumer goods is perfectly elastic. Other incidence assumptions would lead to

different results. For example, to the extent that consumers reduce their energy consumption in

response to the carbon and gas taxes, the incidence could be shifted back to the factors of

production in energy industries in the form of lower wages for workers in energy industries, lower

returns for owners of capital in this sector, or lower rents to owners of energy resources. This

would occur if factor supplies are not perfectly elastic in the area around the original equilibrium.

Clearly the ultimate incidence effects could differ markedly if the tax is passed backwards rather

than forwards.

        The analysis that I undertake in this paper measures the burden of taxes under the

assumption that substitution in production or consumption in response to price changes does not

occur. Thus, this should be viewed as a first order incidence analysis. Clearly, one of the goals of

the reform is to raise the price of pollution and consequently reduce polluting activities. To the

extent that that is successful, tax collections will fall and either environmental tax rates will have




                                                  -8-
to be increased, or other tax rates will have to rise to keep revenue collections constant7. This

suggests a "problem" for environmental taxes as revenue raising instruments. To the extent that

they are successful in reducing pollution, they will not raise the hoped for revenue. Note though

that while tax collections may fall, product prices are still likely to rise as firms engage in costly

activities to avoid the use of taxed polluting inputs. Thus, even if pollution drops significantly as

a result of a Green tax reform, the incidence results described here may not be substantially

changed.8

        Another incidence result occurs if these taxes replace current regulations that are designed

to mitigate pollution9. Consider, for example, a simple example where pollution (X) is restricted

to an amount (X0) by regulatory efforts. Now we replace those regulations with a system of

pollution taxes that induces firms to reduce their pollution to X0. To see how this would work,

consider Figure 1. [INSERT FIGURE 1 ABOUT HERE] The downward sloping line graphs

marginal benefits of pollution (MB) to the firm. In the absence of any government intervention,

firms would pollute to the point where marginal benefits equal marginal costs. If marginal costs

are zero, then firms would pollute up to an amount equal to X1 in the figure. A quota designed to

reduce pollution to X0 is represented by the vertical dashed line in the figure. With this quota, the

marginal benefit of pollution is now equal to P0. Costs are increased by the use of a quota



        7
          Alternatively, government spending can be reduced. Note though that reduction in
pollution may reduce health costs which could lead to lower spending in Medicare or Medicaid.
        8
          The degree to which prices will rise as pollution reducing activities occur depends, in
part, on the elasticity of substitution between pollution and other production inputs.
        9
        See Fullerton and Metcalf (1997) for a discussion of various environmental policy
experiments and their revenue and efficiency implications.

                                                   -9-
regulation. The restriction on pollution means that pollution now has scarcity value and a shadow

price equal to its marginal benefit (P0). This scarcity value translates into higher prices. The

incidence of the environmental reform now depends on 1) whose income is ultimately reduced by

the imposition of environmental taxes and 2) whose purchasing power is increased by the

reduction in the price of goods following the elimination of a quota. But these two effects exactly

offset so that the net impact of the environmental tax from an incidence point of view is zero. The

government, however, has the revenue with which it can reduce other taxes. In this case, the

appropriate incidence analysis is simply an absolute incidence analysis focusing on the reduction

of taxes financed by the environmental tax revenues. I hold environmental regulatory policy fixed

in this analysis and so ignore these additional distributional effects.

                                                B. Data

          The basic data source for this analysis is the 1994 Consumer Expenditure Survey (CES).

The CES has detailed household level data on consumption patterns as well as some data on

household income, taxes and household demographic characteristics10. There are 3 adjustments I

must make to the CES data before I can analyze any tax reform. First, the CES reports out of

pocket medical expenditures and ignores spending on a consumer's behalf by HMOs and insurance

companies. I use data from the National Medical Expenditure Survey (NMES) to attribute

medical spending to individual households to replace the health spending reported in the CES.

Second, I make adjustments to the CES income and consumption categories to match aggregate

numbers in the National Income and Product Accounts. Third, I attribute corporate tax payments



          10
               I use the CES datasets prepared by John Sabelhaus and documented in Sabelhaus
(1996).

                                                  -10-
to individual households using a methodology developed by Feldstein (1988). I provide details on

these adjustments in Appendix A.

       Most of the environmental taxes that I will consider are applied to industries in

production. Attributing these taxes to consumer goods is a somewhat more complicated process.

I use the 1992 Benchmark Input Output Accounts to follow the flow of price increases arising

from taxation of intermediate goods through to consumer price increases. I describe the use of

this data set in Appendix B.

                                        IV. Tax Shift Analysis

               A. A Green Tax Shift Equal to 10 Percent of Federal Revenues

       I begin with an analysis of a moderate shift in the income tax base in which I replace 10

percent of federal receipts with a cluster of environmental taxes. Since federal revenues totaled

$1,258 billion in 1994 (see Table 1), this scenario requires raising roughly $126 billion in new

taxes. I begin with a description of the environmental taxes that I consider followed by a

description of the tax reductions that are funded by the environmental levies11. The new taxes that

I implement are taxes on carbon emissions, gasoline consumption, air pollution, and the use of

new (virgin) materials in production.

       A carbon tax is a tax on the carbon content of fossil fuels. As such it differs across fuel

types. Coal contains the most carbon per BTU (.025 tons of carbon per billion BTUs) followed

closely by oil (.020 tons per billion BTUs). Natural gas contains .015 tons per billion BTUs

(Poterba, Table 3.3, 1991). The main attraction of a carbon tax is that it discourages carbon



       11
          These tax proposals are designed to correspond roughly to the proposals contained in
Scenario 1 of Hamond et al. (1997).

                                                 -11-
emissions on two fronts. First, the increase in overall energy prices encourages energy

conservation and investment in energy efficiency leading to a reduction in energy consumption

overall. Second, the tax encourages the substitution of low carbon for high carbon fuels.

Specifically, it would encourage the use of hydropower, nuclear energy, and renewable energies

(solar and wind).

         In 1994, 1,399 million metric tons of carbon (MtC) were emitted in the United States

(Annual Energy Review, 1996). Under the assumption that carbon emissions are inelastically

supplied in the short run, a $40 per ton tax would raise $56 billion. A carbon tax at this level

would be roughly the optimal tax if marginal environmental damages from carbon emissions were

between $50 to $75 per ton (Bovenberg and Goulder (1996)).

         The carbon tax is allocated to petroleum products (42 percent) , natural gas (22 percent),

and coal (35 percent) on the basis of aggregate carbon dioxide emissions in 199512. Based on this

breakdown, I allocate $24 billion of carbon tax to petroleum, $12 billion to natural gas, and $20

billion to coal. The tax on coal is allocated to the coal mining industry while I allocate the tax on

natural gas to the output of the crude oil and natural gas industry used by electric and gas

utilities13.

         In addition to a carbon tax, I model a motor fuels excise tax. This is a tax on gasoline and

diesel fuel sales. Currently, federal excise taxes on motor fuels are 18.3¢ per gallon of gasoline

and 24.3¢ per gallon of diesel fuel (CBO, 1997). I model an increase in the gasoline tax of 15¢



         12
               See table 12.3, Annual Energy Review 1996.
         13
           See Appendix B for more details on how industry level taxes are implemented as well
as the process for tracing price effects through to consumer prices.

                                                 -12-
per gallon and an increase in the diesel fuel tax (for diesel in highway use) of 9.4¢ per gallon.

Based on fuel consumption in 1994 (and assuming inelastic demand), these taxes would raise an

additional $19.8 billion in tax revenue. Gasoline is used directly by consumers and is used by

businesses. The former is allocated directly to households while the latter is allocated to the

transportation industry in the Input-Output Accounts. Based on gasoline expenditures reported in

personal consumption expenditures in NIPA accounts, personal gasoline consumption accounts

for 85 percent of total gasoline expenditures. Thus, I allocate 85 percent of the gasoline tax

revenues to consumers directly and the remaining 15 percent along with the diesel tax revenue as

an additional cost of production (higher transportation costs) and allocate the tax based on

industry use of transportation.

       Taxes on air pollution can be levied on point source or non-point sources of pollution.

For point source emissions, I model a $150 per ton tax on sulphur dioxide (SO2) emissions, a

$1500 per ton tax on nitrogen oxide (NOx) emissions, a $900 per ton tax on particulate matters

(PM-10), and a $2000 per ton tax on volatile organic compounds (VOC). In order to distribute

these taxes to consumer goods, I need to allocate emissions across industries. Table 2 provides

information on emissions in 1990 from which I make this allocation14. Sulphur oxide (SOx)

emissions arise predominately from coal and fuel oil combustion. I allocate the tax to SO2 on the

basis of SOx emissions with the tax on coal applied to the coal mining industry and the tax on fuel

oil applied to the use of output from the fuel oil and natural gas industry by the petroleum refining

industry. Industry emissions are allocated to their respective industries.

       A similar approach is used for the other pollutants. Because a significant amount of NOX,


       14
            I am grateful to Larry Goulder for providing me with these data.

                                                 -13-
VOC and PM-10 emissions are due to motor vehicles, I also include a $35 per new vehicle tax to

proxy for a tax on motor vehicle emissions15. In total, these air pollution taxes would raise $40.5

billion.

           In 1994, 209 million tons of solid waste were generated and 49 million tons were

recovered through recycling efforts. The remaining 160 million tons was disposed in landfills

(127 million tons) or burned (33 million tons), primarily for energy recovery16. While burning

solid waste for energy production was initially viewed as a valuable energy source, it has

increasingly been recognized that it creates its own air and solid waste pollution problems. In an

effort to reduce the amount of materials disposed of either in landfills or by burning, I include a

tax on unrecovered waste of $55 per ton. Hamond et al. (1997) refer to this as a virgin materials

tax. Based on 1994 quantities of unrecovered waste, this tax would raise $9.3 billion. I allocate

this tax to industries on the basis of materials that make up the waste being generated.

           A combination of taxes on energy, air pollutants, and unrecovered solid wastes as

described above will raise revenue equal to roughly 10 percent of federal receipts. Table 3

summarizes the revenues. Table 4 gives a detailed breakdown of the increase in consumer prices

that results from this collection of taxes. The carbon tax primarily raises the price of utilities as

well as gasoline products. The largest increase is for natural gas. This may seem surprising since

coal is an important component of electricity production. The reason that electricity prices do not

rise as much as do natural gas prices is that while 79 percent of the share of industry goods used

by the natural gas industry are subject either directly or indirectly to the carbon tax, only 37


           15
                These air pollution taxes are based on revenue scenarios contained in CBO (1997).
           16
                Table 380, Statistical Abstract of the United States 1996.

                                                    -14-
percent of the share of industry goods used by the electricity industry is subject to the tax. Other

important industrial inputs into the electricity industry include construction (22 percent) and

services (12 percent).

       The motor fuels tax increases the price of gasoline over 13 percent. The remaining tax

increases the price of other goods quite modestly with the largest increase occurring in various

transportation services (mass transit, taxicab, airline fares) with an increase of 0.6 percent. Air

pollution taxes raise electricity and natural gas prices by 8 and 6 percent respectively while raising

the price of other goods modestly. Jewelry and watch prices rise by nearly 4 percent due to the

use of VOCs in their production. The virgin materials tax has a modest impact less than 1 percent.

Taken as a group, these taxes predominately raise the price of energy for consumers. Except for

jewelry and watches, consumer price increases for other goods rarely exceed 2 percent.

       I use these revenues to fund three tax changes in the payroll and personal income tax.

First, I exempt from the OASDI payroll tax the first $5,000 of tax base for each worker. For

workers earning less than $5,000 of covered wages, I exempt them from the tax, both at the

personal and business level. Based on data in the Consumer Expenditure Survey on the

distribution of workers, this will reduce payroll tax collections by $71.2 billion. Next, I implement

a refundable $150 tax credit for each exemption taken in the personal income tax. Based on the

232.7 million exemptions taken in 1994 (SOI, Winter 96-97), this will cut tax collections by $34.9

billion. Finally, I implement an across the board income tax cut of 4 percent. This reduces tax

revenue by $21.3 billion in my data. Table 5 summarizes the tax cuts that are funded by the new

environmental levies.




                                                 -15-
                       B. Distributional Impact of a Green Tax Reform

       Table 6 provides incidence results for households in the Consumer Expenditure Survey17.

As discussed above, I provide results using three different measures of income and group

households into ten income groups with decile 1 representing households in the lowest 10 percent

of the income distribution and decile 10 representing households in the top 10 percent of the

income distribution18. Using annual income to rank households, I find that this scenario reduces

the progressivity of the tax system slightly with an increase in taxes paid by the bottom half of the

distribution and tax cuts for most of the top half. The top decile faces a very small increase in

taxation. In percentage terms, the increase in taxes is substantial for the bottom 20 percent of the

income distribution: the income group in the 5th to 10th percentiles see their taxes go up on

average 3 percent of their income while the group from 10th to 20th percentiles face an increase of

over 1 percent of income. Given the small size of the redistribution ($125.6 billion), no single

group faces a large tax increase. If the hope is to design a progressive tax shift, however, this

proposal falls short on the basis of annual income measures.

       The Suits Index provides a summary measure of income redistribution. The Suits Index is

a tax-based analogue to the Gini Coefficient. It ranges from -1 to 1 with negative values

indicating a regressive tax and positive values a progressive tax. Figure 2 illustrates how the Suits

Index is calculated. [INSERT FIGURE 2 ABOUT HERE] The horizontal axis indicates the



       17
            Households are weighted by consumption spending.
       18
           Because of considerable income measurement problems in the bottom of the income
distribution, I follow the approach of Pechman (1985) as well as Gale, Houser, and Scholz (1996)
by excluding the bottom 5 percent of the income distribution from the analysis. Thus decile 1
only includes households in the 5th to 10th percentiles of the income distribution.

                                                -16-
cumulative distribution of income (ranging from zero to one). The vertical axis indicates the

cumulative distribution of taxes (again, ranging from zero to 1). We can then graph the

cumulative tax collections from different portions of the income distribution in this graph. Such a

graph is called a Tax Concentration Curve and I have drawn three possible curves. Consider first

the curve in the lower right triangle of the box. This tax concentration curve represents a

progressive tax system. To read it, consider the point (0.50, 0.15) that I have marked on this

curve. This point indicates that the bottom 50 percent of the income distribution pays 15 percent

of all taxes. Whenever a tax concentration curve lies entirely below the main diagonal of the box,

the tax system is unambiguously progressive. The Suits Index is given by the ratio of the area B

(area between the tax concentration curve and the main diagonal) and the area A + B (the lower

right triangle of the box).

        The diagonal line running from the lower left corner of the box to the upper right corner

indicates a tax concentration curve for a proportional tax system. The bottom 50 percent (20

percent) of the population would pay 50 percent (20 percent) of the taxes. The Suits Index in this

case would be zero. Finally, the dashed line above the main diagonal is a tax concentration curve

for a regressive tax. The bottom half of the income distribution pays more than half of the taxes.

In this case the Suits Index would be negative.

        I constructed Suits Indices for the incremental taxes (both positive and negative) that

follow the reform. The Suits Index for the environmental taxes is -0.248 indicating that this new

tax levied in isolation would be a regressive tax. We are reducing a tax, however, in a progressive

fashion. If we had levied an incremental tax equal in magnitude to the tax that we are eliminating

(the "decrease" column in Table 6), that tax would also have been regressive (as measured by a


                                                  -17-
Suits Index of -0.207). Note, however, that the regressivity of the income tax component that we

propose to eliminate is smaller than the regressivity of the new tax (as measured by Suits Indices).

Thus the shift is regressive (as measured by the difference in Suits Indices). The degree of

regressivity is fairly small, however, as the difference in Suits Indices is near 0.

        One problem with this measure of tax shifting and distribution is that we are implementing

a small tax and so should not expect large changes in the Suits Index. The Suits Index is also a

single summary measure of tax redistribution and does not indicate the full flavor of the change in

tax burdens following a tax reform. As a final measure of the degree of tax redistribution, I

construct a variable that I call a "tax shift" measure. It is the additional aggregate taxes paid by

each decile measured as a percentage of the total amount of taxes that are being replaced by the

new tax. The tax shift variable measures redistribution across income deciles but ignores

redistribution within income deciles19. For example, the tax reform modeled in Table 6 shifts

$125.4 billion from income to environmental taxes. The households in the lowest decile face a

higher tax burden equal to 0.9 percent of this shifted amount ($1.13 billion in additional taxes). A

distributionally neutral tax reform would be a reform for which the tax shift variable equaled zero

for each decile. The tax shift variable indicates that much of the variation in taxes cancels out

within deciles and that across decile shifting is on the order of 5 percent of the total new tax

revenues ($6.1 billion). The sixth and ninth deciles receive the greatest reductions in decile tax

burden receiving nearly 2 percent (each) of the total new taxes.

        The second set of columns uses the measure of annualized lifetime income that I have



        19
         This is simply an alternative way of presenting information about the change in average
tax payments within each decile.

                                                  -18-
proposed in Caspersen and Metcalf (1994). Ranking households by this measure of income

makes the tax reform look slightly more progressive. The lowest income group and the highest

two income groups see their taxes go up modestly while the groups in the 10th to 80th percentiles

face lower taxes. Measured as a percentage of income, no group sees a change in tax liability as

large as ½ of one percent. The difference in Suits Indices is now positive, albeit close to zero,

indicating a slight increase in progressivity with this reform. The tax shift variable shows that the

top decile receives over 3 percent of the new tax revenues and that the lowest decile along with

the top two deciles receive over 4 percent of revenues. Again, the degree of across decile tax

shifting is not very large with this reform.

        Given the criticisms of the lifetime income approach discussed above, I have also

constructed a distributional table for households with married couples in which the head of

household is between the ages of 40 and 50. While households in this group may still suffer from

transitory income shocks (both positive and negative), we can be reasonably confident that

income differences in this group do not arise from lifecycle considerations. The distributional

story is essentially the same as the story when I rank households by my measure of lifetime

income. The lowest income group is the only group for whom tax liabilities increase (though on a

percentage basis, the increase is very small) while other groups face slightly lower taxes.

Measured as a fraction of income, the change is slightly larger for some groups. For example,

households in the 20th to 30th percentiles receive a tax reduction equal to .7 percent of annual

income as opposed to a reduction equal to .4 percent of annualized lifetime income20. The change


        20
           Note that households in the third decile as measured by annualized lifetime income may
not be the same as households in the third decile as measured by annual income. The first two
income rankings also use all households while the last measure only uses a subset of households.

                                                -19-
in Suits Indices for this group is 0.01 indicating that this is essentially a proportional reform when

considered over the entire distribution.

       Table 7 reports Suits Indices on components of the tax reform. Among the new

environmental taxes, the carbon tax is most regressive and the virgin materials tax is least

regressive. The differences among the various environmental taxes in terms of regressivity are not

large however. That fact suggests that adjusting the components of the environmental revenue

package will not affect the distribution very much. On the other hand, the differences in degree of

regressivity are quite large for the components of the tax reduction. Since these are rate

reductions, a negative sign on the Suits Index indicates the system becomes more progressive as

this tax is reduced while a positive sign indicates an increase in regressivity. The refundable tax

credits add the most progressivity to the system (as measured by the Suits Index) while

proportional rate reductions add the least progressivity. In fact, rate reductions diminish the

progressivity of the tax system.

       To measure the sensitivity of the distributional results to changes in the reform proposal, I

increased the refundable tax credit from $150 per exemption to $200 per exemption while

decreasing the proportional rate reduction to maintain revenue neutrality. The cost of the

refundable exemption rises from $34.9 billion to $46.5 billion. The rate reduction on the personal

income tax must be lowered to reduce the collections by $11.6 billion and the proportional rate

reduction is now 1.7 percent. With this small change, the tax reform now looks progressive (as

measured by the Suits Index) regardless of the income measure used or cohort considered (see


Finally, note that the distribution of tax changes in the cohort measure is not revenue neutral.
This group as a whole pays roughly $2.4 billion less in taxes as a result of this reform. Those
revenues are recaptured through higher taxes on other age and marital status cohorts.

                                                 -20-
Table 8). Taking annual income as the appropriate measure of household well-being, the tax is

now essentially proportional. Households in the 5th to 10th percentiles face an increase in taxes on

average of $171 per year (2.2 percent of their income) while households in the 10th to 30th

percentiles face smaller increases. Households in the 30th to 90th percentiles receive tax reductions

with the largest reduction going to the 6th decile. The top decile faces the largest tax increase (in

absolute terms though the increase is small relative to their income). The tax shift (as a percentage

of tax collections from the new tax) is largest for this decile with the increase in their taxes equal

to 2.9 percent of the $125 billion collected from the new taxes.

        The degree of progressivity rises considerably under either of the two measures designed

to account for lifecycle considerations. The lifetime income approach indicates that the 5th to 10th

percentile households face very small tax increases (.2 percent of income) while households in the

10th to 80th percentiles face tax cuts up to .4 percent of income. The top 20 percent of the

distribution face tax increases with the top decile facing an increase of .4 percent. A similar result

holds for the married, middle-aged cohort except now the lowest income group receives a tax cut

rather than a tax increase. The tax cuts range from a low of .01 percent to a high of 1.01 percent.

The top decile has a modest tax increase of .18 percent and the change in the Suits Index is now

.057. In summary, Table 8 demonstrates that it is possible to construct an environmental tax that

is essentially distributionally neutral despite the regressivity of the various environmental levies.

        Next, I consider a reform that increases the progressivity of the tax system. The

environmental taxes are the same but the use of the proceeds differs. Rather than give each

worker a $5,000 wage exemption from payroll taxes, I tie the size of the exemption to family size.

In particular, I provide each worker an exemption equal to the poverty level for a family of their


                                                 -21-
size divided by the size of number of workers21. This costs $55.1 billion and allows an increase in

the refundable tax credit from $150 per exemption to $300.22 Table 9 presents results from this

scenario.

        Ranking households by annual income, the tax looks mildly progressive except in the

lowest income group. Households in the income 10th through 70th percentiles face lower taxes

while the top three deciles face tax increases. Note, though, that the greatest tax increase (as

measured by change in average tax rate) falls on the households in the lowest income group. As

measured by the change in Suits Index, the tax reform adds some progressivity to the system.

The largest shift in terms of tax collections occurs in the top decile which faces a higher tax

burden equal to nearly 6 percent of the revenues collected from the new taxes.

        The lifetime income approach eliminates the regressivity at the lower end of the income

distribution. Now, the lowest 70 percent of the income distribution face lower taxes with the

additional burden falling on the top three deciles and predominantly on the top 10 percent of the

distribution. A similar result holds if we use annual income to rank households but focus on the

married 40 to 50 year old cohort. Taxes fall for the bottom 40 percent of the distribution with the

largest decreases in the 10th to 20th percentiles. Taxes also fall for the households in the 50th to

70th percentiles. The fifth decile faces a small increase in taxes. Again, the largest increase occurs

in the top decile of the distribution. Measured either by the lifetime or cohort income approach,

the tax looks slightly more progressive with a change in the Suits Index now between .084 and


        21
          The size of exemption is limited to covered wages for each worker up to the
individual's contribution.
        22
          To maintain revenue neutrality, I also lower gross of credit personal tax collections by
.11 percent ($.5 billion).

                                                 -22-
.118.

        Summing up, all of the reforms that I have considered can essentially be viewed as both

revenue and distributionally neutral. Given the modest amount of revenue changes resulting from

the reform, we should not expect large shifts in the income distribution. Despite the rather

regressive nature of the taxes that make up the new environmental tax revenues (as measured by

the Suits Index in Table 7), I have shown in this section that it is possible to choose ways to

reduce income tax collections in a progressive fashion to offset the regressivity of the

environmental taxes. And, as demonstrated in Table 9, it would not be difficult to structure the

tax reform to add progressivity to the tax system. An important question is the degree of tax

shifting that occurs under any of these reforms relative to the tax shifting that would occur under

alternative reforms. To address this issue, I next contrast the green tax shift to a shift from

income to consumption taxation, a reform that has been discussed and debated at some length in

the past few years.

                                   D. A Retail Sales Tax Reform

        It is instructive to contrast the distributional impact of a green tax reform to a reform that

is currently under discussion: a shift from income to consumption taxation. In this section, I

consider a shift from the current income tax to a broad based retail sales tax23. I consider two

different reforms: first a replacement of the entire income tax with a national retail sales tax and

then a replacement of 10 percent of the income tax with a small sales tax. This latter reform,

while not under serious consideration, allows comparisons between the environmental tax reforms


        23
          While I model a retail sales tax, the distributional results are identical to those that
would result from analyzing a broad based value added tax or a Flat Tax with no family
exemptions.

                                                 -23-
discussed above and the consumption tax reform discussed in this section.

        The tax base for the national sales tax as modeled here is quite comprehensive. Housing

services are not taxed per se but are taxed at the time of purchase of the house. The same

approach is used for other durable goods. Medical services are included in the tax base as are

other services. Assuming that non-profits and imputed financial services are included in the tax

base, the revenue neutral tax rate would be 16.5 percent.24 Table 10 shows the distribution of a

shift from the income tax to a broad based income tax using an annual income incidence approach.

Based on the annual income approach, the tax reform is very regressive. Tax liabilities increase

for the bottom 70 percent of the income distribution and decrease for the top 30 percent. The

changes are quite substantial with the lowest income group seeing their average tax rate increase

by 34 percentage points. Meanwhile the top decile's average tax rate falls by 7 percent. Another

way to measure the regressivity of the tax reform based on annual income is to note that the Suits

Index falls from 0.202 (income tax) to -0.228 (retail sales tax) as a result of the reform. Given the

size of the tax, the shift across deciles can be quite substantial. Each of the deciles from the 10th

to the 40th percentiles faces an increase in taxes equal to 5 percent of the taxes collected under the

personal and corporate income taxes. Meanwhile, the top decile enjoys a decrease in taxes equal

to a quarter of tax collections.

        The regressivity of the tax reform is reduced significantly when I shift to a lifetime income

analysis. The variation in changes in tax liabilities across lifetime income deciles falls markedly

relative to the annual income analysis. The reform is still regressive - the lowest 70 percent of the



        24
           Excluding imputed financial services and non-profits from the tax base would require a
tax rate of 18.2 percent. See Metcalf (1997) for details.

                                                 -24-
income distribution face tax increases while the top 30 percent enjoy tax decreases. However the

differences are not nearly as large as when measured using annual income to rank households.

Moreover, the change in average tax rates is much smaller with the lowest lifetime income group

facing an average increase in their average tax rate of 7.8 percentage points while the top decile's

average tax rate falls by 3.5 percentage points. Ranking households by lifetime income, the Suits

Index now falls from 0.068 to -0.045 with this tax reform. Unlike in the previous tax shifts, the

cohort analysis provides results more similar to the annual income approach than to the lifetime

income approach. The sensitivity of distributional results for a consumption tax reform to how

lifetime income is measured suggests that one should be cautious in using annual income and

consumption data to try to measure distributional effects based on lifetime or permanent income.25

        One misconception about consumption tax reform (and, in particular, a reform that

involves a value added tax or a national retail sales tax) is that it is by definition regressive.   It

would be possible to add progressive elements to the reform to mitigate regressivity. I next

illustrate this point by modifying the national retail sales tax to incorporate a family rebate. I

model the rebate on the proposal of Burton and Mastromarco (1996). Burton and Mastromarco

(1996) have proposed providing universal rebates to households equal to the poverty level to



        25
           An additional issue for consumption tax distributional analysis is that much of the
suggested gains from tax reform result from increased capital accumulation and productivity,
which in turn implies wage growth. The dynamic responses to tax reform cannot be captured in a
"snap shot" distributional analysis and requires the use of large scale computable general
equilibrium models. Fullerton and Rogers (1996) have applied such a model to a Flat Tax Reform
and found the tax shift to be regressive. Altig et al. (1997) have also analyzed the Hall-Rabushka
Flat Tax and concluded that a "clean" tax reform can raise incomes at the lowest income levels.
The income gains at the bottom of the distribution diminish rapidly, however, as they add
increased realism to their reform in the form of deviations of the actual tax reform from an
idealized tax reform.

                                                  -25-
build progressivity into the tax system. Poverty thresholds for 1994 ranged from $7,107 for an

elderly unrelated individual to $30,285 for a family of size 9 or more. The rebate would equal the

tax rate times the poverty threshold for a given family size26. In effect, the rebate removes from

the tax base an amount equal to the sum of poverty thresholds for each family unit in the United

States added up over all family units. Call this amount the aggregate rebate base. Based on

extrapolations from the Consumer Expenditure Survey data set for 1994, the aggregate rebate

base would equal $1.15 trillion. Assuming that non-profits and imputed financial services are

included in the tax base, the revenue neutral tax rate would rise from 16.5 percent to 22.8 percent.

       Table 11 presents incidence results for a broad based national sales tax with a universal

rebate based on poverty thresholds. Compared to Table 10, the tax is modestly less regressive

when evaluated using the annual income approach. However it continues to look very regressive.

The Suits Index for the sales tax with rebate is -0.171 indicating considerable regressivity (relative

to the income tax system it replaces for which the Suits Index equals 0.202). Tax shifts continue

to be quite substantial with the top decile receiving a decrease in aggregate taxes equal to nearly

one quarter of tax collections under the national retail sales tax. The regressive nature of the

reform falls when I rank people by lifetime income. The change in taxes ranges from a decrease

of nearly 2 percent (decile 10) to an increase of 5.4 percent (decile 1).   Ranking households by

lifetime income the Suits Index for the sales tax with rebate (0.005) is much closer to the value of

the index for the current income tax (0.068). The cohort measure, however, suggests that the tax

reform is still quite regressive. The Suits Index rises substantially and across decile distributions


       26
         Burton and Mastromarco propose grossing up the rebate so that disposable income after
the rebate is brought up to the poverty threshold. Structuring the rebate that way would not
change the distributional impact of the tax reform in any substantive way.

                                                 -26-
are also quite large (nearly one third of tax collections accrue to top decile in lower taxes).

         Next I consider a more modest tax reform that is more comparable to the environmental

tax reforms considered in the last section. A broadbased sales tax is imposed with a rate

sufficiently high to raise $125 billion in revenue. The revenue is used to lower taxes as described

in the first scenario (Table 6). Based on the annual income analysis, the tax reform is regressive

with the lowest 30 percent of the income distribution along with the top 10 percent facing tax

increases. Across decile tax shifts exceed one percent of tax revenue for the groups facing a tax

increase. The change in Suits indices shows a shift toward greater regressivity in the tax system.

Under either the lifetime income measure or the cohort measure, the tax shift looks modestly

progressive with the Suits Index increasing in both cases. For the cohort analysis, taxes fall for all

but the top 20 percent of the income distribution. Using the lifetime income measure, taxes fall

for the 10th through 80th percentiles. The lowest decile faces a .3 percent increase in average tax

rates.

         If the desire in tax reform is to maintain or increase the progressivity of the tax system, it

appears from this analysis that environmental tax reforms may be more effective than a

comprehensive consumption tax reform. The differences between a ten percent shift to

consumption tax versus a cluster of environmental taxes is much smaller. Focusing on the bottom

of the distribution, the environmental taxes do not increase the tax burden for the lowest income

decile as much as the consumption tax reform (using annual or lifetime income measures). A

smaller fraction of the taxes collected are shifted onto the top decile, however, under the

environmental taxes (0.5 percent versus 1.7 percent for the sales tax).

         This paper has only focused on distributional considerations. Whether efficiency gains are


                                                  -27-
greater under environmental than consumption tax reforms is an issue that I have not addressed in

this paper. For environmental reforms, one efficiency gain is the closer alignment of marginal

social costs with marginal social benefits in the use of pollution related inputs and goods. A

second issue is the degree to which the efficiency distortions which arise from price changes in the

face of pre-existing tax distortions are greater or less than distortions that can be reduced by

lowering other taxes27.

                                           V. Conclusion

       I have considered a number of environmental and other tax reforms in this paper to

measure the distributional impact of changes in the tax system. A reform that raises

environmental taxes and uses the proceeds to lower the personal income tax will affect consumers

directly (paying the gasoline tax at the pump) and indirectly (through higher consumer prices).

Using the 1992 Input-Output Accounts, I have traced through changes in intermediate goods

prices resulting from taxes on these goods to changes in consumer prices. Assuming forward

shifting of taxes, I allocate these taxes to households in the 1994 Consumer Expenditure Survey

to measure the distributional impact using both annual income and lifetime income approaches to

ranking households.

       A modest tax reform in which environmental taxes equal to 10 percent of federal receipts

are collected has a negligible impact on the income distribution when the funds are rebated to

households through reductions in the payroll tax and personal income tax. The degree of income

shifting can be adjusted with changes in how the revenues are returned to households and it is



       27
         For more discussion of this point, see Fullerton and Metcalf (1997, 1998). Also, see
the computational results in Bovenberg and Goulder (1996).

                                                -28-
possible to increase the progressivity of the tax system with an environmental tax reform.

        I then compared these reforms to a reform that shifts the tax base from income to

consumption. In this case, it is difficult to maintain the level of progressivity that exists under the

current income tax although ways exist by which the regressivity of the reform could be blunted.

Whether the long term growth gains from consumption tax reform would offset the initial increase

in regressivity remains to be determined28.

        It appears from this analysis that any distributional concerns about the greater use of

environmental taxes can be addressed through a careful menu of tax reductions that are targeted

to low income households. While it is true that environmental reforms could be designed that are

quite regressive, this analysis indicates that distributionally neutral (or even mildly progressive)

reforms are certainly feasible.




        28
           I have also ignored transition effects. It is possible that transition effects could offset
some of the regressivity to the extent that the transition incorporates a lump sum tax on old
capital by disallowing transition rules to protect old capital.

                                                  -29-
                                           References

Altig, D., A. Auerbach, L. Kotlikoff, K. Smetters, and J. Walliser, "Simulating U.S. Tax Reform,"
        Congressional Budget Office Technical Paper Series No. 1997-6, September 1997.

Armington, P. "A Theory of Demand for Products Distinguished by Place of Production,"
      International Monetary Fund Staff Papers, 16(1969): 159-176.

Ballard, C., D. Fullerton, J. Shoven, and J. Whalley, A General Equilibrium Model for Tax Policy
       Evaluation, University of Chicago Press: Chicago, 1985.

Bovenberg, L. and R. deMooij, "Environmental Levies and Distortionary Taxation," American
      Economic Review, 84(1994): 1085-89.

Bovenberg, L. and L. Goulder, "Optimal Environmental Taxation in the Presence of Other Taxes:
      General Equilibrium Analyses," American Economic Review, 86(1996): 985-1000.

Bull, N., K. Hassett, and G. Metcalf, "Who Pays Broad-Based Energy Taxes? Computing
       Lifetime and Regional Incidence," The Energy Journal, 15(1994): 145-164.

Bureau of the Census, Statistical Abstract of the United States, 1996, U.S. Government Printing
       Office: Washington D.C., 1996.

Burton, D. R. and D. R. Mastromarco, "Emancipating America From the Income Tax: How a
       National Sales Tax Would Work," mimeo, Cato Institute, December, 1996.

Caspersen, E. and G. Metcalf, "Is a Value Added Tax Regressive? Annual Versus Lifetime
       Incidence Measures," National Tax Journal 47(1994): 731-746.

Congressional Budget Office, Spending and Revenue Options to Reduce the Deficit (?), U.S.
      Government Printing Office: Washington, DC, 1997.

Energy Information Administration, Annual Energy Review 1996, Washington, D.C.: U.S.
       Department of Energy, 1997.

Feenberg, D., A. Mitrusi, and J. Poterba, "Distributional Effects of Adopting a National Retail
      Sales Tax," (1996) forthcoming in Tax Policy and the Economy.

Feldstein, M. "Imputing Corporate Tax Liabilities to Individual Taxpayers," National Tax Journal
        41(1988): 37-60.

Friedman, M. A Theory of Consumption Function, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press,
      1957.


                                               -30-
Fullerton, D. and G. Metcalf, "Environmental Controls, Scarcity Rents, and Pre-Existing
        Distortions," NBER Working Paper No. 6091, 1997.

Fullerton, D. and G. Metcalf, "Environmental Taxes and the Double-Dividend Hypothesis: Did
        You Really Expect Something for Nothing?" forthcoming, Chicago-Kent Law Review,
        1998.

Fullerton, D. and D. Rogers, Who Bears the Income Tax Burden? Brookings Institution,
        Washington, D.C., 1993.

Fullerton, D. and D. Rogers, "Lifetime Effects of Fundamental Tax Reform," in H. Aaron and W.
        Gale, eds, Economic Effects of Fundamental Tax Reform, Washington: Brookings, 1996.

Gale, W., S. Houser, and J.K. Scholz, "Distributional Effects of Fundamental Tax Reform, "in H.
       Aaron and W. Gale, eds, Economic Effects of Fundamental Tax Reform, Washington:
       Brookings, 1996.

Goulder, L.,"Energy Taxes: Traditional Efficiency Effects and Environmental Implications," Tax
      Policy and the Economy, 8(1994): 105-158.

Hamond, M.J. et al., Tax Waste, Not Work, San Francisco: Redefining Progress, 1997.

Internal Revenue Service, Statistics of Income, Winter 1996-97, Department of the Treasury:
        Washington, DC.

Joint Committee on Taxation, Methodology and Issues in Measuring Changes in the Distribution
       of Tax Burdens, JCS-7-93, 1993.

Lawson, A., "Benchmark Input-Output Accounts for the U.S. Economy, 1992," Survey of
      Current Business, November 1997, 36-82.

Leontief, W. Input-Output Economics, Oxford University Press: New York, 2nd edition, 1986.

Metcalf, G., "The Lifetime Incidence of State and Local Taxes: Measuring Changes During the
       1980's," in J. Slemrod, ed. Tax Progressivity and Income Inequality, New York:
       Cambridge University Press, 1993a.

Metcalf, G. 1993b. "Lifecycle vs. Annual Perspectives on the Incidence of a Value Added Tax,"
       Tax Policy and the Economy, 8(1994): 45-64.

Metcalf, G., "Measuring the Incidence of a National Retail Sales Tax," Cato Institute, 1997.

Parry, I., "Pollution Taxes and Revenue Recycling," Journal of Environmental Economics and


                                               -31-
       Management, 29(1995): S64-77.

Pechman, J. Who Bears the Tax Burden?, Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C., 1985.

Pearce, D. "The Role of Carbon Taxes in Adjusting to Global Warming," The Economic Journal,
        101(1991): 938-948.

Poterba, J.M. "Lifetime Incidence and the Distributional Burden of Excise Taxes," American
       Economic Review 79 (2), (1989): 325-30.

Poterba, J.M. "Is the Gasoline Tax Regressive?" in David Bradford, ed., Tax Policy and the
       Economy, vol. 5, (1991):145-164.

Poterba, J.M. "Who Bears the Lifetime Tax Burden? A Book Review," National Tax Journal 44
       (4), (1993): 539-542.

Repetto, R., R. Dower, R. Jenkins, and J. Geoghegan, Green Fees: How a Tax Shift Can Work
       For the Environment and the Economy, World Resources Institute: Washington, DC,
       1992.

Sabelhaus, J. "Consumer Expenditure Survey: Family-Level Extracts, 1980:1-1994:1,"
       Congressional Budget Office, (1996), Washington, DC, mimeo.

Terkla, D. "The Efficiency Value of Effluent Tax Revenues," Journal of Environmental
        Economics and Management, 11(1984): 107-?

Tullock, G. "Excess Benefit," Water Resources Research, 3(1967): 643-45.




                                              -32-
             Appendix A - Adjustments to Consumer Expenditure Survey Data

                      I. Attributing Health Care Spending to Individuals

       While the bulk of spending on health care is done on behalf of households by insurance

companies and health care organizations, the CES only records out of pocket spending by

households. Moreover, this spending can often be negative if the household has received a

refund from an insurance company for medical spending in the current survey period. Therefore,

I exclude the out of pocket spending recorded in the CES and replace it with a prediction of

spending on behalf of a household using data from the National Medical Expenditure Survey

(NMES), a nationally representative sample that followed spending by roughly 20,000 families in

1987. Total medical spending for a household is the sum of employer provided and individual

health insurance, out of pocket spending, and spending reimbursed by government insurance

(Medicare, and Medicaid). The 1987 data are inflated to 1994 values using the NIPA aggregates

for the two years. I regressed total medical spending on income indicator variables29, an indicator

variable for the presence of elderly family members, an indicator for the presence of children

under the age of 18, and family size. The coefficients are precisely estimated with the expected

signs. I then forecast income in the CES using the estimated coefficients and replaced the medical

related spending in the CES with this forecasted value.

                    II. Imputing Corporate Tax Liabilities to Individuals

       I follow the methodology set out in Feldstein (1988) to impute corporate tax liabilities to

individuals. The approach compute two numbers: 1) the ratio of corporate taxes to total capital



       29
        The income classes were 5000 to 10000, 10000 to 15000, 15000 to 20000, 20000 to
30000, 30000 to 40000, 40000 to 50000, 50000 to 75000 and above 75000.

                                               -33-
income (2) and 2) the ratio of pretax corporate profits to dividends (µ). Under the assumption

that corporate income taxes are borne by all capital income, 2 represents the average tax rate on

capital income. Taxes on corporate income are taxes on distributed and non-distributed profits.

This method assumes that corporate profits associated with an individual are proportional to

dividends received. Thus µ gives the mark-up to associate corporate profits with households.

       Capital income (K) is the sum of corporate profits (C), net interest received by households

(I), and rental income (R). Once I compute K and its components along with the corporate tax

liability (T) and personal dividends (D), I can compute 2 and µ:

(A1)                                          2 = T/K

(A2)                                          µ = C/D

Pretax corporate profits are the sum of NIPA corporate profits plus the decrease in the value of

corporate debt resulting from inflation plus real interest earned by pension funds.

       NIPA corporate profits (excluding Federal Reserve Bank profits) equaled $506.0 billion in

1994. Credit market instrument liabilities of the corporate sector equaled $2,627.4 billion (Flow

of Funds). The inflation rate for 1994 based on the CPI was 2.6 percent. Thus corporate profits

should be increased by (.026)($2,627.4) = $68.3 billion.

       Interest income received by pension funds equaled $57.6 billion. To convert to real

interest income, I use nominal interest rates weighted by holdings of pension funds and convert

using the inflation rate (B). The holdings are:




                                                  -34-
             Holding          Amount Percentage Interest Rate          Source
             Time             116.9          15.7             3.0%     FRB source;
             Deposits, etc.                                            assumed based
                                                                       on various rates
             Money Funds       31.2            4.2            4.9%     6 mo.
                                                                       Commercial
                                                                       Paper
             Govt Bonds       362.5          48.7             7.1%     10 yr G bonds
             Corp Bonds       233.4          31.4             8.6%     Baa Bonds


This implies a nominal interest rate (D) of 6.8 percent. The real rate (r) is given by (1+D)/(1+B)-1

which in this case equals 4.1 percent. The adjuster to convert nominal interest into real interest is

the ratio of real to nominal interest: 4.1/6.8 = .602. Thus, real pension interest income is

(.602)(57.6) = $34.7 billion. Corporate profits are the sum of reported corporate profits (506.0),

the decrease in corporate debt due to inflation (68.3), and real pension interest income (34.7) for

a total of $609.0 billion.

        Interest received by households from NIPA is $661.6 billion. This is converted to real

interest by the same method as pension interest income. The interest rate weights are based on

holdings of households in Flow of Funds:




                                                -35-
                Holding          Amount Percentage Interest Rate        Source
                Time             2994.8        64.8              3.0%   FRB source;
                Deposits, etc.                                          assumed based
                                                                        on various rates
                Money Funds      352.2            7.6            4.9%   6 mo.
                                                                        Commercial
                                                                        Paper
                Govt Bonds       925.8         20.0              7.1%   10 yr G bonds
                Corp Bonds       346.3            7.5            8.6%   Baa Bonds

This gives a nominal interest rate of 4.4 percent and a real interest rate of 1.8 percent. Thus real

personal interest income is (1.8/4.4)(661.6) = $263.8 billion.

           Personal interest expenses (excluding mortgage interest) is $117.2 billion. The nominal

interest rate is based on:



             Holding              Amount Percentage Interest Rate        Source
             Consumer Credit 990.2         59.2           15.7%          credit card rates
                                                                         in FRB
             Misc. Debt           681.9    40.8           9.2%           Prime Rate + 2%

This gives a nominal interest rate of 13.0 percent, a real rate of 10.1 percent and an adjustment

factor of .780. Thus real interest expenses are (.780)(117.2) = $91.4 billion. Net real interest

income is the difference of real interest income (263.8) and real interest expenses (91.4) or $172.4

billion.

Finally, rental income in the NIPA tables is 116.6 billion. Capital income (K) is the sum or

corporate income (609.0), net real interest income (172.4) and rental income (116.6) for a total of

$898.0 billion.



                                                   -36-
       Corporate tax liabilities come from the NIPA tables and equal $144.0 billion in 1994.

Personal Dividends (D) are the NIPA dividends paid to persons (211.0) less dividends

attributable to pension funds (26.3) or $184.7 billion.

       The average tax rate on corporate income (2) is the ratio of corporate tax collections to

capital income and equals 144.0/898.0 or .160. The ratio of pretax corporate profits to dividends

(µ) equals 609.0/184.7 or 3.30. Finally, pretax corporate profits per dollar of dividends

distributed equals 2µ = .528. Finally, I use the adjusters for underreporting that Feldstein uses for

dividends (.71) and interest income (.82). Thus my formula for attributing corporate tax liability

is

(A3)           Corporate Tax Liability = .528*Div/.71 + .160*Int/.82 + .160*Rent.




                                                -37-
                        Appendix B. Using the 1992 Input Output Accounts30

          The input-output accounts trace through the production of commodities by industries and

the use of those commodities by other industries. Taken together, one can trace the use of inputs

by one industry by all other industries. Various adding up identities along with assumptions about

production and trade allow the accounts to be manipulated to trace through the impact of price

changes in one industry on the products of all other industries in the economy. A brief description

of the use of the input-output accounts follows31.

          Tracing price changes through the economy on the basis of input-output accounts dates

back to work by Leontief (documented in Leontief (1986)). The model makes a number of

important assumptions the most important of which are 1) goods are produced and sold in a

perfectly competitive environment such that all factor price increases are passed forward to

consumers, 2) domestic and foreign goods are sufficiently different that the price of domestic

goods can adjust following changes in factor prices32, and 3) input coefficients (the amount of

industry i used in the production of industry j) are constant. Thus input substitution is not

allowed as factor prices change. This last assumption means that price responses are only

approximate as they don't allow for product mix changes as relative prices change. In effect, the

input-output accounts can be used to trace first order price effects through the economy.

          Two sets of equations define the basic input-output accounts. The first set relates the


          30
               The 1992 input-output accounts are described in Lawson (1997).
          31
               For a more complete discussion, upon which this discussion is based, see Fullerton
(1996).
          32
               Fullerton (1996) terms this the Armington assumption following work by Armington
(1969).

                                                   -38-
demand for goods from an industry to the value of output from that industry:

                                 x11p1 + x12p1 + ... + x1Np1 + d1p1 = x1p1
(B1)                             x21p2 + x22p2 + ... + x2Np2 + d2p2 = x2p2
                                                      .
                                                      .
                                                      .
                               xN1pN + xN2pN + ... + xNNpN + dNpN = xNpN

where xij is the quantity of the output from industry i used by industry j, pi is the unit price of

product i, di is the final demand for output i, and xi is the total output of industry i. These N

equations simply say that the value of output from each industry must equal the sum of the value

of output used by other industries (intermediate inputs) plus final demand. Without loss of

generality, we can choose units for each of the goods so that all prices equal 1. This will be

convenient as the expenditure data in the input-output accounts can then be used to measure

quantities prior to any taxes that I will impose.

          The second set of equations relates the value of all inputs and value added to the value of

output:

                                 x11p1 + x21p2 + ... + xN1pN + v1 = x1p1
(B2)                             x12p1 + x22p2 + ... + xN2pN + v2 = x2p2
                                                     .
                                                     .
                                                     .
                                x1Np1 + x2Np2 + ... + xNNpN + vN = xNpN

where vi is value added in industry i. Define aij = xij/xj, the input of product i as a fraction of the

total output of industry j. The system (B2) can be rewritten as




                                                    -39-
                                 (1-a11)p1 - a21p2 - ... - aN1pN = v1/x1
(B3)                            -a12p1 + (1-a22)p2 - ... - aN2pN = v2/x2
                                                    .
                                                    .
                                                    .
                               -a1Np1 - a2Np2 - ... + (1-aNN)pN = vN/xN

These equations can be expressed in matrix notation as

(B3')                                       (I - A')PI = V

where I is an NxN identity matrix, A is an NxN matrix with elements aij, PI is an Nx1 vector of

industry prices, pi, and V is the Nx1 vector whose ith element is vi/xi. Assuming that (I-A') is non-

singular, this system can be solved for the price vector:

(B4)                                       PI = (I-A')-1V.

With the unit convention chosen above, PI will be a vector of ones. However, we can add taxes

to the system in which case the price vector will now differ from a vector of ones as intermediate

goods taxes get transmitted through the system. Specifically, let tij be a unit tax on the use of

product i by industry j. In this case, the value of goods used in production (grossed up by their

tax) plus value added now equals the value of output:

                     x11p1(1+t11) + x21p2(1+t21) + ... + xN1pN(1+tN1) + v1 = x1p1
(B5)                 x12p1(1+t12) + x22p2(1+t22) + ... + xN2pN(1+tN2) + v2 = x2p2
                                                   .
                                                   .
                                                   .
                    x1Np1(1+t1N) + x2Np2(1+t2N) + ... + xNNpN(1+tNN) + vN = xNpN


This set of equations can be manipulated in a similar fashion to the equations above to solve for

the price vector:

(B6)                                        PI = (I - B')V



                                                 -40-
where B is an NxN matrix with elements (1+tij)aij.33

       I regrouped industries in the input-output accounts into 40 industry groupings. Table B1

lists the groups along with the input-output accounts grouping. Tax rates are computed as the

ratio of required tax revenue from the industry divided by the value of output from that industry.

For the carbon tax, for example, the tax rate equals

                                                     20
                                            t3. '
                                                    j x3j
                                                    N


                                                    j'1




where the tax is designed to collect $20 billion from the coal industry (industry 3). This tax is

applied to all variables in the third equation of B5. Other industry level taxes are computed in a

similar fashion. Some taxes only apply to the output of certain industries used by certain other

industries. The treatment of industry 4, crude oil and natural gas, provides an example. The

crude oil and natural gas industries are combined into one industry by the input-output accounts.

Natural gas, however, is predominantly used by the utilities industries (industries 33 and 34) while

crude oil goes to the petroleum refining industry. Thus, I allocate the tax on natural gas to output

from the crude oil and natural gas industry (industry 4) used by the utilities (industries 33 and 34)

while the carbon tax on petroleum is allocated to the use of industry 4 by the petroleum refining

industry (industry 19).

       Equation B6 indicates how prices change in response to the industry level taxes. I next

have to allocate the price responses to consumer goods. The input-output accounts provide the



       33
           I restate the 1992 input-output accounts data in 1994 dollars by grossing up the data by
the ratio of 1994 to 1992 industry level output as measured in the NIPA accounts.

                                                -41-
information with which this transformation can be made. Let Z be an NxM matrix where zij

represents the proportion of consumer good j (j = 1, ..., M) derived from industry i (i = 1, ..., N).

The columns of Z sum to 1. If PC is a vector of consumer goods prices (an Mx1 vector), then

(B7)                                          PC = Z'PI.



Selected columns from the price transformation matrix, Z, are given in Table B2. The table for

1992 is similar to the table for 1972 constructed by Ballard, Fullerton, Shoven, and Whalley

(1985) and the table for 1977 in Fullerton and Rogers (1993).




                                                 -42-
Figure 1. Taxes and Quotas




 Figure 2. The Suits Index




           -43-
Table 1. Federal Revenues: 1994
        Source              Amount
                           ($billions)
    Income Taxes             683
Social Insurance Taxes       461
     Excise Taxes              55
 Estate & Gift Taxes           15
        Other                  44
        Total              1,258


Source: Statistical Abstract of the
United States, 1996.




                 -44-
            Table 2. Stationary Source Emissions in 1990
                                           Pollutant
                            Sulphur Nitrous     Volatile Particulate
                             Oxides Oxides      Organic   Matter
                                              Compounds
     Total Emissions        20152.4 11535.3      8209.8    2950.1
(Thousands of Tons Metric)

Coal Combustion                  77.2%     61.7%         0.7%        5.2%
Natural Gas Combustion              0%     28.4%         0.9%        1.0%
and Pipelines
Fuel Oil Combustion               7.3%      4.8%         0.1%        1.8%
Industry
    Agriculture                     0%        0%         2.1%        44.7%
    Coal Mining                     0%        0%           0%        11.2%
    Crude Petroleum & NG            0%        0%         6.6%           0%
    Petroleum Refining            3.3%      1.9%         8.6%         0.9%
    Electric Utilities              0%        0%           0%           0%
    Gas Utilities                   0%        0%           0%           0%
    Construction                    0%        0%         9.3%           0%
    Metals & Machinery            4.5%      0.4%         0.8%           9%
    Motor Vehicles                  0%        0%         2.2%           0%
    Misc. Manufacturing           7.7%      2.7%        62.6%        26.1%
    Services                        0%        0%           6%           0%
    Housing Services                0%        0%           0%           0%

Columns may not sum to 100% due to rounding error.
Source: Data collected by Goulder and described in Goulder (1994).




                                   -45-
   Table 3. Environmental
            Taxes
        Tax            Revenue
                       (billions)
    Carbon Tax          $56.0
   Gasoline Tax         $19.8
Air Pollution Taxes     $40.5
Virgin Materials Tax     $9.3
       Total            $125.6




               -46-
       Table 4. Impact of Environmental Taxes on Consumer Prices
Consumption Items Carbon Motor Air Pollution Virgin Total Tax
                   Tax Fuels Tax  Taxes     Materials Rate
                                              Tax
Food Off-Premise        0.9%     0.2%        0.8%      0.3%        2.2%
Food On-Premise         0.5%     0.1%        0.6%      0.2%        1.3%
Food Furnished          1.0%     0.2%        1.0%      0.4%        2.6%
Employees
Tobacco Products        0.4%     0.1%        0.5%      0.2%        1.2%
Alcohol Off-Premise     0.8%     0.2%        0.8%      0.3%        2.0%
Alcohol On-Premise      0.5%     0.1%        0.6%      0.2%        1.3%
Clothing and Shoes      0.8%     0.1%        1.0%      0.3%        2.2%
Clothing Services       0.5%     0.1%        0.6%      0.2%        1.3%
Jewelry and Watches     0.7%     0.1%        3.8%      0.3%        4.9%
Toilet Articles and     0.8%     0.1%        0.7%      0.3%        2.0%
Preparations
Barbershops, Beauty     0.5%     0.1%        0.6%      0.2%        1.3%
Parlors, Health Clubs
Tenant-Occupied         0.2%     0.0%        0.3%      0.1%        0.6%
Nonfarm Dwellings--
Rent
Other Rented            0.5%     0.1%        0.6%      0.2%        1.3%
Lodging
Furniture and           0.8%     0.1%        0.9%      0.3%        2.1%
Durable Household
Equipment
Nondurable              0.0%     0.0%        0.0%      0.1%        0.1%
Household Supplies
and Equipment
Electricity             12.0%    0.2%        8.1%      0.1%    20.4%
Natural Gas             19.6%    0.1%        6.0%      0.1%    25.8%
Water and Other         0.6%     0.0%        0.4%      0.1%        1.1%
Sanitary Services
Fuel Oil and Coal       12.1%    0.2%        1.8%      0.1%    14.2%
Telephone and           0.3%     0.1%        0.5%      0.1%        1.0%
Telegraph


                                 -47-
      Table 4. Impact of Environmental Taxes on Consumer Prices
Consumption Items Carbon Motor Air Pollution Virgin Total Tax
                   Tax Fuels Tax  Taxes     Materials Rate
                                              Tax
Domestic Service,      1.0%     0.2%        0.6%      0.4%        2.1%
Other Household
Operation
Medical Care           0.5%     0.1%        0.6%      0.2%        1.3%
Business Services      0.3%     0.1%        0.5%      0.1%        1.0%
Expense of Handling    0.3%     0.1%        0.5%      0.1%        0.9%
Life Insurance
New and Used Motor     0.8%     0.2%        0.7%      0.2%        1.9%
Vehicles
Tires, Tubes,          0.9%     0.2%        0.6%      0.3%        2.0%
Accessories, and
Other Parts
Repair, Greasing,      0.5%     0.1%        0.6%      0.2%        1.3%
Washing, Parking,
Storage, Rental
Gasoline and Oil       11.6%   13.7%        1.7%      0.1%    27.1%
Bridge, Tunnel,        0.6%     0.0%        0.4%      0.1%        1.1%
Ferry, and Road
Tolls
Auto Insurance         0.3%     0.1%        0.5%      0.1%        0.9%
Mass Transit Systems   1.9%     0.6%        0.8%      0.1%        3.4%
Taxicab, Railway,      1.9%     0.6%        0.8%      0.1%        3.4%
Bus, and Other
Travel Expenses
Airline Fares          1.9%     0.6%        0.8%      0.1%        3.4%
Books and Maps         0.7%     0.2%        0.6%      0.7%        2.2%
Magazines,             0.8%     0.1%        1.9%      0.4%        3.3%
Newspapers, Other
Nondurable Toys,
etc.
Recreation and         0.7%     0.1%        1.2%      0.2%        2.2%
Sports Equipment
Other Recreation       0.5%     0.1%        0.6%      0.2%        1.3%
Services

                                -48-
      Table 4. Impact of Environmental Taxes on Consumer Prices
Consumption Items Carbon Motor Air Pollution Virgin Total Tax
                   Tax Fuels Tax  Taxes     Materials Rate
                                              Tax
Pari-Mutual Net          0.5%        0.1%            0.6%   0.2%   1.3%
Receipts
Higher Education         0.5%        0.1%            0.6%   0.2%   1.3%
Nursery, Elementary,     0.5%        0.1%            0.6%   0.2%   1.3%
and Secondary
Education
Other Education          0.5%        0.1%            0.6%   0.2%   1.3%
Services
Religious and            0.5%        0.1%            0.6%   0.2%   1.3%
Welfare Activities


Source: Author calculations. See text for details.




                                      -49-
          Table 5. Tax Reductions
        Proposal               Amount
                              (Billions)
       Payroll Tax                  71.2
$150 Refundable Tax Credit          34.9
   4% Personal Income               19.3
     Tax Reduction
        TOTAL                   $125.4




                     -50-
                                                      Table 6. 10% Green Tax Shift
                      Annual Income                              Lifetime Income                            Married, Age 40-50
Decile Increase   Decrease ) Tax ) Average Tax      Increase Decrease ) Tax ) Average      Tax Increase   Decrease ) Tax ) Average Tax
                                  Tax Rate Shift                              Tax Rate     Shift                          Tax Rate Shift
  1        569        335 234          3.01 0.9%         695      645     51       0.23    0.2% 1,248       1,214      34      0.18 0.1%
  2        681        533 148          1.29 1.2%         830      913    -83      -0.31   -0.7% 1,406       1,580 -174        -0.61 -0.9%
  3        923        801 122          0.74 1.0%         917    1,056 -139        -0.44   -1.1% 1,382       1,681 -299        -0.72 -1.5%
  4      1,048        975      73      0.32 0.6%       1,062    1,111    -48      -0.13   -0.4% 1,513       1,761 -248        -0.47 -1.3%
  5      1,157      1,143      14      0.07 0.1%       1,199    1,282    -83      -0.20   -0.7% 1,861       1,903     -42     -0.05 -0.2%
  6      1,131      1,375 -244        -0.62 -2.0%      1,266    1,297    -31      -0.06   -0.3% 1,706       2,097 -391        -0.57 -2.0%
  7      1,410      1,457     -48     -0.10 -0.4%      1,272    1,384 -112        -0.21   -0.9% 1,761       2,163 -402        -0.51 -2.0%
  8      1,485      1,591 -105        -0.17 -0.8%      1,440    1,502    -62      -0.11   -0.5% 1,972       2,133 -161        -0.17 -0.8%
  9      1,712      1,924 -212        -0.27 -1.7%      1,659    1,571     88       0.13    0.7% 1,998       2,107 -110        -0.08 -0.6%
 10      2,260      2,197      62      0.08 0.5%       2,095    1,688 408          0.44    3.3% 2,830       2,954 -124        -0.04 -0.6%

                           )Suits                                   )Suits                                        )Suits
Suits   -0.248      -0.207 -0.041                    -0.056   -0.092 0.036                       -0.224     -0.234 0.010

Author's calculations from CES. The column titled Increase measures the increase in taxes from the new environmental taxes, while Decrease
measures the decrease in taxes from cuts in excise and personal income taxes.




                                                                  -51-
              Table 7. Suits Indices for
             Components of Tax Reform
    Tax Proposal        Increased Tax Decreased Tax
     Carbon Tax             -0.260
  Motor Fuels Tax           -0.250
 Air Pollution Taxes        -0.238
Virgin Materials Tax        -0.214
     Payroll Tax                             -0.230
     Reductions
Refundable Tax Credit                        -0.358
   Rate Reductions                            0.129


Indices are computed for the annual income measure of
well-being.




                          -52-
                                   Table 8. 10% Green Tax Shift: Increased Refundable Tax Credit
                      Annual Income                         Lifetime Income                      Married, Age 40-50
Decile Increase   Decrease ) Tax ) Average Tax Increase Decrease ) Tax ) Average Tax Increase Decrease ) Tax ) Average Tax
                                  Tax Rate Shift                         Tax Rate Shift                        Tax Rate Shift
  1        569        398 171          2.22 0.7%    695      686       9      0.23 0.0% 1,248    1,308    -60      -0.33 -0.2%
  2        681        608      73      0.64 0.6%    830      955 -125        -0.31 -1.0% 1,406   1,693 -287        -1.01 -1.5%
  3        923        883      40      0.26 0.3%    917    1,086 -169        -0.44 -1.4% 1,382   1,765 -383        -0.93 -2.0%
  4      1,048      1,050      -2     -0.02 -0.0% 1,062    1,119     -57     -0.13 -0.5% 1,513   1,788 -275        -0.52 -1.5%
  5      1,157      1,192     -35     -0.08 -0.3% 1,199    1,287     -88     -0.20 -0.7% 1,861   1,947    -86      -0.12 -0.5%
  6      1,131      1,401 -270        -0.69 -2.2% 1,266    1,306     -40     -0.06 -0.3% 1,706   2,080 -374        -0.54 -2.0%
  7      1,410      1,469     -59     -0.12 -0.5% 1,272    1,389 -117        -0.21 -1.0% 1,761   2,127 -366        -0.46 -1.9%
  8      1,485      1,565     -80     -0.13 -0.6% 1,440    1,488     -48     -0.11 -0.4% 1,972   2,050    -78      -0.08 -0.4%
  9      1,712      1,858 -146        -0.19 -1.2% 1,659    1,541 118          0.13 1.0% 1,998    2,003     -5      -0.01 -0.0%
 10      2,260      1,897 363          0.24 2.9% 2,095     1,585 510          0.44 4.2% 2,830    2,423    407       0.18 2.2%

                          )Suits                                    )Suits                                     )Suits
Suits   -0.248      -0.254 0.006                    -0.056    -0.092 0.036                      -0.224   -0.281 0.057

Author's calculations from CES. The column titled Increase measures the increase in taxes from the new environmental taxes, while Decrease
measures the decrease in taxes from cuts in excise and personal income taxes.




                                                                  -53-
                               Table 9. Green Tax Shift II: Payroll Tax Reduction Tied To Family Size
                                                 and Increased Refundable Tax Credit
                     Annual Income                            Lifetime Income                      Married, Age 40-50
Decile Increase   Decrease ) Tax )Average Tax Increase Decrease ) Tax )Average Tax Increase Decrease ) Tax )Average Tax
                                  Tax Rate Shift                           Tax Rate Shift                        Tax Rate Shift
  1        569        526      43      0.64 0.2%      695      738     -43     -0.19 -0.2% 1,248    1,448 -200       -1.13 -0.6%
  2        681        758     -77     -0.64 -0.6%     830    1,020 -190        -0.70 -1.5% 1,406    1,945 -539       -1.87 -3.1%
  3        923      1,083 -160        -0.87 -1.3%     917    1,152 -235        -0.74 -1.9% 1,382    1,739 -357       -0.88 -2.1%
  4      1,048      1,187 -139        -0.53 -1.1% 1,062      1,108     -46     -0.12 -0.4% 1,513    1,588    -75     -0.14 -0.4%
  5      1,157      1,283 -126        -0.37 -1.0% 1,199      1,280     -81     -0.19 -0.7% 1,861    1,790     71      0.15 0.4%
  6      1,131      1,373 -242        -0.61 -1.9% 1,266      1,345     -79     -0.16 -0.6% 1,706    1,900 -194       -0.28 -1.1%
  7      1,410      1,423     -13     -0.03 -0.1% 1,272      1,426 -154        -0.28 -1.3% 1,761    1,866 -105       -0.13 -0.6%
  8      1,485      1,468      17      0.03 0.1% 1,440       1,428      12      0.02 0.1% 1,972     1,735   237       0.26 1.4%
  9      1,712      1,673      39      0.05 0.3% 1,659       1,460 199          0.29 1.6% 1,998     1,651   347       0.31 2.0%
 10      2,260      1,541 719          0.49 5.8% 2,095       1,482 613          0.67 5.0% 2,830     1,806 1,024       0.50 6.0%

                          )Suits                                  )Suits                                    )Suits
Suits   -0.248      -0.323 0.075                   -0.056   -0.140 0.084                     -0.224   -0.342 0.118

Author's calculations from CES. The column titled Increase measures the increase in taxes from the new environmental taxes, while
Decrease measures the decrease in taxes from cuts in excise and personal income taxes.




                                                                -54-
                                                Table 10. Broad Based Consumption Tax
                       Annual Income                           Lifetime Income                      Married, Age 40-50
Decile Increase   Decrease )Tax )Average Tax Increase Decrease )Tax )Average Tax Increase Decrease )Tax )Average Tax
                                  Tax Rate Shift                            Tax Rate Shift                        Tax Rate Shift
  1      3,119        337 2,782      34.49 2.4% 3,315         1,590 1,725        7.83 0.8% 5,399    1,508 3,891      19.89 2.3%
  2      3,230        316 2,914      24.95 5.1% 3,962         2,504 1,458        5.33 1.5% 5,467    2,726 2,741        9.49 3.3%
  3      4,115      1,044 3,071      17.54 5.3% 4,092         3,624    468       1.43 2.5% 6,220    2,822 3,398        8.34 4.1%
  4      4,495      1,571 2,924      11.93 5.0% 4,996         4,261    735       1.95 0.8% 6,318    4,491 1,827        3.62 2.2%
  5      5,000      3,013 1,987        6.30 3.5% 5,607        4,834    773       1.68 1.3% 8,682    4,858 3,824        6.69 4.6%
  6      5,107      4,108     999      2.45 1.7% 5,610        5,398    212       0.43 0.4% 7,654    7,354     300      0.42 0.4%
  7      6,679      5,050 1,629        3.47 2.8% 5,936        5,619    317       0.67 0.5% 7,635    8,001    -366     -0.48 -0.4%
  8      6,551      6,813    -262     -0.38 -0.4% 6,436       7,550 -1,114      -1.75 -1.9% 9,581   9,460     121      0.15 0.1%
  9      8,332      9,129    -797     -1.00 -1.4% 7,919       9,033 -1,114      -1.67 -1.9% 10,078 10,349    -271     -0.09 -0.3%
 10     11,250     26,591 -15,341     -7.05 -26.6% 10,191 13,234 -3,043         -3.46 -5.3% 15,964 47,602 -31,638   -11.44 -38.4%

                          ) Suits                                   ) Suits                                    ) Suits
Suits   -0.228      0.202 -0.430                    -0.045     0.068 -0.113                    -0.185    0.255 -0.440

Author's calculations from CES. The column titled Increase measures the increase in taxes from consumption taxes, while Decrease measures
the decrease in personal and corporate income taxes.




                                                                  -55-
                                     Table 11. Consumption Tax with Family Based Exemption
                     Annual Income                         Lifetime Income                      Married, Age 40-50
Decile Increase Decrease )Tax )Average Tax Increase Decrease )Tax )Average Tax Increase Decrease )Tax )Average                       Tax
                                Tax Rate Shift                          Tax Rate Shift                        Tax Rate              Shift
  1      2,600      337 2,263      28.04 2.0% 2,776        1,590 1,186       5.40 1.0% 4,999    1,508 3,491      15.90               2.0%
  2      2,626      316 2,310      19.85 4.0% 3,440        2,504 936         3.38 1.6% 4,542    2,726 1,816        5.59              2.0%
  3      3,570    1,044 2,526      14.59 4.4% 3,533        3,624    -91     -0.33 -0.2% 5,936   2,822 3,114        7.35              3.5%
  4      4,070    1,571 2,499      10.03 4.3% 4,845        4,261 584         1.55 1.0% 6,236    4,491 1,745        3.57              2.0%
  5      4,814    3,013 1,801        5.75 2.9% 5,530       4,834 696         1.48 1.2% 9,181    4,858 4,323        8.05              4.9%
  6      4,676    4,108     568      1.39 1.2% 5,468       5,398     70      0.13 0.1% 7,766    7,354     412      1.04              0.5%
  7      6,913    5,050 1,863        3.96 3.2% 5,826       5,619 207         0.47 0.4% 7,796    8,001    -205     -1.06             -0.2%
  8      6,670    6,813   -143      -0.16 -0.2% 6,492      7,550 -1,058     -1.65 -1.8% 10,597  9,460 1,137        2.89              1.3%
  9      8,931    9,129   -198      -0.26 -0.3% 8,536      9,033 -497       -0.78 -0.9% 11,342 10,349     993      0.16              1.1%
 10 13,090 26,591 -13,501           -5.78 -23.4% 11,652 13,234 -1,582       -1.86 -2.8% 19,303 47,602 -28,299     -9.11            -32.4%

                        )Suits                                       )Suits                                    )Suits
Suits   -0.171    0.202 -0.373                       0.005     0.068 -0.063                    -0.135    0.255 -0.390

Author's calculations from CES. The column titled Increase measures the increase in taxes from consumption taxes, while Decrease
measures the decrease in personal and corporate income taxes.




                                                                  -56-
                                       Table 12. Sales Tax to Replace 10% of Income Tax
                    Annual Income                           Lifetime Income                    Married, Age 40-50
Decile Increase Decrease )Tax )Average Tax Increase Decrease )Tax )Average Tax Increase Decrease )Tax )Average                 Tax
                               Tax Rate Shift                            Tax Rate Shift                     Tax Rate           Shift
  1         668      335 333        4.15 1.3%       710      645      65      0.31 0.3% 1,157   1,214   -57     -0.41         -0.2%
  2         691      533 158        1.46 1.3%       848      913     -65     -0.24 -0.5% 1,172  1,580 -408      -1.36         -2.3%
  3         882      801    81      0.48 0.6%       876    1,056 -180        -0.56 -1.4% 1,333  1,680 -347      -0.83         -1.9%
  4         962      974   -12     -0.02 -0.1% 1,070       1,110     -40     -0.11 -0.3% 1,354  1,760 -406      -0.77         -2.3%
  5       1,090   1,143    -53     -0.16 -0.4% 1,200       1,281     -81     -0.20 -0.7% 1,861  1,903   -42     -0.05         -0.2%
  6       1,075   1,375 -300       -0.75 -2.4% 1,201       1,297     -96     -0.20 -0.8% 1,640  2,096 -456      -0.66         -2.5%
  7       1,430   1,457    -27     -0.06 -0.3% 1,271       1,383 -112        -0.21 -0.9% 1,636  2,162 -526      -0.67         -2.9%
  8       1,402   1,590 -188       -0.30 -1.5% 1,378       1,501 -123        -0.21 -1.0% 2,053  2,132   -79     -0.08         -0.4%
  9       1,784   1,923 -139       -0.19 -1.1% 1,695       1,570 125          0.18 1.0% 2,160   2,106    54      0.06          0.3%
 10       2,408   2,195 213         0.18 1.7% 2,182        1,686 496          0.53 4.0% 3,421   2,950 471        0.33          2.7%

                         )Suits                                   )Suits                                    )Suits
Suits   -0.228    -0.207 -0.021                   -0.045    -0.093 0.048                     -0.185   -0.235 0.050

Author's calculations from CES. The column titled Increase measures the increase in taxes from consumption taxes, while Decrease
measures the decrease in personal and corporate income taxes.




                                                                -57-
             Table B1. Industry Groupings
Group No.    IO Groups                Industry Description
    1            1-4       Agriculture, Forestry & Fisheries
    2         5,6,9,10     Mining (other than coal)
    3              7       Coal Mining
    4              8       Crude Oil and Natural Gas
    5           11,12      Construction
    6             14       Food and Kindred Products
    7             15       Tobacco
    8           16-19      Textile Products
    9           20,21      Lumber and Wood Products
   10           22,23      Furniture and Fixtures
   11        24,25,26A     Paper and Paperboard Products
   12            26B       Printing and Publishing
   13            27A       Industrial & Other Chemicals
   14            27B       Agricultural Fertilizers and Chemicals
   15             28       Plastics and Synthetic Materials
   16            29A       Drugs
   17            29B       Cleaning and Toilet Preparations
   18             20       Paints and Allied Products
   19             31       Petroleum Refining
   20             32       Rubber & Misc. Plastics
   21           33,34      Leather Goods
   22             35       Glass Products
   23             36       Stone and Clay Products
   24           37,38      Primary Metals
   25         13,39-42     Fabricated Metals
   26           43-52      Machinery, not Electrical
   27           53-58      Electrical Machinery
   28          59A-61      Motor Vehicles
   29           62-63      Scientific Instruments
   30             64       Miscellaneous Manufacturing
   31         65A-65E      Transportation
   32           66,67      Communications
   33           68.01      Electric Utilities
   34           68.02      Gas Utilities and Distribution
   35            69A       Wholesale Trade
   36            69B       Retail Trade
   37             70       Finance and Insurance
   38             71       Real Estate
   39           72-77      Services
   40       68.03, 78-85   Government and Other Enterprises

                               -58-
  Table B2. Price Transformation Matrix for Selected Consumption Items
          Industry Description           Food Off- Tobacco Alcohol Off- Clothing Gasoline
                                          Premise            Premise    and Shoes
Agriculture, Forestry & Fisheries            0.0486       0           0          0      0
Mining (other than coal)                          0       0           0          0      0
Coal Mining                                       0       0           0          0      0
Crude Oil and Natural Gas                         0       0           0          0      0
Construction                                      0       0           0          0      0
Food and Kindred Products                    0.5932       0      0.5202          0      0
Tobacco                                           0  0.6331           0          0      0
Textile Products                                  0       0           0     0.3724      0
Lumber and Wood Products                          0       0           0          0      0
Furniture and Fixtures                            0       0           0          0      0
Paper and Paperboard Products                     0       0           0     0.0151      0
Printing and Publishing                           0       0           0     0.0009      0
Industrial & Other Chemicals                 0.0016       0           0          0      0
Agricultural Fertilizers and Chemicals            0       0           0          0      0
Plastics and Synthetic Materials                  0       0           0          0      0
Drugs                                             0       0           0          0      0
Cleaning and Toilet Preparations                  0       0           0          0      0
Paints and Allied Products                        0       0           0          0      0
Petroleum Refining                                0       0           0          0 0.4542
Rubber & Misc. Plastics                           0       0           0     0.0171      0
Leather Goods                                     0       0           0     0.0723      0
Glass Products                                    0       0           0          0      0
Stone and Clay Products                           0       0           0          0      0
Primary Metals                                    0       0           0          0      0
Fabricated Metals                                 0       0           0          0      0
Machinery, not Electrical                         0       0           0          0      0
Electrical Machinery                              0       0           0          0      0
Motor Vehicles                                    0       0           0          0      0
Scientific Instruments                            0       0           0          0      0
Miscellaneous Manufacturing                       0       0           0     0.0017      0
Transportation                               0.0235  0.0038      0.0226     0.0043 0.0261
Communications                                    0       0           0          0      0
Electric Utilities                                0       0           0          0      0
Gas Utilities and Distribution                    0       0           0          0      0
Wholesale Trade                              0.0888  0.1805      0.2311     0.0697 0.3242
Retail Trade                                 0.2463  0.1826      0.2261     0.4481 0.1955
Finance and Insurance                             0       0           0          0      0
Real Estate                                       0       0           0          0      0
Services                                          0       0           0     0.0003      0
Government and Other Enterprises            -0.0020       0           0    -0.0019      0




                                             -59-
                         Table B2. (continued)
        Industry Description             Fuel Motor Health Household
                                         Oil Vehicles Care Operations
Agriculture, Forestry & Fisheries                  0        0      0    0.0005
Mining (other than coal)                           0        0      0    0.0005
Coal Mining                                  0.0056         0      0          0
Crude Oil and Natural Gas                          0        0      0          0
Construction                                       0        0      0          0
Food and Kindred Products                          0        0      0          0
Tobacco                                            0        0      0          0
Textile Products                                   0        0      0    0.0019
Lumber and Wood Products                     0.0086         0      0          0
Furniture and Fixtures                             0        0      0          0
Paper and Paperboard Products                      0        0 0.0026    0.1371
Printing and Publishing                            0        0      0    0.0002
Industrial & Other Chemicals                 0.0284         0 0.0001    0.0027
Agricultural Fertilizers and Chemicals             0        0      0    0.0135
Plastics and Synthetic Materials                   0        0      0          0
Drugs                                              0        0 0.0591          0
Cleaning and Toilet Preparations                   0        0      0    0.1576
Paints and Allied Products                         0        0      0    0.0071
Petroleum Refining                           0.4668         0 0.0001          0
Rubber & Misc. Plastics                            0        0 0.0007    0.0047
Leather Goods                                      0        0      0          0
Glass Products                                     0        0      0          0
Stone and Clay Products                            0        0      0    0.0055
Primary Metals                                     0        0      0          0
Fabricated Metals                                  0        0      0    0.0081
Machinery, not Electrical                          0        0      0          0
Electrical Machinery                               0        0 0.0003          0
Motor Vehicles                                     0   0.6499      0          0
Scientific Instruments                             0        0 0.0087          0
Miscellaneous Manufacturing                        0        0      0          0
Transportation                               0.0358    0.0169 0.0038    0.1106
Communications                                     0        0      0          0
Electric Utilities                                 0        0      0          0
Gas Utilities and Distribution                     0        0      0          0
Wholesale Trade                              0.1395    0.0297 0.0115    0.0597
Retail Trade                                 0.3122    0.1905 0.0364    0.1155
Finance and Insurance                              0        0 0.0583   -0.0036
Real Estate                                        0        0      0          0
Services                                           0        0 0.8185    0.2302
Government and Other Enterprises             0.0031    0.1130      0    0.1482
Source: Author's calculations from 1992 Input-Output Accounts. A complete price
transformation table is available from the author upon request.




                                    -60-
