Output per Worker Across Countries                                            1


1    Introduction
In 1988, output per worker in the United States was more than 35 times
higher than output per worker in Niger. In just over ten days, the average
worker in the United States produced as much as an average worker in Niger
produced in an entire year. Explaining such vast differences in economic
performance is one of the fundamental challenges of economics.
    Analysis based on an aggregate production function provides some in-
sight into these differences, an approach taken by Mankiw, Romer and Weil
(1992) and Dougherty and Jorgenson (1996), among others. Differences
among countries can be attributed to differences in human capital, physical
capital, and productivity. Building on their analysis, our results suggest
that differences in each element of the production function are important.
In particular, however, our results emphasize the key role played by pro-
ductivity. For example, consider the 35-fold difference in output per worker
between the United States and Niger. Different capital intensities in the two
countries contributed a factor of 1.5 to the income differences, while different
levels of educational attainment contributed a factor of 3.1. The remaining
difference — a factor of 7.7 — remains as the productivity residual.
    The breakdown suggested by the aggregate production function is just
the first step in understanding differences in output per worker. Findings
in the production function framework raise deeper questions such as: Why
do some countries invest more than others in physical and human capital?
And why are some countries so much more productive than others? These
are the questions that this paper tackles. When aggregated through the
production function, the answers to these questions add up to explain the
differences in output per worker across countries.
    Our hypothesis is that differences in capital accumulation, productivity,
and therefore output per worker are fundamentally related to differences
in social infrastructure across countries. By social infrastructure, we mean
Output per Worker Across Countries                                           2


the institutions and government policies that determine the economic envi-
ronment within which individuals accumulate skills, and firms accumulate
capital and produce output. A social infrastructure favorable to high lev-
els of output per worker provides an environment that supports productive
activities and encourages capital accumulation, skill acquisition, invention,
and technology transfer. Such a social infrastructure gets the prices right so
that, in the language of North and Thomas (1973), individuals capture the
social returns to their actions as private returns.
   Social institutions to protect the output of individual productive units
from diversion are an essential component of a social infrastructure favor-
able to high levels of output per worker. Thievery, squatting, and Mafia
protection are examples of diversion undertaken by private agents. Para-
doxically, while the government is potentially the most efficient provider of
social infrastructure that protects against diversion, it is also in practice a
primary agent of diversion throughout the world. Expropriation, confisca-
tory taxation, and corruption are examples of public diversion. Regulations
and laws may protect against diversion, but they all too often constitute the
chief vehicle of diversion in an economy.
   Across 127 countries, we find a powerful and close association be-
tween output per worker and measures of social infrastructure. Countries
with long-standing policies favorable to productive activities—rather than
diversion—produce much more output per worker. For example, our anal-
ysis suggests that the observed difference in social infrastructure between
Niger and the United States is more than enough to explain the 35-fold
difference in output per worker.
   Our research is related to many earlier contributions. The large body
of theoretical and qualitative analysis of property rights, corruption, and
economic success will be discussed in Section 3. The recent empirical growth
literature associated with Barro (1991) and others shares some common
Output per Worker Across Countries                                                     3


elements with our work, but our empirical framework differs fundamentally
in its focus on levels instead of rates of growth. This focus is important for
several reasons.
    First, levels capture the differences in long-run economic performance
that are most directly relevant to welfare as measured by the consumption
of goods and services.
    Second, several recent contributions to the growth literature point to-
ward a focus on levels instead of growth rates. Easterly, Kremer, Pritch-
ett and Summers (1993) document the relatively low correlation of growth
rates across decades, which suggests that differences in growth rates across
countries may be mostly transitory. Jones (1995) questions the empirical
relevance of endogenous growth and presents a model in which different
government policies are associated with differences in levels, not growth
rates. Finally, a number of recent models of idea flows across countries such
as Parente and Prescott (1994), Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1995) and Eaton
and Kortum (1995) imply that all countries will grow at a common rate in
the long run: technology transfer keeps countries from drifting indefinitely
far from each other. In these models, long-run differences in levels are the
interesting differences to explain.
    Some of the cross-country growth literature recognizes this point. In par-
ticular, the growth regressions in Mankiw et al. (1992) and Barro and Sala-
i-Martin (1992) are explicitly motivated by a neoclassical growth model in
which long-run growth rates are the same across countries or regions. These
studies emphasize that differences in growth rates are transitory: countries
grow more rapidly the further they are below their steady state. Never-
theless, the focus of such growth regressions is to explain the transitory
differences in growth rates across countries.1 Our approach is different—we
   1
     The trend in the growth literature has been to use more and more of the short-run
variation in the data. For example, several recent studies use panel data at 5 or 10-year
intervals and include country fixed effects. The variables we focus on change so slowly
Output per Worker Across Countries                                                    4


try to explain the variation in long-run economic performance by studying
directly the cross-section relation in levels.2
    The purpose of this paper is to call attention to the strong relation be-
tween social infrastructure and output per worker. Countries with corrupt
government officials, severe impediments to trade, poor contract enforce-
ment, and government interference in production will be unable to achieve
levels of output per worker anywhere near the norms of western Europe,
northern America, and eastern Asia. Our contribution is to show, quantita-
tively, how important these effects are.
    We can summarize our analysis of the determinants of differences in
economic performance among countries as:

 Output per Worker ←− (Inputs, Productivity) ←− Social Infrastructure.

This framework serves several purposes. First, it allows us to distinguish be-
tween the proximate causes of economic success—capital accumulation and
productivity—and the more fundamental determinant. Second, the frame-
work clarifies the contribution of our work. We concentrate on the relation
between social infrastructure and differences in economic performance. The
production function-productivity analysis allows us to trace this relation
through capital accumulation and productivity.
    We are conscious that feedback may occur from output per worker back
to social infrastructure. For example, it may be that poor countries lack
the resources to build effective social infrastructures. We control for this
feedback by using the geographical and linguistic characteristics of an econ-
omy as instrumental variables. We view these characteristics as measures of
over time that their effects may be missed entirely in such studies.
   2
     Chari, Kehoe and McGrattan (1997) also analyze levels of economic performance. In
cross-country growth regressions that include the initial level of income and emphasize
the transition dynamics interpretation, one can map the growth regression coefficients
into effects on the long-run level of income. However, we know of only one attempt to do
this mapping, the prepublication version of Sachs and Warner (1997).
Output per Worker Across Countries                                           5


the extent to which an economy is influenced by Western Europe, the first
region of the world to implement broadly a social infrastructure favorable
to production. Controlling for endogeneity, we still find that differences in
social infrastructure across countries account for much of the difference in
long-run economic performance around the world.


2    Levels Accounting
Our analysis begins by examining the proximate causes of economic suc-
cess. We decompose differences in output per worker across countries into
differences in inputs and differences in productivity.
    There are three approaches to the decomposition of output per worker
into inputs and productivity. One was developed by Christensen, Cummings
and Jorgenson (1981) and involves the comparison of each country to a
reference point. A country’s productivity residual is formed by weighting the
log-differences of each factor input from the reference point by the arithmetic
average of the country’s factor share and the reference factor share. The
second is similar, except that the factor shares are assumed to be the same
for all countries; this amounts to calculating the residual from a Cobb-
Douglas technology. Finally, there is a method based directly on Solow
(1957), discussed in a predecessor to this paper, Hall and Jones (1996), and
summarized below. Because the Solow method gives results quite similar to
those based on Christensen et al. (1981) or on Cobb-Douglas with standard
elasticities, we will not dwell on this aspect of the work. We present results
based on the simplest Cobb-Douglas approach.
    Assume output Yi in country i is produced according to

                             Yi = Kiα (Ai Hi )1−α ,                        (1)

where Ki denotes the stock of physical capital, Hi is the amount of human
capital-augmented labor used in production, and Ai is a labor-augmenting
Output per Worker Across Countries                                                      6


measure of productivity. We assume labor Li is homogeneous within a coun-
try and that each unit of labor has been trained with Ei years of schooling
(education). Human capital-augmented labor is given by

                                     Hi = eφ(Ei ) Li .                                (2)

In this specification, the function φ(E) reflects the efficiency of a unit of labor
with E years of schooling relative to one with no schooling (φ(0) = 0). The
derivative φ0 (E) is the return to schooling estimated in a Mincerian wage
regression (Mincer 1974): an additional year of schooling raises a worker’s
efficiency proportionally by φ0 (E).3 Note that if φ(E) = 0 for all E this is a
standard production function with undifferentiated labor.
    With data on output, capital, and schooling, and knowledge of α and
φ(·), one can calculate the level of productivity directly from the production
function. It turns out to be convenient to rewrite the production function
in terms of output per worker, y ≡ Y /L, as
                                             α/(1−α)
                                         Ki
                              yi =                       hi Ai ,                      (3)
                                         Yi
where h ≡ H/L is human capital per worker.
    This equation allows us to decompose differences in output per worker
across countries into differences in the capital-output ratio, differences in
educational attainment, and differences in productivity. We follow David
(1977), Mankiw et al. (1992) and Klenow and Rodriguez-Clare (1997) in
writing the decomposition in terms of the capital-output ratio rather than
the capital-labor ratio, for two reasons. First, along a balanced growth
path, the capital-output ratio is proportional to the investment rate, so that
this form of the decomposition also has a natural interpretation. Second,
consider a country that experiences an exogenous increase in productivity,
    3
      Bils and Klenow (1996) suggest that this is the appropriate way to incorporate years
of schooling into an aggregate production function.
Output per Worker Across Countries                                                        7


holding its investment rate constant. Over time, the country’s capital-labor
ratio will rise as a result of the increase in productivity. Therefore, some of
the increase in output that is fundamentally due to the increase in produc-
tivity would be attributed to capital accumulation in a framework based on
the capital-labor ratio.
       To measure productivity and decompose differences in output per worker
into differences in capital intensity, human capital per worker, and produc-
tivity, we use data on output, labor input, average educational attainment,
and physical capital for the year 1988.
       Our basic measure of economic performance is the level of output per
worker. National income and product account data and labor force data
are taken from the Penn World Tables Mark 5.6 revision of Summers and
Heston (1991). We do not have data on hours per worker for most countries,
so we use the number of workers instead of hours to measure labor input.
Our calculations of productivity also incorporate a correction for natural re-
sources used as inputs. Because of inadequate data, our correction is quite
coarse: we subtract value added in the mining industry (which includes oil
and gas) from GDP in computing our measure of output. That is, we assign
all of mining value added to natural resource inputs and neglect capital and
labor inputs in mining. Without this correction, resource-rich countries such
as Oman and Saudi Arabia would be among the top countries in terms of
productivity.4 Average educational attainment is measured in 1985 for the
population aged 25 and over, as reported by Barro and Lee (1993). Phys-
ical capital stocks are constructed using the perpetual inventory method.5
   4
     Apart from the ranking of productivity and output per worker, none of our empirical
results that follow are sensitive to this correction. We compute the mining share of GDP
in current prices from United Nations (1994) for most countries. Data for China, Israel,
Czechoslovakia, Ireland, Italy, Poland, and Romania are taken from United Nations (1993).
   5
     We limit our sample to countries with investment data going back at least to 1970 and
use all available investment data. For example, suppose 1960 is the first year of investment
data for some country. We estimate the initial value of the 1960 capital stock for that
country as I60 /(g + δ) where g is calculated as the average geometric growth rate from
Output per Worker Across Countries                                                        8


Because we only need data on the capital stock for 1988, our measure is
quite insensitive to the choice of the initial value. Our data set includes 127
countries.6
    Regarding the parameters of the production function, we take a standard
neoclassical approach.7 We assume a value of α = 1/3, which is broadly con-
sistent with national income accounts data for developed countries. With re-
spect to human capital, Psacharopoulos (1994) surveys evidence from many
countries on return-to-schooling estimates. Based on his summary of Mince-
rian wage regressions, we assume that φ(E) is piecewise linear. Specifically,
for the first 4 years of education, we assume a rate of return of 13.4 per-
cent, corresponding to the average Psacharopoulos reports for sub-Saharan
Africa. For the next 4 years, we assume a value of 10.1 percent, the average
for the world as a whole. Finally, for education beyond the 8th year, we use
the value Psacharopoulos reports for the OECD, 6.8 percent.

2.1    Productivity Calculations by Country

Figure 1 shows productivity levels across countries plotted against output
per worker. The figure illustrates that differences in productivity are very
similar to differences in output per worker; the correlation between the two
series (in logs) is 0.89. Apart from Puerto Rico8 , the countries with the
1960 to 1970 of the investment series. We assume a depreciation rate of 6 percent.
    6
      As discussed in more detail later, we had to impute the data on educational attainment
for 27 of these countries.
    7
      This is a natural benchmark. It ignores externalities from physical and human capital.
We believe there is little compelling evidence of such externalities, much less any estimate
of their magnitudes. We leave a more general analysis of such possibilities in our framework
to future work.
    8
      Puerto Rico deserves special mention as it is—by far—the most productive country
according to our calculation. Its output per worker is similar to that in the U.K. but
measured inputs are much lower. The result is a high level of productivity. Baumol and
Wolff (1996) comment on Puerto Rico’s extraordinary recent growth in output per worker.
In addition, there is good reason to believe that Puerto Rico’s national income accounts
overstate output. Many U.S. firms have located production facilities there because of low
tax rates. To take maximum advantage of those low rates and to avoid higher U.S. rates,
Output per Worker Across Countries                                                                                                                             9


                                                               Figure 1: Productivity and Output per Worker


                                                                                                                                               PRI
                                                        1.50
                                                                                                                                                     ITA
                                                                                                                                            HKGESP FRA LUX
                                                                                                                                    SYR SAUSGP GBR CAN
         Harrod−Neutral Productivity, 1988, U.S.=1.00




                                                                                                                 YEM              JOR                BEL USA
                                                                                                                                                AUTNLD
                                                                                                                                   MEX           ISL DEU
                                                                                                                                                   SWE CHE
                                                                                                                                                      AUS
                                                                                                    BGD                               VEN     ISR
                                                                                                                      MUS    DZA    OANTTO
                                                        .75                                                     GTM
                                                                                                              EGY
                                                                                                                            BRAPRT
                                                                                                                                 BRBMLT
                                                                                                                                          IRL DNKFIN
                                                                                                                                                  NOR
                                                                                                                 TUN                 GRC
                                                                                                                                   OMN     JPN
                                                                                                                 SYC SURIRN       ARG
                                                                                                                                    CYP         NZL
                                                                                     SLE                              COL URY   KOR
                                                                                                    PAK
                                                                                                              MAR REUCRI
                                                                                                          SLV    TUR
                                                                                                                DOM ZAF           SUN
                                                                                                           SWZ        MYS
                                                                                                                       FJI
                                                        .40                                                        PERCHL
                                                                                                   COG LKA  PRY    ECU
                                                                                       SEN           HND THA
                                                                                                                  PAN     YUG
                                                                          MOZ                                  NAM
                                                                                  BEN         CIV      BOLGAB
                                                                            RWA                                            HUN
                                                                                        CMR         NIC
                                                                           MDGGMBHTI       IND
                                                                                     SDN         IDN JAM        CSKPOL
                                                                    UGA         GHA      PNG        PHL
                                                                     TCD
                                                        .20            MLI GIN      LSO
                                                                              SOM                 ROM
                                                                     ZAR
                                                                      CAF        KENZWECPV BWA
                                                                   BDI                          GUY
                                                                      AGO GNB NGA
                                                                  NER
                                                                               MRT                                                 Coeff = 0.600
                                                                    TZA
                                                                  BUR     TGO
                                                                   MWI             CHN
                                                        .10        BFA
                                                                                                                                   StdErr= 0.028
                                                                       COM
                                                                               ZMB                                                   R2 =     0.79


                                                                1000          2000         4000           8000         16000                     32000
                                                                                Output per Worker, 1988 (in 1985 U.S. Dollars)



highest levels of productivity are Italy, France, Hong Kong, Spain, and Lux-
embourg. Those with the lowest levels are Zambia, Comoros, Burkina Faso,
Malawi, and China. U.S. productivity ranks 13th out of 127 countries.
    Table 1 decomposes output per worker in each country into the three
multiplicative terms in equation (3): the contribution from physical capital
intensity, the contribution from human capital per worker, and the contri-
bution from productivity.                                                              It is important to note that this productivity
level is calculated as a residual, just as in the growth accounting literature.
    To make the comparisons easier, all terms are expressed as ratios to U.S.
values.9 For example, according to this table, output per worker in Canada
they may report exaggerated internal transfer prices when the products are moved within
the firm from Puerto Rico back to the U.S. When these exaggerated non-market prices
are used in the Puerto Rican output calculations, they result in an overstatement of real
output.
   9
     A complete set of results is reported in the Appendix table.
Output per Worker Across Countries                                                10


        Table 1: Productivity Calculations: Ratios to U.S. Values


                                              ——Contribution from——
       Country                      Y /L    (K/Y )α/(1−α) H/L     A

       United States                1.000        1.000       1.000     1.000
       Canada                       0.941        1.002       0.908     1.034
       Italy                        0.834        1.063       0.650     1.207
       West Germany                 0.818        1.118       0.802     0.912
       France                       0.818        1.091       0.666     1.126
       United Kingdom               0.727        0.891       0.808     1.011

       Hong Kong                    0.608        0.741       0.735     1.115
       Singapore                    0.606        1.031       0.545     1.078
       Japan                        0.587        1.119       0.797     0.658
       Mexico                       0.433        0.868       0.538     0.926
       Argentina                    0.418        0.953       0.676     0.648
       U.S.S.R.                     0.417        1.231       0.724     0.468

       India                        0.086        0.709       0.454     0.267
       China                        0.060        0.891       0.632     0.106
       Kenya                        0.056        0.747       0.457     0.165
       Zaire                        0.033        0.499       0.408     0.160

       Average, 127 Countries:      0.296        0.853       0.565     0.516
       Standard Deviation:          0.268        0.234       0.168     0.325
       Correlation w/ Y /L (logs)   1.000        0.624       0.798     0.889
       Correlation w/ A (logs)      0.889        0.248       0.522     1.000

       Note: The elements of this table are the empirical counterparts to the
       components of equation (3), all measured as ratios to the U.S. val-
       ues. That is, the first column of data is the product of the other three
       columns.




is about 94 percent of that in the United States. Canada has about the
same capital intensity as the United States, but only 91 percent of U.S.
human capital per worker. Differences in inputs explain lower Canadian
output per worker, so Canadian productivity is about the same as U.S.
productivity. Other OECD economies such as the United Kingdom also
have productivity levels close to U.S. productivity. Italy and France are
Output per Worker Across Countries                                                11


slightly higher; Germany is slightly lower.10
       Consistent with conventional wisdom, the U.S.S.R. has extremely high
capital intensity and relatively high human capital but a rather low produc-
tivity level. For the developing countries in the table, differences in produc-
tivity are the most important factor in explaining differences in output per
worker. For example, Chinese output per worker is about 6 percent of that
in the United States, and the bulk of this difference is due to lower pro-
ductivity: without the difference in productivity, Chinese output per worker
would be more than 50 percent of U.S. output per worker.
       The bottom half of Table 1 reports the average and standard deviation
of the contribution of inputs and productivity to differences in output per
worker. According to either statistic, differences in productivity across coun-
tries are substantial. A simple calculation emphasizes this point. Output
per worker in the five countries in 1988 with the highest levels of output
per worker was 31.7 times higher than output per worker in the five lowest
countries (based on a geometric average). Relatively little of this difference
was due to physical and human capital: differences in capital intensity and
human capital per worker contributed factors of 1.8 and 2.2, respectively,
to the difference in output per worker. Productivity, however, contributed
a factor of 8.3 to this difference: with no differences in productivity, output
per worker in the five richest countries would have been only about four
times larger than in the five poorest countries. In this sense, differences in
physical capital and educational attainment explain only a modest amount
of the difference in output per worker across countries.
       The reason for the lesser importance of capital accumulation is that most
of the variation in capital-output ratios arises from variation in investment
rates. Average investment rates in the five richest countries are only 2.9
times larger than average investment rates in the five poorest countries.
  10
    Hours per worker are higher in the United States than in France and Italy, making
their productivity levels more surprising.
Output per Worker Across Countries                                                       12


Moreover, this difference gets raised to the power α/(1 − α) which for a
neoclassical production function with α = 1/3 is only 1/2—so it is the
square root of the difference in investment rates that matters for output
per worker. Similarly, average educational attainment in the five richest
countries is about 8.1 years greater than average educational attainment
in the five poorest countries, and this difference also gets reduced when
converted into an effect on output: each year of schooling contributes only
something like 10 percent (the Mincerian return to schooling) to differences
in output per worker. Given the relatively small variation in inputs across
countries and the small elasticities implied by neoclassical assumptions, it is
hard to escape the conclusion that differences in productivity — the residual
— play a key role in generating the wide variation in output per worker
across countries.
       Our earlier paper, Hall and Jones (1996), compared results based on
the Cobb-Douglas formulation with alternative results based on the ap-
plication of Solow’s method with a spatial rather than temporal ordering
of observations.11 In this latter approach, the production function is not
restricted to Cobb-Douglas and factor shares are allowed to differ across
countries. The results were very similar. We do not think that the sim-
ple Cobb-Douglas approach introduces any important biases into any of the
results presented in this paper.
       Our calculation of productivity across countries is related to a calcu-
lation performed by Mankiw et al. (1992). Two important differences are
  11
    More specifically, assume that the index for observations in a standard growth account-
ing framework with Y = AF (K, H) refers to countries rather than time. The standard
accounting formula still applies: the difference in output between two countries is equal to
a weighted average of the differences in inputs plus the difference in productivity, where
the weights are the factor shares. As in Solow (1957), the weights will generally vary
across observations. The only subtlety in this calculation is that time has a natural order,
whereas countries do not. In our calculations, we found that the productivity results were
robust to different orderings (in order of output per worker or of total factor input, for
example).
Output per Worker Across Countries                                                      13


worth noting. First, they estimate the elasticities of the production function
econometrically. Their identifying assumption is that differences in produc-
tivity across countries are uncorrelated with physical and human capital
accumulation. This assumption seems questionable, as countries that pro-
vide incentives for high rates of physical and human capital accumulation
are likely to be those that use their inputs productively, particularly if our
hypothesis that social infrastructure influences all three components has
any merit. Our empirical results also call this identifying assumption into
question since, as shown in Table 1, our measure of productivity is highly
correlated with human capital accumulation and moderately correlated with
the capital-output ratio. Second, they give little emphasis to differences in
productivity, which are econometric residuals in their framework; they em-
phasize the explanatory power of differences in factor inputs for differences
in output across countries. In contrast, we emphasize our finding of sub-
stantial differences in productivity levels across countries. Our productivity
differences are larger in part because of our more standard treatment of hu-
man capital and in part because we do not impose orthogonality between
productivity and the other factors of production.12
       Finally, a question arises as to why we find a large Solow residual in
levels. What do the measured differences in productivity across countries
actually reflect? First, from an accounting standpoint, differences in physi-
cal capital intensity and differences in educational attainment explain only
a small fraction of the differences in output per worker across countries.
One interpretation of this result is that we must turn to other differences,
  12
     In helping us to think about the differences, David Romer suggested that the treatment
of human capital in MRW implies that human capital per worker varies by a factor of
more than 1200 in their sample, which may be much higher than is reasonable. Klenow
and Rodriguez-Clare (1997) explore the differences between these two approaches in more
detail. Extending the MRW analysis, Islam (1995) reports large differences in productivity
levels, but his results, led by econometric estimates, neglect differences in human capital
in computing the levels.
Output per Worker Across Countries                                         14


such as the quality of human capital, on-the-job training, or vintage effects.
That is, we could add to the inputs included in the production function.
A second and complementary interpretation of the result suggests that a
theory of productivity differences is needed. Differences in technologies may
be important — for example, Parente and Prescott (1996) construct a the-
ory in which insiders may prevent new technologies from being adopted.
In addition, in economies with social infrastructures not conducive to effi-
cient production, some resources may be used to protect against diversion
rather than to produce output: capital could consist of security systems and
fences rather than factories and machinery. Accounting for the differences
in productivity across countries is a promising area of future research.


3    Determinants of Economic Performance

At an accounting level, differences in output per worker are due to dif-
ferences in physical and human capital per worker and to differences in
productivity. But why do capital and productivity differ so much across
countries? The central hypothesis of this paper is that the primary, fun-
damental determinant of a country’s long-run economic performance is its
social infrastructure. By social infrastructure, we mean the institutions and
government policies that provide the incentives for individuals and firms in
an economy. Those incentives can encourage productive activities such as
the accumulation of skills or the development of new goods and production
techniques, or those incentives can encourage predatory behavior such as
rent-seeking, corruption, and theft.
    Productive activities are vulnerable to predation. If a farm cannot be
protected from theft, then thievery will be an attractive alternative to farm-
ing. A fraction of the labor force will be employed as thieves, making no
contribution to output. Farmers will spend more of their time protecting
their farms from thieves and consequently grow fewer crops per hour of
Output per Worker Across Countries                                                15


effort.
       Social control of diversion has two benefits. First, in a society free
of diversion, productive units are rewarded by the full amount of their
production—where there is diversion, on the other hand, it acts like a tax
on output. Second, where social control of diversion is effective, individual
units do not need to invest resources in avoiding diversion. In many cases,
social control is much cheaper than private avoidance. Where there is no
effective social control of burglary, for example, property owners must hire
guards and put up fences. Social control of burglary involves two elements.
First is the teaching that stealing is wrong. Second is the threat of punish-
ment. The threat itself is free—the only resources required are those needed
to make the threat credible. The value of social infrastructure goes far be-
yond the notion that collective action can take advantage of returns to scale
in avoidance. It is not that the city can put up fences more cheaply than
can individuals—in a city run well, no fences are needed at all.
       Social action—typically through the government—is a prime determi-
nant of output per worker in almost any view. The literature in this area is
far too voluminous to summarize adequately here. Important contributions
are Olson (1965), Olson (1982), Baumol (1990), North (1990), Greif and
Kandel (1995), and Weingast (1995).
       A number of authors have developed theoretical models of equilibrium
when protection against predation is incomplete.13 Workers choose between
production and diversion. There may be more than one equilibrium—for ex-
ample, there may be a poor equilibrium where production pays little because
diversion is so common, and diversion has a high payoff because enforcement
is ineffective when diversion is common. There is also a good equilibrium
with little diversion, because production has a high payoff and the high
probability of punishment deters almost all diversion. Rapaczynski (1987)
  13
    See, for example, Murphy, Shleifer and Vishny (1991), Acemoglu (1995), Schrag and
Scotchmer (1993), Ljungqvist and Sargent (1995), Grossman and Kim (1996).
Output per Worker Across Countries                                           16


gives Hobbes credit for originating this idea. Even if there is only a single
equilibrium in these models, it may be highly sensitive to its determinants
because of near-indeterminacy.
   Thus the suppression of diversion is a central element of a favorable
social infrastructure. The government enters the picture in two ways. First,
the suppression of diversion appears to be most efficient if it is carried out
collectively, so the government is the natural instrument of anti-diversion
efforts. Second, the power to make and enforce rules makes the government
itself a very effective agent of diversion. A government supports productive
activity by deterring private diversion and by refraining from diverting itself.
Of course, governments need revenue in order to carry out deterrence, which
requires at least a little diversion through taxation.
   Diversion takes the form of rent seeking in countries of all types, and is
probably the main form of diversion in more advanced economies (Krueger
1974). Potentially productive individuals spend their efforts influencing the
government. At high levels, they lobby legislatures and agencies to provide
benefits to their clients. At lower levels, they spend time and resources
seeking government employment. They use litigation to extract value from
private business. They take advantage of ambiguities in property rights.
   Successful economies limit the scope of rent seeking. Constitutional pro-
visions restricting government intervention, such as the provisions in the
U.S. Constitution prohibiting interference with interstate commerce, reduce
opportunities for rent seeking. A good social infrastructure will plug as
many holes as it can where otherwise people could spend time bettering
themselves economically by methods other than production. In addition to
its direct effects on production, a good social infrastructure may have im-
portant indirect effects by encouraging the adoption of new ideas and new
technologies as they are invented throughout the world.
Output per Worker Across Countries                                                  17


4     Estimating the Effect of Social Infrastructure
Two important preliminary issues are the measurement of social infrastruc-
ture and the econometric identification of our model.

4.1    Measurement

The ideal measure of social infrastructure would quantify the wedge between
the private return to productive activities and the social return to such
activities. A good social infrastructure ensures that these returns are kept
closely in line across the range of activities in an economy, from working in
a factory to investing in physical or human capital to creating new ideas or
transferring technologies from abroad, on the positive side, and from theft
to corruption on the negative side.
    In practice, however, there does not exist a usable quantification of
wedges between private and social returns, either for single countries or
for the large group of countries considered in this study. As a result, we
must rely on proxies for social infrastructure and recognize the potential for
measurement error.
    We form our measure of social infrastructure by combining two indexes.
The first is an index of government anti-diversion policies (GADP) created
from data assembled by a firm that specializes in providing assessments of
risk to international investors, Political Risk Services.14 Their International
Country Risk Guide rates 130 countries according to 24 categories. We fol-
low Knack and Keefer (1995) in using the average of 5 of these categories
for the years 1986-1995. Two of the categories relate to the government’s
role in protecting against private diversion: (i) law and order, and (ii) bu-
   14
      See Coplin, O’Leary and Sealy (1996) and Knack and Keefer (1995). Barro (1997)
considers a measure from the same source in regressions with the growth of GDP per
capita. Mauro (1995) uses a similar variable to examine the relation between investment
and growth of income per capita, on the one hand, and measures of corruption and other
failures of protection, on the other hand.
Output per Worker Across Countries                                            18


reaucratic quality. Three categories relate to the government’s possible role
as a diverter: (i) corruption, (ii) risk of expropriation, and (iii) government
repudiation of contracts. Our GADP variable is an equal-weighted average
of these 5 variables, each of which has higher values for governments with
more effective policies for supporting production. The index is measured on
a scale from zero to one.
   The second element of our measure of social infrastructure captures the
extent to which a country is open to international trade. Policies toward
international trade are a sensitive index of social infrastructure. Not only
does the imposition of tariffs divert resources to the government, but tariffs,
quotas, and other trade barriers create lucrative opportunities for private
diversion. In addition, policies favoring free trade yield benefits associated
with the trade itself. Trade with other countries yields benefits from spe-
cialization and facilitates the adoption of ideas and technologies from those
countries. Our work does not attempt to distinguish between trade policies
as measures of a country’s general infrastructure and the specific benefits
that come from free trade itself.
   Sachs and Warner (1995) have compiled an index that focuses on the
openness of a country to trade with other countries. An important advantage
of their variable is that it considers the time since a country adopted a
more favorable social infrastructure. The Sachs-Warner index measures the
fraction of years during the period 1950 to 1994 that the economy has been
open and is measured on a [0,1] scale. A country is open if it satisfies all
of the following criteria: (i) nontariff barriers cover less than 40 percent of
trade, (ii) average tariff rates are less than 40 percent, (iii) any black market
premium was less than 20 percent during the 1970s and 1980s, (iv) the
country is not classified as socialist by Kornai (1992), and (v) the government
does not monopolize major exports.
   In most of the results that we present, we will impose (after testing) the
Output per Worker Across Countries                                          19


restriction that the coefficients for these two proxies for social infrastruc-
ture are the same. Hence, we focus primarily on a single index of social
infrastructure formed as the average of the GADP and openness measures.

4.2   Identification

To examine the quantitative importance of differences in social infrastruc-
ture as determinants of incomes across countries, we hypothesize the follow-
ing structural model:
                           log Y /L = α + βS + ,                          (4)

and
                        S = γ + δ log Y /L + Xθ + η,                       (5)

where S denotes social infrastructure and X is a collection of other variables.
   Several features of this framework deserve comment. First, we recognize
explicitly that social infrastructure is an endogenous variable. Economies are
not exogenously endowed with the institutions and incentives that make up
their economic environments, but rather social infrastructure is determined
endogenously, perhaps depending itself on the level of output per worker in
an economy. Such a concern arises not only because of the general possibility
of feedback from the unexplained component of output per worker to social
infrastructure, but also from particular features of our measure of social
infrastructure. For example, poor countries may have limited ability to
collect taxes and may therefore be forced to interfere with international
trade. Alternatively, one might be concerned that the experts at Political
Risk Services who constructed the components of the GADP index were
swayed in part by knowledge of income levels.
   Second, our specification for the determination of incomes in equation (4)
is parsimonious, reflecting our hypothesis that social infrastructure is the
primary and fundamental determinant of output per worker. We allow for
a rich determination of social infrastructure through the variables in the X
Output per Worker Across Countries                                        20


matrix. Indeed, we will not even attempt to describe all of the potential
determinants of social infrastructure — we will not estimate equation (5)
of the structural model. The heart of our identifying assumptions is the
restriction that the determinants of social infrastructure affect output per
worker only through social infrastructure and not directly. We test the
exclusion below.
   Our identifying scheme includes the assumption that EX 0  = 0. Under
this assumption, any subset of the determinants of social infrastructure con-
stitute valid instruments for estimation of the parameters in equation (4).
Consequently, we do not require a complete specification of that equation.
We will return to this point in greater detail shortly.
   Finally, we augment our specification by recognizing, as discussed in the
previous section, that we do not observe social infrastructure directly. In-
stead, we observe a proxy variable S̃ computed as the sum of GADP and
the openness variable, normalized to a [0,1] scale. This proxy for social
infrastructure is related to true social infrastructure through random mea-
surement error:
                                 S̃ = ψS + ν                              (6)

where ν is the measurement error, taken to be uncorrelated with S and X.
Without loss of generality, we normalize ψ = 1; this is an arbitrary choice
of units since S is unobserved. Therefore,

                                 S = S̃ − ν.

   Using this measurement equation, we rewrite equation (4) as

                           log Y /L = α + β S̃ + ˜,                      (7)

where
                                 ˜ ≡  − βν.
Output per Worker Across Countries                                           21


   The coefficient β will be identified by the orthogonality conditions EX 0 ˜ =
0. Therefore, both measurement error and endogeneity concerns are ad-
dressed. The remaining issue to discuss is how we obtain valid instruments
for GADP and our openness measure.

4.3   Instruments

Our choice of instruments considers several centuries of world history. One
of the key features of the 16th through 19th centuries was the expansion of
Western European influence around the world. The extent of this influence
was far from uniform, and thus provides us with identifying variation which
we will take to be exogenous. Our instruments are various correlates of the
extent of Western European influence. These are characteristics of geogra-
phy such as distance from the equator and the extent to which the primary
languages of Western Europe — English, French, German, Portuguese, and
Spanish — are spoken as first languages today.
   Our instruments are positively correlated with social infrastructure. West-
ern Europe discovered the ideas of Adam Smith, the importance of property
rights, and the system of checks and balances in government, and the coun-
tries that were strongly influenced by Western Europe were, other things
equal, more likely to adopt favorable infrastructure.
   That the extent to which the languages of Western Europe are spoken as
a mother tongue is correlated with the extent of Western European influence
seems perfectly natural. However, one may wonder about the correlation of
distance from the equator with Western European influence. We suggest
this is plausible for two reasons. First, Western Europeans were more likely
to migrate to and settle regions of the world that were sparsely populated
at the start of the 15th century. Regions such as the United States, Canada,
Australia, New Zealand, and Argentina appear to satisfy this criterion. Sec-
ond, it appears that Western Europeans were more likely to settle in areas
Output per Worker Across Countries                                                     22


that were broadly similar in climate to Western Europe, which again points
to regions far from the equator.15
       The other important characteristic of an instrument is lack of correlation
with the disturbance ˜. To satisfy this criterion, we must ask if European
influence was somehow more intensively targeted toward regions of the world
that are more likely to have high output per worker today. In fact, this does
not seem to be the case. On the one hand, Europeans did seek to conquer
and exploit areas of the world that were rich in natural resources such as
gold and silver or that could provide valuable trade in commodities such as
sugar and molasses. There is no tendency today for these areas to have high
output per worker.
       On the other hand, European influence was much stronger in areas of
the world that were sparsely settled at the beginning of the 16th century,
such as the United States, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and Argentina.
Presumably, these regions were sparsely settled at that time because the land
was not especially productive given the technologies of the 15th century. For
these reasons, it seems reasonable to assume that our measures of Western
European influence are uncorrelated with ˜.
       We measure distance from the equator as the absolute value of latitude in
degrees divided by 90 to place it on a 0 to 1 scale.16 It is widely known that
economies further from the equator are more successful in terms of per capita
income. For example, Nordhaus (1994) and Theil and Chen (1995) examine
  15
     Engerman and Sokoloff (1997) provide a detailed historical analysis complementary
to this story. They conclude that factor endowments such as geography, climate, and
soil conditions help explain why the social infrastructure that developed in the United
States and Canada was more conducive to long-run economic success than the social
infrastructure that developed in Latin America.
  16
     The latitude of each country was obtained from the Global Demography Project at
U.C. Santa Barbara (http://www.ciesin.org/datasets/gpw/globldem.doc.html), discussed
by Tobler, Deichmann, Gottsegen and Maloy (1995). These location data correspond to
the center of the county or province within a country that contains the largest number
of people. One implication of this choice is that the data source places the center of the
United States in Los Angeles, somewhat south of the median latitude of the country.
Output per Worker Across Countries                                                     23


closely the simple correlation of these variables. However, the explanation
for this correlation is far from agreed upon. Kamarck (1976) emphasizes a
direct relationship through the prevalence of disease and the presence of a
highly variable rainfall and inferior soil quality. We will postulate that the
direct effect of such factors is small and impose the hypothesis that the effect
is zero — hence distance from the equator is not included in equation (4).
Because of the presence of overidentifying restrictions in our framework,
however, we are able to test this hypothesis, and we do not reject it, either
statistically or economically, as discussed later in the paper.
       Our data on languages comes from two sources: Hunter (1992), and, to
a lesser extent, Gunnemark (1991).17 We use two language variables: the
fraction of a country’s population speaking one of the five primary Western
European languages (including English) as a mother tongue, and the fraction
speaking English as a mother tongue. We are, therefore, allowing English
and the other languages to have separate impacts.
       Finally, we also use as an instrument the variable constructed by Frankel
and Romer (1996): the (log) predicted trade share of an economy, based on
a gravity model of international trade that only uses a country’s population
and geographical features.
       Our data set includes 127 countries for which we were able to construct
measures of the physical capital stock using the Summers and Heston data
set. For these 127 countries, we were also able to obtain data on the primary
languages spoken, geographic information, and the Frankel-Romer predicted
trade share. However, missing data was a problem for four variables: 16
countries in our sample were missing data on the openness variable, 17 were
missing data on the GADP variable, 27 were missing data on educational
attainment, and 15 were missing data on the mining share of GDP. We
imputed values for these missing data using the 79 countries for which we
  17
    The sources often disagree on exact numbers. Hunter (1992) is much more precise,
containing detailed data on various dialects and citations to sources (typically surveys).
Output per Worker Across Countries                                                                                                                      24


                                          Figure 2: Social Infrastructure and Output Per Worker




                                                                                                                                        LUX     USA
                                                                                                                                               CAN
                                          32000                                                                             AUS BEL
                                                                                                                            ITA                   CHE
                                                                                                                                    DEU
                                                                                                                                   FRANLD
                                                                                                                                    SWE
                                                                                                                                   NOR
                                                                                                                                 GBRFIN
                                                                                                                                      ISL
                                                                                                    PRI NZL               ESP     AUT
                                                                                                                                    DNK
                                                                                          ISR
                                                                                                                               JPN    HKGSGP
                                                                                                                        IRL
                                                                                              SAU
                                                                         TTO            VEN
                                                                                                      MLT              GRC
                                          16000                            ARG
                                                                         SUN
                                                                                  SYR
                                                                                 MEX                 OMNJOR
                                                                                                                        OAN        CYP
                                                                                                                                    BRB
                                                                                                              KOR
          Y/L (U.S. dollars, log scale)




                                                                                                                            PRT
                                                                   DZA     URY
                                                                                 BRA  HUN
                                                                YUG
                                                                 IRN
                                                                          COL             FJICHL                                  MYS
                                                                                                                                  MUS
                                                                          SUR      ZAF        CRI
                                                                                  POL PER                           ECU
                                          8000                 SYCDOM
                                                                           PAN    REU
                                                                           TUNTURGTMCSK                               YEM
                                                                    EGY       NAM         MAR
                                                                        PRY                  SWZ
                                                                     GAB        SLV LKA                                           THA
                                                                                                BOL
                                                              PAK PHL
                                                        BGD COG                 HNDNIC JAM
                                          4000                       ROM
                                                                   GUY                     IDN
                                                                        CIV                  BWA
                                                                       IND
                                                               CPV      PNG CMR
                                                                 SEN
                                                         SDNSLE     ZWE                        LSO
                                                                 BEN     CHN
                                          2000      HTI                 KEN
                                                                               GHA
                                                            MRT
                                                        SOM NGA ZMB              GMB
                                                           RWAMDG           GIN
                                                              TGOGNB
                                                                   MOZ
                                                                MLI                       COM
                                                    ZAR      CAF
                                                             AGO UGATCD
                                                                    TZA
                                                          BUR BFA  BDI
                                                                  MWI
                                          1000                    NER




                                                  0.1     0.2       0.3      0.4      0.5     0.6       0.7      0.8                0.9          1
                                                                          Observed Index of Social Infrastructure



have a complete set of data.18


5        Basic Results

Figure 2 plots output per worker against our measured index of social in-
frastructure. The countries with the highest measured levels of social in-
frastructure are Switzerland, the United States, and Canada, and all three
    18
     For each country with missing data, we used a set of independent variables to impute
the missing data. Specifically, let C denote the set of 79 countries with complete data.
Then, (i) For each country i not in C, let W be the independent variables with data and V
be the variables that are missing data. (ii) Using the countries in C, regress V on W . (iii)
Use the coefficients from these regressions and the data W (i) to impute the values of V (i).
The variables in V and W were indicator variables for type of economic organization, the
fraction of years open, GADP, the fraction of population speaking English at home, the
fraction of population speaking a European language at home, and a quadratic polynomial
for distance from the equator. In addition, total educational attainment and the mining
share of GDP were included in V but not in W , i.e. they were not treated as independent.
Output per Worker Across Countries                                                     25


are among the countries with the highest levels of output per worker. Three
countries that are close to the lowest in social infrastructure are Zaire, Haiti,
and Bangladesh, and all three have low levels of output per worker.
       Consideration of this figure leads to two important questions addressed
in this section. First, what is the impact on output per worker of a change in
an exogenous variable that leads to a one unit increase in social infrastruc-
ture? Second, what is the range of variation of true social infrastructure?
We see in Figure 2 that measured social infrastructure varies considerably
along this 10-point scale. How much of this is measurement error, and how
much variation is there across countries in true social infrastructure? Com-
bining the answers to these two general questions allows us to quantify the
overall importance of differences in social infrastructure across countries in
explaining differences in long-run economic performance.
       Table 2 reports the results for the estimation of the basic relation between
output per worker and social infrastructure. Standard errors are computed
using a bootstrap method that takes into account the fact that some of the
data have been imputed.19
       The main specification in Table 2 reports the results from instrumental
variables estimation of the effect of a change in social infrastructure on the
log of output per worker. Four instruments are used: distance from the
equator, the Frankel-Romer predicted trade share, and the fractions of the
population speaking English and a European language, respectively. The
point estimate indicates that a difference of .01 in social infrastructure is
associated with a difference in output per worker of 5.14 percent. With a
  19
     The bootstrap proceeds as follows, with 10,000 replications. First, we draw uniformly
127 times from the set of 79 observations for which there is no missing data. Second,
we create missing data. For each “country,” we draw from the sample joint distribution
of missing data to determine which variables, if any, are missing (any combination of
GADP and years open). Third, we impute the missing data, using the method described
in footnote 18. Finally, we use instrumental variables on the generated data to get a new
estimate, β̄. The standard errors reported in the table are calculated as the standard
deviation of the 10,000 observations of β̄.
Output per Worker Across Countries                                                          26




                 Table 2: Basic Results for Output per Worker


                             log Y /L = α + β S̃ + ˜

                                                        OverID Test   Coeff Test
                                      Social              p-value       p-value
 Specification                    Infrastructure        Test Result   Test Result    σ̂˜

 1. Main Specification                 5.142               .256          .812       .840
                                       (.508)             Accept        Accept

                      Alternative Specifications to Check Robustness

 2. Instruments:                       4.998               .208          .155       .821
      Distance, Frankel-Romer          (.567)             Accept        Accept

 3. No Imputed Data                    5.323               .243          .905       .889
      79 Countries                     (.607)             Accept        Accept

 4. OLS                                3.289                —            .002       .700
                                       (.212)                           Reject

 The coefficient on Social Infrastructure reflects the change in log output per worker as-
 sociated with a one unit increase in measured social infrastructure. For example, the
 coefficient of 5.14 means than a difference of .01 in our measure of social infrastructure
 is associated with a 5.14 percent difference in output per worker. Standard errors are
 computed using a bootstrap method, as described in the text. The “Main Specification”
 uses distance from the equator, the Frankel-Romer instrument, the fraction of the popu-
 lation speaking English at birth, and the fraction of the population speaking a Western
 European language at birth as instruments. The “OverID Test” column reports the
 result of testing the overidentifying restrictions and the “Coeff Test” reports the result
 of testing for the equality of the coefficients on the GADP policy index variable and the
 openness variable. The standard deviation of log Y /L is 1.078.
Output per Worker Across Countries                                         27


standard error of .508, this coefficient is estimated with considerable preci-
sion.
   The second column of numbers in the table reports the result of testing
the overidentifying restrictions of the model, such as the orthogonality of
the error term and distance from the equator. These restrictions are not
rejected. Similarly, we test for the equality of the coefficients on the two
variables that make up our social infrastructure index, and this restriction
is also not rejected.
   The lower rows of the table show that our main result is robust to the
use of a more limited set of instruments and to estimation using only the
79 countries for which we have a complete data set. In results not reported
in the table, we have dropped one instrument at a time to ensure that no
single instrument is driving the results. The smallest coefficient on social
infrastructure obtained in this robustness check was 4.93.
   Our estimate of β tells us the difference in log output per worker of a
difference in some exogenous variable that leads to a difference in social in-
frastructure. The point estimate indicates that a difference of .01 in social
infrastructure, as we measure it, is associated with a difference in output
per worker of a little over 5 percent. Because we believe that social infras-
tructure is measured with error, we need to investigate the magnitude of
the errors in order to understand this number. We need to determine how
much variation there is in true, as opposed to measured, social infrastructure
across countries.
   Our discussion starts from the premise that true simultaneity results in a
positive correlation between the disturbance in our structural equation and
social infrastructure. Recall that our system is:

                        log Y /L = α + β S̃ +  − βν,                     (8)

                        S = γ + δ log Y /L + Xθ + η.                      (9)
Output per Worker Across Countries                                          28


The reduced-form equation for S̃ is
                              γ + δα + δ + Xθ + η
                       S̃ =                        + ν.                   (10)
                                     1 − δβ

   Correlation of S̃ with  arises from two sources. One is feedback con-
trolled by the parameter δ. Provided the system satisfies the stability condi-
tion δβ < 1, a positive value of δ implies that  is positively correlated with
S̃. As we noted earlier, the natural assumption is that δ is non-negative,
since social infrastructure requires some resources to build, and log Y /L
measures those resources.
   The second source of correlation of S̃ with  is correlation of η with .
Again, it would appear plausible that countries with social infrastructure
above the level of the second structural equation would tend to be the same
countries that had output per worker above the first structural equation.
Thus, both sources of correlation appear to be non-negative.
   On the other hand, as the reduced-form equation for S̃ shows, measured
social infrastructure is unambiguously positively correlated with the mea-
surement error, ν. Hence there is a negative correlation between S̃ and the
part of the disturbance in the first structural equation arising from measure-
ment error, −βν.
   Information about the net effect of the positive correlation arising from
simultaneity and the negative correlation arising from measurement error is
provided by the difference between the instrumental variables estimate of
β and the ordinary least squares estimate. The last row of Table 2 reports
the latter. Because the OLS estimate is substantially smaller than the IV
estimate, measurement error is the more important of the two influences.
   Under the assumption that there is no true simultaneity problem, that
is,  is uncorrelated with S̃, we can calculate the standard deviation of
true social infrastructure, σS , from the difference between the IV and OLS
estimates. A standard result in the econometrics of measurement error is
Output per Worker Across Countries                                               29


that OLS is biased toward zero by a multiplicative factor equal to the ratio
of the variance of the true value of the right-hand variable to the variance
of the measured value. Thus,
                                                    !1/2
                                            β̂OLS               σS
                                  plim                     =        .          (11)
                                             β̂IV               σS̃

That is, we can estimate the standard deviation of true social infrastructure
relative to the standard deviation of measured social infrastructure as the
square root of the ratio of the OLS and IV estimates. With our estimates,
the ratio of the standard deviations is 0.800.
      If the correlation of S̃ and  is positive, so true simultaneity is a problem,
additional information is required to pin down σS . The positive correlation
from endogeneity permits a larger negative correlation from measurement
error and therefore a larger standard deviation of that measurement error.
A simple calculation indicates that the ratio of standard deviations given in
equation (11) is the correlation between measured and true social infrastruc-
ture, which we will denote rS̃,S . Therefore, a lower bound on the correlation
between measured and true social infrastructure provides a lower bound on
σS . It is our belief, based on comparing the data in Figure 2 to our pri-
ors, that the R2 or squared correlation between true and measured social
infrastructure is no smaller than 0.5. This implies a lower bound on rS̃,S of
√
  .5 = .707.
      With these numbers in mind, we will consider the implications of our
estimate of β̂IV = 5.14. Measured social infrastructure ranges from a low
value of 0.1127 in Zaire to a high value of 1.0000 in Switzerland. Ignor-
ing measurement error, the implied range of variation in output per worker
would be a factor of 95, which is implausibly high. We can apply the ra-
tio rS̃,S = σS /σS̃ to get a reasonable estimate of the range of variation
of true social infrastructure.20 The lower bound on this range implied by
 20
      That is, we calculate exp(rS̃,S β̂IV (S̃max − S̃min )).
Output per Worker Across Countries                                           30


rS̃,S = .707 suggests that differences in social infrastructure can account for
a 25.2-fold difference in output per worker across countries. Alternatively, if
there is no true endogeneity so that rS̃,S = .800, differences in social infras-
tructure imply a 38.4-fold difference in output per worker across countries.
For comparison, recall that output per worker in the richest country (the
United States) and the poorest country (Niger) in our data set differ by a
factor of 35.1.
   We conclude that our results indicate that differences in social infrastruc-
ture account for much of the difference in long-run economic performance
throughout the world, as measured by output per worker. Countries most
influenced by Europeans in past centuries have social infrastructures con-
ducive to high levels of output per worker, as measured by our variables,
and, in fact, have high levels of output per worker. Under our identifying
assumptions, this evidence means that infrastructure is a powerful causal
factor promoting higher output per worker.

5.1   Reduced-Form Results

Table 3 reports the two reduced-form regressions corresponding to our main
econometric specification.     These are OLS regressions of log output per
worker and social infrastructure on the four main instruments. Interpret-
ing these regressions calls for care: our framework does not require that
these reduced forms be complete in the sense that all exogenous variables
are included. Rather, the equations are useful but potentially incomplete
reduced-form equations.
   The reduced-form equations document the close relationship between
our instruments and actual social infrastructure. Distance from the equa-
tor, the Frankel-Romer predicted trade share, and the fraction of the popu-
lation speaking a European language (including English) combine to explain
a substantial fraction of the variance of our index of social infrastructure.
Output per Worker Across Countries                                          31


                     Table 3: Reduced Form Regressions


                                         —— Dependent Variables ——
                                            Social     Log(Output
           Regressors                   Infrastructure per Worker)

           Distance from the                0.708            3.668
           Equator, (0,1) Scale             (.110)           (.337)

           Log of Frankel-Romer             0.058            0.185
           Predicted Trade Share            (.031)           (.081)

           Fraction of Population           0.118            0.190
           Speaking English                 (.076)           (.298)

           Fraction of Population           0.130            0.995
           Speaking a European Lang         (.050)           (.181)

                        R2                   .41              .60

           Note: N=127. Standard errors are computed using a bootstrap
           method, as described in the text. A constant term is included
           but not reported.




Similarly, these instruments are closely related to long-run economic perfor-
mance as measured by output per worker.

5.2   Results by Component

Table 4 examines in more detail the sources of differences in output per
worker across countries by considering why some countries have higher pro-
ductivity or more physical or human capital than others.
   The dependent variables in this table use the contributions to output per
worker (the log of the terms in equation (3)), so that adding the coefficients
across columns reproduces the coefficient in the main specification of Table 2.
Broadly speaking, the explanations are similar. Countries with a good social
Output per Worker Across Countries                                         32


              Table 4: Results for log K/Y , log H/L, and log A

                                  Component = α + β S̃ + ˜


                                        —— Dependent Variable ——
                                        α
                                         log K/Y
                                       1−α
                                                  log H/L      log A

                Social                        1.052      1.343    2.746
                Infrastructure               (.164)     (.171)   (.336)

                OverID Test (p)                .784      .034      .151
                Test Result                  Accept    Reject    Accept

                         σ̂˜                  .310      .243      .596
                      σ̂DepV ar                .320      .290      .727

                Note: Estimation is carried out as in the main specifi-
                cation in Table 2. Standard errors are computed using
                a bootstrap method, as described in the text.




infrastructure have high capital intensities, high human capital per worker,
and high productivity. Each of these components contributes to high output
per worker.
   Along with this broad similarity, some interesting differences are evident
in Table 4. The residual in the equation for capital intensity is particularly
large, as measured by the estimated standard deviation of the error. This
leads to an interesting observation. The United States is an excellent ex-
ample of a country with good social infrastructure, but its stock of physical
capital per unit of output is not remarkable. While the U.S. ranks first in
output per worker, second in educational attainment, and 13th in produc-
tivity, its capital-output ratio ranks 39th among the 127 countries. The U.S.
ranks much higher in capital per worker (7th) because of its relatively high
productivity level.
   Table 5 summarizes the extent to which differences in true social infras-
Output per Worker Across Countries                                              33


           Table 5: Factors of Variation: Maximum / Minimum

                                                            α
                                          Y /L   (K/Y ) 1−α     H/L       A

            Observed Factor
            of Variation                  35.1        4.5        3.1    19.9

            Ratio, 5 richest to
            5 poorest countries           31.7        1.8        2.2     8.3

            Predicted Variation,
            Only Measurement Error        38.4        2.1        2.6     7.0

            Predicted Variation,
                       2
            Assuming rS̃,S = .5           25.2        1.9        2.3     5.6

            The first two rows report actual factors of variation in the
            data, first for the separate components and then for the geo-
            metric average of the 5 richest and 5 poorest countries (sorted
            according to Y /L). The last two rows report predicted factors
            of variation based on the estimated range of variation of true
            social infrastructure. Specifically, these last two rows report
            exp(r β̂IV (S̃max − S̃min )), first with r = .800 and second with
            r 2 = .5.




tructure can explain the observed variation in output per worker and its
components.     The first row of the table documents the observed factor of
variation between the maximum and minimum values of output per worker,
capital intensity, and other variables in our data set. The second row shows
numbers we have already reported in the interpretation of the productivity
results. Countries are sorted by output per worker, and then the ratio of
the geometric average of output per worker in the 5 richest countries to the
5 poorest countries is decomposed into the product of a capital intensity
term, a human capital term, and productivity. The last two rows of the ta-
ble use the basic coefficient estimates from Tables 2 and 4 to decompose the
predicted factor of variation in output into its multiplicative components.
Output per Worker Across Countries                                                      34


    One sees from this table that differences in social infrastructure are suf-
ficient to account for the bulk of the observed range of variation in capital
intensity, human capital per worker, and productivity.21 Interpreted through
an aggregate production function, these differences are able to account for
much of the variation in output per worker.


6     Robustness of the Results
The central equation estimated in this paper has only a single fundamental
determinant of a country’s output per worker, social infrastructure. Our
maintained hypothesis (already tested in part using the test of overiden-
tifying restrictions) is that this relation does not omit other fundamental
determinants of output per worker. For example, characteristics of an econ-
omy such as the size of government, the rate of inflation, or the share of
high-tech goods in international trade are all best thought of in our opinion
as outcomes rather than determinants. Just as investment in skills, capital
and technologies, these variables are determined primarily by a country’s
social infrastructure.
    To examine the robustness of our specification, we selected a set of can-
didates to be additional fundamental determinants and consider a range of
specifications. These alternative specifications are reported in Table 6.
    The first two specifications redefine measured social infrastructure to be
either the GADP variable or the Sachs-Warner openness variable, rather
than the average of the two. The results are similar to those in our main
specification. When social infrastructure is measured by GADP alone, the
overidentifying restrictions are rejected — some of the instruments appear
to belong in the equation.
  21
     One must be careful in interpreting these results since social infrastructure is po-
tentially endogenous. What this statement really means is that differences in exogenous
variables that lead to the observed range of variation in social infrastructure would imply
the factors of variation reported in the table.
Output per Worker Across Countries                                                           35




                            Table 6: Robustness Results


                   log Y /L = α + β S̃ + λAddedV ariable + ˜

                                                                   OverID Test
                                       Social        Additional      p-value
 Specification                     Infrastructure     Variable     Test Result        σ̂˜

 1. S̃ = GADP                          5.410             ...           .006          .769
                                       (.394)                         Reject

 2. S̃ =Years Open                     4.442             ...           .131         1.126
                                       (.871)                         Accept

 3. Distance from Equator              5.079            0.062          .129          .835
                                       (2.61)          (2.062)        Accept

 4. Ethnolinguistic Fractional-        5.006           -0.223          .212          .816
      ization (N=113)                  (.745)          (.386)         Accept

 5. Religious Affiliation              4.980            See            .478          .771
      (N=121)                          (.670)           Note          Accept

 6. Log(Population)                    5.173           0.047           .412          .845
                                       (.513)          (.060)         Accept

 7. Log(C-H Density)                   5.195            -.546          .272          .850
                                       (.539)          (1.11)         Accept

 8. Capitalist System                  6.354           -1.057          .828          .899
      Indicator Variable               (1.14)          (.432)         Accept

 9. Instruments: Main Set plus         4.929             ...           .026          .812
      Continent Dummies                (.388)                         Reject

 See notes to Table 2. Instruments are the same as in Table 2, except where noted.
 Additional variables are discussed in the text. The coefficients on the religious variables
 in line 3, followed by standard errors, are Catholic (0.992, .354), Muslim (0.877, .412),
 Protestant (0.150, .431), and Hindu (0.839, 1.48).
Output per Worker Across Countries                                                         36


       In the third specification, we treat distance from the equator as an in-
cluded exogenous variable. The result, consistent with previous overidenti-
fying tests, is little change in the coefficient on social infrastructure and a
small and insignificant coefficient on distance from the equator.22 This sup-
ports our contention that the bulk of the high simple correlation between
distance from the equator and economic performance occurs because histor-
ical circumstances lead this variable to proxy well for social infrastructure.
       The fourth specification examines the ethnolinguistic fractionalization
(ELF) index computed by Taylor and Hudson (1972) and used by Mauro
(1995). ELF measures the probability that any two people chosen at random
from within a country will belong to different ethnic or linguistic groups.
While the simple association of this variable with output per worker is quite
strong, the partial regression coefficient is small in magnitude (the variable
is measured on a [0,1] scale) and statistically insignificant.
       The fifth specification adds religious affiliation variables to the specifica-
tion. Specifically, these variables measure the fraction (on a [0,1] scale) of a
country’s population affiliated with the Catholic, Muslim, Protestant, and
Hindu religions.23 The point estimate on social infrastructure is changed
little when these variables are included in the specification. Both Catholic
and Muslim affiliation variables enter significantly into the regression, while
the Protestant and Hindu variables do not.
       The sixth specification adds the log of population to the regression. A
number of recent growth models in the tradition of Romer (1990) emphasize
that nonrivalry of ideas should lead to increasing returns to scale. Our
  22
      The large standard error on social infrastructure is somewhat misleading. The associ-
ated p-value testing the hypothesis of a zero coefficient on social infrastructure (computed
from the bootstrap distribution of coefficients) is only 0.008. The large standard error —
the standard deviation of the bootstrap coefficients — occurs because the distribution of
coefficients is skewed heavily toward the right, i.e. toward positive values. In contrast, the
distribution of the bootstrap coefficients for distance from the equator is skewed heavily
toward the left.
   23
      These data were provided by Robert Barro and are discussed in Barro (1997).
Output per Worker Across Countries                                                          37


simple attempt to measure scale with population does not find evidence of
this effect. One explanation is that national boundaries do not limit the
areas where ideas are applied.
       The seventh specification considers a measure of the density of economic
activity, computed following the methods of Ciccone and Hall (1996).24 The
density measure is constructed to have a theoretical coefficient of one—
it would have precisely this value in Ciccone and Hall’s cross section of
states. Here, however, in a cross section of countries, the variation in other
determinants of output per worker is so large that it is difficult to measure
the effects of density with much precision.
       The results for the eighth specification are unexpected. This specification
adds an indicator variable taking the value of 1 for countries that are cate-
gorized as capitalist or mixed-capitalist by the Freedom House (1994). The
odd result is that the regression coefficient implies that capitalist countries
produce substantially less output per worker than otherwise similar noncap-
italist countries. In part, this reflects the particular definition of capitalism
employed by the Freedom House. According to their classification, a number
of sub-Saharan African economies are classified as capitalist.
       The final specification of Table 6 adds a list of continent dummies to
the instrument set.25 As with the other specifications, the coefficient on
social infrastructure is unchanged by the addition of the continents to the
instrument list. However, the overidentification test now rejects the restric-
  24
       The Ciccone-Hall measure for country i is given by
                                          1 X γ −(γ−1)
                                   Di =      ns as
                                          Ni
                                            sSi

where Ni is the population of country i, Si is the set of all provinces in country i, ns is the
population of province s, and as is the area of province s. We use a value of γ = 1.058,
as estimated by Ciccone and Hall. This value implies that doubling density increases Di
by about 6 percent.
  25
     The continents are North America (including Central America), South America,
Africa, Asia (plus Oceania), and Europe.
Output per Worker Across Countries                                             38


tions, in part because African economies have lower output per worker than
otherwise similar economies on other continents.


7     Conclusion
Countries produce high levels of output per worker in the long run because
they achieve high rates of investment in physical capital and human capital
and because they use these inputs with a high level of productivity. Our
empirical analysis suggests that success on each of these fronts is driven by
social infrastructure. A country’s long-run economic performance is deter-
mined primarily by the institutions and government policies that make up
the economic environment within which individuals and firms make invest-
ments, create and transfer ideas, and produce goods and services.
    Our major findings can be summarized by the following points:

    1. Many of the predictions of growth theory can be successfully consid-
       ered in a cross-section context by examining the levels of income across
       countries.

    2. The large variation in output per worker across countries is only par-
       tially explained by differences in physical capital and educational at-
       tainment. Paralleling the growth accounting literature, levels account-
       ing finds a large residual that varies considerably across countries.

    3. Differences in social infrastructure across countries cause large differ-
       ences in capital accumulation, educational attainment, and productiv-
       ity, and therefore large differences in income across countries.

    4. The extent to which different countries have adopted different social
       infrastructures is partially related to the extent to which they have
       been influenced by Western Europe. Using distance from the equa-
       tor and language data, we conclude that our finding that differences
Output per Worker Across Countries                                       39


     in social infrastructure cause large differences in income is robust to
     measurement error and endogeneity concerns.
Output per Worker Across Countries                                       40


References
Acemoglu, Daron, “Reward Structures and the Allocation of Talent,”
    European Economic Review, January 1995, 39, 17–33.

Barro, Robert J., “Economic Growth in a Cross Section of Countries,”
    Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 1991, 106, 407–443.

    , Determinants of Economic Growth: A Cross-country Empirical Study,
    Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1997.

     and Jongwha Lee, “International Comparisons of Educational At-
    tainment,” Journal of Monetary Economics, December 1993, 32, 363–
    394.

     and Xavier Sala-i-Martin, “Convergence,” Journal of Political
    Economy, 1992, 100 (2), 223–251.

     and      , “Technological Diffusion, Convergence, and Growth,” 1995.
    NBER Working Paper No. 5151.

Baumol, William J., “Entrepreneurship: Productive, Unproductive, and
    Destructive,” Journal of Political Economy, 1990, 98 (5), 893–921.

     and Edward N. Wolff, “Catching up in the Postwar Period: Puerto
    Rico as the Fifth ‘Tiger’ ?,” World Development, 1996, 24 (5), 869–885.

Bils, Mark and Peter Klenow, “Does Schooling Cause Growth or the
    Other Way Around?,” 1996. University of Chicago GSB mimeo.

Chari, V.V., Pat Kehoe, and Ellen McGrattan, “The Poverty of
    Nations: A Quantitative Investigation,” 1997. Working Paper, Federal
    Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.
Output per Worker Across Countries                                       41


Christensen, Laurits R., Dianne Cummings, and Dale W. Jorgen-
    son, “Relative Productivity Levels, 1947-1973,” European Economic
    Review, May 1981, 16 (1), 61–94.

Ciccone, Antonio and Robert E. Hall, “Productivity and the Density
    of Economic Activity,” American Economic Review, March 1996, 86
    (1), 54–70.

Coplin, William D., Michael K. O’Leary, and Tom Sealy, A Business
    Guide to Political Risk for International Decisions, Syracuse: Political
    Risk Services, 1996.

David, Paul A., “Invention and Accumulation in America’s Economic
    Growth: A Nineteenth-Century Parable,” Journal of Monetary Eco-
    nomics, 1977, 6 (0), 176–228. Special Supplement.

Dougherty, Chrys and Dale W. Jorgenson, “International Compar-
    isons of the Sources of Economic Growth,” American Economic Asso-
    ciation Papers and Proceedings, May 1996, 86, 25–29.

Easterly, William, Michael Kremer, Lant Pritchett, and Lawrence
    Summers, “Good Policy or Good Luck? Country Growth Perfor-
    mance and Temporary Shocks,” Journal of Monetary Economics, De-
    cember 1993, 32, 459–483.

Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel S. Kortum, “Trade in Ideas: Patenting
    and Productivity in the OECD,” 1995. NBER Working Paper No. 5049.

Engerman, Stanley L. and Kenneth L. Sokoloff, “Factor Endow-
    ments, Institutions, and Differential Paths of Growth Among New
    World Economies,” in Stephen Haber, ed., How Latin America Fell
    Behind, Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1997.
Output per Worker Across Countries                                      42


Finn, James, ed., Freedom in the World: The Annual Survey of Political
    Rights and Civil Liberties, 1993-1994, New York: Freedom House, 1994.

Frankel, Jeffrey A. and David Romer, “Trade and Growth: An Em-
    pirical Investigation,” March 1996. NBER Working Paper No. 5476.

Greif, Avner and Eugene Kandel, “Contract Enforcement Institutions:
    Historical Perspective and Current Status in Russia,” in Edward P.
    Lazear, ed., Economic Transition in Eastern Europe and Russia: Real-
    ities of Reform, Stanford, CA: Hoover Institution Press, 1995, pp. 292–
    321.

Grossman, Herschel I. and Minseong Kim, “Inequality, Predation,
    and Welfare,” August 1996. NBER Working Paper No. 5704.

Gunnemark, Erik V., Countries, Peoples, and their Languages: The Ge-
    olinguistic Handbook, Dallas, Texas: Summer Institute of Linguistics,
    Inc., 1991.

Hall, Robert E. and Charles I. Jones, “The Productivity of Nations,”
    November 1996. NBER Working Paper No. 5812.

Hunter, Barbara F., ed., Ethnologue: Languages of the World, twelth
    ed., Gothenburg, Sweden: Lanstryckeriet, 1992.

Islam, Nazrul, “Growth Empirics: A Panel Data Approach,” Quarterly
    Journal of Economics, November 1995, 110, 1127–1170.

Jones, Charles I., “R&D-Based Models of Economic Growth,” Journal of
    Political Economy, August 1995, 103, 759–784.

Kamarck, Andrew M., The Tropics and Economic Development, Balti-
    more: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1976.
Output per Worker Across Countries                                   43


Klenow, Peter and Andres Rodriguez-Clare, “The Neoclassical Re-
    vival in Growth Economics: Has It Gone Too Far?,” in Ben S. Bernanke
    and Julio J. Rotemberg, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1997,
    Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1997.

Knack, Stephen and Philip Keefer, “Institutions and Economic Per-
    formance: Cross-Country Tests Using Alternative Institutional Mea-
    sures,” Economics and Politics, November 1995, 7, 207–227.

Kornai, Janos, The Socialist System: The Political Economy of Commu-
    nism, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1992.

Krueger, Anne, “The Political Economy of the Rent-Seeking Society,”
    American Economic Review, 1974, 64, 291–303.

Ljungqvist, Lars and Thomas J. Sargent, “The Swedish Unemploy-
    ment Experience,” European Economic Review, 1995, 39 (5), 1043–
    1070.

Mankiw, N. Gregory, David Romer, and David Weil, “A Contri-
    bution to the Empirics of Economic Growth,” Quarterly Journal of
    Economics, May 1992, 107 (2), 407–438.

Mauro, Paolo, “Corruption and Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
    nomics, August 1995, 110 (3), 681–713.

Mincer, Jacob, Schooling, Experience, and Earnings, New York: Columbia
    University Press, 1974.

Murphy, Kevin M., Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny, “The
    Allocation of Talent: Implications for Growth,” Quarterly Journal of
    Economics, May 1991, 106 (2), 503–530.
Output per Worker Across Countries                                      44


Nordhaus, William D., “Climate and Economic Development,” Proceed-
    ings of the World Bank Annual Conference on Development Economics
    1993, 1994, pp. 355–376.

North, Douglass C., Institutions, Institutional Change, and Economic
    Performance, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990.

     and Robert P. Thomas, The Rise of the Western World, Cam-
    bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1973.

Olson, Mancur, The Logic of Collective Action, Cambridge: Cambridge
    University Press, 1965.

    , The Rise and Decline of Nations, New Haven: Yale University Press,
    1982.

Parente, Stephen L. and Edward C. Prescott, “Barriers to Technology
    Adoption and Development,” Journal of Political Economy, April 1994,
    102 (2), 298–321.

     and      , “Monopoly Rights: A Barrier to Riches,” 1996. University
    of Minnesota, mimeo.

Psacharopoulos, George, “Returns to Investment in Education: A Global
    Update,” World Development, 1994, 22 (9), 1325–1343.

Rapaczynski, Andrzej, Nature and Politics: Liberalism in the Philoso-
    phies of Hobbes, Locke, and Rousseau, Ithaca: Cornell University Press,
    1987.

Romer, Paul M., “Endogenous Technological Change,” Journal of Polit-
    ical Economy, October 1990, 98 (5), S71–S102.
Output per Worker Across Countries                                        45


Sachs, Jeffrey D. and Andrew Warner, “Economic Reform and the
    Process of Global Integration,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
    1995, 1, 1–95.

     and         , “Fundamental Sources of Long-Run Growth,” American
    Economic Association Papers and Proceedings, May 1997, 87 (2), 184–
    188.

Schrag, Joel and Suzanne Scotchmer, “The Self-Reinforcing Nature of
    Crime,” 1993. Working Paper 93-11, Center for the Study of Law and
    Society, School of Law, University of California, Berkeley.

Solow, Robert M., “Technical Change and the Aggregate Production
    Function,” Review of Economics and Statistics, August 1957, 39 (3),
    312–320.

Summers, Robert and Alan Heston, “The Penn World Table (Mark 5):
    An Expanded Set of International Comparisons: 1950–1988,” Quarterly
    Journal of Economics, May 1991, 106, 327–368.

Taylor, Charles L. and Michael C. Hudson, World Handbook of Polit-
    ical and Social Indicators, New Haven: Yale University Press, 1972.

Theil, Henri and Dongling Chen, “The Equatorial Grand Canyon,” De
    Economist, 1995, 143 (3), 317–327.

Tobler, Waldo, Uwe Deichmann, Jon Gottsegen, and Kelly Maloy,
    “The Global Demography Project,” April 1995. NCGIA Technical Re-
    port TR-95-6, Department of Geography, U.C. Santa Barbara.

United Nations, Industrial Statistics Yearbook, 1991, Vol. 1 1993.

    , National Accounts Statistics: Main Aggregates and Detailed Tables,
    1992 1994.
Output per Worker Across Countries                                   46


Weingast, Barry R., “The Economic Role of Political Institutions:
    Market-Preserving Federalism and Economic Development,” Journal
    of Law, Economics, and Organization, April 1995, 11 (1), 1–31.
Output per Worker Across Countries                                     47


        Table 7: Productivity Calculations, Ratios to U.S. Values


                                            ——Contribution from——
      Country               Code   Y /L    (K/Y )α/(1−α) H/L    A

      U.S.A.                USA    1.000      1.000    1.000   1.000
      Luxembourg            LUX    0.986      1.116    0.805   1.098
      Canada                CAN    0.941      1.002    0.908   1.034
      Switzerland           CHE    0.874      1.189    0.832   0.883
      Australia             AUS    0.843      1.094    0.900   0.856
      Belgium               BEL    0.836      1.023    0.836   0.978
      Italy                 ITA    0.834      1.063    0.650   1.207
      West Germany          DEU    0.818      1.118    0.802   0.912
      France                FRA    0.818      1.091    0.666   1.126
      Netherlands           NLD    0.806      1.060    0.803   0.946
      Sweden                SWE    0.787      1.029    0.853   0.897
      Norway                NOR    0.759      1.196    0.909   0.699
      Finland               FIN    0.734      1.179    0.855   0.728
      Iceland               ISL    0.730      1.023    0.764   0.933
      U.K.                  GBR    0.727      0.891    0.808   1.011
      New Zealand           NZL    0.717      1.117    1.017   0.631
      Puerto Rico           PRI    0.711      0.827    0.550   1.564
      Austria               AUT    0.709      1.076    0.674   0.979
      Denmark               DNK    0.690      1.082    0.905   0.705
      Spain                 ESP    0.682      1.018    0.605   1.107
      Israel                ISR    0.659      0.948    0.851   0.817
      Hong Kong             HKG    0.608      0.741    0.735   1.115
      Singapore             SGP    0.606      1.031    0.545   1.078
      Japan                 JPN    0.587      1.119    0.797   0.658
      Ireland               IRL    0.577      1.052    0.773   0.709
      Saudi Arabia          SAU    0.528      0.904    0.560   1.043
      Trinidad and Tobago   TTO    0.498      0.956    0.664   0.785
      Venezuela             VEN    0.495      0.994    0.593   0.839
      Greece                GRC    0.469      1.023    0.680   0.674
      Malta                 MLT    0.463      0.902    0.692   0.743
      Cyprus                CYP    0.446      0.975    0.708   0.646
      Taiwan                OAN    0.445      0.821    0.699   0.776
      Syria                 SYR    0.438      0.812    0.515   1.048
      Mexico                MEX    0.433      0.868    0.538   0.926
      Oman                  OMN    0.424      1.132    0.565   0.663
      Argentina             ARG    0.418      0.953    0.676   0.648
      U.S.S.R.              SUN    0.417      1.231    0.724   0.468
      Jordan                JOR    0.416      0.783    0.532   0.998
      Barbados              BRB    0.404      0.728    0.733   0.756
      Korea                 KOR    0.380      0.861    0.761   0.580
      Portugal              PRT    0.366      0.960    0.504   0.755
      Uruguay               URY    0.340      0.888    0.661   0.579
      Algeria               DZA    0.328      1.023    0.416   0.771
      Brazil                BRA    0.319      0.873    0.482   0.758
Output per Worker Across Countries                                     48




                                            ——Contribution from——
       Country              Code   Y /L    (K/Y )α/(1−α) H/L    A

       Hungary              HUN    0.307      1.124    0.932   0.293
       Yugoslavia           YUG    0.300      1.241    0.710   0.340
       Iran                 IRN    0.295      0.981    0.469   0.642
       Fiji                 FJI    0.273      0.921    0.682   0.435
       Malaysia             MYS    0.267      1.004    0.592   0.450
       Colombia             COL    0.264      0.818    0.544   0.593
       Chile                CHL    0.263      0.989    0.661   0.403
       Mauritius            MUS    0.262      0.614    0.548   0.778
       Costa Rica           CRI    0.257      0.862    0.590   0.506
       Suriname             SUR    0.254      0.979    0.400   0.650
       South Africa         ZAF    0.250      0.959    0.568   0.460
       Poland               POL    0.238      1.278    0.795   0.235
       Ecuador              ECU    0.237      1.012    0.605   0.386
       Peru                 PER    0.237      0.935    0.618   0.409
       Reunion              REU    0.226      0.854    0.510   0.518
       Panama               PAN    0.223      1.008    0.651   0.340
       Turkey               TUR    0.218      0.925    0.469   0.503
       Tunisia              TUN    0.217      0.755    0.421   0.683
       Seychelles           SYC    0.215      0.808    0.407   0.654
       Yemen                YEM    0.212      0.617    0.336   1.022
       Czechoslovakia       CSK    0.211      1.146    0.763   0.241
       Guatemala            GTM    0.210      0.652    0.427   0.753
       Dominican Republic   DOM    0.206      0.824    0.525   0.477
       Namibia              NAM    0.194      1.255    0.477   0.324
       Egypt                EGY    0.187      0.454    0.576   0.716
       Morocco              MAR    0.187      0.618    0.575   0.527
       Paraguay             PRY    0.170      0.808    0.554   0.379
       Swaziland            SWZ    0.164      0.754    0.500   0.436
       Gabon                GAB    0.157      1.304    0.408   0.295
       Thailand             THA    0.157      0.739    0.575   0.369
       El Salvador          SLV    0.157      0.641    0.487   0.501
       Sri Lanka            LKA    0.155      0.662    0.593   0.394
       Bolivia              BOL    0.140      0.862    0.531   0.305
       Honduras             HND    0.130      0.738    0.486   0.361
       Jamaica              JAM    0.130      1.064    0.524   0.232
       Pakistan             PAK    0.128      0.582    0.390   0.566
       Bangladesh           BGD    0.127      0.384    0.393   0.844
       Philippines          PHL    0.126      0.854    0.663   0.223
       Nicaragua            NIC    0.126      0.894    0.501   0.281
       Congo                COG    0.122      0.680    0.460   0.389
       Romania              ROM    0.113      1.037    0.608   0.180
       Indonesia            IDN    0.110      0.915    0.499   0.242
Output per Worker Across Countries                                      49




                                             ——Contribution from——
       Country               Code   Y /L    (K/Y )α/(1−α) H/L    A

       Guyana                GUY    0.105      1.247    0.577   0.146
       Ivory Coast           CIV    0.097      0.739    0.447   0.294
       Botswana              BWA    0.094      1.100    0.496   0.172
       India                 IND    0.086      0.709    0.454   0.267
       Papua New Guinea      PNG    0.078      0.948    0.377   0.218
       Cameroon              CMR    0.076      0.684    0.407   0.274
       Cape Verde Island     CPV    0.076      0.992    0.472   0.162
       Senegal               SEN    0.072      0.477    0.416   0.361
       Sudan                 SDN    0.067      0.837    0.341   0.233
       Zimbabwe              ZWE    0.065      0.898    0.429   0.170
       Sierra Leone          SLE    0.064      0.291    0.380   0.581
       Lesotho               LSO    0.063      0.678    0.483   0.192
       China                 CHN    0.060      0.891    0.632   0.106
       Benin                 BEN    0.059      0.605    0.332   0.294
       Haiti                 HTI    0.057      0.575    0.375   0.263
       Kenya                 KEN    0.056      0.747    0.457   0.165
       Ghana                 GHA    0.052      0.516    0.465   0.218
       Zambia                ZMB    0.051      1.209    0.535   0.079
       Mauritania            MRT    0.050      0.961    0.423   0.124
       Somalia               SOM    0.049      0.682    0.410   0.174
       Gambia                GMB    0.048      0.534    0.338   0.269
       Nigeria               NGA    0.048      0.937    0.367   0.140
       Guinea                GIN    0.043      0.516    0.414   0.201
       Rwanda                RWA    0.043      0.441    0.338   0.287
       Madagascar            MDG    0.041      0.299    0.514   0.264
       Togo                  TGO    0.040      0.879    0.402   0.113
       Guinea-Bissau         GNB    0.039      0.859    0.325   0.140
       Mozambique            MOZ    0.039      0.349    0.349   0.321
       Comoros               COM    0.035      0.875    0.453   0.089
       Mali                  MLI    0.035      0.524    0.337   0.196
       Central African Rep   CAF    0.033      0.582    0.357   0.159
       Angola                AGO    0.033      0.493    0.457   0.146
       Zaire                 ZAR    0.033      0.499    0.408   0.160
       Chad                  TCD    0.032      0.358    0.428   0.210
       Tanzania              TZA    0.032      0.650    0.410   0.119
       Uganda                UGA    0.032      0.362    0.390   0.224
       Burundi               BDI    0.030      0.495    0.395   0.152
       Malawi                MWI    0.030      0.677    0.427   0.102
       Burkina Faso          BFA    0.029      0.581    0.502   0.101
       Myanmar               BUR    0.029      0.668    0.396   0.109
       Niger                 NER    0.029      0.680    0.325   0.129
