1 Introduction
Leasing contracts are extensively used in durable goods markets. A third of the capital
equipment in US corporations is leased. In the automobile market the importance of leases
has been growing and has reached the point where in 1996, one out of three new cars had been
leased. If one consumer leases and another buys, should we expect them to behave dierently
in secondary markets or are the two consumers simply nancing a similar utilization of a
durable good in a dierent way?
Evidence in the car market, shows that buyers and lessees behave in a dierent manner.
First, the turnover of leased cars is higher than that of sold cars. Second, o-lease used cars
seem to be of better quality than pre-owned cars of the same vintage. Evidence of the rst
phenomenon is particularly strong. Lessees buy their cars at maturity only 25% of the time.
Since most car leases have a two to three year duration, this means that a large fraction of
leased cars are sold in the used market by the time they are three years old.1 In 1996 42% of
the so called premium used cars, which include two to four year old cars, were o-lease cars.
But back in 1993 only one out of four new cars was leased. For leased cars to account for 42%
of trades in 1996, while only being 25% of the stock in 1993, they must have a propensity
to be traded within the rst four years which is 117% larger than that of sold cars. Further
evidence is provided by Sattler (1995) who reports that 56% of 1989 car models in his sample
were held by their rst owner ve years later. Moreover, the average length of period that all
new cars (leased and bought) are held before changing hands is almost 6 years. This means
that new car buyers hold on to their cars much longer than consumers who lease.
Evidence that o-lease cars are better quality is a little weaker but still suggestive. In
the automotive press it is a common nding. For instance, [T]he industry-wide assumption
[is] that the most desirable used vehicle is the consumer o-lease variety....2 Moreover, advertisements of used cars for sale often specify whether a car is o-lease. This would hardly
be highlighted if the perception was that o-lease cars are no better than sold cars. Finally,
Polk's analysis estimates 2.88 million o-lease vehicles returned to the used car market in 1997, 87 percent
being two- and three-year-old vehicles. In fact, nal 1997 numbers should show o-lease vehicles representing
65 percent of two-year-old vehicles on the market, and 57 percent of three-year-old vehicles. Source, Polk
Corporation: http://www.polk.com/whatsnews/jan98/01139801.html
2
Polk Corp, Press release 1996.
1

1

Desai and Purohit (1997), using auction data for a popular car model, nd that o-lease cars
sell at a premium or, more precisely, that the price decline is slower than for sold cars.
How can we explain these phenomena? Can manufacturers benet from appropriately
designing leasing contracts? What are the consequences for social welfare? We present a
model to address these questions.
A leasing contract, beyond specifying the rental payments for the good, also species the
option price at which the used good can be bought at maturity. This option price can be set
independently of the price in the used market and provides an additional control variable for
the manufacturer of the good. If the option price is set above the market clearing price in the
used market, lessees choose which cars to keep on the basis of the option price. We show that
in the absence of asymmetric information the additional control variable is useless; market
allocations and prots for manufacturers are the same for any menu of leasing contracts.
We then introduce the possibility of adverse selection in the used market. We build on the
model of adverse selection in durable goods markets presented in Hendel and Lizzeri (1997b).
The key ingredients of the model are the following. Consumers are long lived and have
heterogeneous valuation for quality. Cars are produced every period and they depreciate.
Thus, high valuation consumers favor new cars and low valuation consumers favor used cars.
This generates the possibility of exchange in the second hand market.
When there is adverse selection, then leasing aects equilibrium allocations in the market.
We show that when leasing and selling contracts are oered simultaneously on the market,
then consumers who lease are higher valuation consumers. Thus, oering both contracts
serves to segment the market. Moreover, the percentage of o-lease cars that are returned at
maturity is higher than the percentage of pre-owned cars that are traded and the o-lease cars
have higher average quality. These predictions of the model match the empirically observed
dierences in behavior between lessees and buyers.
We then investigate the welfare eects of leasing contracts. We show that a social planner
can use leasing contracts to ameliorate the welfare distortion caused by adverse selection.3
However, except for the case where there are only two types of consumers, no menu of leasing
contracts can achieve even the second best allocation. Leasing contracts are good tools to
3

This point is related to the analysis in Guha and Waldman (1997) which is discussed in more detail later.

2

control the keeping behavior of new car consumers and therefore to adjust the volume of
trade in the used car market. However, they cannot deal well with the distortion in the
allocation of used goods among used good buyers. Solving this distortion requires that ner
information about the quality of the used goods be obtained from the rst users. A menu of
leasing contracts is not capable of doing this. We show that there exists a mechanism that
completely solves the adverse selection problem; the rst best allocation can be achieved by
an incentive compatible, individually rational, and budget balanced mechanism.
We then consider the issue of the optimal choice of leasing contracts by a monopolist. We
present an example that has the striking feature that the manufacturer can raise the option
price above the market clearing price in the used market and increase its prots without
aecting the equilibrium allocation in the market. The reason the monopolist prots from
increasing the option price is the following: Under selling the option of keeping is implicitly
priced by the market clearing price in the used market. With adverse selection, this price
reects the fact that the traded used good is of lower quality than the good that is kept by
the new car buyer. Thus, the new car buyer gets to keep a high quality good that is priced as
if it were a low quality one. Leasing allows the manufacturer to raise the option price thereby
reducing the competitive threat that the used good poses to the new good.4 We go on to
show that this allows the manufacturer to protably expand output and that manufacturers
with unreliable cars benet more from leasing.
Given the ability to control behavior in the used market, and given the fact that adverse
selection is commonly perceived to have negative eects on market allocations, it is natural
to ask why leasing contracts often include the option of buying the good at the end of the
lease. If this option were very expensive, all used goods would be returned resulting in a pool
of used cars that does not suer from adverse selection. We show that allowing some lessees
the option of keeping the used good is the optimal policy for the manufacturer despite the
Our analysis is thus in contrast with McConnel and Schallheim (1983) who argue that In many cases
leases grant the lessee an option to purchase the leased asset at its 'fair market value' at the maturity date of
the contract. However, the lessee can purchase the asset at its market price at maturity of the lease whether
or not the contract contains such an option. Thus, an option to purchase the asset at its fair market price
is valueless and the equilibrium rental payments will be the same whether or not the lease contract contains
such an option. The contrast is due to the fact that we study a world with asymmetric information.
4

3

fact that lessees who have private information about the quality of the good will only return
the worse quality cars. This is due to the following phenomenon: If no keeping option is
allowed, all used car consumers purchase cars with the same average quality. But some of
these consumers have valuations for quality that are almost as high as those of the lowest
valuation consumers who consume new goods, whereas other used car consumers have much
lower valuations. Thus a menu of leasing contracts, where one of the contracts includes an
option for keeping allows for a better segmentation of the market.

2 Related Literature
Several roles for leasing have been suggested in the durable goods literature. Bulow (1986)
shows that leasing can be used by a monopolist to overcome the Coasian time inconsistency
problem. Waldman (1996) and Hendel and Lizzeri (1997a) show that manufacturers may
choose to lease because this gives them additional market power in the used market. The
monopolist exercises this power by scrapping some of the used units. These papers provide
rationales for leasing but do not contain analyses of adverse selection and have no predictions
on how units that were sold and units that were leased dier in the secondary market.
There is a large literature in nance that focuses on the valuation of leasing contracts.
Most of this literature takes as given the structure of the leasing contract and obtains the
equilibrium lease value and the rental rate for a wide variety of leasing contracts.5 There is
also a literature that addresses the tax incentives for leasing. Tax issues cannot fully explain
the eects of leasing in the car market because, while the tax advantages of leasing were
lowered in the tax reform act of 1986, the importance of leasing has increased.6
Smith and Wakeham (1985) provide the most extensive analysis of the determinants of
corporate leasing policy. Their analysis is informal but very insightful. Some of the issues that
they consider are the following: Repossessing an asset is easier for a lessor than for a secured
debtholder in the event of bankruptcy. Thus, rms that have problems obtaining nancing
might be expected to lease. Sharpe and Nguyen (1995) present evidence that rms likely to
face high nancial contracting costs lease a higher proportion of their capital equipment. This
5
6

Examples are papers by Grenadier (1995, 1996) and McConnel and Schallheim (1983).
See Sharpe and Nguyen (1995) for a discussion of this.

4

is an implausible explanation for the car market because it is unlikely that it can account for
the observed higher turnover of leased cars as opposed to sold cars.7 Smith and Wakeham
also argue that leasing might be favored if the lessees plan to use the equipment for less than
its useful life and the lessor has a comparative advantage in disposing of the asset. However,
they acknowledge that this transaction cost explanation for leasing is problematic since it
requires that the comparative advantage of the manufacturer not be available under selling.
Many manufacturers (including car manufacturers) however, allow dealers to accept trade-ins
thereby making available to buyers the same advantage that is available to lessees. Smith and
Wakeham also discuss the rationales for a number of common provisions in leasing contracts.
The most relevant to our analysis is their discussion of options to purchase at the end of the
lease. They argue that this provision serves to give an incentive to the user to take care of
the asset. We show that there is also a market segmentation reason for the existence of such
provisions.
Guha and Waldman (1996) is the only other paper that deals with leasing and adverse
selection. The basic environment they model is quite similar to ours. The focus of their paper
is to show that leasing solves the lemons problem; leasing contracts oered by a competitive
industry would lead to ecient allocations. Most of their analysis is concerned with an
environment where there are two types (qualities) of used cars and two types (valuations
for quality) of consumers. Under additional assumptions, in this world the social optimum
and the equilibrium outcome in a competitive industry are the same and they involve the
absence of a keeping option in the leasing contract; all users return the car at the end of the
lease. They recognize that this is a special case and discuss an example with three types of
cars where the social optimum and the equilibrium outcome in a competitive industry still
coincide but they both allow lessees to keep the highest realization of quality of the used
good.
As mentioned above, we show that leasing contracts can achieve a rst best allocation
only in the case where there is a single type of used car consumer. When there are many
types of used car consumers there is a misallocation of quality in the secondary market
Because of the higher turnover, consumers who lease spend more money on average than consumers who
buy. Thus, it is unlikely that lessees are those who have higher nancial contracting costs.
7

5

which cannot be resolved through leasing contracts. We show that there exists an incentive
compatible, individually rational and balanced budget mechanism that implements the rst
best allocation. Thus, in general, leasing contracts cannot even achieve the incentive ecient
allocation.
Other dierences with Guha and Waldman are the following: Our analysis shows how
rms with market power can benet from the appropriate design of leasing contracts. We
show that selling and leasing contracts can both be oered simultaneously in equilibrium, and
how this mixture generates outcomes that match observed patterns in the car market. In our
paper the mix arises solely out of market segmentation in the presence of adverse selection.
Guha and Waldman show that a mix of selling and leasing can arise in a world where in
addition to adverse selection there is moral hazard on maintenance and some consumers have
lower costs of maintenance. We will highlight the dierences with their analysis at several
points in the paper.
Laont and Tirole (1996) study the problem of inducing the right amount of pollution and
investment in pollution abatement. Despite the dierence in the topic, their model has some
similarity with the one that we study. They look at a two period problem where the second
period private information is correlated with the rst period private information and there
is an investment in the rst period. They show that the optimal mechanism involves an oer
of two menus of option contracts depending on whether the agent decides to invest. In their
model the allocation of pollution is not ex post ecient, while in our model the allocation in
the optimal incentive compatible mechanism is ex post ecient. The main dierence between
the models is the existence of a second hand market, that is a crucial aspect of our model.
This dierence turns out to be important.

6

3 The Model
We assume that there is an innite horizon. Time is discrete, and there is a unit mass of
consumers who live forever (no new consumers are born). Preferences resemble those in
Mussa and Rosen (1978). In any given period each consumer demands at most one unit of
the good, a consumer of type  consuming a sequence of units with qualities (q0 ; q1 ; : : :) at
t
prices (p0 ; p1 ; : : :) obtains utility u(; q; p) = 1
t=0  (qt , pt )t where t is either zero or one
depending on whether he consumes in period t or not. We assume that consumers are heterogeneous and we represent the distribution of consumer tastes by the cumulative distribution
function F : [; ] ! [0; 1]. With the exception of the example in section 7 and some of the
discussion in section 6, we assume that F () is strictly increasing and continuous. Consumer
heterogeneity is essential for the used markets to have an allocative role (no trade would be
possible if consumers were homogeneous). The value of  is assumed to be unobservable so
that trading is anonymous.
Goods last two periods. We denote by v the quality of a new good and by w the quality of
a used one. Both v and w are assumed to be random variables. However, since the realization
of v will be irrelevant, we shall simply denote by v the expectation of the quality of the new
product. Let G() be the distribution of w with support [wl ; wh ]. We assume that G is strictly
increasing and wh  v (the good depreciates).

Denition 1 We denote by z the type such that 1 , F (z )  z.
Thus, z is the type such that there is a mass z of consumers with higher valuation; for
example, 1=2 is the median type.
Goods can be sold or leased. Only new goods are leased and the length of a lease is one
period. There are potentially many leasing contracts. Each contract i is characterized by the
rental price PiL and the price of keeping the good at the end of the lease (or option price) Pik .
The price at which a new good is sold is denoted by P n . A special case of a leasing contract
is in fact the selling contract. If the price of the option of keeping is set at zero (P k = 0),
the rental price P L is in fact a selling price. All cars that are returned at the end of the lease
are then sold on the used market.8 Because of the presence of asymmetric information, the
8

Waldman (1997) and Hendel and Lizzeri (1997a) show that a monopoly manufacturer may have an incen-

7

used cars that are returned by consumers who chose dierent contracts are dierent goods.
The price of a used good that was leased under contract i is denoted by Piu . We assume that
the type of contract is observable by used good buyers, i.e. the latter know whether they are
buying a good that was leased under contract i or contract j .
A customer who consumes a new good at date t knows the realization of w at date t + 1
for that unit of the good. A buyer who decides to buy a used good does not know the value
of w for that good. We assume that there is an innite number of consumers of each type so
the realized distribution of qualities w is G().9
We shall denote by y the output of new goods. We shall only analyze steady state
equilibria. The mass of consumers who get to consume either a new or a used product at
any date is at most 2y. We will rst x the menu of leasing contracts and/or y to determine
equilibrium behavior in the market. We then discuss the incentives for a manufacturer and
a social planner to optimally choose output and the structure of contracts.

Remarks

We analyze the case of many possible leasing contracts for two reasons. First, we want
to capture the dierences observed in the car market between the behavior of lessees and
the behavior of buyers. In the buying/leasing case we believe it is realistic to assume that
used car consumers can distinguish between the pre-owned and o-lease units. As discussed
in the introduction the automotive press does highlight the dierences between o-lease cars
and pre-owned cars. Moreover, used car buyers can easily distinguish between the two types
of used cars by checking the title of the car. The second reason to be interested in the
case of many contracts is to explore the welfare eects of adverse selection and the role of
leasing contracts in ameliorating the distortions. We want to nd out what allocations can
be implemented through leasing contracts thereby discovering their limitations. For much of
the analysis the reader can, with no loss, think of the case where there are only two contracts:
leasing and selling. The analysis of the examples only focuses on these contracts.
To focus on the eects of asymmetric information we ignore the time consistency problem
faced by manufacturers of durable goods. This would introduce an additional dimension
tive to scrap some of the used units. We ignore this incentive to focus on the issues at hand.
9
This is like a joint distribution of  and another variable distributed independently of ; that plays no role
in the model, it just captures that there is a density of each specic type :

8

in the dierences between selling and leasing which would obscure the force that we want
to highlight. Thus, when we discuss manufacturers' incentives we shall assume that they
have the ability to commit. When goods depreciate, the commitment outcome can be an
equilibrium of the game where a monopolist cannot commit.10
We neglect the issue of moral hazard on the part of consumers. This is a potentially
important phenomenon since the level of maintenance that is chosen by new car consumers
may depend on the terms of the leasing contract. A lessee who is facing a high option price and
therefore anticipates not exercising the option to buy at the end of the lease might take less
good care of the car. We justify this neglect on three grounds. First, most cars are still under
warranty by the time the lease expires. This reduces the disincentive to maintain. Second,
as mentioned in the introduction, the common perception is that cars coming o leases are
better quality cars. This is consistent with our analysis and suggests that, if there is a moral
hazard problem on the part of consumers, this problem is of secondary importance relative
to the forces that we discuss.11 The third reason we neglect moral hazard is that interesting
phenomena arise even in a world with pure adverse selection; including maintenance decisions
by the consumer would add unnecessary complexity to our analysis.12
Results in sections 4 and 5 describe equilibrium allocations in the market for used goods
given some prices in the new good market. The characterization does not rely on any assumption on the market structure of the producers of the good. We do not deal with optimal
behavior of the manufacturer until section 7 where we present a simple monopolist example
and section 8 where we describe some features of the optimal menu of contracts under both
monopoly and competition.
See Bond and Samuelson (1987).
Some readers may have an objection in the opposite direction; leasing could be a way to overcome the
moral hazard problem. Manufacturers are in a better position to verify the quality of the car at the end of
a lease. However, if this were true, it is not clear why manufacturer could not do this for sold cars that are
traded in at dealers. In fact, some manufacturers do certify some pre-owned cars.
12
Guha and Waldman (1997) contains a discussion of the issue of moral hazard under leasing.
10
11

9

4 An Irrelevance Result
Before discussing adverse selection, we consider the case where there is no asymmetric information. This benchmark will allow us to better evaluate the impact of adverse selection
on the optimal structure of leasing contracts. We show that in the absence of asymmetric
information leasing contracts have no eects, the ability to manipulate the keeping price has
neither an eect on prots nor on the equilibrium allocation.
Since the quality of the used cars is observable an allocation in the used market must
specify which type consumes which quality. We must therefore dene a function # : [wl ; wh ] !
[; ] that species that a consumer of type #(w) consumes a used good of quality w. Denote
prices in the used market by a function P u : [wl ; wh ] ! <+ that describes the price of every
quality of used good. Used markets must clear for every quality w.
Let us briey describe the equilibrium under a selling contract.13 In equilibrium, types in
[; 2y ] do not buy cars at all, types in [2y ; y ] buy used cars, with lower types consuming
lower qualities, and types in [y ; ] buy new cars at every date. Thus there is a hundred
percent volume of trade in the used market (all used units change hands); a new good buyer
at date t will be a new good buyer at all dates and therefore never holds on to a used good.
In order to see why this is the case, consider a consumer who bought a new car at time t
and is an owner of a used car when used markets open at date t + 1. Keeping the used car
at date t + 1 (thus postponing the purchase of a new car) is the same as buying a used car
at time t (keeping the used car has the same opportunity cost as buying one). Since the
consumer preferred buying a new car at date t, he must prefer to sell the used car at date
t +1 in order to buy a new car again. To obtain market clearing in the used market for every
quality given that the supply of used cars is y and the distribution of used car qualities is G,
the function #() must be increasing (higher types consume higher quality) and must satisfy
F (#(w)) , F (2y ) = yG(w) 8w 2 [wl , wh] (market clearing for every quality w).
Equilibrium prices under selling can be shown to be the following:

P u (w) =
13

Z

w

wl

#(s)ds + 2y wl

For details see Hendel and Lizzeri (1997b) Section 3.2.

10

(1)

Pn

=

Z wh
u
y (v , wh ) + P (wh) + 
P u(w)dG(w)
wl

(2)

The expression for P u (w) is obtained through incentive conditions for used car consumers.
The expression for P n can be interpreted by observing that

P n , P u(wh ) = y (v , wh ) + E (P u (w))
Thus, the extra cost of buying a new car relative to the best available substitute (the highest
quality used car) is equal to the extra quality of the new car (v , wh ), evaluated by the
marginal consumer of the new car y , plus the expected discounted resale value of the used
car E (P u (w)).
Denote now by P^ L the implied rental price of a new car in a selling-only regime. By
equation 2 P^ L must satisfy:
P^ L = y (v , wh) + P u (wh )
(3)
Under a leasing contract the manufacturer species a rental price P L , and a function
P k : [wl ; wh ] ! <+ which determines the future price of keeping a car of quality w. Notice
rst that if the manufacturer sets P k (w) = P u (w) then the equilibrium is the same as under
selling and the equilibrium P L is P^ L . The question we want to ask now is the following:
can the manufacturer prot from manipulating P k (w)? The answer is given in the following
proposition. Not only does the manufacturer not gain, but nothing is aected by manipulating
P k (), except that any gaps between P k (w) and P u (w) get capitalized into P L:

Proposition 1 (i) Leasing has no eect on prots and on the equilibrium allocation.
(ii) The equilibrium P u () satises equation 1 regardless of P k (). P L satises the follow-

ing equation.

P L = P^ L + 

Z

wh

wl

maxfP u(w) , P k (w); 0gdG(w)

(4)

Where P^ L is given in equation 3 and P u (w) is given in equation 1
Proof: We shall show that for any P k () the equilibrium allocation under selling is still an
equilibrium under leasing, that P L satises 4 and that prots to a manufacturer are the same.
We will omit the proof that the equilibrium is unique.

11

Equation 4 says that the rental price of the new good has to be adjusted upward from P^ L
to capitalize all the gains that lessees can make in the used market by keeping the car and
immediately selling in the used market when P k < P u . Thus, keeping decisions are unaected
by changing P k (): when P k (w) < P u (w) the true cost of keeping is P u (w) and the eective
rental price of consuming a used cars is unchanged; when P k (w) > P u (w) consumers who
did not plan to keep at P u also do not keep at P k , hence nobody pays a P k (w) > P u (w). It
is also clear that, given that the supply of used cars is unchanged, the equilibrium P u () is
unchanged and still satises equation 1. Thus, the equilibrium allocation is unchanged.
To obtain prots, from the previous analysis we get that in the used market the lessor
sells cars of quality w at P u (w) when P u (w) < P k (w) and at P k (w) when P u (w) > P k (w).
We thus obtain that prots for a lessor who produces y units and leases these units are:

 = 1 ,y  (P L + (

Z

fw:P u(w)P k (w)g

P u(w)dG(w) +

Z

fw:P u(w)>P k (w)g

P k (w)dG(w)))

Substituting into this expression P L from equation 4 we obtain that prots are not aected
by the structure of the leasing contract.
The proposition shows that the ability of the manufacturer to manipulate the option
price has no role in a world with symmetric information. The intuition for this is that under
observable quality consumers will nd a way to exploit all the gains from trade and they will
undo through trading any change in P k .
An important feature of the equilibrium allocation in the case of no asymmetric information is that it is rst best ecient, all types of consumers are matched with the right quality
of the good. Moreover, it is easy to see that a competitive industry that produces the good
at a marginal cost of c would produce the optimal quantity of the good. This is important
in reference to our welfare results in section 6.
We could allow for a whole menu of functions Pik (). However, since quality is observable,
we can focus without loss of generality on a single function. This is because, in a world with
observable quality, all consumers of new cars will consume new every period. Since they all
consume the same bundle they will all choose the cheapest way to consume it.

12

5 Adverse Selection
5.1 Consumer Behavior
We now turn to an analysis of the eects of leasing under adverse selection.
Let wiu denote consumers' beliefs about the average quality of used cars that were leased
under contract i and were returned at the end of the lease. Clearly, rational consumers will
always believe that wiu  E (w) , i.e. they will never believe that lessees keep the bad quality
cars and return the good quality cars; at best they return all cars regardless of quality, in
which case, wiu = E (w). Because of adverse selection, unless Pik is very high, typically we
will have that wiu < E (w). The average supplied quality, which we shall denote by wiA , is
determined by the keeping behavior of the lessees who chose contract i. Of course, equilibrium
requires wiu = wiA 8i, i.e. in equilibrium expectations are correct. The appendix discusses
the determination of wiA .
Consumers take as given the following variables: fwiu ; PiL ; Pik ; Piu gi2I .
Dene Viu () to be the discounted utility of a consumer of type  who buys a used car
from leasing contract i every period.14 Then,
u
u
Viu () = w1i ,,Pi

(5)

The determination of the utility of consumers who contemplate leasing is more complex
since such consumers must decide what to do when the lease period is over. They can exercise
the option of keeping the used car by paying Pik or return the car at no cost and lease another
new car. These decisions clearly depend on the private information of the consumer, namely
the quality of the car w and the intensity of valuation for quality . It is easy to show that
optimal behavior is characterized by a cut-o rule; if the quality of the car is lower than
some level xi (), a consumer of type  will return the car, if the car is of higher quality the
consumer will exercise the option.
Assume a consumer of type  chooses contract i and behaves optimally conditional on this
choice. We denote by ViL () the discounted utility for a consumer who has no car, chooses to

In what follows we shall suppress P L ; P u ; P k and wu as arguments of the value functions V ( ) and cut-o
functions x( ).
14





13

lease a new car, decides for contract i and then behaves optimally conditional on this choice.

ViL () = v , PiL + [G(xi ())ViL () + (1 , G(xi()))(E (wjw  xi()) , Pik + ViL())]
This expression has a simple interpretation. The rst term (v , PiL ) is the ow of utility
enjoyed during the lease period. In the next period there are two possible events: either (1)
the quality of the car turns out to be below the cut-o (with probability G(xi ())) and the
consumer starts a new lease, in which event he gets utility ViL (), or (2) the quality is higher
than the cut-o (with probability 1 , G(xi ())), in which event he enjoys a ow of utility of
E (wjw  xi()) , Pik , and in the next period he starts a new lease which will then yield a
utility of ViL ().
To determine the value of xi (), observe that the consumer must be indierent between
(1) keeping the used good of quality xi () at a cost of P k , and (2) initiating a new lease
right away. Option (1) yields a utility of xi() , Pik + ViL (). Option (2) yields a utility of
ViL (). Therefore we have:
xi () , Pik = (1 , )ViL ()
(6)

Proposition 2 Given the choice of contract i, optimal behavior for consumers who lease is
characterized by a continuous increasing function xi : [l ; h ] ! [wl ; wh ] such that a consumer
of type  keeps all used cars of quality above xi () and returns all those with quality below
xi (), where xi () is given by equation 6.
Moreover,

xi()))(E (wjw  xi()) , Pi ) , Pi
ViL () = v + (1 ,1 ,G(G
(x ()) , 2 (1 , G(x ()))

(7)

)))E (wjw  x())] + G(x())P u , P n
V n () = [(v + (1 , G1 (,x(G
(x()) , 2 (1 , G(x()))

(8)

k

i

L

i

We omit the proof of this proposition since it can be obtained by a simple modication
of the arguments in Hendel and Lizzeri (1997b), Proposition 3.
Because the cut-o function is increasing higher types are less likely to exercise the option
of keeping.
If cars are sold instead of leased, equation 7 must be modied to take into account the
fact that when the consumer buys the car, he does not pay anything if he decides to keep
and he gets P u if he decides to sell. This yields:

14

We now want to determine how optimal behavior partitions the set of consumers as
either (1) non-buyers, (2) buyers of used cars of type i, or (3) lessees of contract i. The
next proposition describes this classication. All of the statements in the proposition are
consequences of the following standard self selection result.

Lemma 3 Suppose that consumers ; 0 choose qualities q and q0 with q > q0. Then  > 0.
Proof: Denote the price of consuming quality q by P and the price of consuming quality
q0 by P 0. Then, P > P 0 since otherwise both types would choose quality q. Because type 
chooses quality q, q , P  q0 , P 0 . Analogously, 0q0 , P 0  0q , P . Combining the two
inequalities we obtain 0 (q , q0 )  P , P 0  (q , q0 ). Thus, since P , P 0 > 0,  > 0 .

>From now on we shall restrict attention to the case where Pik  Piu . This is without
loss of generality since, whenever Piu > Pik , all lessees will exercise the option regardless of
the realization of quality because there is an arbitrage opportunity. Their keeping behavior
xi () would thus be determined by Piu . Denote by ui the set of types who consume used
cars of type i, ni the set of types who choose to lease a new car according to contract i.

Proposition 4 (i) Suppose that wiu > wju . Then, if  2 ui and 0 2 uj,  > 0.
(ii) Suppose that Pik > Pjk . Then, if  2 ni and 0 2 nj ,  > 0.
(iii) If  2 ni and 0 2 uj,  > 0 .
Proof: See Appendix.

Remarks: Proposition 4 says that the set of types is partitioned into two classes of non

overlapping intervals. In the rst class are consumers with relatively low valuations. These
consumers buy used cars, with the lowest types buying used cars of low expected quality, and
higher types buying used cars of higher expected quality. In the second class are consumers
with relatively high valuation. These consumers are lessees, those with higher valuations
choose contracts with higher option prices.
Because the environment facing a consumer is stationary, if a particular type of behavior
is optimal for a consumer at date t it will be optimal at all future dates where the consumer
faces the same choice. Thus, if contract i is best for a consumer of type  at date t it will be
optimal at all future dates.
15

5.2 Equilibrium
Equilibrium requires that supply equals demand in the used market and in the new market,
and that expected quality wiu equals the average traded quality wiA for each type of car. As
we explained in the introduction we still take as given the supply in the new market without
specifying the market structure, we deal with optimal supplier's behavior later in the paper.
The appendix states precisely how aggregate demand, supply and average traded quality are
determined from individual behavior.15 It is easy to adapt the proof in Theorem 7 of Hendel
and Lizzeri (1997b) to show that an equilibrium exists.
For the case in which all units are sold, Hendel and Lizzeri (1997b, Section 4.3) showed
that the volume of trade in the used market is always strictly between zero and one hundred
percent. When P k > P u , keeping a used car becomes less appealing, implying that the
volume of trade will always be positive in this case as well. It is clear though that P k can be
set so high as to discourage keeping altogether. Thus, under leasing we may have that the
volume of trade is 100%. We will show later that this is not optimal for a manufacturer. We
now discuss some other features of equilibrium.

Proposition 5 Suppose that Pik > Pjk . Then,

(i) If any consumer chooses contract i, PiL < PjL .
(ii) wiA > wjA , and G(xi ()) > G(xj (0 )) > 0 8 2 ni ; 0 2 nj ; average quality and
volume of trade are higher for the contract with the higher option price.
(iii) Contract i generates a higher present value of revenue per unit.
Proof: Part (i) is immediate; if PjL  PiL no consumer would choose contract i.
Part (ii) is a consequence of Proposition 2 and Proposition 4. We want to show that, if
 buys contract i and 0 buys contract j , xi() > xj (0 ). By Proposition 4,  > 0 . Because
 chose contract i, ViL()  VjL(). Thus, from equation 6, xi() > xj (). By proposition 2,
xj () > xj (0). Thus, xi () > xj (0 ).
The determination of the equilibrium quantities is complicated by the need to account for the relative
frequency with which dierent types of lessees keep their cars: as dierent types have dierent xi ()s. For
example, if a consumer of type  always kept the car he would lease (and consume new) only half as often as
a consumer of type 0 who always returned his used car.
15

16

To prove that G(xj (0 )) > 0 80 2 nj , observe that the lowest xj (0 ) can be is in the case
where Pjk = 0. But then contract j is a selling contract and this is an immediate consequence
of the positive volume of trade result in Hendel and Lizzeri (1997). This concludes the proof
of (ii).
To prove part (iii), observe that the average discounted quality consumed by a consumer
who chooses contract i is strictly higher than the average quality consumed by a consumer
who chooses contract j . If the present value of the expenditure by the consumer in contract
i was not also higher, nobody would choose contract j . Moreover, Piu > Pju since the quality
of used goods in contract i is higher by part (ii). Thus, the present value of revenue per unit
from contract i is higher.

5.2.1 Equilibrium Implications
A special case of Proposition 5 is one where the only two options are a single selling contract and a single leasing contract. Thus, the results of Proposition 5 are consistent with
the observed phenomena in the used car market discussed earlier. As we discussed in the
introduction, there is a common perception in the automotive press and among consumers
that the average quality of o-lease used cars is higher than the average quality of used cars
that are sold by consumers who had bought their car. Moreover the average age of o-lease
used cars is much smaller than the average age of non leased used cars that are sold in the
used market for the rst time. Thus, turnover is higher for leased cars. These phenomena
are consistent with equilibrium behavior in our model by proposition 5 part (ii), for P k >
P u ; the latter is the cost of keeping under a selling contract, which is perceived as lower than
P k .16 In section 8.2 we solve for the optimal contract oered by a monopolist; we will see it
indeed involves a much higher P k than P u .
Observe that the menu of contracts serves to segment the market since dierent contracts
appeal to dierent types. For the simple case where there are only two contracts, a leasing
and a selling contract, part (i) says that the rental rate P L in the leasing contract is lower
than the implicit rental rate in a selling contract. It may be puzzling that anybody would
choose the selling contract if the rental rate is lower in the leasing contract. The reason some
16

Guha an Waldman (1996) report that P k is on average 18% higher than P u .

17

types choose to buy is that in the selling contract the price of the option of keeping is lower.
In a world with adverse selection, consumers value this option because they plan to keep the
high realizations of quality of the used car. One can then ask the opposite question: if the
option is so valuable, why does anybody choose the leasing contract with the high option
price? The two questions together can be rephrased to ask why neither contract dominates
the other from the point of view of consumers. The reason is that dierent types of consumers
value the option dierently. High valuation consumers do not value the option very much
since they are not likely to keep the car, and therefore choose the leasing contract. Low
valuation consumers, on the other hand, value the option more because they are more likely
to keep the car. We shall come back in sections 7 and 8.2 to the issue of how the pricing of
the keeping option inuences equilibrium behavior and the prots of a manufacturer.

6 Welfare
We shall now discuss the welfare consequences of introducing leasing contracts. In this section
we continue to ignore manufacturers' incentives to study what allocations can be achieved
through leasing contracts and the limits of these contracts. It turns out that leasing contracts
are powerful instruments when only two types of consumers are present. In the more general
case, however, they do not achieve eciency as shown by the following proposition.

Proposition 6 (i) If there are two types of consumers then the ex post ecient allocation

can be obtained through a single leasing contract.
(ii) If there is more than one type of consumer buying used cars then the ex-post ecient
allocation cannot be achieved through leasing contracts.
Proof: Part (i) is due to the fact that when there are only two types of consumers ex
post eciency is solely an issue of volume of trade. Let L and H be the two types, with
L < H . Given y, the ex post ecient allocation requires that the high types consume the
highest possible quality. Let  be the measure of the set of high types. If   y, the ex post
ecient allocation involves high types never keeping. This can be achieved by setting a very
high P k . If  > y , let x be the cut-o rule such that, if it is adopted by all high types, all

18

high types consume new and no low type consumes new.17 It is easy to see that it is possible
to nd a P k that generates such keeping behavior by the high types as an optimal response.
Thus, for any y it is possible to construct contracts that generate ex post ecient allocations.
It is then also possible to choose the ecient y.
To prove part (ii), denote by 1 and 2 two types of consumers such that 1 < 2 and
both are used car consumers. Let w1 ; w2 denote the qualities consumed by the two types.
If these qualities are the result of equilibrium with leasing contracts, we have that w1 =
E (wjcontract 1), w2 = E (wjcontract 2) for some contracts 1,2 (possibly identical). The form
these expected qualities take is E (wjcontract i) = E (wjw  xi ) for some xi . Thus, there
is an overlap in the support of the qualities consumed by the dierent types of consumers.
This means that there is always a positive probability that low types of consumers end up
consuming realizations of quality that are higher than the realizations of quality consumed
by a consumer of type 2. This is a violation of ex post eciency.
Guha and Waldman (1997) suggest that leasing can lead to rst best allocations. Throughout their analysis of the pure adverse selection case they assume that there are only two types
of consumers.18 Part (i) of proposition 6 restates their result and generalizes it to any distribution of quality of used cars.19 Guha and Waldman also show that a competitive industry
would provide the optimal leasing contract.
Part (ii) of Proposition 6 shows that the assumption of two types is crucial in their
analysis; if there is more than one type consumer who buys used cars it is impossible to
achieve ex post ecient allocations solely through leasing contracts. Leasing contracts make
it possible to manipulate the volume of trade but it is not possible to solve the allocative
distortion in the used market. Proposition 6 says that leasing contracts cannot achieve the
ex post ecient allocation except in a very special case. This is because the leasing contracts
cannot completely resolve the mismatching of qualities and types of consumers in the used
market.
See section 7 for an example that shows how this works.
In their discussion of moral hazard they also discuss the case of an additional dimension of heterogeneity.
Consumers can also dier by how costly it is for them to maintain the car.
19
They assume that there are at most three types of used cars.
17

18

19

Another important question is whether leasing contracts can achieve eciency subject
to incentive constraints. The following result shows that the answer to this question is
negative. We show that it is possible to achieve the rst best allocation even with an incentive
compatible, individually rational and balanced budget mechanism. This implies that leasing
contracts are incomplete tools.

Proposition 7 There exists an incentive compatible budget balanced mechanism that imple-

ments the rst best allocation.

Proof: The rst best allocation is described in proposition 1. The social planner can implement this through the following mechanism. Use a leasing contract with a very high P k
so that nobody keeps and P L = P^ L , from equation 3. When a consumer returns the car
he must report the quality of the car. Since his utility does not depend on his report it is
(weakly) incentive compatible for him to tell the truth. The allocation in the used market
can be decentralized with the function P u (w) described in equation 1.
This replicates the rst best allocation. Budget balance can easily be shown to hold for
the optimal choice of output given a marginal cost c. This is because the revenues that are
received by the social planner in the proposed mechanism are the same as the revenues in
the world with observable quality.

Remarks:

First note that this result is in stark contrast with what happens in static
adverse selection models. The contrast is due to the fact that in our model, at the time
the new car consumer enters into the contract, he does not yet know the quality of the car.
Thus, his payment does not depend on this information. Since the ex post ecient allocation
requires him to consume new goods every period, he should never keep the used good. Thus,
extracting information about quality is not costly for the social planner.
Second, observe that there is a major dierence between a leasing contract and the mechanism described in proposition 7. In a leasing contract there is no information communicated
from the lessee to the used car consumers beyond that which is inferred from the equilibrium
behavior. By proposition 6 the information transmitted via leasing contracts is much too
coarse to lead to ecient allocations.
20

The nal result on welfare highlights the fact that 100% trade in the used market (i.e., if
no consumer keeps used cars) is only optimal if quality can be allocated in the right way
in the used market.

Proposition 8 If the social planner is constrained to using menus of leasing contracts, the

allocation that maximizes consumer surplus does not involve full trade in the second hand
market.

Proof: Suppose that the we start from an allocation with 100% trade. This implies that
all types in [2y ; y ] consume used goods every date and all types in [y ; h] consume new
goods every date. Take the set of consumers with types between y and y + . Instead of
forcing them to trade, allow them to keep the high realizations of quality of the used (this can
be implemented with a leasing contract with a slightly lower option price than the one that
generates no keeping). The resulting equilibrium allocation will involve some consumers with
slightly lower valuation consuming new cars (types in [y , ; y )). We thus have a transfer
of quality from types in [y ; y + ) to types in [y , ; y ). This is bad from the welfare
perspective. However, the quality of the used good falls because types in [y , ; y + ) keep
some of the realizations of quality of the used good. Thus, there is also a transfer in quality
from types in [2y ; y ,  ) to types in [y , ; y ). This transfer is good for welfare. In other
words, types in [y , ; y ) gain at the expense of types in [y ; y + ) and [2y ; y ,  ). The
welfare loss is negligible since types in [y , ; y ) and types in [y ; y + ) are very close. The
welfare gain however is substantial because types in [y , ; y ) and those in [2y ; y ,  ) are
not close on average. Thus this type of deviation from full trade is benecial.

The logic of this result is the following. As we saw in proposition 6, it is not possible to
eciently match the right used cars with the right types of consumers by only using leasing
contracts. In this world, allowing some lessees to keep the high draws of the used good has
good welfare consequences because it permits better matching of quality to types: it reduces
the quality consumed by the lowest valuation consumers increasing the quality consumed by
consumers with intermediate valuation.

21

7 Leasing and Market Power: Option Pricing and Optimal
Output.
We shall now discuss in detail a simple example where the optimal solution for a monopoly
manufacturer is particularly easy to characterize. We discuss results and intuition in this
section, while derivations are relegated to the Appendix. The point of the example is to show
that the option of keeping the used good is mispriced in a selling contract. We explain the
source of this mispricing and show how the optimal pricing of this option in a leasing contract
allows the manufacturer to protably expand output.
Consider two types of consumers, low valuation with L = 1=3 and high valuation with
H = 1. There is a mass of 1/2 of each type of consumer. We also assume that  = :8, v = 2,
and that G(), the distribution of quality of used goods, is uniform on [1 , s; 1 + s] with
s 2 [0; 1]. The parameter s represents the extent of asymmetric information; a low (high) s
means that there is little (a lot of) uncertainty about the quality of a used car. The role of
the assumption s  1 is to guarantee that wh  v.

7.1 Selling vs. Leasing
We shall rst x output at y = 1=3, solve for the equilibrium under selling, and then solve
for the optimal leasing contract. Fixing a particular y is a good starting point because the
features of the solution will be very similar for all choices of y but the discussion should be
easier to follow for a particular numerical value of y. We will later obtain optimal output
under both selling and leasing for the case of zero marginal cost.20
Selling : Since y = 1=3, there are not enough new cars for the high types to consume
new cars every period. Thus, in equilibrium some high types must consume some used cars.
The equilibrium has the following features: (1) High types buy new cars and none of the
low types buy new cars. (2) The keeping behavior of high types is x(H ) = 1, i.e. the high
types keep the upper half of the realizations of quality of the used cars. The way we nd the
equilibrium (for details see Appendix B) is to solve the P u that clears the used market at
An output of 1/3 would be optimal for some weakly convex cost function. However, output under leasing
would be dierent than under selling.
20

22

the wA implied by x(H ) = 1; then solve the P n that makes x(H ) = 1 optimal, and nally
show that the new market clears as well (since x(H ) = 1; high types keep half of their cars,
hence the new market clears, as 13 + 13  21 = 12 , the latter is the mass of high types): Prots for
the manufacturer in this case are: S = P n y = :53333 , s=30.
Leasing : In Appendix B we show that the manufacturer benets from setting P k > P u
despite the fact that under the optimal leasing contract the equilibrium allocation is the same
as under selling. The optimal contract here involves leasing only; because there are only two
types, more complicated menus serve no purpose.
We saw that under selling market clearing requires that x(H ) = 1, implying that P n must
be such that this keeping behavior is optimal for the high types. The important consequence
of this is that under selling, V n (H ) > V u (H ) (see V n and V u in Appendix B). This is in
stark contrast with what happens when there is symmetric information in the used market.
In the case of symmetric information the new car buyers must be indierent between the
new good and the best alternative, the highest quality used good. Under adverse selection,
the new car buyers must be indierent between buying a new car and keeping a used car of
quality x(H ). This indierence is determined by the cost of keeping a used car of quality
x(H ). Under selling, this cost is P u (the amount that would be received in the used market
by selling the used car), but P u must equal L wA to clear the used market. This price is too
low because it evaluates a lower quality good (wA < x(H )) by a lower valuation consumer
(L < H ). This means that the option of keeping the used car is not fully priced for the
high types. Thus, in a world with adverse selection, the competition for the new good is a
used good that is priced too low. In contrast, in a world without information asymmetries
the quality of the used good is observed in the market and therefore adequately priced.
By raising the option price above the market clearing price in the used market (P k > P u )
the manufacturer can better price the keeping option and extract more rents from the high
valuation consumers.
The equilibrium is solved in a similar way to the one described for selling, the only
dierence is that the manufacturer has two instruments to make x(H ) = 1; they are P k and
P L : Actually, there are many pairs of (P L ; P k ) that generate x(H ) = 1 as optimal keeping
behavior. The following expression describes the market clearing P L that corresponds to any

23

given P k :

L(P k ) = 1 + :2s + P k

(9)

Expression 9 is remarkable; as the manufacturer increases P k , one would expect that the
rental price of the new good would have to fall to compensate for the fact that the option
becomes less attractive as P k increases. However, this reasoning does not take into account
the fact that markets must clear. If a fall in P L were to coincide with an increase in P k ,
keeping a used car of any given quality would become less attractive relative to starting a new
lease. We would then have excess demand for new cars.21 P k will be set to equalize V L (H )
and V u (H ); yielding P k = 1=3 + s=3 and P L = 4=3 + :5333s. Prots for the manufacturer
under this optimal leasing contract are L = :5333 + :2s. By comparing with prots under
selling we see that L , S = s=6, which is positive for any nondegenerate distribution of
quality of the used good.
In contrast with what we saw under selling, prots under the optimal leasing contract are
increasing in s. In both cases the increase in s lowers P u and increases the expected value of
the cars kept by the high types. In the case of selling, the reduction in the used price makes
keeping more appealing relative to buying, while in the case of leasing the cost of keeping is
P k , not P u ; leasing allows the manufacturer to control the pricing of the option, reducing
the competitive threat that the used good poses to the new good.
It is interesting to consider endogenizing s (the design of the car). One can see that the
manufacturer would have an incentive to design cars with high s under leasing and low s under
selling. Observe that social surplus is increasing in s since the average quality consumed by
high types increases and the average quality consumed by low types falls. This generates a
better t between types of consumers and qualities of cars. Thus, under leasing the design
of the car is going to be better from a social welfare perspective.

7.2 The Choice of Optimal Output
So far we have restricted attention to the case where y = 1=3: We now derive the optimal
output for dierent values of s under the assumption of zero marginal cost. In Appendix B
21

This phenomenon is not always present in a world with a continuum of types.

24

we show that the optimal output under leasing is y = :5 for all values of s while optimal
output under selling depends on s; for low values of s optimal output is y = :5, for high values
of s optimal output is y = :25. Thus, a monopolist who leases may produce more output
than one who sells.
Selling : In the appendix we show that for s  :2 optimal output is :5. For s > :2 optimal
output is :25. At s = :2 the manufacturer is indierent between the two values. Finally,
we compute S (y; s) = P n y: For s  :2 prots are increasing in y until .5. Thus y = :5 is
optimal for s  :2. S (:5; s) = :8 , :5s. Since S (:25; s) = :7, y = :25 is optimal for s > :2.
Let us rst discuss the intuition for the fact that low output is optimal for high values
of s whereas high output is optimal for low values of s. When y = :25, high types keep all
the draws of quality of the used good and no low type buys the used good. The expected
utility from keeping the used good for all realizations of quality is independent of s because
the average quality is 1 for all s. Since in this case the condition that sets P n is that the high
types must have zero utility, P n is independent of s. When y = :5, none of the high types
keep any of the draws of the used good. For this to be optimal, from equation 6, we must
have that
H x(H ) , P u = (1 , )V n(H )
(10)
Since market clearing requires that high types never keep, P u is constant in s (P u = L E (w)).
However, x(H ) = 1+s is increasing in s. Thus, the left hand side of equation 10 increases with
s; as s increases, the higher types must be indierent between buying a new car and keeping
a higher quality used car. Since the high type never keeps the used good, (1 , )V n (H ) =
H , P n + P u. Thus, for the right hand side of equation 10 to also increase with s, the
price of the new good must drop. The competition from high quality used cars explains why
s(1=2; s) declines in s, hence maximized at s = 0. To conclude, since P n is independent of
s for y = :25 but is declining in s for higher y's, then for low s a high output is optimal and
for high s a low output is optimal.
Observe that at y = :5 the option of keeping is not used in equilibrium by the high types
because they never keep. However, the presence of this option still aects equilibrium prices
and prots because market clearing prices must be such as to make the high types prefer not
to keep even the highest draws of the used good. We will see that this implies that leasing
25

has an eect even in a world where the option is not utilized.
Leasing : As in the case of y = 1=3, by choosing P k the manufacturer gets to price the
option of keeping high quality draws of the used good. This allows the manufacturer to
extract more from the high types and makes keeping less appealing, hence less of a threat
to the sale of new units. As shown in Appendix B, for s > 0; y > :25, in the equilibrium
under selling, V n (H ) > V u (H ); high types strictly prefer new cars to used cars. This means
that by increasing P k the manufacturer can reduce V n (H ) without changing the equilibrium
allocation, thereby extracting more surplus from the high types. This is because, by pricing
the option, the manufacturer eectively eliminates the problems associated with high s under
selling. That is, the manufacturer does not have to lower the price of the new good to avoid
excessive keeping by the high types. This implies that under leasing optimal output will be
y = 0:5 independent of s, hence higher than under selling. Prots are L (0:5; s; P k ) = 0:8;
which is independent of s. These are the maximum attainable prots and under selling were
only achieved at s = 0:
An interesting observation that may lead to empirical predictions is the fact that the
manufacturer benets more from leasing if s is high. Thus, we would expect manufacturers
with unreliable brands to lease more.
The presence of asymmetric information is crucial for all of the previous analysis. Indeed,
we showed in section 4, in a world with no information asymmetries, leasing has no eects
on the equilibrium allocation and on prots. This is because in such a world the value of
the option of keeping is priced in the used market according to the actual quality of the used
good.
Remark: In the example that we have discussed, the prots from leasing come from the
fact that under selling the utility that the high types receive from buying a new car is strictly
higher than the utility they would get from buying a used car. In a world with a continuum
of types there must always be a type who is indierent between buying used and buying
new. Does this mean that our example has nothing to say about a world with a continuum of
types? The answer is no. In this world there are additional eects which inuence the optimal
pricing of the option in a leasing contract. However, something similar to what we uncovered
in our two type example still exists. The type who is indierent (the marginal type) depends

26

on P k . To see this, observe rst that we could write down a continuous approximation of the
two type example and the optimal solution would be very similar. Thus, the fact that the
marginal type is indierent between new and used in the continuous case does not aect the
logic of our example. In a more general case the option of keeping may still be priced too low
to induce the desired keeping behavior by lessees. It will no longer be possible to increase
P k and leave unchanged the equilibrium allocation because some types would stop leasing
and become used car buyers. However, this eect would be benecial to the manufacturer
because the marginal lessee would be higher.

8 Optimal Menus of Contracts
8.1 Is Full Trade Optimal for Manufacturers?
It is puzzling that most leasing contracts include the option of keeping the car at all. After
all, the very expression adverse selection problem suggests that leasing contracts with
a prohibitive option price would benet manufacturers because they allow a solution of
this problem. A leasing contract with a very high option price would make it optimal for
consumers to never exercise their option of keeping and would get rid of adverse selection in
the used market. Any P k  y (wh , E (w)) + 2y E (w) would be such that no lessee would
ever want to exercise the option.
The following result shows that this reasoning is awed. It does not take into account
the benets of market segmentation. Here we go back to assuming that the distribution of
consumer tastes F () is continuous and increasing.

Proposition 9 It is never optimal for a monopolist to oer contracts that make all con-

sumers return their cars at the expiration of the lease.

Proof: Fix y. Let P k ; P u ; P L be the equilibrium values that generate 100% trade. The
lowest P k that works is P k = y (wh , E (w)) + 2y E (w). Note that P u = 2y E (w) since
the lowest type who buys used must be indierent between buying used and buying nothing.
The monopolist can change the contract in the following way. Keep the same y, oer one
contract with P1k = P k ; P1L = P L , and oer a second contract with P2k slightly smaller than

27

P1k . Observe that P2L is free to vary so that the market clears (recall that P1L is xed). At
the lower P2k some people who lease will want to keep the used good. Thus in the second

hand market we have two types of cars: ones coming out of contract 1 and ones coming out
of contract 2. The rst set of cars has quality E (w). The second set of cars has quality w2A
which is slightly smaller than E (w). By proposition 4 lowest types will buy the low quality
used car. The price will be P2u = 2y w2A . The price of the better used car is now determined
by making the lowest type who buys this car (let's call him 1 ) indierent between this car
1 and the lower quality one. Thus, 1 E (w) , P1u = 1 w2A , P2u = (1 , 2y )w2A . Thus
P1u = 1(E (w) , w2A) + 2y w2A . Therefore, P1u , P2u = (1 , 2y )(E (w) , w2A ) > 0. We thus
have the rst eect on prots: the used cars of type 1 are sold at a higher price under the
new menu of contracts.
By proposition 5 a second eect is also positive: P2L  P1L since P1k > P2k .
Thus, to prove that introducing the second leasing contract is protable, it is sucient
to prove that the used cars of type 2 are also sold at a higher average price than 2y E (w)
(i.e. P u ). The used units that are kept by the lessees are sold by the monopolist at a price of
P2k . This price can be made arbitrarily close to P k = y (wh , E (w)) + 2y E (w), which is the
lowest P k that generates no keeping. The units that are returned are sold at P2u = 2y wA .
Let wk be the average quality of kept units and let 2 be the lowest type who leases contract
2. All the units that are kept are not sold in the used market. Therefore E (w) is an average
of wA and wk : E (w) = wk + (1 , )wA . The average price at which the used units are sold
is E (P ) = P2k + (1 , )2y wA . As mentioned above, P2k can be made arbitrarily close to
P k = y (wh , E (w))+ 2y E (w). Thus, E (P ) is approximately 2 (wk , wA)+(1, )2y wA .
But the old P u can be rewritten as P u = 2y wk + (1 , )2y wA . Subtracting the RHS of
the second equation from the RHS of the rst, we get: [(2 , 2y )wk , (2 , 2y )wA ] > 0
since wk > E (w) and 2 > 2y . This concludes the proof.
The phenomenon presented in proposition 9 is due to the following force. As we saw in
proposition 8, social welfare is increased by not restricting the allocation to 100% trade. The
monopolist gets to capture some of this increase in surplus through a segmentation of the
market. As P k is reduced on one contract, some of the high quality used units are consumed
by high types. While this reduces the price in the used market, this reduction is more than
28

compensated for by the fact that the option price of these units is much larger.
The logic of the proof of proposition 9 does not depend on the assumption of a monopoly
manufacturer. In fact, a subset of the proof is sucient to show that 100% trade would never
be an equilibrium outcome in a world where there is perfect competition among rms that
oer leasing contracts. A rm that deviates and oers the contract described in the proof
would increase its prots. In fact, the proof would be easier because in such a case we would
not need to worry about the old contract remaining protable.
Guha and Waldman provide an example where the equilibrium outcome in a competitive
industry involves allowing the option of keeping. The dierence is that we show that for any
continuous increasing distribution equilibrium outcomes must always include this option.

8.2 Uniform Preferences: An Example with a Continuum of Valuations
In this section we provide an example where preferences are uniformly distributed. The
purpose of this section is to show the functioning of the model and the gains from leasing in an example with a continuous distribution of consumer valuations and to determine
quantitatively the eects from optimally mixing selling and leasing.
Assuming G is uniform is convenient since it leads to an analytic solution for x(). By
plugging the uniform distribution of quality in the expressions that dene V L and x() in
Proposition 2 we get:

x() = 1 + P + s + 2s , 1 4s ( + P k + (1 + )s , v + P L ) + (P k )2
k

q

The model could be solved for any distribution function, but the solution would involve
numerically approximating x() in a grid of values of . The enormous computational simplicity gained by using the uniform distribution is clear; it avoids having to nest one xed
point into another (nesting the one that generates x() into the one that determines the
equilibrium prices and quantities).
We computed the equilibrium by nding optimal behavior of each consumer for every set
of prices and expected used quality. Then we aggregated behavior to dene market demand
and supply just as in the appendix. Finally we searched for the prices and quality that
clear markets. We found equilibrium quantities by minimizing a norm of the excess demand
function. The search was done using Matlab; codes are available upon request.
29

We assume that the support of the distribution of  is [0; 1]; while the support of the
distribution of w is [0:5; 1:5]. We computed the equilibrium for v = 2,  = 0:8, s = :5 and
dierent output levels y and P k . We then checked which output and keeping price maximizes
prots for the lessor and compared to prots from selling. When selling the optimal output
is y = 0:306, which leads to P u = 0:31; P n = 1:35; V OT (volume of trade) = 56%; and
prots are 0.4105. When leasing the manufacturer produces almost the same output level,
y = 0:303; but sets a P k = 0:655 which leads to P u = 0:385; P L = 1:082; V OT = 97%; and
prots of :426:
Thus it pays for the manufacturer to set the option price above the market clearing price
in the used market but below the price that would generate full trade. It is not in the
manufacturer's interest to completely solve the adverse selection problem.
When the manufacturer leases and sells at the same time, the optimal solution is the
following. The optimal values for prices are: P L = 1:0828, P k = 0:6550, and P n = 1:4096.
At these prices the manufacturer leases 0.285 units with and sells 0.02 units. The volume of
trade of the leased units in the second hand market is almost 100% (97 %); lessees keep only
3% of the cars. In contrast, the volume of trade of the sold units is 31%, less than a third of
the volume of trade of the leased units. The average quality of the leased units is 30% higher
than the average quality of the sold units. The prices in the used market are P1u = 0:2569,
P2u = 0:3878. Thus, prices of o-lease cars are more than 50% higher.
These numbers are interesting because they suggest that quantitatively important dierences in the behavior of lessees and buyers can arise as the outcome of market segmentation
by manufacturers with market power and optimal behavior by consumers in a world with
adverse selection. This gives us some hope that the phenomena described in the introduction
can be attributed at least to some extent to the forces discussed in this paper.

9 Appendix
9.1 Aggregate Quantities
Let i1 = inf f 2 nig and i2 = supf 2 nig
The determination of wiA is complicated by the need to account for the relative frequency
30

with which dierent types of consumers are in the market: dierent consumers have dierent
trading behavior so they show up with dierent frequencies on the market. For example, if a
consumer of type   n always kept its used car he would show up on the new market only
half as often as a consumer of type 0 who always sold his used car.

Proposition 10 The quality traded in the used market is:
Z 2
A
wi = 1 i E (wjw  xi())dHi ()
i

Where

Hi() =

(11)

G(xi (s))
i1  [2,G(xi (s))] dF (s)
R i2 G(xi (s))
i1 [2,G(xi (s))] dF (s)

R

denotes the distribution of consumer types who trade in the used car market at any given
date.
Proof: The expression for wiA has a simple explanation: the average quality returned by a
type  consumer is E (wjw  xi ()). By integrating over all  2 ni we obtain the average
quality of cars of type i that are oered in the used market. The only thing that needs to
be explained is the expression for Hi () that is the distribution with respect to which we are
integrating.
Denote by prt () the proportion of consumers of type  who lease at date t. Observe
that (1 , G(xi ()))prt () will decide to keep the car as their quality realization is higher
than x(): We can solve for pr() by using the fact that, in a steady state, 1 , prt () =
(1 , G(xi()))prt,1 (), that is, the proportion of lessees of type  who do not lease on any
given date should equal the proportion of those getting high quality realizations out of the
lessees in the previous period. Thus we get:

pri() = (2 , G1(x ()) :
i

This explains the numerator of Hi(). The denominator is simply to normalize so that
Hi() is a probability distribution.

31

Proposition 11 Supply of used cars of type i is:
Z 2
u
yis = 1 i [2 ,G(Gx(ix(())))] dF ()
i
i
Demand for used cars of type i is:

yidu = (ui)

(12)
(13)

Demand in the market for new cars is:
Z


yidn = 1 i
i

2

1
[2 , G(xi())] dF ()

(14)

9.2 Proof of Proposition 4.
Proof: Part (i) is an immediate consequence of lemma 3.
Let us now prove part (ii). Assume that there are only two contracts, 1 and 2 with
P1k < P2k . Suppose by way of contradiction that  2 n2 , 0 2 n1 , and  < 0. Note rst
that ni = f : ViL () > VjL (); i 6= j; ViL () > Vhu () > 0; 8 i; hg. Because the V functions
are continuous, V2L () , V1L () is continuous. Therefore, it must be the case that for any ,
there exist ; such that 2 n2 , 2 n1 , and , < , with  > 0. By the continuity of
xi(), for and very close, x1 ( ) ' x1( ) and x2 ( ) ' x2( ). We can then conclude that,
because P2k > P1k , by equation 6, x2 ( ) > x1 ( ). Since contract 2 is the contract chosen by
type and contract 1 is the contract chosen by type , this implies that the actual cut-o
rule given the optimal choice of contract involves type keeping fewer realizations of the
used good. But the average discounted quality consumed by a lessee who uses a cut-o rule
x is
q(x) = v + (1 , G(x))2E (wjw  x)
(15)

1 , G(x) ,  (1 , G(x))

which is increasing in x. Since > , an application of lemma 3 to types and , and
qualities q(x1 ( )) and q(x2 ( )) yields the desired contradiction.
When the number of contracts is bigger than 2 there is always a pair of contracts such
that we can replicate the above exercise.
Part (iii) is again a consequence of lemma 3 plus the fact that the average discounted
quality consumed by a lessee is higher than the average discounted quality consumed by a
32

used car buyer for any i; j . To see this, observe that, because v  wh , q(x) > wiu =(1 , ),
where q(x) is dened in equation 15.

10 Appendix B
10.1 Fixed Output
Selling : We rst prove the optimality of consumer behavior and derive equilibrium prices.
Given that the high types are the only sellers of used cars, the average quality of used cars
is wA = E (wjw  x(H )) = (1 , s + x(H ))=2 = (2 , s)=2. The market clearing price
of used cars is P u = L wA = (2 , s)=6. At this price V u (L ) = 0; the low types are
indierent between buying used cars and buying nothing. The equilibrium P n must be such
that x(H ) = 1, the postulated keeping behavior for the high types. By combining equations
6 and 8, given that P u = (2 , s)=6, we obtain P n = 1:6 , :1s. Given P n and P u , we have
V n (H ) = 10=3 + 5s=6 > V u(H ) = 10=3 , 5s=3 > 0. This shows that it is optimal for the
high types to be new car buyers. Finally, V n (L ) < 0. This guarantees that low types do not
want to buy new cars and conrms that the postulated behavior is optimal.
It is easy to see that both markets clear. First, the new market clearing condition:
y(1 + (1 , G(x(H ))) = 12 (where 12 is the mass of high types) holds at x(H )) = 1: Whereas
at market clearing prices low types are indierent between buying and not buying a used car.
Thus, we can pick a mass of 1/6 of low types to be used car demanders to clear the used
market.
Leasing : In order to obtain the optimal leasing contract, let us conjecture that the allocation in the market is the same as under selling. This implies that x(H ) = 1. Because of
this, P u = (2 , s)=6, just as under selling. To obtain x(H ) = 1 as optimal behavior, from
equation 6 we must have 1 , P k = (1 , )V L (H ). Let L(P k ) be a function that species P L
such that the last equation is satised. By substituting from equation 7, we get equation 9:
Because x(H ) is constant by construction, and L(P k ) (equation 9) is increasing in P k ,
prots are increasing in P k . Thus the manufacturer will want to increase P k as high as
possible. However, P k cannot be increased indenitely since V L (H ) is decreasing in P k

33

whereas V u (H ) is independent of P k . Therefore, if P k is set too high, we would have
V L (H ) < V u (H ) and the high type would buy a used car. But then the market would not
clear. We can conclude that P k will be set to equalize V L (H ) and V u (H ).22 The equation
V L (H ) = V u(H ), yields P k = 1=3 + s=3 and, from equation 9, P L = 4=3 + :5333s. Since
V L (H ) = V u(H ), and V u (L ) = 0  V L(L ), it is optimal for both types of consumers to
behave as postulated. This proves that the proposed allocation is part of an equilibrium.

10.2 Optimal Output
Selling : We shall discuss how we obtain optimal output for every s  :7. The answer is the
same for s 2 [:7; 1] but the analysis is more complicated.23 We now show that for s  :2
optimal output is :5. For s > :2 optimal output is :25. At s = :2 the manufacturer is
indierent between the two values. It is clear that y < :25 cannot be optimal. If y  :25
high types buy new and keep all draws, and low types buy nothing at all. Thus, P n =
H (v + E (w)) = 2:8. Since P n is independent of y in this range, S (y; s) = yP n is increasing
in y up to y = :25, and S (0:25; s) = 0:7. It is also easy to show that y > :5 cannot be
optimal since in that case the marginal type who determines the price of new cars becomes
L.
For all y 2 [:25; :5], s  :7, the equilibrium allocation has the same features as the one
derived for the case of y = 1=3; all high types buy new cars and none of the low types buy
new cars. Thus the keeping behavior of high types, x(H ); must be such that the market for
new cars clears, i.e., output plus the mass of used units that are kept should equal 1/2, the
mass of high types. Thus y(1 + (1 , G(x(H ))) = 12 . Since G(x(H )) = x(H2)s,1+s we get
x(H ) = 1+3s, ys : Just as in the case of y = 1=3, given x(H ) we get wA = E (wjw  x(H )) =
(x(H ) + 1 , s)=2 = 1 + s , s=2y and P u = LwA = 1+s,3s=2y . The equilibrium P n must be
such as to make x(H ) satisfy equation 6. Plugging P u and x(H ) in equation 6 we get the
Both here and in the following analysis we do not discuss the case where P k is set so high that some high
types buy used goods. This is just to avoid making the discussion of the example excessively long. However,
it is easy to see that such a policy cannot be optimal for the monopolist.
23
When s is very high and y is close to .5, the equilibrium allocation must involve some low types buying
new. This creates some complications in the calculation of the equilibrium wA . However, in that range of s
the optimal solution is still y = :25.
22

34

P n that makes the high types indierent between keeping x(H ) and buying new again. It
is easy to verify that these variables dene an equilibrium because V n (H )  V u (H ), and
V n (L )  V u(L ) = 0.
Leasing : To clear the market we use the same x(H ) (x(H ) = 1 + 3s , ys ) as under
selling. This determines the same P u : P L is found by plugging x(H ) and P k (instead of P u )
in equation 6. As in the previous analysis, prots increase in P k , which is then set as high
as possible so that V L (H ) = V u (H ). This maximizes the surplus extraction from the high
types. After plugging the optimal P k we nd that L (y; s; P k ) = 1: 45y , 1: 35ys + : 675s:
Prots are maximized, in the relevant range, at y = 0:5: In contrast to the optimal output
under selling, even for a large s the manufacturer sells y = 0:5.

11 References
Akerlof, G. (1970). The Market for Lemons: Qualitative Uncertainty and the Market
Mechanism Quarterly Journal of Economics, August, 488-600.
Bond, E. and W. Samuelson (1987). The Coase Conjecture does not hold for Durable
Good Monopolies with Depreciation. Economics Letters , 24: 93-97.
Bulow, Jeremy. (1986) An Economic Theory of Planned Obsolescence. Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 101: 729-749.
Desai, P and D. Purohit (1998). Leasing and Selling: Optimal Marketing Strategies for a
Durable Good Firm, forthcoming Management Science.
Guha, R., Waldman, M. (1996) Leasing Solves the Lemons Problem. Mimeo Cornell
University.
Grenadier, S. (1995). Valuing Lease Contracts A Real-Options Approach, Journal of
Financial Economics, 38, 297-331.
Grenadier, S. (1996). Leasing and Credit Risk, Journal of Financial Economics, 42,
333-3654.
Hendel, I and Lizzeri, A. (1997a) Interfering with Secondary Markets, Mimeo
35

Hendel, I. and Lizzeri, A. (1997b) Adverse Selection in Durable Goods Markets, NBER
Working Paper No 6194.
Laont, J.J. and Tirole, J. (1996) Pollution Permits and Compliance Strategies, Journal
of Public Economics, 62, 85-125.
McConnell, J and J. Schallheim (1983) Valuation of Asset Leasing Contracts, Journal of
Financial Economics,12, 237-261.
Mussa, M. and S. Rosen. (1978). Monopoly and Product Quality, Journal of Economic
Theory, 18: 301-317.
Sattler, P. (1995). New Cars, Used Cars and Clunkers: The imperfect Substitutability of
Used Goods and Patterns of Trade in the Market for Durables: Theory and Evidence,
mimeo Northwestern University.
Sharpe, S. and H. Nguyen (1995) Capital Market Imperfections and the Incentives to
Lease, Journal of Finance, 39 271-294.
Smith, C. and L Wakeham (1985). Determinants of Corporate Leasing Policy, Journal of
Finance, 15, 895-910.
Waldman, M. (1996b). Eliminating the Market for Secondhand Goods: An Alternative
Explanation for Leasing, Journal of Law and Economics , XL: 61-92.

36

