                                         I. INTRODUCTION


       Child abuse has become a national epidemic. The statistics are grim: more than one million

children each year are confirmed as victims of child abuse and neglect by child protective service

agencies, and every day at least three children die as a result of abuse and neglect. Many studies

have shown that alcohol plays a significant role in incidents of domestic violence. For example, it

is estimated that about forty percent of all cases of child maltreatment (including physical abuse,

sexual abuse and neglect) involve alcohol (Children of Alcoholics Foundation, 1996). In addition

to being subjected to violence, children whose parents have drug and alcohol problems suffer more

physical and mental health problems than children in the general population, they have more

injuries and poisonings, and more behavioral problems.

       This paper studies the link between alcohol use and physical violence aimed at children,

with the main purpose of examining the role that changes in alcohol regulatory variables may play

in reducing the incidence of physical child abuse. More specifically, the principal hypothesis to be

tested is that an increase in alcoholic beverage prices will lead to a reduction in the incidence of

violence. We also examine the effects of measures of the prevalence of and ease of obtaining

alcohol, illegal drug prices, and the socio-demographic characteristics of the parent on physical

child abuse.



               II. THE LINKS BETWEEN ALCOHOL, DRUGS, AND VIOLENCE

       The link between alcohol and violence has been the focus of many biological, psychological,

sociological, and epidemiological studies. While each discipline seeks to answer its own questions

about the association, for the purpose of this paper one can draw a few main conclusions from the

existing literature. First, there is a general agreement that a strong link exists between alcohol

consumption and violence. In a variety of settings, alcohol is found to have been used prior to


                                                    1
assault. There is an overwhelming amount of evidence showing that the use of alcohol is prevalent

in many cases of criminal assaults and rapes (see Collins, 1981 for an overview). For example, the

Bureau of Justice Statistics (1988) reports that about 60 percent of all persons convicted of assault

had been drinking just prior to the crime. By contrast, about 40 percent of burglars and 30 percent

of drug offenders used alcohol just prior to the crime for which they had committed. In the context

of child abuse, Gil (1973) found that 13 percent of child abuse cases involved a perpetrator who was

intoxicated at the time of the attack.1 Many other studies link alcoholism to child abuse and neglect.

Behling (1979) found that in 69 percent of cases of child abuse at least one parent was an alcoholic.

Famularo et al. (1986) found that of parents who had lost custody of their children because of abuse

and neglect, 38 percent were alcoholics.

       Given the general association between alcohol use and violence, an important question for

policy purposes is how alcohol use may promote violent behavior. While this paper makes no

attempt to explain the causes of the link, a few theories which are relevant to this paper are

discussed. To begin, there is no general agreement in the existing literature on the nature of this

observed association. Theories range from simple pharmacological effects to the complex

interaction of endocrinological, neurobiologic, environmental, social and cultural determinants.

(See National Research Council, 1993 chapter 4, and Goldstein, 1985 for further information.) For

example, there may exist a psychopharmacological relationship in which alcohol can alter behavior

by increasing excitability and/or boosting courage. (See Pernanen, 1981 and Fagan, 1993 for a

complete discussion.) Under this theory, people may be more likely to commit a violent act when

under the influence of alcohol than they would otherwise. A second theory asserts that people use

alcohol as an excuse for aberrant behavior. Our society teaches people that alcohol use may cause

people to lose their inhibitions and/or release violent tendencies, and thus users cannot be fully

blamed for their actions. In other words, drunkenness may give people an excuse for violence,




                                                   2
despite whether or not actual pharmacological effects exist (see Gelles and Cornell, 1990, and

Fagan, 1990). Finally, there is the “third factor” theory in which there exists some unknown

common cause that results in both drinking and violent behaviors (see Fagan, 1990).

       There may also be a link between illegal drugs and violence, although the literature

supporting this notion is mixed. For example, when the perceived drug use of offenders is reported

by the victims of violent crimes, the offender was reported to be under the influence of drugs 8 to

10 percent of the time (Bureau of Justice Statistics, 1993). The Bureau of Justice Statistics (1988)

reports that about 25 percent of violent offenders claim they were under the influence of drugs at the

time of the offense. This study also reports that jail and prison inmates are much more likely to use

drugs than the general population. Another source of uncertainty regarding the link between drugs

and violence concerns the possible biological effects of drugs. It is known that any biological

effects differ by drug type and amount of use. For example, short-term use of marijuana, morphine

and opium may inhibit aggressive behavior in humans, while long-term use can alter the nervous

system in a way that actually promotes tendencies towards violence (National Research Council,

1993). Amphetamines, LSD, PCP and cocaine in small doses tend to increase aggressive behaviors,

but this link may be an indirect result of the distortions in the interpretation of social signals by the

users. (See Fagan, 1993 and Goldstein, 1985). In general, not much is yet known about the

relationship between drugs and violence. Including drugs in this study may help to shed some light

on the nature of this connection.



                                       III. RELATED STUDIES

       In an earlier paper, (Markowitz and Grossman, 1998), we examine the effects of alcohol

regulation on violence aimed at children. Using the 1976 Physical Violence in American Families

survey, we show that increasing the beer tax is an effective policy tool to reduce both the




                                                    3
probability and frequency of violence towards children. In addition, we show some evidence that

restrictions on the availability of alcohol may decrease violence. This current study expands upon

our previous work on the effects of alcohol regulation on child abuse in three ways. First, we add

data from another comparable survey conducted nine years later: the 1985 Physical Violence in

American Families survey. The additional survey is useful because it is allows for a comparison of

the effects of alcohol regulation over time, and it allows the years to be pooled and state fixed

effects added. Fixed effects are important in determining whether the effects of the state-level

alcohol regulation variables in the cross sections are reflecting unobserved state sentiment towards

regulation and violence rather than true policy effects. Second, we perform the analyses separately

for mothers and fathers. Third, we estimate structural as well as reduced form models. In the

former, violence depends on an endogenous measure of alcohol consumption, while in the later it

depends on exogenous measures of alcohol regulation.

       Currently, there are no other studies in the economic literature on alcohol and child abuse.

In fact, there are very few studies on any aspect of domestic violence at all. The most notable

economic studies on domestic violence are by Long, et al. (1983), Tauchen, et al. (1991), and

Farmer and Tiefenthaler (1997). These papers all focus only on spousal abuse and model violence

as a good which can be bought or avoided with income transfers. One drawback of these studies is

that the models are not applicable to instances of child abuse. The models in these papers assume

that the victim has a choice to be in the relationship or not. In reality, this choice is not always

available, especially for young dependents. In addition, such dependents generally have little or no

income to transfer as a means of avoiding violence. Finally, there are many other factors involved

in the propensity to commit violence. As previously discussed, alcohol in particular plays a major

role and should not be left out of any model dealing with domestic violence. We outlined a simple

framework for analysis in our earlier paper. The theoretical framework presented below formalizes




                                                    4
the ideas discussed therein and presents a framework that is appropriate for the case of violence

aimed at children.



                                 IV. ANALYTICAL FRAMEWORK

       The model of domestic violence utilized here is derived from Long et al. (1983) and Becker

(1968). The model is as follows: Equation 1 shows that a perpetrator’s choice problem is to

maximize a utility function which depends on V, a good representing violence, consumption of

alcohol (A), and consumption of all other goods (C). More appropriately, gains from violence,

such as control over the victim or stress relief, should be in the utility function, but for simplicity

violence will enter directly.2 Note that violence can positively or negatively affect utility.

1)     U=u(V, A, C).

Violence is produced by time spent engaged in violence (Tv), alcohol consumption (A), and is also

affected by α which represents efficiency in producing violence.3, 4

2)     V=v(Tv, A, α).

It is assumed that ∂V/∂Tv >0. Alcohol enters the production function in that alcohol consumption

can result in a physical reaction that makes the user more prone to violence or that makes it easier to

commit a violent act, therefore, ∂V/∂A >0.

       As previously discussed, alcohol and violence may be linked not only through the chemical

effects of alcohol, but also by the notion that alcohol serves to reduce the probability of the offender

having to face consequences by creating a viable excuse for the behavior. That is, the perpetrator

may face costs of his actions only if caught. These costs can be monetary costs such as legal fees,

fines, or lost wages due to prison sentences and can be accounted for in the budget constraint of the

perpetrator. Non-monetary costs may include the dissolution of the relationship, or loss of respect

by the victim, family members or friends. For simplicity, we focus on the probability of facing




                                                    5
monetary costs.5 The term P represents the probability of facing monetary costs and is represented

by:

3)      P=p(Π, A),

where Π represents the part of the probability that is unaffected by alcohol use, A is alcohol

consumption and ∂P/∂A <0.

       Considering the possibility of monetary losses gives two possible budget constraints faced

by the perpetrator:

4a)    I=CNL + PaA + wTv              when no monetary costs of violence are faced and

4b)    I=CL + PaA + wTv + L(Tv) when costs are imposed.

The term I represents income, Pa represents the monetary price plus travel and time costs of

obtaining alcohol, and w is the wage rate which is meant to represent the opportunity cost of

spending time engaged in violence. The monetary costs of violence are represented by the loss

function L(Tv). The losses are a function of the time spent in violence and it is assumed that losses

increase as the time spent in violence increases. CNL and CL denote other consumption when there

is no loss and when there is loss resulting from violence, respectively. By design, CNL > CL since

L(Tv) is positive. The price of other consumption is normalized to 1 for simplicity.

       Substituting equations 2, 3, 4a, and 4b into 1 yields an expected utility function:

5)     EU= 1-p(Π, A) * U[v(Tv, A, α), A, I – PaA - wTv] +
             p(Π, A) * U[v(Tv, A, α), A, I – PaA - wTv - L(Tv)].

Equation 5 is the expected utility function that a perpetrator maximizes. Maximization with respect

to the inputs in the production of violence yields first order equations that equate the expected

marginal benefits of time spent in violence to the expected marginal costs of time spent in violence,

and the expected marginal benefits of alcohol consumption to the expected marginal costs of




                                                   6
alcohol consumption.6 The first order conditions imply the following reduced form demand

equations:

6)     Tv=tv(Pa, w, I, Π, α)

7)     A=a(Pa, w, I, Π, α)

Substituting equations 6 and 7 into equation 2 gives:

8)     V=v(Pa, w, I, Π, α).

Equation 8 is the reduced form model of the amount of violence supplied by the perpetrator and is

the equation that will be estimated by regression techniques in this paper. Equation 8 is the main

focus of this paper because the estimation of this equation will show the direct effects of increases

of the price of alcohol and other regulatory measures on violence. A secondary focus of this paper is

the structural model as given by equation 2. This is the equation which relates alcohol consumption

to violence directly. A positive coefficient on the measure of alcohol consumption would indicate a

positive relationship between consumption and violence.

       Since violence is a behavior that many people do not engage in, the model as presented

above can predict values of zero for the optimal time spent in violence and for violence. Clearly,

the marginal utility of violence must be positive for there to be any time spent in violence. Even if

this is the case, the optimal time input will equal zero if the expected marginal benefit of time spent

in violence evaluated at Tv = 0 is smaller than or equal to the expected marginal cost of time spent

in violence also evaluated at Tv = 0. Given that it is optimal to allocate no time to violence but

optimal to consume some alcohol, violence itself will be zero if v(0, A, α) = 0 and positive

otherwise. When no time is allocated to violence, alcohol consumption may have to exceed a

threshold quantity, which can vary among persons, for violence to be positive.




                                                   7
       The same corner solution with Tv = 0 and v ≥ 0 occurs in a model in which violence is a

negative source of utility. This suggests that a framework in which violence is a positive source of

utility and can be increased by allocating time to its production is only one way of getting to a

reduced form equation such as equation 8. A framework in which violence is a negative source of

utility and a negative by-product of the consumption of alcohol provides an alternative justification

of equation 8. Thus, the empirical analysis of equation 8 is not meant to test the validity of our

specific model; rather the theoretical model is used as a means to reach equation 8. The nature of

the corner solution just outlined also suggests that the probability of committing violence, rather

than the quantity of violence, can be treated as the outcomes in equations 2 and 8.


                                              V. DATA

       Data on violence aimed at children come from the 1976 and 1985 Physical Violence in

American Families (PVAF) surveys. These surveys were designed to collect information about

violence in the home and have detailed information on how conflicts are resolved. The 1976 data

consist of a nationally representative sample of 2,143 married or cohabiting individuals. Of these

individuals, 1,147 have children ages 3-17 living at home and thus comprise the sample examining

violence towards children.7 The 1985 data are a nationally representative sample of 4,990

individuals who are either married or cohabiting, are single parents living with children under 18, or

are individuals who had been married or cohabiting within the past two years. Included in this total

are 4,032 individuals in the initial cross section and 958 individuals in an oversample of states.8 Of

the 4,990 individuals in the cross section and state oversample, 2,675 have children ages 0-17

living at home.


A. Dependent Variables




                                                   8
        Measures of domestic violence in the PVAF survey are collected by use of the “Conflict

Tactic Scale” (CTS) developed by Straus and Gelles (1990). The CTS gathers information on the

number of times in the past year a respondent has committed or has been the victim of a violent act.

The dependent variable, termed the “severe violence” indicator, is a dichotomous indicator which

equals 1 if the respondent committed any of the following acts towards the child in the past year:

kicked, bit or hit with fist; hit or tried to hit with something; beat up the child; burned or scalded

him/her (1985 survey only); threatened with a gun or knife; or had used a gun or knife on the child.9

These acts were chosen because they have potential to seriously injure a child, and the designers of

the CTS identify these acts as most closely resembling what is commonly thought of as child abuse.

Eighteen percent of women in the 1976 sample and 10.1 percent of men responded that they had

committed at least one of these acts in the past year. In the 1985 data, 11.4 percent of women and

9.4 percent of males had committed at least one severe act of violence. Hypothesis tests of the

proportions by gender reveals that females are more violent than men in both years, but the null

hypothesis can only be rejected at the 10 percent level in the 1985 sample.

       It can be argued that the act of hitting or trying to hit with something can be considered as

punishment rather than representing an abusive or violent act (Straus and Gelles, 1990). For

example, hitting the child with a belt or a hair brush is a common way to punish a child but hitting

with a frying pan would be considered violence. Unfortunately, there is no way to distinguish

between responses that were meant as punishments or as violence. Models of the severe violence

indicator were tested with and without the act of hitting with an object, but results were very

similar. Henceforth, only the violence indicator inclusive of this act are reported.

       Other variations on the measure of violence were also tested. Less severe acts of violence

were included, such as throwing something at the child and pushing grabbing or shoving the child.

Adding these additional acts of violence do not alter the conclusions of this paper any. In addition,




                                                    9
models were tested which include these less severe acts of violence as well items which represent

verbal aggression such as threatening to hit or throw something at the child and throwing, smashing,

hit or kicked something. Again, results were very similar to those presented below.

       Even though the survey question gathers information on the number of times in the past year

each act of violence had been committed, this information is not used because of the ambiguity

regarding the question. The wording does not allow for a distinction between specific acts of

violence that occurred on different occasions or occurred along with other types of violence on the

same occasion. For example, a value of “2” could mean that the respondent hit the child twice in

the past year, implying separate occasions. Alternatively, the same value could mean that the

respondent hit the child once and hit the child with an object once, perhaps during the same

incident. Any variable constructed on the number of acts would represent a combination of

intensity and frequency of violence thus making interpretation difficult. This problem prevents the

utilization of techniques such as tobit or any of the models for count data from being meaningful.



B. Reliability of the Data

       One criticism of the Physical Violence in American Families survey focuses on the

reliability of the respondents’ answers to the occurrence of violence. The survey seeks to gain

information about sensitive and possibly deviant types of behavior that often arouses antagonism,

high refusal rates and distorted answers from the respondents, thereby bringing into question the

reliability of the results. The principal investigators of the survey discuss this criticism at length.

(See Straus and Gelles, 1990 for complete discussion of this issue.) First, they claim that the

antagonistic aspects are minimized by presenting the questions in the context of resolving family

conflicts. The question on conflicts between parents and children begin with resolution tactics such

as “discuss the issue calmly” which are generally viewed as positive methods of dealing with




                                                    10
problems. The scale gradually increases to questions about more socially unacceptable behavior.

Through this method of getting to the violence questions, the respondent has first been given a

chance to give the “socially correct” answers and is less apprehensive about discussing incidence of

violence.

       Currently, the CTS seems to be the best available technique for collecting truthful

information on domestic violence and has been used in over 200 studies to date (see Straus and

Gelles, 1990). Nevertheless, because of the potential for underreporting violence, the dependent

variables are considered to be conservative estimates of violence. This poses no problem for the

conclusions since so long as the measurement error in the dependent variable is random,

measurement error only serves to raise the standard errors leaving the coefficients as unbiased

estimators. However, if for example, drinkers systematically underreport violence, then the

coefficient on the beer tax will be biased towards zero.

       A related criticism is how well the Physical Violence in American Families survey reflects

the reported national incidence of violence aimed at children. It is difficult to compare the estimates

of violence aimed at children from this survey with those collected from other sources. The most

commonly cited source is the National Study on Child Neglect and Abuse Reporting as conducted

by the American Association for Protecting Children (AAPC). Their data represent cases of

physical and sexual abuse or neglect and come mainly from Child Protection Services agencies

around the country. This implies that cases of abuse must be reported before they can get into the

national statistics, but unfortunately a large proportion of cases go unreported. In 1976 (the earliest

year of data available) the AAPC estimates that 669,000 children or 10.1 children per thousand

were abused or neglected (American Association for Protecting Children, Inc., 1986). The same

number for 1985 is 1,928,000 children or 30.6 children per thousand. The Physical Violence in

American Families survey estimates that about 5.8 million children or 86.4 children per thousand




                                                  11
who lived with both parents were the victims of severe violence in 1975. In 1985, of all children,

almost 6.9 million or 109.6 children per thousand were physically abused.


C. Independent Variables

        i. Alcohol Control Variables

        The price of alcohol is measured by the real (1982-1984 dollars) state excise tax rate on a

case of beer (24 12-ounce cans) as reported by the Beer Institute’s Brewers’ Almanac. This

measure was chosen because beer is the most commonly consumed alcoholic beverage and because

taxes, rather than prices, are directly set by policy makers. The 1976 survey is conducted in the first

quarter of 1976, but pertains to violence in the past year. Therefore, the beer tax is taken as a

simple average of the state excise tax rates that existed in the four quarters of 1975. The 1985

survey was conducted during the summer of 1985. Therefore, the tax on beer is taken as an average

of the tax rate that existed in the first two quarters of 1985 and the last two quarters of 1984.

        A variety of measures are constructed to represent the availability and prevalence of alcohol

in each state. First, variables representing restrictions on beer advertising are included in the

models. These variables come from Modern Brewery Age Blue Book (various years). Specifically,

dichotomous indicators are included for whether a state prohibits each of the following: price

advertising of beer in newspapers and magazines; billboards advertising beer; window displays of

signs, packages and products in liquor stores; and consumer novelty giveaways. Restrictions on the

first three will serve to make the full price of beer higher due to increased search costs. Bans on

consumer novelties also serve to raise the full price of beer because novelties act as discounts in

kind.

        Retail availability factors in to the full price of alcohol faced by individuals. To capture the

availability effects, three measures are employed. The first is a dichotomous indicator for whether

or not grocery stores can sell beer.10 Data for grocery store sales come from Jobson’s Liquor


                                                   12
Handbook (various years). Secondly, the percentage of each state’s population living in counties

dry for beer as given by the Brewers’ Almanac are included. With larger percentages of populations

living in dry counties, travel time to obtain alcohol increases, adding to the full price of alcohol. In

addition, this measure serves to capture some of the unobserved state sentiment towards drinking

which may be reflected in the drinking habits of the state’s residents. Finally, the number of retail

outlets per 1,000 population that are licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for on-premise or off-

premise consumption is included. These data come from Jobson’s Liquor Handbook, (various

years).



          ii. Illegal Drugs

          The price of one gram of pure cocaine is included in some models. Prices are derived from

the System to Retrieve Information from Drug Evidence (STRIDE) maintained by the Drug

Enforcement Administration (DEA) of the U.S. Department of Justice. The reported prices vary by

weight and purity, so the price of one gram of pure cocaine is obtained from a regression of the

natural logarithm of purchase price on the natural logarithms of weight and purity, dichotomous

variables for each city and year except one, and interactions between the year and variables

representing eight of the nine Census of Population divisions. (See Grossman and Chaloupka,

forthcoming, for further details.) Since 1977 is the earliest year the cocaine data are available, the

1976 violence data are matched with cocaine prices from 1977.

          The prices of marijuana is generally unavailable. However, by 1976, some states had

decriminalized the possession of small amounts of marijuana for personal use, thus effectively

lowering the full price of its use. Therefore, a dichotomous indicator for whether a state

decriminalized marijuana is included in some models. Information on decriminalization comes

from the Sourcebook of Criminal Justice Statistics (Bureau of Justice Statistics, 1984).




                                                   13
       iii. Individual Characteristics

       Literature on domestic violence from other disciplines provides insight into the personal

characteristics that lead to a predisposition towards violence. (See Gelles and Cornell, 1990 for

profiles of domestic abusers and their victims.) People who were abused by their parents or saw

their parents fight a lot, for example, are more likely to be violent towards their own children. In

order to proxy for these two factors, dichotomous indicators are included to represent whether or

not the respondent’s parents used physical punishment on the respondent and if the respondent’s

parents hit or threw things at each other during the respondent’s teenage years.

       Three measures of stressful life styles are also included. The first measure is the number of

children at home. More children can lead to more stress as well as more opportunities for violence.

The second is a dichotomous variable indicating whether the respondent talks to other people about

personal family problems in order to help relieve stress. There are differences in the wording of this

question in the two survey years so this variable is omitted from models which pool the 1976 and

1985 cross sections. The third is a direct measure of stress. In the 1976 data, this question takes the

form of the number of specific stressful events encountered in the past year. These events include

trouble at work, health problems, money problems, and problems with family members. In the

1985 data, the question designed to measure stress simply asks how often the respondent felt

nervous or stressed in the past year. The answers can range from never to very often. Because of

the difference in the form of the stress question, this measure is also omitted from the pooled

models.

       Socio-economic and demographic characteristics may also play a role in determining an

individual’s propensity towards violence. Three indicators of race are included; black, not

Hispanic; Hispanic; and other race. The missing category is white, not Hispanic. The respondent’s




                                                  14
age, gender, education, income, occupation, employment status, religion, frequency of religious

service attendance (in the 1976 cross section only) , and an indicator for whether the respondent is a

single parent (in 1985 only) are included in all models. In addition, the child’s gender and age are

included in the models. Any missing values are coded at the mean of the known observations. The

variables with the largest number of missing variables for the 1976 data are whether the

respondent's parents hit him or her as a teenager (16 percent of the sample missing) and whether or

not the respondent's parents hit each other when the respondent was a teenager (17 percent missing).

The rest of the socioeconomic and demographic variables in the 1976 data have relatively few

missing variables with amounts ranging from 0 to 6 percent missing. The percentage of the sample

with missing values is much smaller for the 1985 data and ranges from 0 to 3 percent missing.

Results on the regulatory variables are not sensitive to the deletion of regressors with missing

values.

          One potential problem with many of the individual characteristics is that they may be

correlated with the error term in the violence equations. That is, there may be some unmeasured

factor that affects the outcomes of both the propensity to commit violence and the individual

characteristics. The characteristics most likely to be endogenous are the number of children at

home, the indicator for whether people talk to others about their problems, the measures of stress,

the respondent’s education, income, occupation, employment status, religiosity and single parent

status. The coefficients on these potentially endogenous variables are likely to be biased if not

instrumented for. However, including these variables will not bias the coefficients on the state-level

regulatory variables (the variables of interest in this paper) so long as the individual and state-level

variables are not correlated. Models were tested that exclude the above mentioned variables from

the cross sections. The results are not shown, but the coefficients on the beer tax and the other




                                                   15
price, availability and advertising measures for both males and females are very similar to those that

include the potentially problematic individual characteristics.



                                 VI. ESTIMATION AND RESULTS

       Equation 8 serves as the basic equation for estimation. The probability of participation in

violence is specified as a probit function and depends on the full price of alcohol, the price of illegal

drugs and the characteristics of the parent, the child, and the household.

       Equation 8 is also estimated separately for males and females. This is done because of

different observed drinking and violence patterns of men and women. For example, studies have

shown that men are more likely than women to become violent when drinking (see Fagan, 1990 and

the references he cites). In addition, some studies have shown that females drink less than males

and are more price sensitive (Kenkel, 1993, and Moore and Cook, 1995). Likelihood ratio tests on

all of the independent variables in each of the two surveys reveal that the two sexes should not be

pooled.11 In addition, models which include interaction terms between gender and all the

independent variables show that coefficient on the interaction for the beer tax (the coefficient of

interest in this paper) and gender is insignificant in the 1976 data but significant in the 1985 data.

This implies that at least in the 1985 data, there are differences in the tax coefficients for males and

females.

       Two basic models are estimated. The first model contains the state excise tax rate on beer

and the individual characteristics. The second adds to the first all the price, advertising, and

availability measures. There are a few potential problems with the two models presented. First, the

specifications which include only the beer tax and the individual characteristics are prone to omitted

variable bias if the drug, advertising or availability measures are predictors of violence. Omitted

variable bias is a more serious problem in probit models than in ordinary least squares because even




                                                   16
if the omitted variables are uncorrelated with the included variable, the coefficient on the included

variable can still be inconsistent. (See Greene, 1993 and Yatchew and Griliches, 1985 for a

discussion of this issue.) However, including all the relevant control variables may lead to the

problems of multicollinearity. This problem may arise because states which heavily restrict

advertising are more likely to restrict availability. Also, states tend to simultaneously enact laws

regulating different forms of advertising.

        Another potential problem is that the effects of state-specific regulatory variables will reflect

unobserved state sentiment towards violence and/or drinking. This issue is addressed by testing

models which pool the two cross sections, thus allowing for state fixed-effects to be added. These

results are discussed below. A final problem is that Moulton (1990) has shown that standard errors

of coefficients of aggregate variables in micro regressions are biased downward if the disturbance

terms in the regressions are positively correlated among persons who live in the same area. Thus,

models were tested which correct the standard errors for intra-state correlation according to Huber

(1967). Making this correction does not alter the conclusions of this paper and in many cases,

serves to lower the standard errors of the coefficients. The results below are shown with the

uncorrected standard errors.

        All reduced form estimates display the effects of the beer tax, drug prices, and alcohol

availability and advertising variables on the probability of violence. Given that the measures of

alcohol control are the variables of interest, the individual characteristics included in each model are

not shown in the tables. Results of the individual characteristics are discussed below. Each table

lists the probit coefficients first, the t-statistic on the coefficients in parentheses, and the marginal

effects of the coefficients in bold italics. The marginal effects shown for the dummy variables are

calculated by Φ(X1b) - Φ(X0b), where Φ is the cumulative normal density, and X0 and X1 are

vectors of the means of the independent variables except that the value of the dummy variable of




                                                     17
interest equals 0 and 1, respectively. Marginal effects for continuous variables are calculated at the

mean of the independent variables.



A. The Cross Sections by Gender

        i. Females

        Table 1 shows the effectiveness of the tax on beer in reducing the probability of severe

violence committed by female respondents in the 1976 and 1985 samples. The coefficients on the

beer tax are negative and significant.12 Beginning with the 1976 sample, the results show that a one

percent increase in the tax on beer will decrease the probability of violence by about 0.33 percent

(which is a simple average of the elasticities of the two models). Tax elasticities are calculated by

multiplying the marginal effects by the ratio of the average tax to the proportion of respondents who

are violent.13

         Column 2 shows that the number of outlets licensed to sell liquor is positive and significant

indicating that increasing the number of outlets by 1 per 1000 population will increase the

probability of severe violence towards children by about 6 percentage points. In addition, increases

in the percentage of a state living in dry counties will reduce severe violence. The other availability

measure, the prohibition of the sale of beer in grocery stores, does not explain any of the variation

in violence, nor do the drug prices or most of the advertising restrictions. The prohibition of

window displays is the only advertising measure that is negative and significant. Multicollinearity

among the advertising variables may make the individual effects of the variables indistinguishable

from each other. Therefore, the last rows in each table show a chi-squared test of the availability

and advertising variables each as a set. However, the results in Table 1 indicate that the availability

and advertising measures as sets are not statistically different from zero.




                                                   18
       The female respondents in the 1985 sample are also responsive to the state excise tax on

beer. Estimates in columns 3 and 4 in Table 1 show that the beer tax is effective in reducing

violence committed by women, with an average elasticity of -0.13. The results also show that

severe violence by women in 1985 is sensitive to the price of cocaine (at the ten percent level in a

two-tailed test), whereas the same did not hold true for females in 1976. Another contrast to the

1976 data is that in 1985, the availability and advertising measures appear to have no impact on the

probability of severe violence committed by women in 1985. This result is surprising given the

larger sample size in the 1985 data.

       Caution must be exercised in comparing the 1985 and 1976 cross sections because of the

different composition of the two samples. The main difference between the two surveys is that

respondents who are single parents and parents with children under age three are not included in the

1976 data. In order to make a more direct comparison to the 1976 cross section, models were tested

with the 1985 sample that exclude mothers with infants and mothers who are single parents (results

not shown). In these limited specifications, the coefficient on the beer tax is negative but not

statistically significant. This is in direct contrast to both the 1976 results and the 1985 full sample

results. One possible explanation for the observed inability of the beer tax to reduce violence in the

limited 1985 sample is that it is inappropriate to restrict the sample. For example, it is possible that

the 1976 sample may include married women who share the same characteristics as the single

women in the 1985 sample. The national divorce rate was much higher in 1985 than in 1976.

There were 128 divorced persons per 1,000 married persons versus 69 divorced persons per 1,000

married persons in 1976, (Bureau of the Census, 1989) so it is plausible that the 1976 sample

includes women who would otherwise be divorced were it 1985. Since the probability of divorce

was much lower in 1976, these women are more likely to be married and included in 1976 when




                                                   19
during later time period they may have been part of a single parent sample. Unfortunately, there is

no way to test this hypothesis with these data.



        ii. Males

        Table 2 shows results from the 1976 and 1985 cross sections for males. The issue of the

presence of single men in the 1985 sample is not problematic because single fathers make up only

4.6 percent of the sample of males. There are 214 fathers of infants (20 percent) in the 1985 male

sample, but the results are the same regardless of the inclusion of these fathers.

        In the 1976 cross section, the coefficient on the beer tax is negative and significant at the 10

percent level in the model that includes only the beer tax and the individual characteristics.

However, this effect is greatly reduced when the other control variables are added. The coefficients

on the beer tax in the 1985 data are surprisingly positive and significant in both models. We have

no explanation for this last result.

        Increases in the tax on beer seems to be ineffective in reducing the probabilities of violence

committed by males. In addition, there is no evidence that the other regulatory variables may be

any more effective. In both years, almost none of the drug prices, availability measures or

advertising variables are statistically significant in reducing the probability of violence. However,

the signs of the availability measures are as anticipated in both years.



B. 1976 and 1985 Pooled Results

        There are two possible problems with the cross sectional analyses. The first is that small

sample sizes may not allow for precise estimates of the coefficients. A second problem is that it is

impossible to control for unobserved state effects or sentiments that may influence alcohol

regulation and violence rates. Pooling the 1976 and 1985 cross sections allows both of these issues




                                                   20
to be addressed. By pooling, sample sizes will increase, and unobserved state effects can be

controlled for by including dummy variables for all of the states except for one.

       Table 3 shows the pooled results for females and males. It is unclear whether it is

appropriate to make the 1985 female sample similar to the 1976 sample in terms of demographics

by omitting respondents with infants and respondents who are single mothers. However, based on

the argument that some women who were married in 1976 may not have been were it 1985, it seems

more appropriate to leave the 1985 sample as is and not exclude any observations. Excluding both

single women and women with infants alters the findings slightly for women, for in this case the

beer tax is negative and significant in all models regardless of the inclusion or exclusion of the state

dummy variables (results not shown). In addition, when compared to the results in Table 3, the

magnitude of the tax effect becomes larger when state dummies are included and smaller when the

state dummies are excluded.

       A few words of caution must be put forth in relying on the pooled models. First, some

observations had to be deleted from the regressions that include state dummies because certain

states had only a few respondents in them. If it happens that those few respondents all have the

same outcome for violence then the predicted probability of violence based on those states would

have to be the same as the outcome. The probit coefficient must then approach plus or minus

infinity. In order to eliminate this problem, individuals in states where the respondents all had the

same response to the violence question were omitted from the regressions.

       Next, one may question the validity of pooling two years ten years apart. It is quite

plausible that the slope coefficients for many if not all of the variables had changed over the sample

period. A likelihood ratio test for pooling is shown in Table 3. In all cases, the tests reveal that the

two years should not be pooled. However, this result is being driven by the individual, household,

and child characteristics, for in models that include interaction terms between all the independent




                                                   21
variables and a dummy for 1985, there is evidence that the coefficient on the real beer tax does not

change between the two years. This result holds for the sample of women, in models that include

and exclude the state dummies. For men, the same conclusion holds only for the models that

include the state dummies. See the section on males below for further discussion of this result. One

can reject the hypothesis that the interactions between the time dummy and the individual,

household, and child characteristics are equal to zero. Technically, these interactions should be

included in the models in Table 3, but their inclusion or exclusion does not alter the results of the

alcohol and drug regulatory variables so these interactions are omitted.



       i. Pooled Females

       For females, the cross sectional analyses showed separately that increases in the beer tax

would reduce the probability of violence towards children. Not surprisingly then, the pooled

sample exclusive of the state fixed effects shows the same results (see columns 1 and 2 of Table 3).

The tax elasticity is -0.20 in the model in column 1 and is -0.16 in the model in column 2 for an

average elasticity of –0.18. This average is comparable to the average elasticity derived from the

two cross sections, which is –0.23.

       It is interesting to note that pooling the sample and thereby increasing the sample size does

not result in measurable effects of the advertising or availability measures on violence, even thought

in the 1976 cross section both the percent dry and the number of licensed outlets were significant.

Contrary to what was expected a priori, the prohibition of sales of beer in grocery stores is

significant in increasing the probability of violence.

       When the state dummies are added to the models in columns 1 and 2 in Table 3, the

coefficients on the beer tax remain negative, but in general, lose significance (see columns 3 and 4).

However, the magnitude of the coefficients and marginal effects are largely unaffected by the




                                                   22
inclusion of the state dummies. Given that as a set, the state dummies are not significant, these

results most likely reflect collinearity between the state dummy variables and the state-specific tax

on beer . In other words, state dummies do not capture any unobserved state sentiment towards

drinking or violence, rather they act as irrelevant included variables that are correlated with the beer

tax.



       ii. Pooled Males

       For males, the results from the two cross sections show that an increase in the beer tax has

either no effect or a positive effect on the probability of violence. The pooled results tell a slightly

different story. The coefficients on the beer tax in the severe violence equations which excludes the

state dummies (columns 5 and 6 in Table 3) are insignificant with the sign varying depending on the

other included variables. However, these coefficients are biased. This is because in a model which

includes the beer tax interacted with the dummy for 1985, the coefficient on the beer tax is negative

and significant and the interaction term is positive and significant. This indicates that there are

difference in the slope coefficients in the two years and the models should not be pooled. By

contrast, including the state dummies renders an interaction coefficient that is insignificant implying

that once unobserved state effects are controlled for the two years can be pooled. In sum, because

of the potential statistical inappropriateness of pooling the data, it is difficult to draw a conclusions

about the propensity of increases in the beer tax to reduce violence aimed at children by their

fathers. This is an area for further research.


                                  VII. ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION

       The theory on which this study is based rests on the assumption that alcohol consumption is

positively related to violence. The Physical Violence in American Family surveys contain some

measures of alcohol consumption, thus allowing for an estimation of this structural relationship.


                                                    23
Estimates of the structural model as given by equation 2 are shown in Table 4. In this table, the

measure of alcohol consumption, drunkenness, is treated as both exogenous and endogenous. The

theory presented in this paper strongly suggests that alcohol consumption should be treated as

endogenous for the following reasons: First, the first order equation for alcohol consumption shows

that consumption is partly determined by time spent in violence.14 Intuitively, this reverse causality

can be explained by the argument that if a person is planning on being violent, they may drink in

order to lower the probability of facing monetary costs. Secondly, alcohol consumption may be

correlated with the error term in the violence equation if there are some unmeasured characteristics

that makes people both drink and be violent. In this case, alcohol consumption would still be

endogenous and should be instrumented for in the violence equations. Linear probability models

with standard errors corrected for heteroskedasticity are used to estimate the structural equations.15

The two-stage least squares equations correspond to Heckman and MaCurdy’s (1985) simultaneous

equations linear probability model.

         In the 1976 survey, the only question on alcohol consumption asks how often the

respondent gets drunk. The answers are categorized into never, rarely, occasionally, often, very

often, or almost always. Note that this question does not put a time frame on drunkenness. Since

violence and beer taxes are in regards to the past year, the question on drunkenness in 1976 may or

may not be a good representation of alcohol consumption in the past year. In 1985, however, the

same question is asked in regards to the past year, and this time the answers are coded as the actual

number of times the respondent got drunk. In estimating the structural equation, the responses for

how often a parent gets drunk are transformed into a dichotomous indicator in both years of the

survey. This is done in order to allow the results for the 1976 data to be compared to and pooled

with the 1985 data. A respondent in the 1976 data was given a zero if he or she reported getting




                                                  24
drunk either never or rarely, and was given a one otherwise. Five percent of the females in 1976

received a value of one for drunkenness whereas 16 percent of the males were given a value of one.

A respondent in the 1985 data was given a zero if he or she reported getting drunk either zero, one,

or two times in the past year and a one if the response was more than two times. Six percent of

females in 1985 and 15 percent of males in 1985 reported getting drunk more than 2 times in the

past year. Categorizing less than three incidents of drunkenness as approximate to never or rarely

being drunk is an arbitrary assignment. However, increasing the number of times classified as

never or rarely to three times in the past year does not alter the results presented.

       Table 4 shows the results of the dichotomous indicator of drunkenness for females and

males in the 1976 data, the 1985 data and in pooled models.16 In this table, columns 1 and 3 treat

drunkenness as exogenous and columns 2 and 4 treat drunkenness as endogenous. In columns 2 and

4, the only instrument is the state excise tax on beer. Models were tested which include all the

regulatory variables as instruments, however, these estimates are unreliable because the set of

regulatory variables do not serve as good instruments. Chi-squared tests of the set of regulatory

variables are only statistically significant for females when the years are pooled. In all other

models, the chi-squared is insignificant indicating that the bias in the TSLS estimates approach that

of OLS. By contrast, the coefficients on the state excise tax on beer in the first stage estimates that

omit the other regulatory variables are negative and statistically different from zero for females in

all years, and for males in 1985 and the pooled model.

       Focusing first on women in columns 1 and 2 of Table 4, the results show that the

dichotomous indicator of drunkenness is positively related to the probability of violence in both

years. The coefficients in the OLS estimates are positive but are not statistically significant. The

coefficients in the TSLS models are also positive, and the 1976 and pooled values are significant. A




                                                   25
Hausman test reveals that exogenity can only be rejected in the pooled sample of women, but the

estimates for this sample are likely to be the most reliable given its size.

       The coefficient on drunkenness in the OLS models can be interpreted as the difference in the

probability of violence by those who get drunk often and those who do not. In the pooled models

for females, this differences is about 6 percentage points, indicating that those who get drunk often

are about 6 percentage points more likely to be violent than those who do not get drunk often. In

the TSLS model, the coefficient shows the effect of an increase in the predicted probability of

drunkenness. According to the estimates, a one percentage point increase in the probability of

drunkenness leads to a two percentage point increase in the probability of child abuse. One way to

evaluate the magnitude of this effect is to note that the probability of alcohol-related violence is the

product of the probability of drunkenness and the probability of violence conditional on

drunkenness. If an increase in the incidence of drunkenness has no impact on the conditional

probability of violence, the coefficient of the probability of drunkenness in the violence equation

should be smaller than one since it would equal the conditional probability. A coefficient greater

than one could result if an increase in the probability of drunkenness raises the condition probability

of violence.17

       The story for males in columns 3 and 4 of Table 4 is quite different from that of females.

The coefficients on drunkenness are positive in all models except in the TSLS estimate in 1985, but

are always insignificant in both the OLS and TSLS estimates. The Hausman test shows that

exogenity cannot be rejected in all cases, and the first stage results show that the beer tax is

generally not a good instrument. Only in the pooled sample of males is the beer tax a valid

instrument.




                                                   26
          The tax elasticity of consumption is given by the first stage results of estimation of the

structural model. Using the pooled samples, the tax elasticity is –0.19 for females and –0.14 for

males. These elasticities can be compared to the results of other studies. Kenkel (1993) computes a

price elasticity of demand for heavy drinking (number of days with five or more drinks in the past

year) and finds an estimated elasticity of –1.14 for females and –0.71 for males. Multiplying our

estimated tax elasticities by the ratio of the average beer price to the average tax gives an

approximation of the price elasticity. Using the average price of beer in 1982 as given by the

American Chamber of Commerce Researchers Association, our price elasticities are –0.89 for

females and –0.64 for males. While slightly smaller, these are reasonably close to Kenkel’s

estimates even though we employ a very different measure of consumption.

          In summary, for females the estimates of the structural violence equation and the reduced

form demand function for beer are consistent with a causal mechanism in which the price of alcohol

affects violence because it affects the consumption of alcohol. The results do not indicate whether

alcohol consumption is treated by parents as a means of lowering the probability of facing the

consequences of committing violent acts or as a good whose consumption has negative as well as

positive consequences. Furthermore, the magnitude of the alcohol consumption effect should be

interpreted with caution in light of the relatively poor indicator of heavy drinking available in the

survey.



                               VIII. INDIVIDUAL CHARACTERISTICS

          Table 5 shows the results of the socio-economic and demographic characteristics of the

respondent on the probability of severe violence towards children. The impacts of these variables

are not sensitive to the inclusion or exclusion of the drug prices, and alcohol advertising and

availability measures, and therefore, results from the models which exclude the availability and

                                                     27
advertising variables are shown. In general, the variables that affect the probability of violence

committed by women are the same as those for men. Primarily, if as a teenager, the respondent was

hit by his or her parents, the probability of violence will increase. Females may also learn to be

violent by having watched their parents hit each other (see the 1985 results for females). Race plays

a role in that black women (in 1985) and Hispanic women (in 1976) are more likely than white

women to be violent, while Hispanic men are less likely to be violent than white men. With the

exception of females in 1976, age does not seem to affect the probability of violence. In addition,

the employment status of the respondent does not have much of an effect on violence nor do the

religion variables for men. Religion does play a role in determining violence by women.

       Education and income both do not determine incidence of violence. These results are not

surprising from an economic standpoint. The theoretical model of violence shows that an increase

in the wage rate (as proxied for by income) will have an ambiguous effect on violence. This occurs

because a wage increase will increase the shadow price of violence and decrease violence. But the

increase in income from the wage increase will allow more violence to be purchased, leading to an

ambiguous effect of a wage increase on violence. A similar story can be told for education if

education is a proxy for higher wages.

       For men in either year, having a female child or an older child will lower the probability of

violence, while having more children at home will increase the probability. For women, only

having more children at home increases the probability of violence. Finally, more self-reported

stress will increase the probability of violence by women in the 1985 sample.



                                         IX. CONCLUSION




                                                  28
       The main conclusion from the results presented in this paper is that increases in the state

excise tax on beer will reduce the probability of violence committed by females, but have no effect

on the propensity of men to be violent. These results are supported by limited evidence that alcohol

consumption is positively related to violence by females, but is not related to violence by males.

For females, a 10 percent increase in the beer tax will decrease the probability of violence by about

3.3 percent in the 1976 data and 1.3 percent in the 1985 data. Increases in drug prices would have

no effects on violence aimed at children committed by either parent, nor would restrictions on

advertising. The effect of restricted availability of alcohol is ambiguous.

       According to the Bureau of the Census (1977) there were 40 million children between the

ages of 3 and 17 living with both parents in 1975. If 10 percent were the victims of severe violence

by their mothers (4 million) then a 10 percent increase in the beer tax would have lowered the

number of abused children by about 129,360. The same analysis for 1985 would result in a

reduction of 57,300 children who were abused.

           While increasing the tax on beer would lower violence committed by women, any policy

decisions must weight the cost of raising the tax on beer versus the benefits of the reduction in child

abuse. Raising the beer tax would serve to penalize people who consume alcohol but who are not

violent.




                                                  29
                                          REFERENCES

American Association for Protecting Children, Inc. Highlights of Official Child Neglect and Abuse

       Reporting, 1984, The American Humane Association, Denver, CO, 1986.

American Chamber of Commerce Researchers Association. Inter-City Cost of Living Index.

       Louisville, Kentucky: ACCRA, 1982.

Becker, Gary S. “Crime and Punishment: An Economic Approach.” Journal of Political

       Economy, 76:2 March/April 1968, 169-217.

Beer Institute. Brewers’ Almanac. United States Brewers Foundation, New York, NY, various

       years.

Behling, D. “Alcohol Abuse Encountered in 51 Instances of Reported Child Abuse.” Clinical

       Pediatrics 18, 87-91, 1979.

Bureau of the Census, U.S. Department of Commerce. “Marriage, Divorce, Widowhood and

       Remarriage by Family Characteristics: June 1975.” Current Population Reports.

       Government Printing Office, Washington D.C., August 1977.

Bureau of the Census, U.S. Department of Commerce. Statistical Abstract of the United States,

       1989. Washington, DC, 1989.

Bureau of Justice Statistics, U.S. Department of Justice. Report to the Nation on Crime and Justice.

       Second Edition. NCJ-105506, March 1988.

Bureau of Justice Statistics, U.S. Department of Justice. Highlights from 20 Years of Surveying

       Crime Victims: The National Crime Victimization Survey, 1973-92. NCJ-144525, October

       1993.

Bureau of Justice Statistics, U.S. Department of Justice. Sourcebook of Criminal Justice Statistics,

       1983. Government Printing Office, Washington D.C., 1984.




                                                 30
Children of Alcoholics Foundation. Helping Children Affected by Parental Addiction and Family

       Violence: Collaboration, Coordination, and Cooperation. New York: Children of

       Alcoholics Foundation, 1996.

Collins, James J. Jr. editor. Drinking and Crime: Perspectives on the Relationships between

       Alcohol Consumption and Criminal Behavior. The Guilford Press, New York, NY, 1981.

Fagan, Jeffrey. “Intoxication and Aggression” in Drugs and Crime: Crime and Justice, A Review

       of Research, Vol. 13. Michael Tonry and James Q. Wilson, Editors. The University of

       Chicago Press, Chicago, 1990.

Fagan, Jeffrey. “Interactions Among Drugs, Alcohol and Violence.” Health Affairs, 12:4, Winter

       1993, 65-79.

Famularo, R., K. Stone, R. Barnum, and R. Wharton. “Alcoholism and Severe Child

       Maltreatment.” American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 56, 481-485, 1986.

Farmer, Amy and Jill Tiefenthaler. “An Economic Analysis of Domestic Violence.” Review of

       Social Economy, 55:3, Fall 1997, 337-358.

Gelles, Richard J. and Claire P. Cornell. Intimate Violence in Families. Sage Publications, Inc.,

       Newbury Park, CA, 1990.

Gil, D. Violence Against Children: Physical Child Abuse in the United States. Harvard University

       Press, Cambridge, MA, 1973.

Greene, William H. Econometric Analysis. Macmillan Publishing Company, New York, NY,

       1993.

Goldstein, Paul J. “The Drugs/Violence Nexus: A Tripartite Conceptual Framework” Journal of

       Drug Issues, 15, Fall 1985, 493-506.




                                                 31
Grossman, Michael and Frank J. Chaloupka. “The Demand For Cocaine By Young Adults: A

       Rational Addiction Approach.” Journal of Health Economics, forthcoming.

Huber, P.J. “The Behavior of Maximum Likelihood Estimates Under Nonstandard Conditions” in

       Fifth Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and Probability. University of

       California Press, Berkley, CA, 1967, 221-233.

Heckman, James J. and Thomas E. MaCurdy. “A Simultaneous Equations Linear Probability

       Model.” Canadian Journal of Economics, 18:1, February 1985, 28-37.

Jobson's Liquor Handbook. Jobson Publishing Corporation, New York, NY, various years.

Kenkel, Donald S. “Drinking, Driving, and Deterrence: The Effectiveness and Social Costs of

       Alternative Policies.” Journal of Law and Economics, 36, October, 1993, 877-913.

Long, Sharon K., Ann D. Witte and Patrice Karr. “Family Violence: A Microeconomic

       Approach.” Social Science Research, 12, 1983.

Markowitz, Sara and Michael Grossman. “Alcohol Regulation and Domestic Violence Towards

       Children.” Contemporary Economic Policy, 16:3, July, 1998.

Modern Brewery Age Blue Book, Norwalk, CT, various years.

Moore, Michael J. and Philip J. Cook. “Habit and Heterogenenity in the Youthful Demand for

       Alcohol.” NBER Working Paper No. 5152, June, 1995.

Moulton, Brent R. “An Illustration of a Pitfall in Estimating the Effects of Aggregate Variables on

       Micro Units.” Review of Economics and Statistics 72:2, May 1990, 334-338.

National Research Council. Understanding and Preventing Violence. Reiss, Albert J., and Jeffery

       A. Roth, Editors. National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1993.




                                                 32
Pernanen, Kai. “Theoretical Aspects of the Relationship Between Alcohol Use and Crime.” in

       Drinking and Crime: Perspectives on the Relationships between Alcohol Consumption and

       Criminal Behavior. James J. Collins Jr., editor. The Guilford Press, New York, NY, 1981.

Straus, Murray A. and Richard J. Gelles. Physical Violence in American families 1976 and 1985

       [Computer File]. Conducted by Murray A. Straus, University of New Hampshire, and

       Richard J. Gelles, University of Rhode Island. 2nd ICPSR ed. Ann Arbor, MI:

       Interuniversity Consortium for Political and Social Research [producer and distributor],

       1994.

Straus, Murray A. and Richard J. Gelles. Physical Violence in American Families : Risk Factors

       and Adaptations to Violence in 8,145 Families. Transaction Publishers, New Brunswick,

       NJ, 1990.

Tauchen, Helen V., Ann Dryden Witte, and Sharon K. Long. “Domestic Violence: A Nonrandom

       Affair.” International Economic Review, May 1991.

Yatchew, Adonis and Zvi Griliches. “Specification Error in Probit Models” The Review of

       Economics and Statistics, 67:1, February 1985, 134-139.




                                                33
                                              FOOTNOTES

           Research for this paper was supported by grant number 1 R01 AA10817 from the National

Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism to the NBER. The authors would like to express thanks

to Robert Kaestner, Linda Edwards, Ted Joyce, Donald Kenkel, Helen Tauchen, Phil Cook, Jeff

DeSimone, and Debbie Viola for many helpful comments and suggestions. Earlier versions of this

paper were presented at a seminar at the City University of New York Graduate Center and at the

annual conferences of the American Economic Association, the Eastern Economic Association and

the Population Association of American. We also thank the conference participants for many

helpful comments and suggestions. This paper has not undergone the review accorded official

NBER publications; in particular, it has not been submitted for approval by the Board of Directors.

Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not that of NIAAA or the NBER.


       1
           The term “child abuse” in Gil’s study refers to physical violence only. This term is also

commonly used to describe sexual abuse and neglect as well as physical abuse (as is the case in the

next two studies cited). The terms “child abuse” and “violence towards children” are used in this

paper to represent physical violence only. Other types of abuse are not considered here.
       2
           An alternative specification would be to have a good, Z, enter the utility function directly.

Z would represent control over the child, stress relief or the quality of the child. Z would be

produced by violence (which could enter positively or negatively) and by other factors, such as

verbal conflict resolution techniques in the case of control or the child’s health and education in the

case of child quality. The addition of Z would not change any of the predictions of the model.
       3
           Drug use can also be considered here. Drugs will enter into the discussion in the same

manner as alcohol and are therefore omitted.




                                                    34
        4
            While technically an efficiency parameter, in the reduced form, α is indistinguishable from

taste variables.
        5
            We assume that the probability and the size of non-monetary costs, which clearly affect the

supply of offenses, are reflected by some or all of the demographic and socioeconomic variables

which are used as controls in the regressions. If α in equation 2 is interpreted as a vector, some of

the elements in this vector may affect the expected value of non-monetary costs as well as

efficiency in the production of violence.
        6
            The first order condition for the optimal time spent in violence is given by:

                       [   ]           [         ]             [ ]                  [
6a) 1 − p (Π , A) U VNLVTv + p(Π, A) U VLVTv = 1 − p(Π, A) U CNL w + p (Π , A) U CL w + U CL LTv   ]
and for alcohol consumption:

                   [            ]            [            ]             [       ]         [      ] ∂A [          ]
7a) 1 − p(Π, A) U ANL + U VNLVA + p(Π, A) U AL + U VLVA = 1 − p (Π, A) U CNL Pa + p(Π, A) U CL Pa − ∂P U L − U NL .

        7
            In the 1976 survey, the question on violence towards the child was not asked if the child

was less than three years old.
        8
            The state oversampling was done to increase the minimum sample sizes of many states.

Accounting for the state oversample by weighting does not alter the results. All results presented

are unweighted.
        9
            The omission of the item “burned or scalded” in the 1976 data is not problematic for

comparison purposes because all respondents except for one who replied yes to burned or scaled

had also responded positively to at least one other item in the severe violence scale.
        10
             Drug stores can also sell beer and liquor in some states, but this variable is not used

because it is highly collinear with the indicator for grocery store sales.




                                                        35
        11
             The calculated test statistic for models that omit the availability measures is 48.00 in 1976

and is 40.07 in 1985. The critical value for a chi-squared with 23 degrees of freedom is 35.17 at the

5 percent level and 41.64 at the 1 percent level. The calculated test statistic for models that include

the availability measures is 56.27 in 1976 and is 44.13 in 1985. The critical value for a chi-squared

with 32 degrees of freedom is 45.91 at the 5 percent level and 52.67 at the 1 percent level.
        12
             Statements concerning statistical significance of coefficients in the text are based on one-

tailed tests at the 5 percent level except when the direction of the effect is unclear on a priori

grounds or when the estimated effect has the wrong sign. In the latter cases two-tailed tests are

used.
        13
             The average tax on beer in 1976 is $0.80 and is $0.47 in 1985.
        14
             The first term in equation 7a is the difference in utilities in the two states. This difference

is simply the loss from violence, which is a function of time spent in violence.
        15
             Probits were also used to estimate both stages of the structural equation. However, the

resulting marginal effects of drunkenness on violence are very similar to those obtained with the

linear probability model.
        16
             Based on the results of the reduced form, the pooled results for the structural models omit

state dummies.
        17
             The marginal effect discussed above is also greater than one in a probit specification of

violence that uses the predicted probability of drunkenness obtained from a first stage probit model.




                                                      36
                                          Table 1
                      Probit Estimates of Severe Violence by Females


                                                    1976                              1985
                                            (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)
State excise tax on beer                   -0.347           -0.282           -0.211           -0.189
                                          (-3.36)          (-2.43)          (-2.19)          (-1.68)
                                           -0.082           -0.065           -0.034           -0.030
Marijuana decriminalization                                  0.307                            -0.008
                                                            (0.54)                           (-0.08)
                                                             0.082                            -0.001
Cocaine price                                                0.0005                           -0.002
                                                            (0.53)                           (-1.67)
                                                             0.0001                           -0.0003
Number of outlets                                            0.262                            -0.057
                                                            (1.75)                           (-0.59)
                                                             0.061                            -0.009
Percent dry                                                 -0.021                            0.001
                                                           (-1.86)                           (0.18)
                                                            -0.005                            0.0002
Grocery sales of beer prohibited                             0.117                            0.357
                                                            (0.30)                           (1.38)
                                                             0.029                            0.070
Billboards prohibited                                        0.168                            -0.081
                                                            (0.47)                           (-0.37)
                                                             0.042                            -0.013
Window displays prohibited                                  -0.478                            -0.015
                                                           (-1.76)                           (-0.11)
                                                            -0.098                            -0.002
Consumer novelties prohibited                                0.327                            0.135
                                                            (1.10)                           (0.43)
                                                             0.085                            0.023
Price advertising prohibited                                 0.115                            -0.065
                                                            (0.73)                           (-0.33)
                                                             0.027                            -0.010
 N                                         623               623              1,638            1,638
 Log likelihood                          -254.678         -249.102          -516.697         -511.923
 Chi-squared on availability                                 7.89                               2.42
       variables                                            [0.048]                            [0.490]
 Chi-squared on advertising                                  3.36                               0.33
       variables                                            [0.500]                            [0.988]
Note: T-statistics in parenthesis, marginal effects in bold italics, p-values in brackets for chi-squared
tests, and intercept not shown. Other regressors include family history of violence, the respondent’s
age, income, race, employment status, religion and measures of stress, single parent status (1985
only) and the child’s age and sex.




                                                    37
                                           Table 2
                        Probit Estimates of Severe Violence by Males


                                                    1976                             1985
                                            (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)
State excise tax on beer                   -0.190           -0.004           0.228            0.296
                                          (-1.29)          (-0.02)          (2.04)           (2.17)
                                           -0.023           -0.0005          0.017            0.019
Marijuana decriminalization                                 -0.232                            0.110
                                                           (-0.28)                           (0.78)
                                                            -0.021                            0.007
Cocaine price                                               -0.002                           -0.001
                                                           (-1.51)                          (-0.55)
                                                            -0.0002                          -0.0001
Number of outlets                                            0.261                            0.138
                                                            (1.50)                           (1.06)
                                                             0.029                            0.009
Percent dry                                                  0.010                            0.012
                                                            (0.66)                           (1.62)
                                                             0.001                            0.001
Grocery sales of beer prohibited                            -0.171                           -0.067
                                                           (-0.25)                          (-0.17)
                                                            -0.017                           -0.004
Billboards prohibited                                        0.059                           -0.464
                                                            (0.13)                          (-1.38)
                                                             0.007                           -0.023
Window displays prohibited                                   0.268                           -0.075
                                                            (0.80)                          (-0.39)
                                                             0.033                           -0.005
Consumer novelties prohibited                               -0.331                            0.830
                                                           (-0.78)                           (2.09)
                                                            -0.031                            0.106
Price advertising prohibited                                -0.145                           -0.022
                                                           (-0.68)                          (-0.08)
                                                            -0.015                           -0.001
 N                                         499               499              1,037            1,037
 Log likelihood                          -137.576         -134.551          -301.479         -297.365
 Chi-squared on availability                                 2.43                               2.97
       variables                                            [0.488]                            [0.396]
 Chi-squared on advertising                                  1.49                               4.73
       variables                                            [0.829]                            [0.317]
Note: T-statistics in parenthesis, marginal effects in bold italics, p-values in brackets for chi-squared
tests, and intercept not shown. Other regressors include family history of violence, the respondent’s
age, income, race, employment status, religion and measures of stress, single parent status (1985
only) and the child’s age and sex.




                                                    38
                                                       Table 3
                                                    Pooled Years
                                         Probit Estimates of Severe Violence

                                                FEMALES                                             MALES
                                          Without         With                         Without                  With
                                       State Dummies State Dummies                  State Dummies          State Dummies
                                         (N=2,261)     (N=2,231)                      (N=1,561)              (N=1,479)

                                         (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)        (5)         (6)        (7)        (8)
State excise tax on beer                -0.247      -0.202    -0.256      -0.257      -0.013      0.032   -0.944        -0.632
                                       (-3.71)     (-2.71)   (-1.22)     (-1.09)     (-0.17)     (0.34)  (-2.84)       (-1.78)
                                        -0.047      -0.038    -0.047      -0.047      -0.002      0.005   -0.136        -0.089
Marijuana decriminalization                          0.014                -0.040                  0.011                 -0.013
                                                    (0.14)               (-0.21)                 (0.09)                (-0.05)
                                                     0.003                -0.007                  0.002                 -0.002
Cocaine price                                       -0.001                 0.001                 -0.001                  0.001
                                                   (-1.31)                (0.63)                (-1.61)                 (0.41)
                                                    -0.0001                0.0002                -0.0002                 0.0001
Number of outlets                                   -0.010                 0.665                  0.063                 -0.407
                                                   (-0.13)                (1.18)                 (0.70)                (-0.49)
                                                    -0.002                 0.122                  0.010                 -0.057
Percent dry                                         -0.003                 0.028                  0.006                 -0.090
                                                   (-0.70)                (0.88)                 (1.09)                (-1.70)
                                                    -0.001                 0.005                  0.001                 -0.013
Grocery sales of beer prohibited                     0.376                                       -0.066
                                                    (2.05)                                      (-0.24)
                                                     0.086                                       -0.010
Billboards prohibited                               -0.044                 -0.512                 0.073                 -0.406
                                                   (-0.28)                (-1.59)                (0.36)                (-0.81)
                                                    -0.008                 -0.075                 0.012                 -0.046
Window displays prohibited                          -0.025                  0.588                -0.016                  0.012
                                                   (-0.24)                 (1.77)               (-0.12)                 (0.03)
                                                    -0.005                  0.129                -0.002                  0.002
Consumer novelties prohibited                       -0.087                 -0.323                -0.101                 -0.249
                                                   (-0.53)                (-1.13)               (-0.50)                (-0.74)
                                                    -0.016                 -0.050                -0.015                 -0.030
Price advertising prohibited                         0.004                  0.072                -0.103                 -0.443
                                                    (0.03)                 (0.37)               (-0.70)                (-1.77)
                                                     0.001                  0.014                -0.015                 -0.052
1976                                     0.371       0.695     0.349       -0.006      0.094      0.656    0.453         0.205
                                        (4.02)      (2.65)    (3.05)      (-0.01)     (0.84)     (1.85)   (2.89)        (0.22)
                                         0.078       0.157     0.071       -0.001      0.015      0.117    0.073         0.030
Log likelihood                        -806.828    -801.445 -785.069      -781.912   -467.958   -465.048 -434.376      -428.822
Likelihood ratio test for pooling       70.90       80.84                             57.81      66.26
Chi-squared on state dummy                                   32.05        31.41                           37.96        41.61
      variables                                               [0.867]      [0.884]                        [0.426]       [0.242]
Chi-squared on availability                          4.43                   1.62                  1.33                   2.90
      variables                                     [0.218]                [0.446]               [0.722]                [0.235]
Chi-squared on advertising                           0.61                   4.74                  0.95                   6.91
      variables                                     [0.961]                [0.315]               [0.918]                [0.141]
Note: T-statistics in parenthesis, marginal effects in bold italics, p-values in brackets for chi-squared tests, and intercept
not shown. Other regressors include family history of violence, the respondent’s age, income, race, employment status,
religion and measures of stress, single parent status, and the child’s age and sex.



                                                              39
                                             Table 4
                                       Structural Equations

                                                       FEMALES                      MALES
                                                      OLS         TSLS           OLS         TSLS
                                                      (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)
                                                               Beer tax is                Beer tax is
                                                                  only                       only
                                                               instrument                 instrument
1976
   Dichotomous indicator of drunkenness                0.072       4.546          0.029       0.830
                                                      (0.89)      (1.67)         (0.64)      (0.96)
   Hausman chi-squared test for exogenity                         2.72                        0.85

   First stage estimates of beer tax                              -0.014                     -0.027
                                                                 (-1.68)                    (-1.33)
   N                                                               608                       516
1985
   Dichotomous indicator of drunkenness                0.053       1.582          0.036      -1.288
                                                      (1.27)      (1.54)         (1.21)     (-1.15)
   Hausman chi-squared test for exogenity                         2.21                        1.41

   First stage estimates of beer tax                              -0.019                     -0.032
                                                                 (-2.00)                    (-1.56)
   N                                                              1,636                      1,033
POOLED
   Dichotomous indicator of drunkenness                0.057       2.077          0.040       0.075
                                                      (1.55)      (2.65)         (1.61)      (0.22)
   Hausman chi-squared test for exogenity                         6.63                        0.01

   First stage estimates of beer tax                              -0.020                     -0.036
                                                                 (-3.12)                    (-2.58)
   N                                                              2,244                      1,549
Note: T-statistics in parenthesis, and intercept not shown. Critical values for Hausman test are 3.84
at 5 percent and 6.63 at 1 percent. Critical values for tests of all the regulatory variables as
instruments (column 3) are 18.31 at 5 percent and 23.21 at one percent. Other regressions include
family history of violence, the respondent’s age, income, race, employment status, religion and
measures of stress, and the child’s age and sex.




                                                 40
                                    Table 5
                           Individual Characteristics
                               Females         Females     Males      Males
                                 1976            1985       1976       1985
State excise tax on beer        -0.347          -0.211     -0.190      0.228
                               (-3.36)         (-2.19)    (-1.29)     (2.04)
                                -0.082          -0.034     -0.023      0.017
Parents hit respondent           0.248           0.299      0.271      0.313
                                (1.59)          (3.17)     (1.19)     (2.51)
                                 0.057           0.049      0.029      0.022
Parents hit each other          -0.048           0.433      0.070      0.149
                               (-0.26)          (4.20)     (0.29)     (1.02)
                                -0.011           0.084      0.009      0.012
Black                            0.269           0.557      0.136      0.193
                                (0.98)          (4.00)     (0.39)     (0.86)
                                 0.071           0.119      0.018      0.016
Hispanic                         0.636           0.206     -0.671     -0.620
                                (2.07)          (1.16)    (-1.38)    (-1.72)
                                 0.193           0.038     -0.049     -0.027
Other race                      -0.145          -0.053                -0.146
                               (-0.23)         (-0.27)      --       (-0.64)
                                -0.032          -0.008                -0.010
Education                       -0.0004          0.020      0.059     -0.026
                               (-0.01)          (0.99)     (1.38)    (-1.12)
                                -0.0001          0.003      0.007     -0.002
Age                             -0.040          -0.005     -0.006      0.011
                               (-3.44)         (-0.64)    (-0.49)     (1.42)
                                -0.009          -0.001     -0.001      0.001
Income                          -0.005          -0.005     -0.001     -0.007
                               (-1.06)         (-1.18)    (-0.17)    (-1.34)
                                -0.001          -0.001     -0.0001    -0.0005
Female child                    -0.126          -0.092     -0.565     -0.349
                               (-0.96)         (-1.05)    (-3.04)    (-2.98)
                                -0.030          -0.015     -0.067     -0.026
Age of child                    -0.007          -0.003     -0.120     -0.021
                               (-0.36)         (-0.24)    (-4.36)    (-1.59)
                                -0.002          -0.0004    -0.014     -0.002
Number children at home          0.088           0.146      0.169      0.085
                                (1.72)          (3.38)     (2.11)     (1.54)
                                 0.021           0.024      0.020      0.006
Part-time                       -0.170           0.078                -0.137
                               (-0.81)          (0.59)      --       (-0.38)
                                -0.038           0.013                -0.009
Unemployed                      -0.170           0.072     0.008      -0.565
                               (-0.34)          (0.49)    (0.02)     (-1.59)
                                -0.037           0.012     0.001      -0.026
Not employed                    -0.222           0.089     0.745      -0.273
                               (-1.27)          (0.81)    (1.93)     (-0.98)
                                -0.054           0.015     0.143      -0.016
Blue collar                      0.091           0.081     0.379      -0.083
                                (0.59)          (0.85)    (1.65)     (-0.68)
                                 0.022           0.013     0.044      -0.006
Catholic                        -0.616           0.751     0.443       0.198
                               (-2.54)          (1.55)    (1.26)      (0.56)
                                -0.127           0.151     0.064       0.016
Jewish                                           0.722     0.221     -41.939
                                  --            (1.13)    (0.45)     (-0.95)
                                                 0.177     0.030      -0.082




                                          41
                                  Table 5 (continued)


Protestant                         -0.301          0.631     0.175    0.046
                                  (-1.36)         (1.31)    (0.53)   (0.13)
                                   -0.073          0.093     0.020    0.003
No religion                        -0.496          0.944    -0.603    0.277
                                  (-1.25)         (1.88)   (-1.22)   (0.72)
                                   -0.091          0.243    -0.048    0.025
Frequency of religious services    -0.010                   -0.046
                                  (-0.33)           --     (-1.18)     --
                                   -0.002                   -0.005
Talks with others                   0.223          0.264     0.016    0.177
                                   (1.55)         (2.69)    (0.08)   (1.06)
                                    0.052          0.046     0.002    0.015
Stress                             -0.029          0.151     0.037    0.037
                                  (-0.83)         (3.52)    (0.94)   (0.70)
                                   -0.007          0.024     0.004    0.003
Single parent                                     -0.125              0.256
                                    --           (-1.05)     --      (1.01)
                                                  -0.019              0.023




                                            42
