       In this paper, we examine trends in relative wages in the United States and

Canada. These trends are of interest for two reasons. First, technological change is likely

to affect the distribution of income. The data considered here illustrate some of the

consequences we can expect from the introduction of new technologies. They also point

in the direction of policy options for dealing with them.

       Second, labor market data open up a new window on the process of technological

change. As the other papers in this volume suggest, new technologies may arrive at

sharply different rates in different decades. There is little doubt that this kind of variation

arises at the level of the firm or even at the level of the industry. The interesting

conjecture is that it also shows up at the level of the economy as a whole.

       The usual way to infer something about variation in the rate of technological

change is to use the fact that new technologies raise the first moment of the distribution

of income. Variation in the rate of technological change should show up as variation in

the rate of growth of average wages, average income, or productivity. However, data on

these variables are increasingly suspect because of problems with price mismeasurement

that may be getting worse as the economy evolves. (See, for example, Zvi Griliches,

1994.) Errors in measures of the price level will bias measures of real output, real wages,

or productivity. Changes in the magnitude of these errors will bias measured rates of

growth in these variables. At the same time that we try to construct better price measures,

we must also explore other indicators of the trend in technology that are not susceptible

to bias from price level mismeasurement.

       If, as many people believe, technological change also influences the second

moment of the wage distribution, we can use the trend in relative wages as an




                                               2
independent indicator of underlying changes in technology. As an alternative indicator,

the ratio of two wages has the advantage that it does not require a price index and is

therefore invulnerable to bias from price mismeasurement. Of course, this measure has its

own disadvantages. For example, relative wages can tell us about the trend in only one

component of technological change — the skill bias. Nevertheless, it is a potentially

revealing measure that we should certainly exploit, along with others, when we try to

understand the evolution of technology over time.

       To get at both of the questions that interest us — How does technology influence

relative wages? and, How has the rate of technological change varied over time? — we

focus in this paper on the university-high school wage premium. We calculate this

premium as the ratio of the wage for someone with a university degree to the wage for

someone with only a high school education. We illustrate the trends in this premium in

Figure 1. This figure presents data from the United States that were explored by

Lawrence Katz and Kevin Murphy (1992). We extend this series with illustrative

estimates for the United States that extend through 1994. The figure also presents new

data for Canada from 1981 to 1994. (Details of the data we use are presented in section 3

below.) For the rest of the analysis presented here, we work with the Katz-Murphy data

through 1987 and process the Canadian data in the same way that that they processed

their data. For our purposes, the key fact about the data illustrated in Figure 1 is that the

university-high school wage premium varies substantially both over time and between

countries. In the United States, it grew during the 1960s and fell during the 1970s.

Throughout the 1980s, the premium grew in the United States yet fell slightly in Canada.




                                               3
       Many people have interpreted movements in relative wages as an indicator of the

forces influencing the demand for different types of labor. In this sense, they are

implicitly adopting the approach that we advocate here — using movements in relative

wages as indicators of changes in relative demands (which are in turn related to

technological change). However, in informal and popular discussions, people often do not

take account of the confounding effects induced by changes in the relative supply of

different types of labor. Katz and Murphy (1992) have shown that in the United States,

the variation in relative wages plotted in Figure 1 is well explained by a steady growth in

relative demand together with the observed changes in relative supply. Changes in

relative supply of university and high school educated workers seem to account for the

substantial decade-to-decade variations in the path of relative wages illustrated in Figure

1. For the 1980s, we find similar differences in rates of growth of different types of labor

between the United States and Canada. As Richard Freeman and Karen Needels (1993)

conjectured, supply changes seem to explain the difference in the behavior of the relative

wages of more- and less-educated workers in these two countries. Our main result is to

show that this qualitative impression carries over to a quantitative representation. The

same model that Katz and Murphy used to explain the difference in trends over time in

the United States also explains the difference between the trend in inequality between the

two countries.

       After Katz and Murphy correct for relative supply changes, they find no evidence

of variation in the rate at which the relative demand for different types of labor has been

shifting over time. After we correct for the effects of changes in supply, we find no

evidence of differences in the rate at which the relative demand is shifting in Canada and




                                             4
the US. We also find that over the entire sample period the underlying trend seems to

have been increasing relative demand at a steady rate. However, within some sub-periods

there is some evidence of a slowdown and subsequent speedup relative to the underlying

trend. Whether or not this evidence weighs against the hypothesis that the process of

technological change has varied in a fundamental way in recent decades is discussed

later.

         Of course, it is possible that forces such as increased openness to international

trade are also shifting the relative demand for labor. It is also possible that the factor bias

of technological change (the part of technological change that we measure with relative

wages) changes at a steady rate even though the productivity effect of technological

change varies from decade to decade. For both of these reasons, one must be cautious in

interpreting the meaning of the shifts we infer in the relative demand for labor. The

evidence we offer is only one of many different bits of evidence that need to be weighed

in making a judgment about overall trends in technological change.

         But regardless of how we interpret shifts in the relative demand for labor, it is

clear that one cannot infer anything about the magnitude of these shifts, or even their

direction, without first correcting for changes in relative supplies of labor. In the data we

examine, changes in supply appear to be the most important force causing decade-to-

decade and country-to-country variation in trends in relative wages. If this relationship

holds more generally, it has important implications for policy responses to growing wage

inequality caused by technological change. Policy makers who want to influence relative

wages may find it easier and more productive to adjust the relative supply of workers

with different levels of education than the relative demand. If the government adopts




                                               5
policies which raise educational attainment of some workers, it simultaneously increases

the relative supply of more educated workers and lowers the relative supply of less

educated workers. Educational subsidies can therefore have a doubly powerful effect on

the relative supply. We find a relatively high degree of substitution between different

types of workers. Nevertheless, feasible changes in government policies — changes that

are of the same magnitude as the differences in policies we see between the United States

and Canada — can have a substantial effect on the wage premium, and therefore on

income inequality. Moreover, other kinds of policies to encourage skill formation are

likely to have the same effect.

       In the next section, we relate our results to work from labor economics, economic

history, and growth theory. We also outline some of the main positions in the old political

debate about economic prospects for workers in the bottom part of the income

distribution. Then we present our basic model and describe our data and results. We

conclude with some conjectures about how to reconcile our wage-based finding of no

change in the process of technological change with the usual quantity-based finding of a

substantial productivity slowdown in the 1970s.


1. Technological change, income inequality, and policy

       Although few economists stress the connection, the assumption that new

technologies (or new types of capital goods) are relative complements with more

educated labor is closely related to the popular intuition that machinery and new

technology harm low-skill workers. This concern forms the basis for one side in the long-

standing debate about the connection between technology, growth and income inequality,

a debate that goes back at least to Ricardo’s discussion of machinery.


                                             6
       In this debate, proponents of what one could call the “interventionist” position

start from the presumption that technological change harms workers in the bottom part of

the income distribution. They conclude that the gains from economic growth will be

widely shared only if governments adopt activist policies that resist market forces.

Examples of such policies include a minimum wage, regulations limiting work hours,

unemployment insurance, workers’ compensation, employment standards, and support

for unions that negotiate above market wages. Proponents of the interventionist position

believe that the advanced industrial economies have been able to achieve a relatively

equal sharing of the gains from growth only because governments adopted these

measures. Many of them fear that a process of global competition will lead to an erosion

of these interventions and a corresponding growth in income inequality.

       An opposing pole in this debate comes from within the economics profession.

Economists do not necessarily oppose the kinds of social welfare policies advocated by

the interventionists. Some do, and some do not. However, they are close to unanimous

that these measures by themselves cannot explain much of the gains in standards of living

experienced by people in the bottom half of the income distribution. The economists

argue that technological change and the market forces it unleashes tend naturally to raise

the incomes of all members of the labor force, just as the proverbial rising tide lifts all

boats. According to this view, wages for all types of workers will naturally tend to grow

as technological change raises the average level of income.

       Paul Samuelson’s principles textbook gives a representative statement of this

rising-tide position as of the mid-1960s:




                                              7
       An alternative theory would ascribe the rise of wages under capitalism to (1)
       trade-union pressure, (2) government regulation of monopoly, and (3)
       interventions of a welfare and regulatory kind by democratic governments
       reacting to militant political pressures from the masses. This cannot be rejected as
       without substance, for we have seen throughout this book that government actions
       do have consequences for both good and evil. But the magnitude and pattern of
       the rise in real wages in this last century has been such as to cast doubt on union
       or political action as an important element in its explanation. … With the advance
       of technology and the piling up of a larger stock of capital goods, it would take a
       veritable miracle of the devil to keep real wages of men from being bid ever
       higher with each passing decade. Who fails to see this fails to understand the
       fundamentals of economic history, as it actually happened. (Samuelson, 1964, p.
       773)



Samuelson is surely correct when he argues that supporters of the interventionist position

are wrong about the reasons why income gains have been widely shared since the

beginning of the industrial revolution. However, his explanation in terms of capital

accumulation and technological change fails to confront the microeconomic evidence

suggesting that everything else equal, technological progress can harm large parts of the

labor force even as it helps others.

       The neoclassical vision that Samuelson articulates, one based on the assumption

that technology is a complement with a homogeneous labor aggregate, has dominated

textbook and policy discussions of wage trends for many years. Economists formalized

this view in the neoclassical growth model based on two factors of production: capital

and labor. It continues to be embedded in most treatments of aggregate growth. Even

growth models that explicitly introduce human capital as a separate factor of production

generally do so in a way that makes more educated workers perfect substitutes with less


                                             8
educated workers (Assaf Razin, 1972; Robert Lucas, 1988) or that makes technology a

complement with both types of labor (N. Gregory Mankiw, David Romer and David

Weil, 1992; Paul Romer, 1990). Either way, there is no scope in such models for

technological change to differentially affect wages for workers with different levels of

education. In particular, there is no recognition that technological change can reduce

wages for some workers.

       However, there are two important lines of work in economics that do treat

different types of labor as inputs that could be differentially affected by technological

progress or capital accumulation. Since the work of Sherwin Rosen (1968) and Griliches

(1969), a number of labor economists have presented evidence supporting the notion that

higher skilled or more educated workers benefit disproportionately from capital

investment or technological change. The evidence is sketchy, but tends to suggest that

more educated workers are stronger complements with new investment than less

educated workers. It also suggests that there is a relatively high degree of substitution

between these two types of workers. (See Daniel Hamermesh, 1993, for a summary of

research on these questions.)

       These conclusions are reinforced by the work of economic historians on education

and wages. In the last century, the level of educational attainment in the population has

increased substantially. (See, for example, the discussion of the experience in the US

presented by Claudia Goldin, 1994.) In the absence of some force that increases the

relative demand for educated labor, this increase in the relative supply of more educated

workers should have driven their relative wage inexorably downward if more educated

workers are not perfect substitutes with less educated workers.




                                              9
       Both the historical evidence (e.g., Katz and Goldin, 1995) and the contemporary

evidence from labor markets (Hamermesh, 1992; Katz and Murphy, 1992) suggest that

relative wages for more educated workers do fall when the supply of educated workers

outpaces growth in demand. This evidence and everyday experience both suggest that

workers with different levels of education are not perfect substitutes. Four workers with

six years of education cannot do the job that one worker with 24 years of education can

do. Adding more workers with a primary education to the task usually will not help. The

elasticity of substitution between more- and less-educated workers is large, but it is not

infinite. They are substitutes, but they are not perfect substitutes.

       Nevertheless, the general historical pattern is one with no persistent tendency for

relative wages of more educated workers to fall despite the large increases in their

relative supply. For more than a century, some force must therefore have been increasing

the relative demand for more educated workers.

       Some economists have pointed to increased international trade as the source of the

demand shifts that have taken place in the last couple of decades. (Edward Leamer, 1996;

Adrian Wood, 1994). Most attempts at quantifying the effects of trade fall far short of

explaining the shifts (Jeffrey Sachs and Howard Shatz, 1994) or find other evidence that

is inconsistent with the trade explanation (Katz and Murphy, 1992; Robert Lawrence and

Matthew Slaughter, 1993). Nevertheless, the interpretation of the shifts remains open

because it is difficult to offer direct evidence on the effects of technological change.

(However, see, for example, Frank Levy and Richard Murnane, 1996.) The historical

evidence is relevant because it reminds us that the pattern of relative demand shifts

extends back at least into the last century. Any explanation based on developments in the




                                              10
world trading system since World War II cannot capture the whole story. It also fails to

explain why levels of education have been growing throughout the world without driving

down the worldwide returns to education.

        Technological change is an obvious candidate force that has been impinging on

the economy for centuries. There is no theoretical presumption that technological change

will always tend to raise the demand for more educated workers. Nevertheless, the

evidence suggests that over long historical periods, it has done so.

       In their analysis of historical trends, the proponents of the interventionist

interpretation overestimate the power of conventional labor market policies. They also

fail to appreciate the overwhelming importance of education as a force that limits the

growth in inequality. But in responding to the interventionists, the proponents of the

rising-tide view tend to oversimplify, perhaps even overstate, their case. They gloss over

both the theory and the evidence suggesting that technological change can depress both

relative and absolute wages for workers in the bottom part of the skill or educational

distribution. Like the interventionists, advocates for the rising-tide model also fail to

emphasize the importance of increases in educational attainment.

       In language that they borrow from Jan Tinbergen (1975), Katz and Goldin (1996)

suggest that it is more appropriate to think of the behavior of the relative wage of the

skilled and unskilled as the outcome of a race between technological change and

increases in educational attainment. The theory and evidence that we present here fits

more comfortably with this education-race view than it does with either the

interventionist or rising-tide explanations for the interaction between growth and

inequality.




                                              11
       In recent years, the various positions in the debate about wages and technology

have become more complicated than these three positions suggest. The growth in wage

inequality in the United States during the 1980s made it increasingly difficult to support a

pure version of the rising-tide position on growth and wages. As a result, a variety of

economists began to consider once again the possibility that technological change could

increase inequality. Because they believe that the rising-tide theory fits the historical

facts, they suggest that something fundamental about the nature of technology must have

changed. This re-examination has lent additional importance to the concept of a “general

purpose technology” or GPT that was defined by Timothy Bresnahan and Manuel

Trajtenberg (1995) and analyzed in the context of a model of growth by Elhanan

Helpman and Trajtenberg (1994). The introduction of a new general-purpose technology

is a natural way to explain a sharp change in the nature and consequences of

technological change.

       In economic history in general and especially in discussions of technology, there

are many antecedents for the concept of a general purpose technology (GPT). For

example, it is closely related to the concept of “technological convergence” as described

by Nathan Rosenberg (1963) in his discussion of the central role that machine tools

played in the development of industry in the last century. It can also be understood as a

refinement and formalization of the concept of a technological trajectory as described by

Christopher Freeman and Carlota Perez (1988).

       As it has come to be used, both in this volume and more generally, the concept of

a GPT captures two distinct ideas. First, it formalizes the notion that technological

change is an irregular process that can have different effects on the economy at different




                                              12
times. Second, the concept of a GPT reminds us that adopting new technologies can be

costly and disruptive. In this sense, it echoes and partially rehabilitates the old Ricardian

and Marxian vision of technology as a double-edged sword.

       This first part of the GPT concept — the claim that technological change can be

radically different in different periods — offers one possible reason why technological

change seemed to have different effects in the 1950s and 1960s as opposed to the 1970s

and 1980s. This leads to the fourth and final theoretical position that we identify

concerning the relationship between growth and inequality. The “trend-break” hypothesis

argues that developments in the last two decades represent an important departure from

the rest of the post-WWII period. According to the most common statement of this view,

the digital computer is the natural candidate for a GPT that began working its way

through the economy in the last two decades. Some economists have argued that this

approach offers a unified explanation for both the productivity slowdown and the

increase in wage inequality (Jeremy Greenwood and Mehmet Yorukoglu, 1997). Others

recognize that it is difficult to explain the difference in the timing of these events with a

single technology shock. The productivity slowdown in the United States was evident in

the data even before the oil shock in the early 1970s. Wage inequality did not begin to

increase until the end of the 1970s. As a result, other proponents of the trend-break view

have used the arrival of the computer to explain just the productivity slowdown (Paul

David, 1991) or just the developments in the labor market (Alan Krueger, 1993).

       There are many possible versions of the trend-break position and combinations of

this position with the other positions outlined here. For example, the economy could

cycle back and forth. In periods when a new GPT is being introduced, productivity




                                              13
growth slows and income inequality could increase. In periods when existing GPTs are

being developed, productivity growth could be more rapid and income inequality could

shrink. Yet over long periods of time, the average behavior of the economy could look

like one characterized by the rising-tide model (Helpman and Trajtenberg, 1994).

Alternatively, the trend break could be imposed on top of a model of an education race,

as suggested by David Autor, Katz, and Krueger (1997).

       In this broader context, we can restate our conclusions. Based on the behavior of

wages in the United States and Canada, we see no reason to prefer a trend-break model to

a pure model of an education race with a constant rate of technological change. The

education race model seems to fit the historical data and our evidence on developments

over the last few decades and between the US and Canada. In this sense, our evidence

does not provide any aggregate level support for the first of the two ideas subsumed in

the concept of the GPT — the idea that there are sharp breaks in the process of

technological change. This does not deny the importance of irregularity or trend breaks in

the analysis of technological change at the microeconomic level or in the analysis of

specific technologies like digital computing. It merely suggests that their effects may

average out if there are enough different technologies following independent trajectories.

At the aggregate level, the process may resemble most closely a steady process of

technological change.

       Although a steady rate of technological advance does appear to fit best with our

Canadian and U.S. evidence over the entire sample period, we do find some evidence of a

slowdown and speedup phenomenon during relatively brief sub-periods of the U.S.




                                            14
experience. As we note later, this evidence appears consistent with some theoretical

predictions of the economy-wide impacts of GPTs.

        In developing this position, we are forced to move well outside the framework of

a simple neoclassical model in which one can treat labor as a homogeneous commodity

or treat all factors of production as complements with technology. We allow skilled labor

and unskilled labor to be substitutes for each other and take seriously the possibility that

technological change can reduce the relative or absolute wage for low skilled workers. It

has long been clear that it is theoretically possible for Ricardo’s fears to be realized. (See

for example, Samuelson, 1988.) The evidence from the labor market that we examine

supports Ricardo’s concerns about machinery, or, more precisely, it supports a closely

related concern about technology. It suggests that this concern is of real significance in

practice, not just in principle.

        In this sense, we support and extend the revisionist interpretation of technological

change that is implicit in the concept of a GPT. In the neo-classical growth model and

simple endogenous growth models, technological advance tends to raise the marginal

productivity of all factors of production, and growth proceeds in a smooth fashion by

scaling up the marginal productivity of all factors of production. The new interpretation

implicit in the concept of a GPT is that new technologies cause large changes in the

relative marginal productivity of different inputs. These changes in relative returns induce

large changes in prices and offsetting changes in patterns of investment throughout the

economy. Our interpretation of the evidence in terms of an education race is fully

consistent with this second thread in the concept of a general purpose technology.




                                              15
2. Model


       The basic model that we use to motivate our analysis starts with a constant

elasticity of substitution aggregator that depends on university-educated labor, H, and

high school-educated labor, L. Because we are interested in the effects of technological

change, not its sources, we will represent technological change in terms of exogenous

functions of time. Specifically, we characterize technological change in terms of two

functions of time, A(t) and B(t). The first augments the services of university-educated

workers; the second augments high school-educated workers. Then we nest the

expression for labor inside a Cobb-Douglas function that depends on this labor aggregate

and physical capital, K:



                       Y = F( K , H, L, t )

                           = K  γ 0 A(t ) H 5          + (1 − γ )0 B(t ) L5 
                                                                                 (1−α )σ
                                                 σ −1                    σ −1              (1)
                                                                            
                               α                                                   σ −1
                                                  σ                       σ




       When we use this kind of single-sector, aggregate production function, we must

be clear about what it means. At time t, F(K,H,L,t) represents the maximum possible

output for an economy with total resources K, H, and L. This kind of aggregate

production function is always well defined. However, there is no reason to believe that

actual economies satisfy the assumptions from aggregation theory necessary for us to be

able to give this aggregate production any simple interpretation in terms of the production

functions of individual firms.

       For example, the parameter σ, which controls the elasticity of substitution

between H and L in the aggregate economy, may not be closely related to the elasticity


                                                        16
of substitution faced by an individual firm. Shifts between firms or industries may be

more important than shifts within firms. Similarly, one cannot necessarily interpret the

aggregate augmentation factors A(t) and B(t) in terms of standard microeconomic

processes of technological change. At the firm level, one would typically impose the

restriction that technological factors that augment inputs like H and L are monotonically

nondecreasing. In general, this kind of microeconomic assumption does not imply

anything about the behavior of the aggregate functions A(t) and B(t).

       We make one final observation. When we apply this model to data from the last

four decades, we will interpret more educated workers H as workers with a university

degree and less educated workers L as workers with a high school education. However,

if we wanted to apply the model to earlier historical periods, we would bring in additional

levels of education. What constitutes a less skilled worker changes over time. For

example, if we let M denote workers with only a primary school education, we could

write an extended production function F$ as follows:

            F$ ( K , H , L, M , t ) =

                        γ 1 A(t ) H 6                                                    
                                                                                               (1−α )σ

                                                 + ϕ 1 B( t ) L6 + (1 − γ − ϕ )1 D(t ) M 6 
                                          σ −1               σ −1                      σ −1      σ −1

                                                                                          
                    α
                K                          σ                  σ                         σ




       In the decades from the 1960s to the 1990s, a period of time when university

graduates became a significant fraction of the labor force, changes in the economy made

the factor A(t) grow relatively rapidly and made the factor B(t) grow slowly or shrink.

The number of workers with primary education M was sufficiently small that the

dominant group in the “less educated” workers is those with high school education.

However, at the turn of the century, an insignificant fraction of the labor force was




                                                                17
university educated. Relatively few workers were high school educated, and they were

relatively more educated compared to workers with only a primary school education. At

that time, changes in the economy were leading to a greater demand for high school

workers. In terms of the model, B(t) was growing rapidly compared to A(t) and D(t).

(See Goldin 1994, Goldin and Katz, 1995, 1996 for a description of the changes that were

taking place.) Thus, whether a high school-educated worker is a relatively high-skilled or

a relatively low-skilled worker depends very much on the epoch one considers.

        If we neglect the primary-educated workers and return to our basic equation (1),

we can solve for the ratio of the marginal products of the two types of labor:

                                                     H 
                                                           σ −1           1
                                                                      −
                                         WH    A(t )        σ             σ

                                         WL
                                            =C
                                                      L
                                               B(t )
                                                                                            (2)


where C is a constant. We can define growth rate functions gA(t) and gB(t) by the rules

                                  gA (t ) = ln( A(t )), gB (t ) = ln( B(t )).

Then we can take logarithms in equation (2) and write

                            W 0t 5 = c + σ − 1 (g (t) − g (t )) − 1 ln H  .
                            W                                       σ  L
                              H
                      ln                                                                    (3)
                              L               σ        A          B




        This is the equation that we will confront with the data. We will be interested in

the hypothesis that the data are consistent with a model in which the difference

g(t)= gA (t ) − gB (t ) grows linearly with time. If they are, we can write equation 3 as

                                        W 0t 5 = c + σ − 1 gt − 1 ln H 
                                        W                         σ  L
                                          H
                                  ln                                                        (4)
                                          L               σ

for some constant g. If this restriction holds, we can also write this relation in difference

form:




                                                      18
                                     W   1t 6 = σσ− 1 g − σ1 ∆% HL 1t 6 ,
                               ∆%
                                     W                                                  (5)
                                       H

                                       L



where ∆%X stands for the percentage change in X.


3. Data

United States

       Except for the illustrative data used in Figure 1, the data for the United States are

the same as those used in Katz and Murphy (1992), so our description will be relatively

brief. We describe the details primarily to illustrate the steps we will take with the

Canadian data. Raw data from the US come from the March Current Population Survey

covering data for years from 1963 to 1987. Katz and Murphy use two different samples to

construct the wage and labor supply series. The preferred wage series tracks as closely as

possible the wage for a homogenous group of workers, so the sample is restricted to

people with strong labor market attachment. For labor supply, they use a much broader

sample that reflects total hours, by education category, actually worked in the economy in

each year. The labor supply series include hours worked for essentially all people in the

CPS.

       The wage series for high school graduates is based on wages for people with 12

years of schooling. The series for university graduates is based on wages for people who

report having 16 or more years of schooling. After eliminating people who participated in

the labor force less than 39 weeks in the year prior to the March survey, Katz and

Murphy classify workers by sex (2 cells) and years of experience (8 cells). In each of

these 16 cells, they calculate an average wage for each year, then form a wage for all high

school graduates (or all university graduates) by taking a weighted average of wages in



                                                   19
the different cells. The weights are based on the fraction of total hours worked by all

individuals in the cell, averaged over all years in the sample. Because the weights do not

change over time, both the high school and university wage series give an estimate of the

average wage for a pool of workers with fixed demographic characteristics.

       To construct the labor supply series, they count hours worked for all workers and

classify them into four categories based on educational attainment: less than 12 years, 12

years, 13-15 years, and 16 or more years of schooling. Labor supply in each of these four

categories is calculated by assuming that workers within these categories are perfect

substitutes and summing up total hours worked using efficiency units based on average

wages for each sex and experience cell.

       In the final stage, they aggregate hours worked for these four educational

categories into two series corresponding to hours of work by high school-equivalent

workers and hours worked by university-equivalent workers. Because we do not want to

assume that workers with different levels of education are perfect substitutes, we have to

be careful not to use the wrong procedure to do this aggregation. For example, if we

followed an efficiency units approach, we could assume that a worker with 14 years of

education is a more efficient provider of the kind of labor provided by high school

graduates, and use the ratio of wages for these workers to high school-educated workers

to find the scaling factor. Or we could assume that this worker is a less efficient provider

of the kind of labor provided by university graduates, and use the ratio of their wages to

wages for university graduates to calculate efficiency units for them.

       To establish the basic units of measurement, assume that in the United States,

individuals with 12 years of education supply, on average, one hour of high school-




                                             20
equivalent labor per hour worked. Similarly, assume that someone with 16 or more years

of education supplies one hour of university-equivalent labor per hour worked. To deal

with the other two categories, Katz and Murphy assumed that someone in educational

category i supplied ai hours, measured in efficiency units, of high school-equivalent

labor per hour worked and bi hours, measured in efficiency units, of university-

equivalent labor per hour worked. They estimate the coefficients ai and bi by running a

regression (with no constant term) of the wage series for people in education category i

on wages for high school workers and university educated workers:

                                     wi = ai wL + bi wH .                               (6)

In this expression, wL and wH represent the wage series for the high school- and

university-educated workers respectively.


Canada


       There are a number of arbitrary choices one must make in constructing aggregate

relative wage and relative supply series. There are valid rationales for different choices

and none of these choices seem to make an important difference to our final results. Our

goal in processing the data for Canada was simply to follow as closely as possible the

treatment that Katz and Murphy used for the data in the United States. However, because

the measurement of educational attainment in the Canadian survey differs from that in the

United States and because the Canadian data are available for fewer years, the exact

procedures we followed differ slightly.

       The data for Canada come from the Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF), an

annual supplement to the Labour Force Survey carried out in April of each year. This



                                             21
annual supplement is very similar to the March CPS. Indeed, these two surveys have been

used in other comparisons of the Canadian and US labor markets. (See for example, the

articles in Card and Freeman, 1993.) The SCF has data on all individuals 15 years of age

and older starting only in 1981. Before that year, hours worked are publicly available

only for heads-of-households, yet reported income is for the entire household. In

addition, this survey did not collect data for 1983. Thus, our sample includes the 13 years

1981-82 and 1984-94.

       The SCF does not report years of education. Instead it reports 5 categories of

educational attainment: (1) attended primary school, (2) some high school, (3) some post-

secondary, (4) diploma or certificate from a community college, (5) a university degree.

Throughout this paper, we follow the Canadian usage and distinguish between a

university degree and a college diploma or certificate. A college diploma or certificate

typically requires 2 years whereas a university degree generally requires 3 or 4 years.

(Because students in the province of Ontario typically continue in high school through

grade 13, they may complete the course of study in what one would consider a 4-year

institution in only 3 years.) We treat the average worker with some high school as the

basic unit for high school equivalent labor in Canada. Note that this is a different unit

from the one used in the United States, 12 years of schooling. We allow for a correction

factor that takes account of this and any other stable differences between the US and

Canada. Naturally, we treat the average worker with a university degree as the unit for

measuring hours worked by university-educated workers.

       As for the data from the US, we use the survey information on earnings and

weeks of work during the previous year rather than the month of the survey. Because the




                                             22
SCF does not ask about usual hours worked in the previous year, we simply use weeks

worked instead of total hours as our labor supply measure. The CPS does ask this

question so labor supply for the US is measured in hours worked. For Canada, we

discarded any records with non-positive earnings or weeks worked. We formed an

estimate of total labor supply using a sample that includes everyone with positive weeks

worked. Following the Katz-Murphy treatment of the US data, we formed a separate

sample to estimate the weekly wages (annual earnings divided by weeks worked). In the

wage sample, we included full time, paid workers with 39 or more weeks in the labor

force and who earned at least one half of the full-year, full-time minimum wage earnings

during the year.

       We formed cells based on the five educational attainment categories described

above, eight experience categories, and the two sexes. Because the survey gives

educational attainment by broad category rather than by years of education completed,

we subtracted the average years associated with a given level of attainment from age to

form an estimate of years of experience in the labor market for workers in each

educational category.

       The SCF made a major change in the educational attainment questions which

affect the years 1989 and after. Although the education questions were much improved,

the pre-1989 and post-1989 data are not comparable. At present, no parallel survey for

estimating independent conversion factors is available. We adjusted the data by fitting a

trend and a post-1989 dummy to each time series. We adjusted the post-1989 data by the

value of the coefficient on the post 1989 dummy. These adjustments do not make much

difference for the real weekly wage series but do matter for the weeks worked series. If




                                            23
more data becomes available, it would be useful to improve on this crude adjustment

procedure.

        The final step is to aggregate our five labor supply series to two series of labor

supply measured in units of high school equivalents and university equivalents. As noted

above, we treated people in the some-high-school category as our reference level for

measuring high school equivalents. That is, we assumed that the average Canadian

worker in the some-high-school category supplied one hour of Canadian high-school

equivalent labor per hour worked. One Canadian high-school equivalent hour will differ

from one US high-school equivalent hour because we defined high school equivalent

workers in the US in terms of people with 12 years of education. If there are any

differences in the quality of the Canadian and US educational systems, this will also lead

to a difference in the two concepts of hours of high-school labor supplied in the two

countries. Finally, labor supply in Canada is in weeks worked. In the US it is hours

worked.

        We make an allowance for these differences when we compare the two countries.

We can do this because all of our estimates depend only on the rate of growth of H/L,

not on its level. In principle, it is possible that a university education has a different

market value in the two countries. Our adjustment allows for this possibility as well,

provided the difference in quality does not change over time.

        Table 1 reports the fraction of total weeks worked that are accounted for by each

of the five different education categories in Canada. These fractions are based on

averages taken over all 13 years for which we have data in the 14 years from 1981 to

1994. It also reports the rates of growth of total weeks supplied by people in each of these




                                               24
categories. Workers with college diplomas or certificates supply slightly more labor than

university graduates and their labor supply grows as rapidly as the labor supply of

university graduates.

                          Primary      Some          Some post-    College    University
                           school       high         secondary    graduates   graduates
                                       school
     Fraction of total       7%         47%            10%          18%          17%
      weeks worked
      Growth rate of       -5.3%       -0.1%           2.4%         5.3%        5.2%
      weeks worked
 Table 1: Summary statistics on weeks worked by educational category in Canada


       Our final challenge is to allocate weeks worked by people in the three remaining

educational categories: primary school, some post-secondary schooling, and college

graduate. As before, we assume that on average, a worker in category i supplies a fixed

number ai of efficiency units of high school-equivalent hours per week worked and a

fixed number bi of efficiency units of university-equivalent labor per week worked.

       We have only 13 annual observations on wages for each of the five educational

attainment categories. In addition, wages in Canada do not exhibit the kind of sharp

movements that we see in the United States in the Katz-Murphy sample. For both of these

reasons, any attempt to use a regression to estimate the coefficients in an equation like (6)

is unlikely to yield very precise estimates. As a result, we tried a variety of different

estimates for ai and bi and found that our conclusions were not sensitive to the values

we used.

       Workers who have completed a primary school education are relatively easy to

handle. In both countries, wages of primary school-educated workers are little different

from wages for people in some-high-school or 12-year categories. In Canada, they earn



                                                25
about 98% of the wages for the workers with some high school. In the United States,

workers with less than 12 years of education earn about 94% of the wages earned by

workers with 12 years of education. In each country, we allocated 95% of the labor

supply of workers in the lowest skill category to labor supply for high school equivalents

and allocated none of their labor to university equivalents:

                                      average Wprimary
                      aprimary =                               = 0.95,   bprimary = 0 .
                                   average Wsome high school

       These are very close to the weights of .94 and -.04 used by Katz and Murphy.

They used weights of .69 and .29 to allocate work effort by workers with some post-

secondary education to high school equivalents and university equivalents respectively.

Because we could not estimate these weights for the some post secondary and college

diploma categories in Canada, we followed the lead of Autor, Katz, and Krueger (1997).

In one of their estimates, they set both of the weights ai and b i for workers with

education beyond high school equal to 0.5. Like them, we allocated one half of the weeks

worked by workers with some post-secondary education to high school equivalents and

one half to university equivalents. We used these same values for people with a college

education.

       Figure 2 illustrates the small difference that it makes when we change the weights

for the United States from the ones estimated by Katz and Murphy to the more arbitrary

ones we used in both samples in our analysis. It plots both the logarithm of the actual

university-high school relative wage and the predictions generated by the two different

labor supply series. One series uses the Katz-Murphy weights and replicates their

regression:




                                                      26
                             w  = constant −.71 ln H  + .033 t , R
                             w               (.15)  L  (.007)
                       ln      H                                             2
                                                                                 =.52
                               L



Standard errors are reported below the coefficient estimates. The relative supply series

with the new weights generates slightly different coefficient estimates

                             w  = constant −.81 ln H  + .035 t , R
                             w               (.16)  L  (.007)
                       ln      H                                             2
                                                                                 =.53
                               L



As the figure shows, these two equations and relative supply series generate very similar

predictions for the relative wage. We also checked that our conclusions remain the same

if we use the Katz-Murphy weights for both countries instead of the weights described

here.


4. Estimation and Results


        Figure 3 illustrates the sense in which we need to impose some restriction on the

behavior of g(t) over time to be able to pin down the elasticity σ. If we take equation

(3) and solve for g(t) we have

                                          σ  %&                     ()
                                              ' 
                                                w         1   H
                              g (t ) =
                                         σ −1    wL       σ
                                              ln H ( t ) + ln
                                                              L          *
                                                                (t ) − c .


Given a value for σ, we can calculate the time path for g(t) up to a constant term, which

is of no interest. The figure plots the values of g(t) calculated in this way for different

values of σ and for both the United States and Canada. In their analysis of data for the

United States, Katz and Murphy found a value of σ equal to 1.41. Thus, in this figure, we

plot data for σ equal to 1.25, 1.5, and 2. We have adjusted the vertical position of the

curves to make the graph more readable. The vertical position carries no information.




                                                     27
Only the slope matters. In addition to the data series, the figure also plots trend lines

calculated from a linear regression of g(t) on time.

        If, based on a priori information, one specified that g(t) follows precisely the time

path associated with one of the values of σ, then inference conditional on this path for

g(t) would select precisely this value of σ. In this sense, we cannot identify σ without

imposing some restriction on the behavior of g(t). There is a one-dimensional continuum

of values for σ and paths for g(t) that will fit the data exactly. Thus, for every possible

value of σ, there is a path for g(t) that would rationalize this value. However, the

converse is not true. Because the set of possible paths is much larger than the one-

dimensional set of possible values for σ, we generally will not be able to find a value for

σ that will make an arbitrary path consistent with the data. Thus we can test and reject

hypotheses about the behavior of g(t).

       Figure 3 also illustrates one of the basic messages from our analysis. In this figure,

we have not imposed any restriction that forces the slopes of the trend lines to be the

same in Canada and the US for each value of σ. Nevertheless, these slopes are very close.

Also, for all of the illustrated values of σ, the path for g(t) fits a straight line surprisingly

well. The one exception, to which we will return below, arises when g(t) seems to grow

more slowly starting in about 1976 and then grows faster and recovers back to the trend

line starting in 1982.


       Figure 4 shows what happens if we impose the restriction that g(t) is equal to gt

and then estimate the parameters σ and g. This figure plots the actual and predicted

values of the relative wage in the United States and Canada along with the predicted




                                               28
values from the regression. (To improve readability, note that the values for Canada are

plotted against a scale that is translated vertically downward.) The regression estimates

behind this equation are


                             w  = c                          
                                                                 H
                             w               + cCanada −.73 ln
                                                                  
                                                                   + .032 t , R 2 =.56 .    (7)
                               H
                       ln                 US
                               L                         (.13)   L  (.006)

We also performed a Chow test to see whether the Canadian and U.S. parameters differ.

The F statistic for testing the null hypothesis that slope and trend coefficients are the

same is F2,33= 1.2. If we impose the Katz-Murphy weights on both countries, the

corresponding statistic is F2,33= 1.4. In either case, we cannot reject the hypothesis that

the coefficients are the same.

       In this equation, we have allowed for separate constant terms for Canada and the

US. To account for the differences between the data for the two countries, we assume that

the true value of H/L in one country, measured in terms of the definitions from the other

country, differs from our estimate by a constant factor. When we take logarithms of the

relative supply, this factor will be captured in the different values for the constant term.

These will pick up any systematic differences between the measured variables in the two

countries.

       Equation 5, which we repeat below, helps us illustrate why the data imposes some

restrictions on the trend process even though σ is not, strictly speaking, identified.

                               W     1t 6 = σσ− 1 g − σ1 ∆% HL 1t 6
                       ∆%
                               W                                                          (5’)
                                   H

                                   L




                                                          29
Roughly speaking, we ask whether the data are consistent with the restriction imposed by

this equation, and test it against the alternative that the trend rate of growth g takes on

different values in the first and second halves of the sample.

       Figure 5 gives an alternative representation of the data represented in Figure 2, a

representation that is suggested by equation 5. This figure collapses the data into three

key periods in the US data and adds a fourth data point for Canada. The three periods in

the US were determined by picking the turning points in the predicted relative wage

series in Figure 4. After aggregating the data into these four points, we can put them on

the scatter diagram suggested by equation 5. According to this equation, these points

should fit on a straight line with slope − 1σ and should have an intercept g. As Figure 2

suggests, the data are roughly consistent with this characterization. We could also fit

these four points with four different lines that have the same slope and four different

intercepts. These intercepts will correspond to the implied values for g in each period.

However, as Figure 5 shows, we will not be able to do so in a way that makes g

consistently different in the first and second halves of the sample. For example, if we

make the slope of the line flatter by making σ larger, it will impose a relatively high

value of g in the 1960s and 1980s in the US and a relatively low value for g in the

1970s in the US and in the 1980s in Canada.

       If we want to conduct a formal test for a break in the trend, we face the problem

of picking the point where we split the sample and the more difficult problem of

interpreting the results. Figure 6 represents the results from a series of t-tests for a change

in the value of g . For each point in the bottom curve in the graph, we estimated a

separate regression with a dummy variable interacted with the trend term. In each of



                                              30
these regressions, the dummy allows for a break in a different year. We ran these tests for

all years from 1968 to 1987. Each point on this bottom curve corresponds to the estimate

of this term. It can be interpreted as the change in the value of g for all years after the

date corresponding to the point. The points that have a t-statistic that is less than 2 are

marked with triangles and connected with lines. The points with a t statistic greater than 2

are marked with squares and are not connected with lines.

        From this figure, we can infer that a test for a trend break starting in 1974 to 1977

would find a statistically significant slowdown in the rate at which the relative demand

for more educated labor has been growing. In contrast, a test in the years 1981 to 1985

would find a statistically significant increase in the rate at which the relative demand is

increasing. This slowdown and speedup are parallel to the slowdown and speedup in the

paths for g(t) that we observed in Figure 3. By comparing the predicted and actual values

for the real wage, one can see in Figure 6 another manifestation of this same process.

Between about 1976 and 1981, the changes in relative supplies imply a higher value of

the relative wage than the actual value. The estimated trend breaks are another

manifestation of the fact that the regression estimates over-predict wages during this

period. If we estimate a coefficient for a slowdown in g in 1976 and a speedup in 1981,

both of these coefficients are statistically significant. In 1981, the rate returns back to its

previous value, as Figure 3 suggests. This formulation with both a slowdown and a

speedup best captures the behavior of the data. Although it is not clear that we should

interpret this as evidence of a trend-break, this type of slowdown and speedup

phenomenon may be consistent with some theoretical predictions of the impacts of GPTs,

such as those in the model developed by Helpman and Trajtenberg (1994).




                                               31
Conclusions

       There are two ways to interpret the inconsistency between our results and direct

productivity measures, which find a significant slowdown after the early 1970s. In the

first interpretation, the direct productivity measures are telling us that the rate of growth

of the functions A(t) and B(t) has decreased since the 1970s; the labor market evidence is

telling us that the rate of growth of the difference A(t)-B(t) does not seem to have

changed. That is, productivity growth has slowed down but the rate of increase in the

skill bias in technology has not. In the second interpretation, the rate of growth has not

changed for either A(t) or B(t). This explains the labor market evidence which points to

no break in the factor bias of technology. The evidence of a productivity slowdown must

therefore be the result of price mismeasurement that has been getting steadily worse over

time. Our results by themselves offer no basis for choosing between these two

explanations. However, until a few years ago, the second possibility was given little

serious consideration in the economics profession. We interpret our results as one

additional bit of evidence suggesting that this second interpretation deserves careful

consideration. We need to convert the productivity slowdown from a fact about the

economy that needs to be explained into a hypothesis about the economy that needs to be

more fully investigated.

       Regardless of which of these interpretations is correct, the evidence provided here

offers additional support for the claim that over time, the cumulative effect of

technological change has been to increase the relative demand for more educated

workers. The evidence presented here also suggests that the relative earnings of more-

and less-educated workers respond to changes in their relative supply, i.e. that labor



                                              32
demand is sensitive to the price of labor. Because they can influence the relative supply

of more and less educated workers, governments control powerful policies for

counteracting this unwanted side effect of technological progress. Policies like those

followed in Canada — policies that facilitated during the past two decades substantial

growth in post-secondary education at both the college and university levels — can have

a major effect on wage inequality. Our results imply that in the absence of this expansion

of educational attainment Canada would have experienced an increase in income

inequality between the more- and less-educated similar to that observed in the United

States.




                                            33
                                      References

Aghion, Phillipe and Peter Howitt. “A Model of Growth through Creative Destruction,”
Econometrica March 1992, , v60, n2, p. 323-51.

Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz and Alan B. Krueger. “Computing Inequality: Have
Computers Changed the Labor Market?” National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper No. 5956, March 1997.

Bresnahan, Timothy F. and Manuel Trajtenberg. “General Purpose Technologies:
‘Engines of Growth’?” Journal of Econometrics, January 1995, 65, pp. 83-108.

Card, David and Richard B. Freeman, eds. Small Differences That Matter: Labor Markets
and Income Maintenance in Canada and the United States. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press and NBER, 1993.

David, Paul A. et al. “Computer and Dynamo: The Modern Productivity Paradox in a
Not-Too-Distant Mirror,” Technology and Productivity: The Challenge for Economic
Policy, OECD, 1991.

Freeman, Christopher and Carlota Perez, “Structural Crises of Adjustment, Business
Cycles and Investment Behaviour,” in Giovanni Dosi, Christopher Freeman, Richard
Nelson, Gerald Silverberg, and Luc Soete, eds., Technical change and economic theory,
1988, pp. 38-66.

Freeman, Richard B. and Karen Needels. “Skill Differentials in Canada in an Era of
Rising Labor Market Inequality” in David Card and Richard B. Freeman, eds., Small
Differences That Matter: Labor Markets and Income Maintenance in Canada and the
United States. Chicago: University of Chicago Press and NBER, 1993.

Fortin, Nicole M. and Thomas Lemieux. “Institutional Change and Rising Wage
Inequality: Is There a Linkage?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Spring 1997, 11 (2),
pp. 75-96.

Goldin, Claudia. “How America Graduated from High School: 1910 to 1960,” National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 4762, June 1994.

Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence F Katz. “The Decline of Non-Competing Groups:
Changes in the Premium to Education, 1890 to 1940,” National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper No. 5202, August 1995.

_______________. “Technology, Skill, and the Wage Structure: Insights from the Past,”
American Economic Review, May 1996, 86 (2), pp. 252-257.

Gottschalk, Peter. “Inequality, Income Growth, and Mobility: The Basic Facts,” Journal
of Economic Perspectives, Spring 1997, 11 (2), pp. 21-40.



                                          34
Greenwood, Jeremy and Mehmet Yorukoglu. “1974,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference
Series on Public Policy, 1997 (forthcoming).

Griliches, Zvi. “Capital-Skill Complementarity,” Review of Economics and Statistics,
November 1969, 51, pp. 465-68.

_______________. “Productivity, R&D and the Data Constraint,” American Economic
Review, 84, 1, March 1994.

Grossman, Gene and Elhanan Helpman. Innovation and Growth in the World Economy.
Cambridge: MIT Press, 1991.

Hammermesh, Daniel S. Labor demand. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University
Press, 1993.

Helpman, Elhanan and Manuel Trajtenberg. “A Time to Sow and a Time to Reap:
Growth Based on General Purpose Technologies,” Centre for Economic Policy Research,
Discussion Paper: 1080, December 1994.

Johnson, George E. “Changes in Earnings Inequality: The Role of Demand Shifts,”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, Spring 1997, 11 (2), pp. 41-54.

Katz, Lawrence F. and Kevin M. Murphy. “Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987:
Supply and Demand Factors,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 1992, 107(1),
pp. 35-78.

Krueger, Alan B. “How Computers Have Changed the Wage Structure: Evidence from
Microdata, 1984-1989,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1993, 108, pp. 33-60.

Lawrence, Robert Z. and Matthew J. Slaughter, “International Trade and American
Wages in the 1980s: Giant Sucking Sound or Small Hiccup?” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, Microeconomics, 1993, 2, pp. 161-210.

Leamer, Edward E. “Wage Inequality from International Competition and Technological
Change: Theory and Country Experience,” American Economic Review, May 1996, 86
(2), pp.309-314.

Levy, Frank and Richard J. Murnane, “What Skills are Computers Complements With?”
American Economic Review, May 1996, 86 (2), pp. 258-262.

Lucas, Robert E., Jr., “On the Mechanics of Economic Development,” Journal of
Monetary Economics, July 1988, 22, pp. 3-42.

Mankiw, N. Gregory; David Romer, David N. Weil. “A Contribution to the Empirics of
Economic Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 1992, 107 (2), pp. 407-37.




                                          35
Razin, Assaf. “Optimum Investment in Human Capital,” The Review of Economic
Studies, October 1972, 23 (4), pp. 455-60.

Ricardo, David. The Principles of Political Economy and Taxation, Chapter 31, Richard
D. Homewood IL: D. Irwin Inc, 1963.

Romer, Paul M. “Endogenous Technological Change,” Journal of Political Economy,
1990, 98, pp. S71-S102.

Rosen, Sherwin. “Short-Run Employment Variation on Class-I Railroads in the U.S.,
1947-63,” Econometrica, 1968, 36, pp. 511-29.

Rosenberg, Nathan. “Technological Change in the Machine Tool Industry, 1840-1910,”
Journal of Economic History, December 1963, 23, pp 414-43. Reprinted in Nathan
Rosenberg, Perspectives on Technology, Armonk, NY: M. E. Sharpe, 1976.

Sachs, Jeffrey and Howard J. Shatz. “Trade and Jobs in U.S. Manufacturing.” Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, Macroeconomics, 1994, 1, pp. 1-84.

Samuelson, Paul A. Economics: An introductory analysis. New York: McGraw-Hill
Book Company, 1964.

___________. “ Mathematical Vindication of Ricardo on Machinery,” The Journal of
Political Economy, April 1988, 96 (2) pp. 274-282.

Tinbergen, Jan. Income Differences: Recent Research. Amsterdam: North Holland, 1975.

Topel, Robert H. “Factor Proportions and Relative Wages: The Supply-Side
Determinants of Wage Inequality,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Spring 1997, 11
(2), pp. 55-74.

Wood, Adrian. North-South Trade, Employment and Inequality. Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1994.




                                          36
                                                             Relative wages in US and Canada

                                                 1.80
      Ratio of university to high school wages




                                                 1.75

                                                 1.70

                                                 1.65
                                                                                               US, Katz Murphy data
                                                 1.60                                          Canada
                                                                                               US updated data
                                                 1.55

                                                 1.50

                                                 1.45

                                                 1.40
                                                        60    70        80        90
Figure 1
                                                                     Year
                                               Alternative weights for quantity series used with
                                                              Katz-Murphy data
                                        0.55
                                                              rel wage
                                                              Predicted, 50-50 weights
                                                              Predicted, KM weights
           Logarithm of relative wage




                                        0.50




                                        0.45




                                        0.40




                                        0.35
                                               63       68         73           78       83        88

Figure 2


                                                                        38
          Implied values of g(t) and trendline for various values of the
                            elasticity of substitution




                                                                Canada, sigma = 1.25

                                                                US, sigma = 1.25

                                                                Canada, sigma = 1.5

                                                                US, sigma = 1.5

                                                                Canada, sigma = 2

                                                                US   i      2




0

60        65      70      75      80         85   90      95

     Figure 3


                                        39
                  Predicted and actual log wages in the US and Canada

      0.55                                                                                    0.70

      0.50                                                                                    0.65

      0.45                                                                                    0.60

      0.40                                                                                    0.55

      0.35                                                                                    0.50

      0.30                                                                                    0.45

      0.25                                                                                    0.40
             60          65        70          75        80         85         90        95

                  US actual, left scale                       US predicted, left scale
                  Canada actual, right scale                  Canada predicted, right scale
Figure 4


                                                    40
                                                    Average annual changes in relative quantities and
                                                                    relative wages
                                                     3
           Change in logarithms * 100, university
            wages relative to high school wages


                                                                                          Trend line predicted by the
                                                                                          regression using the data
                                                     2                                    from the entire sample
                                                                 US 1982-87

                                                     1                                                                  Canada
                                                                               US 1963-68
                                                                                                                        1981-94

                                                     0

                                                                                                     US 1968-82
                                                    -1
                                                         0            1            2             3            4             5
                                                         Change in logartihm * 100, supply of university equivalents workers divided
Figure 5                                                               by supply of high school equilvalent workers

                                                                                   41
                                                      Tests for trend break

                                        0.30%
                                                        Taken alone, one of these dummies would imply that
                                                        the trend rate of growth of g(t) increased in the 1980s.
           Increase in the trend rate
                of growth of g(t)




                                        0.00%



                                                      Taken alone, one of these dummies would imply that the
                                                      trend rate of growth of g(t) decreased in the late 1970s .


                                        -0.30%
                                                 65       70             75        80          85           90     95


                                                 Insignificant dummies                      Significant dummies



Figure 6


                                                                    42
