1. Introduction
Starting with the capital asset pricing model (CAPM, derived by Sharpe 1964,
Lintner 1965 and Mossin 1966), market nance has emphasized the role of consumers' time preference and risk aversion in the determination of asset prices. The
intertemporal consumption-based asset pricing model (e.g., Rubinstein 1976, Lucas 1978, Breeden 1979, Harrison-Kreps 1979, Cox et al. 1985, Hansen-Jagannathan
1991) predicts that an asset's current price is equal to the expectation, conditioned on current information, of the product of the asset's payo and a representative consumer's intertemporal marginal rate of substitution (IMRS). While
fundamental, this dominant paradigm for pricing assets has some well-recognized
shortcomings (see below), and there is clearly scope for alternative and complementary approaches. This paper begins developing one such approach based on
aggregate liquidity considerations.1
Our starting point is that the productive and nancial spheres of the economy
have autonomous demands for nancial assets and that their valuations for these
assets are often disconnected from the representative consumer's. Corporate demand for nancial assets is driven by the desire to hoard liquidity in order to ful ll
Liquidity in this paper does not refer to the ease with which assets can be resold. While
transaction costs (stamp duties, brokerage fees, bid-ask spread) have an important impact on
the pricing of individual assets, their implications for aggregate liquidity have not yet been
elucidated.
1

3

future cash needs. In contrast to the logic of traditional asset pricing models
based on perfect markets, corporations are unable to raise funds on the capital
market up to the level of their expected income, and hence the corporate sector
will use nancial assets as a cushion against liquidity shocks (Holmstrom-Tirole,
1996, 1998). Financial assets that can serve as cushions will command liquidity
premia.2
There is substantial evidence that rms and banks hold liquid assets as a
partial or full guarantee of future credit availability (see, e.g., Crane 1973 and
Harrington 1987). Companies protect themselves against future credit rationing
by holding securities and, especially, by securing credit lines and loan commitments with banks and other nancial institutions. Lines of credit cover working
capital needs and back up commercial paper sales. Commitments provide longterm insurance through revolving credits, which often have an option that allows
the company to convert the credit into a term loan at maturity, and through
back-up facilities that protect a rm against the risk of being unable to roll over
its outstanding commercial paper. Companies pay a price for these insurance
2
This theme relates to Hicks' notion of \liquidity preference" for monetary instruments and
other close substitutes. He de nes \reserve assets" as assets that are held to facilitate adjustments to changes in economic conditions and thus not only for their yield. For an historical
perspective on the developments following Keynes (1930)'s and Hicks' contributions to liquidity
preference, see the entries by A. Cramp and C. Panico in the New Palgrave Dictionary of Money
and Finance.

4

services through upfront commitment fees and costly requirements to maintain
compensatory balances.
Turning to the supply side, the provision of liquidity is a key activity of the
banking sector. Banks occur a nonnegligible credit risk, as the nancial condition
of companies may deteriorate by the time they utilize their credit facilities. Furthermore, the rate of utilization of credit facilities (which varies substantially over
time) is not independent across time.3 Credit use tends to increase when money
is tight, forcing banks to scramble for liquidity in order to meet demand. Banks
themselves purchase insurance against unfavorable events. On the asset side, they
hoard low-yielding securities such as Treasury notes and high-grade corporate securities. On the liability side, they issue long-term securities to avoid relying too
much on short-term retail deposits. Within the banking sector, liquidity needs
are managed through extensive interbank funds markets.
A corporate nance approach to asset pricing has several potential benets. First, it enlarges the set of determinants of asset prices. In contrast to
consumption-based asset pricing models, in which the net supply of nancial
assets is irrelevant for asset prices because they are determined exclusively by
Calomiris (1989) argues on the basis of a survey of US market participants that the Central
Bank is sometimes forced to inject market liquidity during credit crises because of bank loan
commitments.
3

5

real variables, our model features a feedback e ect from the supply of assets
to the real allocations. The corporate sector is not a veil and the distribution of
wealth within the corporate sector, and between the corporate sector and the consumer sector matters; in particular, the capital adequacy requirements imposed
on banks, insurance companies and securities rms, and the current leverage of
nancial and non nancial institutions a ect corporate demand for nancial assets
and thereby asset prices. Second, government in uences the aggregate amount
of liquidity through interventions such as open market operations, discounting,
prudential rules and deposit insurance (see Stein 1996) and this impacts liquidity
premia and asset prices. Consumption-based asset pricing models, provided they
exhibit a form of Ricardian equivalence, have little to say about the impact of
such policies.
Because the consumption-based asset pricing model is entirely driven by consumers' intertemporal marginal rates of substitution (IMRS), it has several empirical limitations.4 First, it tends to underpredict both equity premia (see, e.g.,
Mehra-Prescott 1985) and Treasury bill discounts.5 Second, changes in marginal
4
We view these facts less as critiques of the theory than as indicators of the need to complement it with liquidity considerations.
5
As Aiyagari-Gertler (1991) note, \reasonably parametrized versions [of the intertemporal
asset pricing model] tend to predict too low a risk premium and too high a risk-free rate,"
and do not account for the 7 percent secular average annual real return on stocks and 1 percent
secular average return on Treasury bills. A number of papers have used nonseparable preferences
to address the equity premium puzzle (with mixed success; see Ferson 1995 and Shiller 1989 for

6

rates of substitution (discount rates) induce asset prices to covary. But as Shiller
(1989, p. 346-8) notes, \prices of other speculative assets, such as bonds, land, or
housing, do not show movements that correspond very much at all to movements
in stock prices."
Third, the consumption-based asset pricing model does not properly account
for the facts that the yield curve is on average upward sloping (at least up to
medium term bonds), that government intervention a ects its slope, and that
long-term bonds feature substantial price volatility (see, e.g., Shiller 1989, chapter
12.) It is often argued that the term premium results from the price risk of longterm bonds. However, this argument is not supported by a complete market
model like CAPM, because price risk per se only entails a reshuing of wealth
among investors and involves no aggregate risk that would deliver a premium.
Fourth, the consumption-based asset pricing model has not guided the important advances in Autoregressive Conditional Heteroskedasticity (ARCH) models.6
ARCH models and their generalizations allow the covariance matrix of innovations to be state-contingent in order to re ect observations by Mandelbrot (1963),
reviews), while the other puzzle { the low risk-free rate { has been largely ignored as pointed
out by Weil (1989) and Aiyagari-Gertler.
6
See, e.g., Bollerslev et al. (1992), Engle et al. (1990) and Ghysels-Harvey-Renault (1996).
ARCH methods, though, have been used on an ad hoc basis (for example by allowing the betas
in a CAPM model to change over time) in order to improve the t of the intertemporal asset
pricing model.

7

Fama (1965) and Black (1976) that variances and covariances of asset prices
change through time and that volatility tends to be clustered across time and
across assets.
A proper treatment of these empirical discrepancies of the consumption-based
asset pricing model lies outside the limited scope of this exploratory paper. Let
us brie y indicate though how the liquidity approach could help to bridge the
gap between theory and empirics.
First, concerning the equity premium puzzle we nd that Treasuries and other
high-grade securities o er better insurance against shortfalls in corporate earnings
and other liquidity needs than do stocks. To highlight this point, we deliberately
assume that consumers are risk neutral, so that stocks and bonds alike would
trade at par in the standard model; yet in our model bonds command a liquidity
premium and trade at a discount relative to stocks.
Second, by assuming risk-neutral consumers, we eliminate consumer IMRS's
as drivers of asset price movements. Instead prices will be responding to changes
in corporate IMRS's, which in turn are in uenced by corporate demand for liquidity. The theoretical implications are di erent. For instance, unlike the consumption CAPM, our model implies that an increase in the supply of liquidity drives
bond prices down at the same time as stock prices go up. In empirical work,
8

we also believe that the corporate sector may o er a better measure of changes
in the marginal purchaser's IMRS than do corresponding attempts to study partial participation among consumers. (For a recent e ort, see Vissing-Jorgensen,
1997).
Third, in our model the yield curve is determined by the value of various
maturities as liquidity bu ers, and is also a ected by the availability of other
assets and by the anticipated institutional liquidity needs. This generates richer
patterns for the yield curve than in a consumption-based theory.
Fourth, in our model price volatility is state contingent and exhibits serial
correlation. Under some conditions, the price volatility of xed-income securities
covaries negatively with the price level (as Black 1976 notes, volatilities, which
covary across assets, go up when stock prices go down.) Intuitively, xed-income
securities embody an option-like liquidity service. When there is a high probability of a liquidity shortage, the option is \in the money" and its price will be
sensitive to news about the future. When the probability of liquidity shortage
is suciently low, the price of the option goes to zero and will not respond much
to news.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 illustrates the determination of
liquidity premia through a simple example. Section 3 sets up a general model of
9

corporate liquidity demand. This model shows how departures from the ArrowDebreu paradigm generates liquidity premia. Sections 4 and 5 demonstrate that
the liquidity approach delivers interesting insights for the volatility of asset prices
and for the yield curve. The nal section 6 studies two examples with endogenous
date-1 asset prices to illustrate the possibility of multiple equilibria and the role
that policy measures can play in ensuring that the better equilibrium gets selected.
The rst example (section 6.1) suggests that unemployment insurance can provide
liquidity that supports long-term investments. The second example (section 6.2)
illustrates the problem with real assets as sources of liquidity: such assets have a
low value precisely when the aggregate need for liquidity is high.

2. Liquidity premium: an example
There are three periods, t = 0; 1; 2, one good, and a continuum (of mass 1) of
identical entrepreneurs, each with one project. Entrepreneurs are risk neutral
and do not discount the future. They have no endowment at date 0 and must
turn to investors in order to defray the xed date-0 set up cost, I , of their project.
At date 1, the project generates a random veri able income x. The realization
of x is the same for all entrepreneurs and so there is aggregate uncertainty. The
distribution G(x) of x is continuous on [0; 1), with density g(x) and a mean
10

greater than I .
At date 1, the rm reinvests a monetary amount y  0, which at date 2
generates a private bene t by , y2 for the entrepreneur, with b > 1. This private
2

bene t cannot be recouped by the investors; it is nonpledgeable.
The only noncorporate nancial asset is a Treasury bond.7 At date 0 the
government issues L bonds that mature at date 1 and yield one unit of the good
in every state. The date-0 price of a bond is q. The repayment of the Treasury
bond is nanced through taxes on consumers.
Consumers (investors) are also risk neutral and do not discount the future.
They value consumption stream (c0 ; c1 ; c2 ) at c0 +c1 +c2 . A key assumption is that
consumers cannot individually commit to provide entrepreneurs with funds at
date 1, because they cannot borrow against their future income.8 The consumers'
preferences imply that they will hold only assets whose expected rate of return is
nonnegative. This implies in particular that q  1. If q > 1, consumers hold no
Treasury bonds and we will refer to q , 1 as the liquidity premium. The liquidity
7
The only feature of a Treasury bond that is going to be relevant for our analysis is that its
payo is exogenous. It could equally well be the output of some similarly exogenous asset like
land.
8
One can rationalize this assumption by assuming that individuals can credibly claim that
they have no date-1 income. The tax authority in contrast has information about individual earnings. An alternative interpretation is that unborn generations of consumers cannot
make commitments, but the government can do so on their behalf. See our 1998 paper for a
more extensive discussion of the theoretical foundations and for the empirical validity of these
assumptions.

11

premium can be strictly positive, because consumers cannot commit to date-1
payments and hence cannot short-sell assets.
A contract between a representative entrepreneur and the investors speci es
a quantity L of Treasury bonds to be held by the rm and an income contingent
reinvestment policy y(x). Because consumers cannot commit to provide more
funds at date 1, the reinvestment policy must satisfy

y(x)  x + L:

(1)

For notational simplicity, we will assume that investors receive x + L , y. It is
easy to show that this is indeed the case if the expected date-1 income is not too
large.9 Investors expect a nonnegative rate of return, and so

E0 [x , I , y(x) , (q , 1)L]  0;

(2)

where is a date-0 expectation, and expectations are taken with respect to the
random variable x. A competitive capital market guarantees that (2) is satis ed
with equality. Because investors break even, entrepreneurs receive the social
surplus associated with their activity. Figure 1 summarizes the timing.
When expected income is very large, that is, when rms generate substantial liquidity themselves, the results below apply with  = 1.
9

12

Figure 1 here.
The optimal contract between a representative entrepreneur and the investors
maximizes the social surplus generated by the entrepreneurial activity,




2
E0 by(x) , (y(2x)) ;

subject to constraints (1) and (2). Letting  > 1 denote the shadow price of
constraint (2), this optimization amounts to






2
max E0 by(x) , (y(2x)) + [x , I , y(x) , (q , 1)L
fy();Lg

subject to the liquidity constraint

y(x)  x + L

for all x:

For xed L, the solution of the unconstrained program is

y = b , ;
and the solution to the constrained program is
13

(3)

y(x) = min(y ; x + L);

(4)

so rms are liquidity constrained in low-income states.
Let us turn to the date-0 choice of liquidity. From our previous characterization, L is chosen to maximize

Z

y ,L 



2
b(x + L) , (x +2 L) , (I + qL) g(x)dx
0

Z 1 
 )2
(
y


+
by , 2 , [I + y + (q , 1)L , x] g(x)dx:


y ,L


Assuming L > 0 the rst-order condition is

q,1 =

Z

y ,L  b , (x + L)




0



, 1 g(x)dx:

Let
8
>
>
<

m(x)  >
>
:

b,(x+L)


, 1 for x  y , L
for x  y , L:

0

Then
14

(5)

q , 1 = E0 [m(x)]:

(6)

The liquidity premium is equal to the expected marginal value of the liquidity
service. In states of liquidity-shortage (x < y , L), an extra unit of liquidity
allows the rm to increase its reinvestment by 1 and the private bene t by b ,
(x + L). This marginal private bene t, expressed in monetary terms, is equal to
[b , (x + L)]=. The increase in reinvestment has monetary cost 1. This yields
the expression for the liquidity premium (6).
We have looked for an equilibrium fq; g in which Treasury bonds command
a liquidity premium. Such an equilibrium satis es the break-even constraint (2)
(with equality) and the asset pricing equation (5), for L = L (because q > 1,
investors do not hold Treasury bonds), and for the optimal reinvestment policy

y() de ned by (3) and (4). If the solution to this system yields q  1, then
Treasury bonds command no liquidity premium (q = 1); that is, even if liquidity
is free, rms may not hold all available liquid claims.
It is easy to show that i) there exists an L such that q > 1 if and only if

L < L ; and ii) the value of the marginal liquidity service m() and the price of
liquid claims q are monotonically decreasing in L . These results are illustrated
in gure 2, where mL () denotes the marginal liquidity service for bond supply L .
15

When L = L 3 > L ; the economy has surplus liquidity, and there is no liquidity
premium.10 Hence, bond prices are low. The cases L = L 1 or L 2 depict the
interesting case of scarce liquidity.
Figure 2 here.
Remark: Note that the value of liquidity m(x) is linear in x in this example.

Linearity requires that the date-2 payo be nonveri able, that is, the payo is
purely a private bene t. Alternatively, the date-2 payo could be veri able but
not fully pledgeable as in Holmstrom-Tirole (1998), for instance, because moral
hazard problems require the entrepreneur to keep a stake in the nal payo .
Under mild conditions, the value of liquidity m(x) would then di er from that
depicted in gure 2 only in that the decreasing part would be convex rather than
linear.11
To endogenize L we would have to introduce a cost of issuing Treasury securities, such as a
deadweight loss of taxing consumers when debt is retired. See our 1998 paper for more detail.
11
The assumptions are: The reinvestment y produces date-2 income f (y) with probability p
and 0 with probability 1 , p. The entrepreneur can work (p = pH ) or shirk (p = pL = pH , p).
Shirking generates a private bene t Bf (y). Letting 0  pH [1 , (B=p)] we have m (x)  0 if
30 (f )2 + (1 , 0 (f )f  0:
10

00

00

0

000

16

3. LAPM
Let us now develop a more general framework. There are three periods, t = 0; 1; 2.
At date 1, a state of nature ! in

is revealed to all economic agents. There is

a further resolution of uncertainty at date 2, but in our risk neutral framework,
only date-1 expectations matter so we need not specify the date-2 random events.
The state of nature ! may include the date-1 pro ts of the various industries in
the corporate sector (as in the example above), their date-1 reinvestment needs
(as in our 1998 paper ), news about the prudential requirements or government
policy, or signal/prospects about date-2 revenues.12

 Investors. As in the example, and in order to highlight the departure from
the canonical asset pricing model, we assume that investors are risk neutral and
have an exogenously given discount rate, normalized at zero. That is, investors
value consumption stream (c0 ; c1 ; c2 ) at c0 + c1 + c2 . One could assume more
generally that investors have endogenously determined and possibly stochastic
discount factors. Similarly, the implicit assumption that investors face no liquidity
needs could be relaxed (see section 6.1).

 Noncorporate claims. At date 0, there are K noncorporate assets, k =
For a more general representation of consumer preferences, could also include shocks to
investors' rate of time preference.
12

17

1; : : : ; K such as Treasury securities or real estate. The return on asset k at date
1, that is, the date-1 dividend plus the date-1 price, is equal to k = k (!)  0.
The mean return on each asset is normalized to be one: E0 [k (!)] = 1, where Et []
denotes the expectation of a variable conditional on the information available at
date t. Let L k denote the supply of asset k. At date 0, asset k trades at price

qk per unit, where qk  1 from the nature of consumer preferences. The liquidity
premium on asset k is equal to qk , 1.

Note that the returns fk (!)g are exogenously given. In section 6 we will
analyze two examples with endogenous returns.

Note also that claims k =

1; : : : ; K do not include claims on the corporate sector (shares, bonds, deposits,
CDs,...). We will later provide valuation formulae for these.

 Corporate sector. Our model treats the productive and nancial sectors as a
single, aggregated entity, called the \corporate sector." The Appendix provides
sucient conditions validating this approach. The corporate sector invests at
dates 0 and 1 and receives proceeds at dates 1 and 2. Let I denote the corporate
sector's date-0 gross investment (or vector of gross investments) in productive
(illiquid) assets. Its date-0 net investment, N (I ), is equal to the di erence between the gross investment and the productive sector's capital contribution at
date 0 (in the example above, N (I ) = I since the entrepreneurs had no initial
18

wealth).
The net investment N (I ) is only part of the investors' date-0 contribution to
the corporate sector. The corporate sector also purchases noncorporate assets

fLk gk=1;:::;K at date 0. The investors' date-0 outlay is thus
N (I ) +

X

qL:
k k k

In equilibrium all claims commanding a liquidity premium (qk > 1) must be
,

held by the corporate sector Lk = L k , because consumers are risk neutral.

At date 1, the corporate sector selects a decision d = d(!) from a feasible
set D(!; L(!)) , where L(!) is the net liquidity available to the corporate sector
in state !. The decision vector d includes all real decisions within the corporate
sector such as reinvestments and production decisions for every rm. Implicitly,
it also includes reallocations of liquidity among rms, required to support these
real decisions. This presumes fully ecient nancial contracting between rms
in the corporate sector. For instance, scarce liquidity may be allocated eciently
at date 1 by nancial intermediaries (see Holmstrom-Tirole 1998 for more detail).
If the corporate sector does not pay insiders (entrepreneurs) anything at date 1
(see below), then

19

L(!) =

X

 (!)Lk :
k k

Recall that investors cannot commit to bringing in new funds at date 1 beyond
the amount that is held in liquid assets L(!).

Assumption 1 (opportunity-enhancing liquidity)
For all !, L1 and L2 : if L1 < L2 ; then D(!; L1 )  D(!; L2 ).
In general, an increase in liquid reserves strictly enlarges the set of feasible
corporate policies when nancial markets are imperfect. For instance, in our
earlier example, ! = x, and D(!; L) = fy j y  x + Lg.
For a given state !, let R(I; !; d) denote the total expected intertemporal
(date 1 plus date 2) payo from illiquid corporate assets (in the example, R =
h

i

x + by , y22 , y). R includes pledgeable and nonpledgeable returns on illiquid assets, but excludes the return

P

k k (!)Lk

on noncorporate securities. Let

r(I; !; d) denote the corresponding pledgeable income from illiquid assets, that
is the expected intertemporal income that can be returned to investors (in the
example, r(I; !; d) = x , y). Accounting for noncorporate assets purchased at
date 0, the corporate sector can return at most
20

r(I; !; d(!)) +

X

k

k (!)Lk

to investors. Let

B (I; !; d(!))  R(I; !; d(!)) , r(I; !; d(!))
denote the nonpledgeable portion of income. The fact that B > 0 is critical for
generating a corporate demand for liquidity in our model.
Let t(!) denote the amount of pledgeable income that is paid out (at date 1)
to corporate insiders (entrepreneurs) in state !. The net liquidity available for
P

reinvestment in state ! is then k k (!)Lk , t(!).
The corporate sector solves:
n

E [R(I; !; d(!))] , I ,
fI;L;d();t()g 0
max

o

X

(q , 1)Lk ;
k k

subject to the investors' break-even condition:

E0 [r(I; !; d(!)) , t(!)] +

X

21

L  N (I ) +
k k

X

qL;
k k k

(7)

and to date-1 decisions being feasible:


d(!) 2 D !;

X



 (!)Lk , t(!) :
k k

(8)

Assuming that the investors' break-even constraint is binding, this program can
be rewritten as
max fE0 [B (I; !; d(!)) + t(!)] + N (I ) , I g

fI;L;d()g

subject to (7) and (8).
Let   1 denote the shadow price of the break-even constraint in this latter
program, and de ne




d max B (I; !; d) + r(I; !; d)
m(!)  dL

d2D(!;L)



L=L (!)

(9)

as the marginal liquidity service (expressed in terms of pledgeable income) in state

! assuming that the available liquidity is L(!) 

P

k k (!)L k .

Assumption 1

implies that m(!)  0 for all !.
Assume that there exists at least one state of nature in which there is excess
liquidity, that is, in which the decision d(!) is in the interior of the feasible decision
set D. This is a mild assumption and is satis ed in all our examples. It implies
22

(see the Appendix for more detail) that pledgeable income is never redistributed
to the corporate sector in states of liquidity shortage (t(!) = 0 if m(!) > 0), and
so the available liquidity in equation (9) is appropriately de ned.13
Optimization with respect to Lk ; at equilibrium market prices, x yields14

qk , 1 = E0 [k (!)m(!)];

(10)

or, equivalently

qk = E0 [k (!)[1 + m(!)]]:
Like risk premia, liquidity premia are determined by a covariance formula, but
this time involving the intertemproal marginal rate of substitution 1 + m(!) of
the corporate sector. An asset's liquidity premium is high when it delivers income
in states in which liquidity has a high value for the corporate sector.
For completeness, we can nally introduce external claims on the corporate
sector (shares, bonds, etc.). Let L j be the date-0 supply of claim j paying j (!)
By the same reasoning, we will be able to ignore state-contingent liquidity withdrawals t()
in the other programs in the paper.
14
Note that we assume that the corporate sector as a whole takes prices as given. Price taking
presumes that there is competition for assets within the corporate sector. In section 6.2 we
consider cartel behavior.
13

23

at date 1 in state of nature !. The set of external claims, j = 1; : : : ; J , must
satisfy
X

 (!)L j = r(I; !; d(!)) +
j j

X

 (!)Lk , t(!):
k k

The date-0 prices of such claims, fqj gj =1;:::;J ; will be given by

qj , 1 = E0 [j (!)m(!)];
Single state of liquidity shortage.

Suppose liquidity is scarce in a single state, !H , which has probability fH .
According to (10), the liquidity premium on asset k is then proportional to the
asset's payo conditional on the occurrence of the bad state:

qk , 1 = fH k (!H )mH :

(11)

This linear relationship yields the following

qk , 1 = k (!H )
q` , 1 `(!H )

(12)

which implies a one-factor model of liquidity premia. We can take the bond price
24

as the single factor. That is, if qb is the date-0 price of a bond delivering one unit
of good at date 1, the liquidity premium on asset k perfectly covaries with the
liquidity premium on the bond:15

qk , 1 = k (!H )(qb , 1):
With more than one state of scarce liquidity, (10) results in a multi-factor model
where the factors can be chosen as the liquidity premia of any subset of assets
that spans the states in which liquidity shortages occur.
The Arrow-Debreu economy.

Assets do not command a liquidity premium under the following additional
assumptions:

Assumption 3 (fully pledgeable income): For all I; !; d; R(I; !; d) = r(I; !; d).
Assumption 3 corresponds to the absence of agency costs and private (nonpledgeable) bene ts.

Assumption 4 (ecient contracting): For all ! and all L,
15
This assumes that the asset's payo k does not vary conditional on !H . If it varies, then
k (!H ) should be replaced by E (k j !H ) in the formula below.

25

max r(I; !; d) = max r(I; !; d)

d2D(!;L)

d2D(!;0)

According to this assumption, liquidity is valueless when it comes to maximizing pledgeable income. To understand its role, suppose that the corporate
sector hoards no liquidity, and so L = 0. Suppose that in state of nature !; there
exists L such that

r(I; !; d (!; L)) > r(I; !; d (!; 0));
where d (!; L) denotes the maximizing pledgeable income decision in state !
given liquidity L. The corporate sector could at date 1 borrow L and pledge

r(I; !; d (!; L)) , L + L > r(I; !; d (!; 0)); a contradiction.
Given Assumptions 3 and 4, m(!) is equal to 0 for all !, since



B (I; !; d) + r(I; !; d)
max

d2D(!;L(!))
=
max fr(I; !; d)g
d2D(!;L(!))
=

max fr(I; !; d)g :

d2D(!;0)

26



Thus, all liquidity premia are zero in an Arrow-Debreu economy.

4. Information ltering and volatility
As we noted in the introduction, many recent advances in empirical nance were
motivated by the observation that conditional variances and covariances change
over time. It is well-known, for instance, that volatility is clustered, that asset
volatilities (stock volatilities, bond volatilities across maturities) move together,
and that stock volatility increases with bad news.16 This section does not attempt
to provide a general theory of the impact of liquidity premia on volatility. Its only
goal is to suggest that a liquidity-based asset pricing model has the potential to
deliver interesting insights into state-contingent volatilities.

4.1. Example
Let us rst return to the example of section 2. In this example with nonveri able
second-period income, the liquidity bene t of the Treasury bond is a put option,
since m(x) decreases linearly with rst-period income x until it hits zero. We
also observed that with veri able second-period income and under some mild
regularity conditions, m(x) decreases and is convex until it hits zero.
Black (1976) attributes the last fact to the \leverage e ect" (equity, which is a residual,
moves more when the debt-equity ratio increases.) However, this leverage e ect does not seem
to account for clustering of volatility and comovements between stock and bond volatilities.
16

27

Suppose now that news arrives intermittently between dates 0 and 1 containing information about the realization of x at date 1. Speci cally, suppose that
there are N news dates between 0 and 1 (the rst distinct from date 0 and the
Nth equal to date 1). Assume further that the realization of x is given by either

an additive or a multiplicative process

x = x0 +

 xn +

N
X

m

m=1
N
X

m=n+1

(13a)

m

for all n;

or



x = x0 Nm=1 m





 xn Nm=n+1m

(13b)


for all n;

where the increments m are independently distributed.
The early accrual of information about the state ! will have no impact on
the optimal decision rule d() and hence no retrading of nancial contracts occurs
between dates 0 and 1. Yet, we can price Treasury bonds by arbitrage at each
28

subdate n. Contingent on the available information at subdate n, summarized
by xn ,

qn(xn ) , 1 = En[m(x) j xn];

(14)

where En [j] denotes the conditional expectation given information at subdate n:
(Formula (14) is derived formally for the general framework in section 4.2.)
It can be shown that, provided m0 < 0 and m00  0, for either the additive
(13a) or the multiplicative process (13b), we have17

d E [[q (x ) , q (x )]2 j x ]  0:
n
dxn n n+1 n+1 n n

(15)

In words, the volatility of the Treasury bond price is state contingent, and the
higher the volatility, the worse the prospects for the economy. The simple logic
is that volatility is high when the option is in the money and low when it is out
of the money.
Remark: In the example with nonveri able second-period income, the Black-

Sholes formula yields an explicit formula for the volatility of the bond price if the
The proof for the multiplicative process follows from that for the additive process by taking
logs in (13b). Indeed if m() is decreasing and convex, m(ex^ ) is also decreasing and convex in x^,
where x^  log x:
17

29

process is a continuous time geometric Brownian motion.

4.2. General LAPM
Let us investigate more generally the impact of news about the state of nature in
the LAPM framework of section 3. As in the example, we assume that there are
subdates n = 1; :::; N between dates 0 and 1, at which informative signals accrue
about the date-1 state of nature !. Thus, the market's information about the state
of nature at date 1 gets re ned over time. Let n denote the market's information
at subdate n with N = !. We let E [ j n ]denote the subdate-n expectation of a
variable conditional on the information available at time n. The corporate sector
purchases quantity Lk of liquid asset k at date 0, and can afterwards recon gure
its portfolio so that it holds (information contingent) quantity Lk (n ) at subdate

n. Asset k's equilibrium price given information n is denoted qk (n ).
Consider the problem of maximizing the corporate sector's expected payo
subject to the investors' date-0 break-even condition and date-1 decisions being
feasible:18
max

fI;L;L();d()g

fE0 [B (I; !; d(!))] + N (I ) , I g ;

18
The maximand of this program is the same as in (3) upon substitution of the budget
constraint.

30

subject to

X

E0 [r(I; !; d(!))]  N (I ) +
+E0

,E0

k

"

qk Lk

N
XX

k n=1
"
X

k

(16)
#

qk (n ) [Lk (n) , Lk (n,1 )]
#

k (!) Lk (!) ;

and

d(!) 2 D !;

X

k

!

k (!)Lk (!) :

(17)

A few comments are in order. First,  is measurable with respect to !, and so the


set of feasible decisions is indeed a well-de ned function of the state of nature. Second, the date-0 contract with investors speci es some portfolio adjustment at each
date. We ignore the possibility that contemplated portfolio adjustments may reP

quire a net contribution by investors at subdate n ( k qk (n ) [Lk (n ) , Lk (n,1 )] > 0).
While such a contribution could occur if the portfolio adjustment raised the investors' wealth conditional on n, it would not occur if the adjustment reduced
it, since the investors would be unwilling ex post to bring in new funds, and
31

they cannot ex ante commit to do so. However, if in equilibrium qk > 1, then

Lk (n) = L k for all n is an optimal policy, and so investors do not have to contribute at intermediate dates. The ctitious subdate-n reshuing of liquid assets
between the corporate sector and the rest of the economy is, as in Lucas (1978),
only used to price nancial assets at an intermediate date.
As before, we let  be the multiplier of the break- even constraint in (16)
and de ne the marginal liquidity service m(!) as in (9).

Taking rst-order

conditions we nd that for each liquid asset k 2 f1; :::; K g and for each subdate

n 2 f1; :::; N , 1g:

qk = 1 + E0 [k (!) m (!)] ;
qk = E0 [qk (n )]
and

qk (n ) = En [k (!) [1 + m(!)] j n] :

(18)

Asset prices (or liquidity premia) form a martingale because there is no liquidity
service within the periods where news arrives. Only at the last subdate (date 1)
32

will the liquidity premium disappear and hence the martingale property fail. Note
that the martingale condition re ects the fact that rms are indi erent regarding
the timing of the purchase of liquidity, as long as the purchase is made before the
nal date. The martingale condition stems from arbitrage within the investors'
budget constraint.
De ne a \generalized xed-income security," as one with expected return
unchanged as news accrues, that is,

En [k (!) j n] = 1;

for all n and n :

(19)

For simplicity, we focus on these securities in the rest of this section. We can
then write (18) as

qk (n ) , 1 = En [k (!) m(!) j n ] :

(20)

Condition (19) rules out volatility stemming from news about the assets' dividends. Such volatility must be added (with a correction depending on the covariance with the innovations about liquidity needs) to our price formulae when
expected payo s change over time.
Asset volatility in the case of a single state of liquidity shortage.

33

Assuming that there is a single state (state !H ) of liquidity shortage, let fH (n )
denote the posterior probability of the bad state of nature at subdate n, conditional on the information available at that subdate. Let

=(n) = En

(

fH (n+1 ) , fH (n)
fH (n)

2

n

)

denote the relative variance of the posterior probability. =(n ) is a measure of
the informativeness of the signal accruing at subdate n + 1.
Note, from (20), that the ratio formula (12) continues to apply with qk (n )
in place of qk . So at subdate n and for any two assets k and `;

qk (n) , 1 = k (!H )  
q` (n) , 1 ` (!H ) k;`

(12')

Under the (strong) assumption of just one liquidity constrained state, and with
a government bond on the market, all assets with constant expected dividend
are priced according to a linear formula involving the liquidity premium on that
bond. This is a close analog to the CAPM.
Contingent volatilities and clustering.

Let Vk and vk denote the absolute and relative volatilities of the price of asset

k conditional on information n:
34

h

Vk (n) = En [qk (n+1) , qk (n )]2 n

i

(21)

and

vk (n ) = En

"

qk (n+1) , qk (n )
qk (n )

2

#

n :

(22)

With only one liquidity-constrained state, the price in information state n of an
asset k with constant expected dividend is, as we have seen,

qk (n ) , 1 = fH (n)k (!H ) mH :

(23)

This immediately yields our main formulae:

Vk (n) = =(n ) [qk (n) , 1]2 ;




(24)

2
Vk (n ) = =(n) qkq((n) ,) 1 ;
k n

(25)

Vk (n) = k;`V`(n );

(26)

35

vk (n) = k;`v`(n );

(27)

Equations (24) and (25) state that, in absolute as well as relative terms, the
volatility of an asset's price is proportional to the square of the asset's liquidity
premium. Because prices move slowly, an immediate corollary is that an asset's
price volatility is serially correlated; that is, we predict temporal clustering of an
asset's volatility.
Equations (26) and (27) state that the volatility ratio of two assets is constant
over time. Assets volatilities move together because they are driven by the same
news concerning the likelihood of a liquidity shortage.
Returning to formulae (24) and (25), we note that volatility is also proportional to the informativeness =(n ) of the signal accruing at subdate n + 1. With
two states, this informativeness measure is generally state-dependent, rendering
these results less useful. To illustrate a case with constant informativeness, suppose that information accrues according to a Bernoulli process: At each subdate

n, with probability  2 (0; 1), the market learns that the economy will not be in
the bad state of nature (fH (n ) = 0). If that happens, the economy becomes an
\Arrow-Debreu economy," in which assets command no liquidity premium and
hence qk (m ) = 1 for all m  n. In this absorbing state, informativeness may
36

be taken equal to 0. With probability 1 , , the economy remains an \LAPM
economy" and fH (n ) = (1 , )N ,n . A simple computation shows that in this
example:

=(n) = 1 ,  :
There is price volatility as long as the liquidity premium is strictly positive.
If news accrues that the economy will be replete with liquidity, the liquidity
premium goes to zero as will the volatility of prices for all assets with constant
expected payo s.

5. The yield curve
5.1. The slope of the yield curve and price risk
The theoretical and econometric research on the term structure of interest rates
traditionally views the corporate sector as a veil in the sense that the yield curve
is not in uenced by asset liability management (ALM). Many believe, however,
that corporate liquidity demand a ects the term structure. First, while debt markets are segmented, there is enough substitutability across maturities to induce
long and short rates to move up and down together (Culbertson, 1957). Dura37

tion analysis, stripping activities and more generally nancial engineering and
innovation (answering the question of \who is the natural investor for the new
security?") provide indirect evidence for segmentation. A number of factors such
as scal incentives, the creation of pension funds, new accounting and prudential rules for intermediaries, and the leverage of the real and nancial sectors are
likely to a ect the demand for maturities di erentially, thereby in uencing the
term structure. Second, the maturity structure of government debt seems to play
a role in the determination of the term structure, a fact that is not accounted for
in Ricardian consumption-based asset pricing models.19
The yield curve is most commonly upward sloping, although it may occasionally be hump-shaped or inverted or even have an inverted-hump-shape (see,
Campbell et al., 1996, Campbell, 1995, and Stigum, 1990). The substantially
higher yield on 6 month- than on 1 month-T bills has been labelled a \term premium puzzle."20 It is often argued that an upward-sloping yield curve re ects the
riskiness of longer maturities. Investors, so the story goes, demand a discount as
compensation for price risk (which presumably is correlated with consumption if
the standard model applies). This argument is based on an analogy with CAPM.
For example, the Clinton administration has begun to shorten the average maturity of
government debt to take advantage of lower short term yields.
20
There are a number of other stylized facts: short yields move more than long yields; longterm bonds are highly volatile; and high yield spreads tend to precede decreases in long rates.
Also the yield curve tends to be atter when money is tight.
19

38

It would be worthwhile, though, to provide a precise de nition of the notion of
\price risk." CAPM is about the coupon risk of assets. Coupon risk relates
to uncertainty about dividends, or, more generally (to encompass uncertainty
about preferences and endowments), to uncertainty about the marginal utility of
dividends.
Price risk may stem from coupon risk, but it need not. Consider an intertem-

poral Arrow-Debreu endowment economy (as in Lucas 1978). In this economy,
early release of information about future endowments is irrelevant in that it a ects
neither the real allocation nor the date-0 price of claims on future endowments.
On the other hand, release of information a ects asset prices, inducing price risk.
In an Arrow-Debreu economy, the date-0 price of claims on date-2 endowments
can be entirely unrelated to the variance of their date-1 price (or to the covariance
of price and some measure of aggregate uncertainty). Price risk per se is not an
aggregate risk and thus need not a ect asset prices.
Returning to the yield curve, Treasury bonds are basically default-free. Uncertainty about the rate of in ation, however, creates a coupon risk (for nominal
bonds), which in turn a ects prices. In ation uncertainty clearly plays an important part in explaining the price risk of long-term bonds. But for short-term
bonds the connection is less obvious. A bond that matures in less than a year
39

is quite insensitive to in ation, at least directly. Indirectly, swings in the price
of long-term bonds will of course in uence short-term prices as long as maturities are partially substitutable. Even so, in ation-induced price risk can hardly
explain the term premium puzzle.
Our point is to caution against drawing hasty conclusions about the link
between price risk and the slope of the yield curve. A theoretical justi cation
based on the standard CAPM logic cannot be provided, because in a complete
market, price risk stemming from early information release will not carry any risk
premium. This opens the door for alternative theoretical approaches to analyzing
the yield curve. Our liquidity-based asset pricing model o ers one possibility.

5.2. Long-term bonds and the Hirshleifer e ect
In order to obtain some preliminary insights into the e ects of liquidity on the
term structure, let us again return to the example of section 2.21 Assume that the
government at date 0 issues two types of bonds: ` short-term bonds yielding one
unit of the good at date 1, and L (zero coupon) long-term bonds yielding  units
of the good at date 2. We allow for a coupon risk on long-term bonds, so let 
be a random variable with support [0; 1), density h(), cumulative distribution
21

The analysis in this section is valid for any concave private bene t function.

40

H (), and mean E0 () = 1. As discussed above,  can be interpreted as the
date-2 price of money in terms of the good. The case of a deterministic in ation
rate (which can be normalized to 0) corresponds to a spike in the distribution at

 = 1. We let q and Q denote the date-0 prices of short- and long-term bonds.
A long-term price premium corresponds to q > Q. Treasury bonds are the only
liquid assets in the economy
In the example the date-1 income x is assumed to be perfectly correlated across
rms. Let g(x) and G(x) denote the density and the cumulative distribution of
income x. Assume that  and x are independent. In this economy, rms have
no liquidity demand past date 1.22 Therefore, if there is no coupon risk (  1)
or if there is no signal about the realization of  before date 2 (so that there is
a coupon risk, but no price risk at date 1), short-term and long-term bonds will
be perfect substitutes and so q = Q. Suppose instead that the realization of  is
learned at date 1. Now the price at which long-term bonds can be disposed of
at date 1, namely , will vary. The coupon risk in this case induces a price risk.
Let ` and L denote the number of short-term and long-term bonds purchased
at date 0 by the corporate sector (in equilibrium, ` = ` if q > 1 and L = L if

Q > 1.) The corporate sector solves
This example is meant to illustrate a situation in which most of the liquidity is expected to
be employed in the short run with long-term liquidity needs expected to be less pressing.
22

41

"

2
max E0 by(x) , (y (2x))
fy();`;Lg

#

s.t.

E0 [x , I , y(x) , (q , 1)` , (Q , 1)L]  0;
and

y(x)  x + ` + L

for all x:

Let  again denote the shadow cost of the investors' break-even constraint and
let y = b ,  denote the optimal unconstrained reinvestment level. Because

` = ` and L = L in equilibrium, equilibrium prices are characterized by:
q,1 =

Q,1 =

Z

Z

1
0

1
0

"Z



y,`,L  b , (x + ` + L
)



0

"Z
0

y,`,L  b , (x + ` + L
)



42



#

, 1 g(x)dx h()d;



(28)

#

, 1 g(x)dx h()d:

(29)

Denote the inside integrals in (28) and (29) by z (). It is easily veri ed that

z0 () < 0. Consequently,
Q , 1 = E0 [z ()] < E0 [] E0 [z()] = E0 [z()] = q , 1:

(30)

The price di erential between short- and long-term bonds here re ects a more
general theme, namely that the liquidity approach to asset pricing implies a skewness in risk tolerance. What matters is the average coupon delivered in states of
pressing liquidity need. The term premium stems from the fact that a short-term
bond delivers 1 unit for sure in such states, while the date-1 price of the longterm bond is negatively correlated with the marginal liquidity service m(). The
di erence q , Q measures the cost of hedging against the date-1 coupon/price
risk on long-term bonds.
Non neutrality of price risk. Long-term bonds would provide a better liquidity

service (namely the same service as short-term bonds) if there were no uncertainty
about in ation or if no information about  arrived at date 1. This contrasts with
an Arrow-Debreu economy, in which early arrival of information never is harmful.
Such information has no impact in an endowment economy, and may generate
social gains in a production economy because of improved decision making. Our
model features a logic similar to Hirshleifer's (1971) idea that early information
43

arrival may make agents worse o .

Our model di ers from Hirshleifer's, in

that in his model information arrives before entrepreneurs and investors sign a
contract. In our model it is the investors' inability to commit to bringing in funds
at date 1 that constrains contracting and makes information leakage problematic.
Put di erently, investors cannot o er entrepreneurs insurance against variations
in the price of long-term bonds. If the price of long-term bonds is negatively
correlated with the rm's liquidity needs, as is the case here, long-term bonds
become inferior liquidity bu ers to short-term bonds.
Neutrality of pure price risk. Let us follow section 4 and assume that news about

the date-1 state accrues between date 0 and date 1, at subdates n = 1; :::; N ; that
is, at each subdate n, a signal n accrues that is informative about the date-1
income and/or the coupon on the long-term bond. Then, the prices of shortand long-term bonds adjust from their date-0 values q and Q to q(n ) and Q(n ).
This price risk, however, has no impact on the date-0 prices q and Q which remain
given by (28) and (29), since the corporate sector in equilibrium does not reshue
its portfolio of liquid assets (this is the point made earlier that capital gains and
losses on nancial assets have o setting e ects.) In other words, price risk has no
impact on the slope of the date-0 yield curve. On the other hand, news a ects
the slope of the yield curve at subdates.
44

The yield curve may be upward sloping even in the absence of a coupon risk. In

the absence of any coupon risk, q = Q. Let i1 and i2 denote the yields on short
and long bonds at date 0. These yields are negative in our model because the
consumers' rate of time preference is normalized to zero. We have

q = Q = 1 +1 i =
1

1 ;
(1 + i2 )2

and so

i1 = 1q , 1 < i2 = p1Q , 1:
This trivial example makes the point that riskiness of long-term bonds is not a
necessary condition for the existence of a term premium. The yield curve can
be upward-sloping, as here, simply because the corporate sector has no liquidity
demand at date 2. This suggests that an upward slope is associated with relatively more pressing short-term liquidity needs, perhaps because the rm has less
exibility to adjust plans in the short term.
Other shapes of the yield curve. Suppose the income shock x and reinvestment

decision y take place at date 2, and the private bene t accrues at date 3. Investments and nancing still occur at date 0. In this temporal extension of the
45

model, date 1 is just a \dummy date," at which nothing happens. Suppose that
the government still issues short-term bonds (maturing at date 1) and long-term
bonds (maturing at dates 2 and 3). Short-term bonds o er no liquidity service
and so q = 1. Hence the short rate (equal to 0) exceeds the long rates, and we
obtain an inverted yield curve.
This example makes the simple point that if the corporate sector does not
expect to face liquidity needs in the short run, it does not pay a liquidity premium
on short-term securities, and so they will yield more than long-term securities.

6. Coordination failures in the creation and utilization of liquidity
The analysis so far has assumed that the corporate sector makes ecient use
of liquidity, but has no control over the aggregate supply. This is a reasonable assumption for assets such as Treasuries whose (i) supply L k and (ii) statecontingent payo s k (!) can be considered exogenous. We now show by means
of simple examples that the corporate sector's date-1 policy can a ect aggregate
liquidity in ways that are relevant for policy making. In the rst example, the
aggregate supply of liquidity can be directly in uenced by the corporate sector.
In the second example, the e ect is indirect as asset prices depend on corporate
decisions. In both cases, coordination failures may occur despite the fact that
46

we continue to assume that the corporate sector makes optimal use of its liquid
assets.
Throughout this section, there are no bonds or other forms of external liquidity.

6.1. Precarious employment relationships hurt long-term savings and
equity investments
In this section only, assume that consumers, whose mass is 1, must consume
some \subsistence level" (food, education, housing, etc.) at the intermediate
date. That is, we replace the utility

c0 + c1 + c2
from consumption ow (c0 ; c1 ; c2 ) by the utility

c0 + u(c1 ) + c2 ;
where

47

8
>
>
<

u(c1 ) = >
>
:

if c1  c1 > 0

c1

,1 otherwise.

(31)

Consumers thus care about the consumption path as well as its level.
The representative rm's investment cost at date 0 is normalized at I = 1.
As before, assume that consumers have enough of the nonstorable good at date
0 to help nance the initial investment I . The rm's income at date-1 has two
possible values: high income xH with probability fH ; and low income xL with
probability fL = 1 , fH , where

xH > xL = c1 :

(32)

Continuation at date 1 requires, in addition to entrepreneurs, one worker /
consumer per unit of investment. A worker must be paid an eciency wage w,
where23

w > c1 :

(33)

23
We can invoke the standard eciency wage model: The worker receives some private bene t
w when shirking and none when working. Suppose for simplicity that the work/shirk decision is
perfectly veri ed ex post, that the worker is protected by limited liability, and that shirking has
disastrous consequences for production and must be prevented. Then rms must pay at least w
to their workers.

48

Assumptions (31) and (33) imply that consumers do not value liquidity at date
1 provided that they know that they will have a job at date 1.
Continuation yields a private bene t B to the entrepreneur, and a veri able
(pledgeable) income X . Assume B + X > w so that continuation is optimal.24
As well, assume that

X , w < 0;

(34)

xL + X , w  0;

(35)

,I + fH (xH + X , w)  0:

(36)

and

With these parameter restrictions there is a feedback between aggregate liquidity and the maturity of savings such that multiple equilibria can arise.

 A long-maturity, high-liquidity, high-employment equilibrium.
Suppose, rst, that all rms continue at date 1 in both states of nature. All
In the notation of section 2, y = 0 or w; B = bw2 , [w2 =2]. In section 2, we assumed X = 0.
Here X is assumed positive.
24

49

consumers then have a job at date 1 and receive a wage w. By (31) and (33)
they have no demand for liquidity and are thus willing to defer all payments on
their date-0 investment to date 2.
Since the corporate sector need not meet any short-term payment obligations,
it always has enough liquidity to pay the date-1 wage w, as xL + X  w from (35).
Conditions (35) and (36) then imply that the rms can repay date-0 investors out
of X since ,I + [fH xH + fL xL ] + X , w  0. In this (ecient) equilibrium the
corporate sector issues long-term claims and does not lay o workers.

 A short-maturity, low-liquidity, low-employment equilibrium.
Suppose instead that rms are unable to continue in the bad state of nature.
Consumers become unemployed and because they have to to consume c1 , they
will insist on receiving at least c1 in this bad state of nature. Therefore, they
want to hold short-term claims on rms. Condition (32) guarantees that this is
indeed feasible, while (34) and (36) imply that given that workers are paid c1 ,
rms no longer have any cash to nance the reinvestment. Firms continue only
in the good state of nature, and equation (36) assures that such a plan can be
nanced at date 0.
This (inecient) equilibrium exhibits a coordination failure.25 It illustrates
25

One might wonder whether this coordination failure could be avoided if workers invested

50

in a stark manner that the liquidity available to the corporate sector depends on
the liability side as well as the asset side. In this respect, it is interesting to note
that a recent speech by the French nance minister26 called for \well-oriented
savings," meaning a switch by households from short-term market investments
towards long-term, equity investments that will bene t the productive sector.27
A couple of additional remarks can be made. First, the government can create
aggregate liquidity by o ering unemployment insurance. Unemployment insurance

(above c1 ) here eliminates the consumers' demand for liquidity and restores the
ecient equilibrium. Second, the multiplicity of equilibria could not arise in an
Arrow-Debreu economy, because in a perfect capital market, rms would be able
to pledge their entire date-2 income which would be enough to pay workers at
date 1 in both states.
solely in their own rm at date 0 and signed a contract with their employer specifying that
no cash will be withdrawn at date 1 as long as they are not laid o . This arrangement is not
robust to minor perturbations of the model such as job mobility or idiosyncratic liquidity shocks.
Suppose for example that with a small probability each rm receives no income at all at date
1. Then the workers, who want to secure c1 , must diversify their portfolio (have claims at least
worth c1 in other rms), and the coordination failure may still occur. [Technically, one must
assume that xL exceeds c1 slightly so as to o set the absence of income in this small number of
rms and allow all consumers to \survive" in the bad state of nature.]
26
Jean Arthuis' January 14, 1997 speech at the parliamentary meetings on savings.
27
The speech discussed several ways of encouraging equity investments, such as the creation
of pension funds and the reform of the tax system (equity investments in France are taxed at
the personal income rate; this implies an overall tax rate of 61.7% for the highest tax bracket.
In contrast, money market funds are taxed in a lump-sum fashion at a rate not exceeding 20%).

51

6.2. Liquidity creation through price support policies: the example of
commercial real estate.
In many countries the recessions of the late 80s and early 90s have left the nancial institutions burdened with depreciated commercial real estate. While banks,
badly in need of liquidity, would have liked to divest their real estate holdings,
they realized collectively that dumping real estate assets on the market simultaneously would have a disastrous impact on prices in a state of low demand for
commercial real estate. In some countries (e.g., in France), cartel-like restraints
on the disposition of real estate prevented prices from falling further.28 To an
industrial organization observer, this behavior has all the attributes of a pricexing case. This section argues that there is more to it than just collusion and
that price stabilization may actually have helped to improve economic eciency.
To illustrate the point, suppose that, as in section 6.1, continuation at date 1
requires paying for an input, but this time, let the input be commercial real estate
rather than labor. In case of continuation, one unit of commercial real estate is
needed. The date-0 investment yields date-1 income xL = 0 with probability fL
and xH > 0 with probability fH = 1 , fL. As in section 2, reinvestment yields
a private bene t B at date 2, but no pledgeable income (X = 0 in the notation
28

Such cartels are sometimes organized by the Central Bank.

52

of section 6.1). The reinvestment cost is  + e; where  > 0 and e is the price
of commercial real estate. Letting eL and eH denote the commercial real estate
prices in the bad and good states, the overall liquidity need is then

 + eL

in the bad state (probability fL )

or

 + eH , xH < 0

in the good state (probability fH )

Commercial real estate construction is part of the initial invesment. Each rm
buys one unit of real estate per unit of investment. Firms invest this amount in
commercial real estate at date 0 because they want to stand ready to produce at
least in the good state.
On the consumer side, we return to our basic paradigm in which preferences
are linear: c0 + c1 + c2 .
Divested real estate is costlessly converted into residential real estate on a oneto-one basis, say. To make our main point in the starkest way, suppose that there
is a xed (residual) demand at price v; the absorption capacity of the residential
real estate market is z . That is, if less than z units of commercial real estate
53

is converted, the price on the residential real estate market is v; if more than

z is converted, there is excess supply and the price on that market drops to 0.
Assume that

v > (1 , z)( + v):

(37)

Again, there are two possible equilibria:

 Low-price, low-production equilibrium:
Suppose that in the bad state the corporate sector dumps all its commercial
real estate onto the residential market. The price drops to 0, and since there is
no other liquid asset besides real estate all rms are liquidated. Even though the
commercial real estate is now free, rms are unable to continue.

 High-price, high-production equilibrium:
Suppose instead that only a fraction z^ of the assets are liquidated, where

v = (1 , z^)( + v)
Conditions (37) and (38) imply that z^ < z , and so the market price of real
estate is v. The corporate sector thus has total available liquidity per unit of
54

investment equal to v, and can nance the shortfall  + v on a fraction 1 , z^ of
its assets.
In this equilibrium, consumers pay higher date-1 prices for residential real
estate and the restraint on sales provides insurance to the corporate sector against
full credit rationing at date 1.29 Such insurance raises ex ante social surplus.

7. Concluding remarks
For a long time, corporate nance has been treated as an appendix to asset pricing
theory, with CAPM frequently used as the basic model for normative analyses
of investment and nancing decisions. While standard textbooks still re ect this
tradition, the modern agency-theoretic literature is starting to in uence the way
corporate nance is taught. This paper takes the next logical step, which is to
suggest that if nancing and investment decisions re ect agency problems | as
seems to be widely accepted | then it is likely that modern corporate nance
will require adjustments in asset pricing theories, too.
Our paper is a very preliminary e ort to analyze this reverse in uence of
corporate nance on asset pricing. We have employed a standard agency model
29
This example is in the spirit of Kiyotaki and Moore's 1997 analysis of the dual role of
certain assets as a store of value and an input into production. Our emphasis di ers both in the
ingredients (our treatment relies on the existence of aggregate shocks while theirs does not) and
in the emphasis (they stress the possibility of business cycles while we emphasize market power
and liquidity creation through price support policies.).

55

in which part of the returns from a rm's investment cannot be pledged to outsiders, raising a demand for long-term nancing, that is, for liquidity. We have
also assumed that individuals cannot pledge any of their future income, so that
borrowing against human capital is impossible. As a result, the economy is typically capital constrained, implying that collateralizable assets are in short supply.
Such assets will command a premium, which is determined by the covariation of
the asset's return with the marginal value of liquidity in di erent states. Risk
neutral rms are willing to pay a premium on assets that help them in states of
liquidity shortage. This is a form of risk aversion, but unlike in models based on
consumer risk aversion, return variation within states that experience no liquidity shortage is inconsequential for prices. Thus, liquidity premia have a built-in
skew.
One consequence of this skew is that price volatility tends to be higher in
states of liquidity shortage, as we illustrated in Section 3. Another consequence
is that long-term bonds, because of a higher price risk, tend to sell at a discount
relative to short-term bonds as we showed in Section 4. This may be one reason
why the yield curve most of the time is upward sloping, a feature that does not
readily come out of a complete market model.
The price dynamics in our model satisfy standard Euler conditions | in par56

ticular, prices follow a martingale as long as there is no readjustment in the
corporate sector's coordinated investment plan. It is an interesting possibility
that marginal rates of substitution for the corporate sector may be quite different, and perhaps more volatile in the short run, than the marginal rates of
substitution of a representative consumer. This could help to resolve some of the
empirical diculties experienced with consumption-based asset pricing models,
which appear to feature too little variation in MRSs.
Our model is quite special in that asset prices are entirely driven by a corporate demand for liquidity; consumers hold no bonds or other assets that sell at
a premium. It has been suggested to us that once the model is changed so that
consumers also have a liquidity demand, MRSs of consumers and rms will be
equalized, and we are back to the old problem with excess asset price volatility.
However, if consumers participate selectively in asset markets, then the MRSs of
the relevant sub-population may have high volatility and yet be hard to detect.
In this case, the equality between consumer and producer MRSs can be exploited
in the reverse: by evaluating corporate MRSs, we can infer what the MRS of the
representative consumer in the sub-population is. This may be a useful empirical strategy if rm data are more readily available and easier to analyze than
consumer data.
57

Finally, we note that violations of the martingale condition, as illustrated by
the end-of-period drop in the liquidity premium, may help to explain the wellknown paradox that prices of long-term bonds tend to move up rather than down,
following a period in which the yield spread (long/short) is exceptionally high.
This nding is very dicult to reconcile with the standard expectations theory
(Campbell, 1995), but could perhaps be accounted for in a theory where liquidity
demand shifts between short and long instruments in response to changes in
liquidity needs.

58

References
Aiyagari, R., and M. Gertler (1991) \Asset Returns with Transaction Costs
and Uninsured Individual Risk," Journal of Monetary Economics, 27: 311-331.
Black, F. (1976) \Studies of Stock Price Volatility Changes," Proceedings of
the American Statistical Association, Business and Statistics Section, 177-181.

Blanchard, O. (1993) \Movements in the Equity Premium," Brookings Papers
on Economic Activity, 2:75-138.

Bollerslev, T., Chou, R. and K. Kroner (1992) \ARCH Modeling in Finance,"
Journal of Econometrics, 52: 5-59.

Breeden, D.T. (1979) "An Intertemporal Asset Pricing Model with Stochastic
Consumption and Investment Opportunities," Journal of Financial Economics,
7:265-96.

Calomiris, C. (1989) \The Motivation for Loan Commitments Backing Commercial Paper," Journal of Banking and Finance, 13: 271-278.
Campbell, J. (1995) \Some Lessons from the Yield Curve," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 9:129-152.

Campbell, J., and R. Shiller (1993) \Yield Spreads and Interest Rate Movements: A Bird's Eye View," Review of Economic Studies, 58: 495-514.
Campbell, J., Lo, A., and C. MacKinlay (1996) The Econometrics of Financial
59

Markets, Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Cox, J., Ingersoll, J., and S. Ross (1985) \A Theory of the Term Structure of
Interest Rates," Econometrica, 53: 385-407.
Crane, D. (1973) \Managing Credit lines and Commitments," study prepared for the Trustees of the Banking Research Fund Association of Reserve
City Bankers, Graduate School of Business Administration, Harvard University.
Culbertson, J. (1957) \The Term Structure of Interest Rates," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 71: 485-517.

Diamond, D., and P. Dybvig (1983) \Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and
Liquidity," Journal of Political Economy, 91: 401-19.
Engle, R., Ng, V., and M. Rothschild (1990) \Asset Pricing with a FactorArch Covariance Structure," Journal of Econometrics, 45: 213-237.
Fama, E. (1965) \The Behavior of Stock Market Prices," Journal of Business,
38: 34-105.

Ferson, V. (1995) "Theory and Empirical Testing of Asset Pricing Models,"
in Handbooks in Organizational Research and Management Science, R. Jarrow et
al. eds., 9:145-200.

Froot, K., Scharfstein, D., and J. Stein (1993) "Risk Management: Coordinating Investment and Financing Policies," Journal of Finance, 48: 1629-1658.
60

Ghysels, E., Harvey, A., and E. Renault (1996) \Stochastic Volatilily," in
Handbook of Statistics, Vol. 14, ed. by G. Maddala and C. Rao, North Holland.

Gorton, G. and G. Pennacchi (1993) \Security Baskets and Indexed-Linked
Securities," Journal of Business, January.
Hansen, L., and R. Jagannathan (1991) \Implications of Security Market Data
for Models of Dynamic Economies," Journal of Political Economy, 99: 225-262.
Harrington, R. (1987) \Asset and Liability Management by Banks," OECD.
Harrison, J., and D.M. Kreps (1979) \Martingales and Arbitrage in Multiperiod Securities Markets," Journal of Economic Theory, 20: 381-408.
Hicks, J. (1967) Critical Essays in Monetary Theory, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hirshleifer, J. (1971) \The Private and Social Value of Information and the
Reward to Inventive Activity," American Economic Review, 61: 561-574.
Holmstrom B. and J. Tirole (1998) \Private and Public Supply of Liquidity,"
Journal of Political Economy, 106: 1-40.

|||{ (1996) \Modelling Aggregate Liquidity," American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 86(2): 187-191.

Jacklin, C. (1987) \Demand Deposits, Trading Restrictions, and Risk Sharing," in Contractual Arrangements for Intertemporal Trade, edited by E. Prescott
61

and N. Wallace, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Keynes, J.M. (1930) \A Treatise on Money," in Collected Writings of J.M.
Keynes, ed. D.E. Moggridge, London: Macmillan 1973.

Kiyotaki, N. and J. Moore (1997) \Credit Cycles," Journal of Political Economy, 105: 211-248.

Leland, H. (1997) \Corporate Risk Management: Promises and Pitfalls," annual IDEI-Region Midi-Pyrnes lecture.
Lintner, J. (1965) \The Valuation of Risk Assets and the Selection of Risky
Investments in Stock Portfolios and Capital Budgets," Review of Economics and
Statistics, 47: 13-37.

Lucas, R. E., Jr. (1978) \Asset Prices in an Exchange Economy," Econometrica 46: 1429-45.

Malkiel, B. (1992) \Term Structure of Interest Rates," in The New Palgrave
Dictionary of Money and Finance, edited by P. Newman, M. Milgate and J.

Eatwell, vol. 3: 650-52.
Mandelbrot, B. (1963) \The Variation of Certain Speculative Prices," Journal
of Business, 36: 394-419.

Mehra, R., and E.C. Prescott (1985) \The Equity Premium: A Puzzle," Journal of Monetary Economics, 15: 145-61.

62

Modigliani, F. and R. Sutch (1966) \Innovations in Interest Rate Policy,"
American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 56: 178-97.

Mossin, J. (1966) \Equilibrium in a Capital Asset Market," Econometrica,
35: 768-783.

Rubinstein, M. (1976) \The Valuation of Uncertain Income Streams and the
Pricing of Options," Bell Journal of Economics, 7: 407-425.
Schiller, R. (1989) Market Volatility, Cambridge: MIT Press.
Sharpe, W.F. (1964) \Capital Asset Prices: A Theory of Market Equilibrium
under Conditions of Risk," Journal of Finance, 19: 425-442.
Stein, J. (1996) \An Adverse Selection Model of Bank Asset and Liability
Management with Implications for the Transmission of Monetary Policy," mimeo,
MIT.
Stigum, M. (1990) The Money Market, 3rd edition. Irwin, Burr Ridge, Illinois.
Subrahmanyam, A. (1991) \A Theory of Trading in Stock Index Futures,"
Review of Financial Studies.

Vissing-Jorgensen, A. (1997) \Limited Stock Market Participation," Mimeo,
Department of Economics, MIT.
Weil, P. (1989) \The Equity Premium Puzzle and the Risk-Free Rate Puzzle,"
Journal of Monetary Economics, 24: 401-421.

63

Williams, W. (1988) \Asset Liability Management Techniques".

64

Appendix: Treatment of the productive sector as an aggregate
Suppose that there are n rms, i = 1; :::; n; each run by an entrepreneur, say.
Firm i starts with initial wealth Ai and invests Ii , so that the net outlay for
investors is Ni (Ii ) = Ii , Ai . At date 1, in state !, rm i takes a decision di (!)
in a subset Di (!; Lni (!)) of the technologically feasible set Di , where Lni (!) ? 0
is the net liquidity available to rm i in state !. Lni (!) > 0 means that rm i
uses liquidity, and Lni (!) < 0 means that rm i supplies liquidity in state !. The
decision di (!) generates an expected pledgeable income from productive assets

ri (Ii; !; di (!)) and a total expected income from productive assets Ri(Ii ; !; di (!)).
Let

Bi(Ii; !; di (!))  Ri (Ii ; !; di (!)) , ri (Ii ; !; di (!))
denote the nonpledgeable income of rm i that must go to entrepreneur i. Entrepreneur i may, however, be paid more than Bi . Let ti (!)  0 denote the expected
transfer on top of the nonpledgeable income Bi . (ti () could without loss of generality be chosen equal to 0 in the example.) So entrepreneur i obtains, in state

!, Bi (Ii; !; di (!)) + ti (!). If rm i withdraws gross liquidity ti(!) from noncorporate assets, then the net liquidity available to the rm is Lni (!) = Li (!) , ti (!).
65

The economically feasible set for rm i re ects the fact that no investor wants
to enter negative NPV investments at date 1:

Di(!; Li (!) , ti (!)) = fdi 2 Di j ri (Ii ; !; di (!)) , ti(!) + Li (!)  0g :
Let

D (!; Ln(!)) 

(

)
n
X
n
n
n
n
i=1Di (!; Li (!)) j Li (!)  L (!)
i=1

denote the product decision set, with generic element d(!). Consider a coordinated plan with weights fwi gi=1;:::;n de ned as the solution to the following
Program I
(

max

fI ;L ;d();t()g




E0

"
X

i

#)

wi [Bi (Ii ; !; di (!)) + ti (!) , Ai ]

s.t.

E0

"

X

i

#

ri(Ii ; !; di (!)) 

X

i

and
66

[Ii , Ai ] +

X

k

(qk , 1)Lk

d (!) 2 D !;

X

k

k (!)Lk ,

X

i

!

ti (!) :

Letting  denote the multiplier of the break-even constraint, optimization with
respect to Lk , together with the equilibrium condition Lk = L k yields

qk , 1 = E0 [m(!)k (!)] ;
where


d
m(!) = dL d2max
D(!;L)

P

P

i wi Bi +  ( i ri )





L=Pk k (!)L k ,Pi ti (!)

:

as in equation (9). The rst-order condition with respect to ti (!) is:
is:
either ti (!) = 0 and wi   [1 + m(!)]
or

ti(!) > 0 and wi =  [1 + m(!)] :

Now assume that there exists at least one state of nature with excess liquidity
(this is the case in all our examples). Then for all i, ti (!) = 0 whenever m(!) >
67

0. That is, pledgeable income is never distributed to entrepreneurs in states of
liquidity shortage. The marginal liquidity service can then be rewritten as:


d
m(!) = dL d2max
D(!;L)

P

P

i wi Bi +  ( i ri )





L=P k (!)L k

Thus the equilibrium is as described in the text, with B 
P

P

:

i wi Bi ,

and r 

i ri .

Remark: In Program I, we did not consider individual rationality constraints for

the entrepreneurs because such constraints only a ect the set of feasible weights

wi .
Let us now show that a decentralized equilibrium of a market for statecontingent liquidity can be construed as an optimal coordinated plan. Suppose
that the rms at date 0 contract on their date-1, state-contingent liquidity in a
perfect market. Let m(!) denote the net cost of one unit of liquidity in state

!: That is, in order to receive Li (!) in state !, for all !, rm i must pay
E0 [(1 + m(!))Li (!)] at date 0. Firm i therefore solves:
max

fIi ;Li ();di ();ti ()g

fE0 [Bi (Ii; !; di (!)) + ti(!) , Ai ]g

s.t.
68

E0 [ri (Ii; !; di (!)) , ti (!)]  Ii , Ai + E0 [m(!)Li (!)]
and

di (!) 2 Di (!; Li (!) , ti (!)):
Letting 1=wi denote the shadow price of the budget constraint, this program,
under our concavity assumptions, is equivalent to
Program II

max

fIi ;Li ();di ();ti ()g

fE0 [wi [Bi (Ii; !; di (!)) + ti (!)]

+ri (Ii ; !; di (!)) , ti (!) , Ii , m (!) Li (!)]g
s.t.

di (!) 2 Di (!; Li (!) , ti (!))

for all !:

Given the existence of a state !0 such that m(!0 ) = 0; optimizing over ti (!) and
69

Li (!) implies that wi  1 for all i, and ti (!) = 0 for all ! if wi < 1.
Summing over the individual programs, we see that the market equilibrium
solves
max E0

"

X

i

wi [Bi + ti ] +

X

i

[ri , rt ] , m(!)

X

i

Li

#

s.t.

di (!) 2 Di (!; Li (!) , ti (!))

for all !.

From our previous characterization,
X

i

(wi , 1) ti (!) = 0

for all !;

which implies that the constraints di 2 Di can be replaced by d 2 D, as de ned
earlier. Therefore the market equilibrium solves Program I for some weights

fwig.
Remarks:

1. This equivalence result would not hold, necessarily, if the set of liquid instruments did not span the state-contingent claim space. In this sense, we
70

are assuming that the state-contingent liquidity space is complete.
2. The weights fwi g are endogenous, so one cannot conduct comparative statics exercises with this representation, and we do not. However, the analysis
of price dynamics in Section 4 is valid, because it entails no rebalancing of
portfolios.

71

