1. Introduction


       The debate over the role international trade plays in determining environmental
outcomes has at times generated more heat than light. Theoretical work has been successful
in identifying a series of hypotheses linking openness to trade and environmental quality, but
the empirical verification of these hypotheses has seriously lagged. Foremost among these is
the pollution haven hypothesis that suggests relatively low-income developing countries will
be made dirtier with trade. Its natural alternative, the simple factor endowment hypothesis,
suggests that dirty capital intensive processes should relocate to the relatively capital
abundant developed countries with trade.      Empirical work by Grossman and Krueger
(1993), Jaffe et al. (1995) and Tobey (1990) cast serious doubt on the strength of the simple
pollution haven hypothesis because they find trade flows are primarily responsive to factor
endowment considerations and apparently not responsive to differences in pollution
abatement costs. Does this mean that trade has no effect on the environment?
       This paper sets out a theory of how "openness" to international goods markets affects
pollution levels to assess the environmental consequences of international trade. We develop
a theoretical model to divide trade's impact on pollution into scale, technique and
composition effects and then examine this theory using data on sulfur dioxide concentrations
from the Global Environment Monitoring Project. The decomposition of trade's effect into
scale, technique and composition effects has proven useful in other contexts [see Grossman
and Krueger (1993), Copeland and Taylor (1994,1995)] and here we move one step forward
to provide estimates of their magnitude. We find that international trade creates relatively
small changes in pollution concentrations when it alters the composition, and hence the
pollution intensity, of national output. Combining this result with our estimates of scale and
technique effects yields a somewhat surprising conclusion: if trade liberalization raises GDP
per person by 1%, then pollution concentrations fall by about 1%. In the case of sulfur
dioxide concentrations, free trade is good for the environment.
          We obtain this conclusion by estimating a very simple model highlighting the
interaction of factor endowment and income differences in determining the pattern of trade.
Our approach, while relatively straightforward, is novel in three respects.         First, by
exploiting the panel structure of our data set, we are able to distinguish empirically between


                                                                                           2
the negative environmental consequences of scalar increases in economic activity - the scale
effect - and the positive environmental consequences of increases in income that call for
cleaner production methods - the technique effect. This distinction is important for many
reasons.1 Our estimates indicate that a 1% increase in the scale of economic activity raises
concentrations by approximately .3%, but the accompanying increase in income drives
concentrations down by approximately 1.4% via a technique effect.
        Second, we devise a method for isolating how trade-induced changes in the
composition of output affects pollution concentrations. Both the pollution haven hypothesis
and the factor endowment hypothesis predict openness to trade will alter the composition of
national output in a way that depends on a nation’s comparative advantage. For example in
the pollution haven hypothesis, poor countries get dirtier with trade while rich countries get
cleaner.2 As a result, looking for a consistent relationship between additional pollution and
openness to trade (across a panel of both rich and poor countries) is unlikely to be fruitful.
Instead we look for trade’s composition effect after conditioning on country characteristics.
We find that openness per se, measured in a variety of ways, has very little consistent impact
on pollution concentrations. Openness conditioned on country characteristics has however a
highly significant, but relatively small, impact on pollution concentrations.
        And lastly, our approach forces us to distinguish between the pollution consequences
of income changes brought about by changes in openness from those created by capital
accumulation or technological progress. We find that income gains brought about by further
trade or neutral technological progress tend to lower pollution, but income gains brought
about by capital accumulation raise pollution. The key difference is that capital accumulation
favors the production of pollution intensive goods whereas neutral technological progress
and further trade do not. One immediate implication of this finding is that the pollution
consequences of economic growth are dependent on the underlying source of growth.
Another more speculative implication is that pollution concentrations should at first rise and


1    For example, income transfers across countries raise national income but not output, whereas foreign
direct investment raises output more than national income. For these, and many other reasons, we need
separate estimates of technique and scale effects.
2     That is, the composition effect of trade for poor countries makes them dirtier while the composition
effect for rich countries makes them cleaner. The full effect of trade may be positive even for poor countries
depending on the strength of the technique and scale effects.


                                                                                                           3
then fall with increases in income per capita, if capital accumulation becomes a less important
source of growth as development proceeds.
       The theoretical literature on trade and the environment contains many papers where
either income differences or policy differences across countries drive pollution intensive
industries to the lax regulation or low-income country. For example, Pethig (1976), Siebert
et al. (1980), and McGuire (1982) all present models where the costs of pollution intensive
goods are lower in the region with no environmental policy. One criticism of these papers is
that while they are successful in predicting trade patterns in a world where policy is fixed and
unresponsive, their results may be a highly misleading guide to policy in a world where
environmental protection responds endogenously to changing conditions. Empirical work
by Grossman and Krueger (1993) suggests that it is important to allow policy to change
endogenously with income levels and in our earlier work (Copeland and Taylor (1994,
1995)) we incorporated the Grossman-Krueger finding to investigate how income-induced
differences in pollution policy determine trade patterns.
       While this earlier work produced several insights, it was limited because it ignored
the potential role factor abundance could play in determining trade patterns. In contrast, the
model we develop here allows income differences and factor abundance differences to jointly
determine trade patterns.          This extension is important, especially in an empirical
investigation, because many of the most polluting industries are also highly capital
intensive.3
         The empirical literature in this area has progressed in three distinct ways. First,
there are studies that primarily concern themselves with growth and pollution levels and
interpret their results as indicative of the relative strength of scale versus technique effects
(for example, Grossman and Krueger (1993, 1995), Shafik (1994), Seldon and Song
(1994), Gale and Mendez (1996), and Dean (1998)). Many of these studies also add a
measure of openness as an additional explanatory variable. There is a second group of
studies that examines how trade flows may themselves be affected by the level of abatement
costs or strictness of pollution regulation in the trading partner countries. This approach was
pioneered by Tobey (1990), and then employed in the context of the NAFTA agreement by
Grossman and Krueger (1993) and for a large cross section of countries by Antweiler


3   See appendix B, section B.1 for evidence linking capital intensity and pollution intensity.


                                                                                                  4
(1996). Finally there are those studies that employ the U.S. Toxic Release Inventory to infer
how changes in production and trade flows has altered the pollution intensity of production
in both developed and developing countries. Work along these lines includes Low and Yeats
(1992).
          Overall the results from these studies are best described as mixed.                 Apart from
specific case studies, there is very little evidence linking liberalized trade in general with
significant changes in the environment. In addition, there is little evidence that differences in
abatement costs are a significant determinant of trade flows. There is, however, evidence
that increases in income will, after a point, lead to lower concentrations of some pollutants.
But the role that trade plays in this process is not entirely clear. Finally, there is some
evidence that the composition of exports of some developing countries have become dirtier
over time but these results follow only from a relatively narrow set of toxic pollutants
recorded in the U.S. inventory.
          Ideally an empirical investigation should be able to distinguish between the negative
environmental consequences of scalar increases in economic activity - the scale effect - and
the positive environmental consequences of increases in income that call for cleaner
production methods - the technique effect. Grossman and Krueger and others interpret their
hump-shaped Kuznets curve as reflecting the relative strength of scale versus technique
effects, but they do not provide separate estimates of their magnitude.4 As well, an empirical
investigation should be able to identify how trade affects average pollution intensity of
national output by altering its composition. Many studies include some measure of openness
in their regressions to capture a composition effect, but there is very little reason to believe
that openness per se affects the composition of output in all countries in the same way.
Without a measure of the compositional effects of trade, we cannot assess whether trade’s
real income gains come at the cost of a dirtier mix of national production. Finally, many of
the existing studies have a very weak theoretical base and this makes inference difficult.
Without a causal mechanism linking trade to consequent changes in the environment it is
difficult to isolate the effects of trade on the environment from other factors such as


4     Moreover we would argue income per capita is not an appropriate measure of scale, and hence the
Grossman-Krueger finding does not reflect the relative strength of scale and technique effects. Gale and
Mendez (1996) separate scale and technique effects by using city population figures, but their method is not
entirely satisfactory. See section 3.2 for further discussion.


                                                                                                         5
technological changes in abatement activity, capital accumulation, or other sources of real
income change.
        We would be the first to admit that our simple theoretical model carries a heavy
burden in providing us with the structure needed to isolate and identify the implications of
international trade. We suggest however that earlier empirical investigations failed to find a
strong link between environmental outcomes and freer trade precisely because they lacked a
strong theoretical underpinning. With a more coherent theoretical framework we are able to
look in the "right directions" for trade's effect.
        The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In section 2 we outline our
theory and in section 3 we describe our empirical strategy. In section 4 we present our
empirical results estimating trade’s effect on pollution. Section 5 concludes. Appendix A
contains summary statistics for data, plus additional notes on data sources and methods.
Appendix B contains some additional supporting materials. In Appendix C we report results
from a series of sensitivity tests of our specification.



2. Theory


2.1. The model


        A population of N agents lives in a small open economy that produces two final
goods, X and Y, with two primary factors, labor, L, and capital, K. Industry Y is labor
intensive and does not pollute. Industry X is capital intensive and generates pollution as a
by-product. We assume constant returns to scale, and hence the production technology for
X and Y can be described by unit cost functions cX(w,r) and c Y(w,r). We let Y be the
numeraire, set py = 1, and denote the relative price of X by p.
        By choice of units, 1 unit of pollution is generated for each unit of X produced. We
call this the base level of pollution and denote it by B.         Producers have access to an
abatement technology however, which for simplicity we assume uses only good X as an
input. For a given base level of pollution B, the amount of pollution abated, A, is given by
the function λA(xa,B), where xa is the amount of resources allocated to abatement. We will




                                                                                           6
treat λ as a parameter that may be affected by technological change. Pollution emissions are
then given by B minus A, or:

                                     z = [x – λA(xa,x)].                                  (2.1)
We assume A(xa,x) is linearly homogeneous, increasing, and concave in xa and x. Hence
we can write

                                       A(xa,x) = xa(θ),                                   (2.2)
where θ = x a/x is the fraction of X output devoted to abatement, and a(θ) ≡ A(θ,1). We
assume there is no abatement without inputs, and that it is not possible to fully abate all
pollution: i.e. a(0) = 0 and λa(1) < 1. Note our specification implies increasing marginal
abatement costs since, for a given level of base pollution, there are diminishing returns to
abatement activity.
         Using (2.2), we can rewrite pollution emissions (2.1) as

                                      z = x[1 – λa(θ)].                                   (2.3)

Producers



         We can now specify the equilibrium conditions for the production side of the
economy.       We assume the government uses pollution emission taxes (which are
endogenous) to reduce pollution. Given the pollution tax τ, the profits π x for a firm
producing X are given by revenue, less production costs, pollution taxes, and abatement
costs:

                         π x = px – cx (w,r) x – τ[1 – λa(θ)]x – pθx.                     (2.4)
Firms will jointly choose gross output (x) and their abatement fraction θ to maximize profits.
Define
                               ~
                               p = p(1 – θ) – τ[1 – λa(θ)].
Then (2.4) becomes:

                                     π x = p~ x – cx (w,r)x.
Because of constant returns to scale, the output of an individual firm is indeterminate, but for
any level of output, the first order condition for the choice of θ implies



                                                                                             7
                                          p = λτa'(θ).                                    (2.5)
(2.5) implicitly defines the optimal abatement θ∗ as an increasing function of τ/p:

                                          θ∗ = θ(λτ/p),                                   (2.6)
where θ' > 0. As one would expect, abatement activity is increasing in the level of the
pollution tax.
       With free entry, firms will enter each industry until profits are zero. Using (2.4), we
have for the X industry

                                       cx (w,r) = p~                                      (2.7)
and for the Y industry, we have

                                          cY (w,r) = 1.                                   (2.8)
        We assume both industries are active, and hence (2.7) and (2.8) determine factor
prices w and r as functions of ~
                               p . Factor prices in turn determine the unit input coefficients
for each sector. For example, by Shepherd's Lemma, the unit labor requirement in X is
          x
given by cw ≡ ∂cx /∂w, etc. The full employment conditions then determine outputs:
                                      x          Y
                                     cw x + cw y = L                                      (2.9)
                                      x         Y
                                  cr x + cr y = K                                 (2.10)
where, as noted before, x denotes gross output of X. Net output of X (that remaining for
consumption and/or export) is xn = x – xa = x(1 – θ).



Consumers


       Each consumer maximizes utility, treating pollution as given. For simplicity, we
assume preferences over consumption goods are homothetic and the marginal disutility of
pollution is constant. The indirect utility function of a typical consumer is given by

                               V(p,G/N,z) = u  ρ(p) – δz,
                                                G/N
                                                                                         (2.11)


where G is national income (so G/N is per capita income), ρ is a price index, u is increasing
and concave, and δ is the marginal disutility of pollution. Note that pollution is harmful to




                                                                                             8
consumers and is treated as a pure public bad (all consumers experience the same level of
pollution).
         It is convenient to define real per capita income as
                                                G/N
                                           I≡          ,                                 (2.12)
                                                ρ(p)
and rewrite the indirect utility as u(I) – δz.


Government


         Pollution policy is determined by the government, and will vary with economic
conditions. We model the policy process very simply by assuming the government sets a
pollution tax, and that the level of the tax is an increasing function of the optimal tax. This
allows for the possibility that government behavior varies across countries (perhaps
depending on country characteristics and political systems), but also allows pollution policy
to respond endogenously to changing economic conditions.
         Since all consumers are identical, the optimal pollution tax maximizes the sum of
utilities:
                                    max   {N[u(I) – δz]} .
                                    {τ}
The solution to this problem yields

                                        τ∗ = N δφ[p,I],                                  (2.13)
where φ = ρ(p)/u', and φI > 0 since u is concave. δφ[p,I] can be interpreted as marginal
damage per person, and hence (2.13) is just the standard Samuelson rule. The pollution tax
is the sum of marginal damages across all individuals and is increasing in real income
because environmental quality is a normal good.
         The actual pollution tax τ is assumed to be an increasing function Τ of the optimal tax
τ*:

                                           τ = Τ(τ∗),                                    (2.14)
where Τ' > 0, T(τ∗) ≤ τ∗, and we assume εT,τ∗ ≤ 1. Τ depends on variables (suppressed
here) that reflect the responsiveness of the government to the efficient policy. If policy is
always optimal, then the elasticity of T with respect to the optimal tax, εT,τ∗ = 1.



                                                                                             9
        The equilibrium level of pollution can now be determined by substituting (2.14) and
(2.6) into (2.3), and then using the market clearing conditions (2.7) - (2.10) to determine
output levels.


2.2. Scale, technique and composition effects


         Because the relationship between economic activity and environmental quality is
complex, it is useful to begin by decomposing the total effect of a change in pollution into
scale, composition, and technique effects. To investigate further, define the scale of
economic activity S as the value of the economy's gross output at world prices:5

                                                  S = px + y.                                   (2.15)
To define the composition effect it is convenient to work with x/y ratios. Let χ = x/y denote
the relative supply of X. Solving (2.9) and (2.10) for x and y and dividing yields
                                             Y          Y
                                   x     cw κ – c r
                               = x y    x        ≡ χ (κ,p~ ),                       (2.16)
                                 cr – c w κ
where κ = K/L is the economy's capital labor ratio. Note that χ is increasing in κ and p~ ;
and therefore increasing in p and decreasing in τ. 6 We will refer to any change in the
economy that alters χ (κ,p~ ) as creating a composition effect. Using (2.15) and (2.16), we
can now rewrite our expression for pollution (2.3) as:

                                                 [ 1 – λa(θ)]χ S
                                        z=                       .                              (2.17)
                                                      1+pχ
        To obtain our decomposition, totally differentiate (2.17) to yield:7
                                         ^                           ^
                                                 + ϕy χ – ζ εa,θ θ
                               ^                       ^
                               z       = S                                                      (2.18)
where "^" denotes "percent change", ϕy = y/(px+y) is the share of y in the value of gross
output, εa,θ is the elasticity of a with respect to θ, and ζ = λa(θ)x/z is the ratio of abated

5    There are other ways of defining scale. We need a quantity index, and (2.15) is convenient for our
purposes.
                                                         ~                          ~
6    To confirm this, note that χ = x/y is increasing in p , and that (using 2.5), dp /dp = 1–θ > 0, and
  ~
dp /dτ = – (1-λa(θ)) < 0.
7    We hold world prices and the abatement technology constant throughout this section. Section 2.3
considers changes in world prices and trade frictions.


                                                                                                    10
pollution to actual pollution. The first term is the scale effect. Holding constant pollution
abatement techniques and the mix of goods produced, an increase in the scale of economic
activity will raise pollution. Next is the composition effect. Holding scale and techniques
constant, a shift in the composition of production towards more pollution intensive goods
will raise pollution. Finally, the technique effect: holding the scale and composition of
economic activity constant, pollution levels will fall in response to an increase in the intensity
of pollution abatement.
         According to (2.18), the observed variation in our pollution data arises from variation
in the scale, composition and techniques of economic activity across countries and over time.
We will adopt a quantity index of output to proxy for scale in our empirical work. To relate
the composition and technique effects to observable variables as well, we differentiate (2.16)
                                    ^       ^
and (2.6) to obtain expressions for χ and θ which we then substitute into (2.18). This
yields
                            ^
                                                  – (ϕy α τ εχ, ~p + ζεa,θεθ,τ) ^τ
                   ^
                   z    = S     + ϕy εχ,k κ^                                                             (2.19)
                                                                              ~ . Since we do
where εij denotes the elasticity of i with respect to j, and α τ = τλ[1-a(θ)]/p
not observe policy directly in our data set, we must replace ^τ in (2.19) with its determinants.
From (2.13) and (2.14) we can write ^τ as:

                                    τ = εT,τ∗ [N
                                                  ^
                                                       + εφ,II + δ ].
                                    ^                          ^      ^
                                                                                                         (2.20)
The pollution tax depends on population size, real per capita income, and consumer tastes.
Now substitute (2.20) into (2.19), to obtain:
                        ^          ^                       ^                      ^
                  z = γ1S + γ2 κ^ – γ3 I – γ4 N         ^
                                                             – γ5δ ,                     (2.21)
where γ1 = 1, γ2 = ϕy εχ,k > 0, γ3 = εφ,I γ4 > 0, γ4 = εT,τ∗ (ϕy θ τ εχ, ~p + ζ εa,θεθ,τ) > 0,
and γ5 = γ4 > 0.
          The first term in (2.21) is the scale effect, as before. The second term measures the
effect on pollution of an increase in the capital/labor ratio. This is a composition effect.
Since the polluting industry is capital intensive, a more capital abundant country generates
more pollution, all else equal. The remaining terms all reflect the effects of changes in
pollution policy; we will refer to them as technique effects.8 An increase in the level of per

                                                     ~
8     In fact, because an increase in τ also reduces p (the producer price of x) , the technique effect is always
reinforced by an induced composition effect. But for simplicity, we shall simply refer to the effects of policy
changes as a technique effect.


                                                                                                            11
capita income increases the demand for environmental quality, and leads to stricter pollution
policy (εφ,I > 0); an increase in the number of people exposed (N
                                                                ^
                                                                  > 0) leads to stricter
pollution policy via the Samuelson rule; and an increase in the marginal disutility of pollution
    ^
(δ > 0, which may arise from increased knowledge about pollution) will also increase the
demand for environmental quality and increase the pollution tax. Finally it is worthwhile to
note the strength of these last three technique effects depends on εT,τ∗ , which indexes the
government responsiveness to the preferences of the representative agent.
         Equation (2.21) neatly summarizes our predictions about how pollution varies across
countries and over time in response to observable variables (holding prices and the abatement
technology fixed). Pollution rises with the scale of the economy and capital abundance.
Increases in income, the marginal disutility of pollution, and the number of people exposed
to pollution lead to a tightening of policy and a reduction in pollution. Equation (2.21) is not
a suitable basis for estimation however because we have held both world and domestic prices
fixed in its derivation.


2.3. Increased openness


         To examine the consequences of increased openness on pollution levels, suppose
transport costs or other frictions act as a barrier to trade. Given a common world price pw,
the domestic price in any country can be written,

                                                 p = βpw
where β measures the importance of trade frictions. Note β > 1 if a country imports X and β
< 1 if a country exports X. 9 We refer to a movement of β towards 1 as an increase in
openness, or freer trade. Referring again to (2.18), recall that any change in the economy
(including an increase in openness) generates scale, technique and composition effects. In
deriving (2.21) we held domestic prices fixed. If we now allow for both trade frictions and
world prices to change we have



9     For example, let υ be the level of iceberg transport costs (that is υ < 1 is the fraction of the good that
arrives at the destination when a unit is exported). Then if the good is exported from home, we have pd = υ
pw, and if the good is imported, we have p d = p w/υ. Freer trade (an increase in υ) raises pd if x is exported
and lowers pd if x is imported.


                                                                                                           12
                                                  ^
                                          p^    = β    + p^ w.
Amending (2.21) yields:

            ^         ^                     ^                     ^                      ^
                            + γ2κ^                   ^
            z = γ1S                  – γ3I      – γ4 N      – γ5δ     + γ6p^ w + γ7β                 (2.22)


where γ6 = γ7 = ϕy εχ, ~p + ζ εa,θεθ,τ(1 – εT,τ∗ εφ,p ) > 0.10 Τhe remaining γi are as defined
previously. As before, pollution varies with scale, capital abundance, income levels, etc. but
as well, pollution now also varies with world prices and trade frictions.
        Equation (2.22) is very important to our subsequent analysis because it establishes
one key result and naturally leads to a discussion of how we identify the impact of trade in
our empirical work. The key result contained in (2.22) is simply that a reduction in trade
frictions will affect different countries in different ways. We should not expect to find
openness per se related in any systematic way to pollution. This follows because β rises
with freer trade for an exporter of the polluting good and β falls for an importer. While the
                ^                                              ^
coefficient of β is positive, an increase in openness yields β > 0 for a country with a
                                             ^
comparative advantage in dirty goods, and β < 0 for a country with a comparative advantage
in clean goods. We summarize these results in Proposition 1.


Proposition 1.            Consider two economies which are identical, except with respect to
openness (that is, they have the same scale, per capita income, population, tastes,
technology, and relative factor abundance). (a) Suppose that both countries export the
polluting good. Then pollution is higher in the country that has lower trade frictions. (b)
Suppose that both countries import the polluting good.                Then pollution is lower in the
country that has lower trade frictions.
Proof: Suppose country 1 has lower trade frictions than country 2. In case (a), we have β 1
< β 2 . In case (b) we have β 2 < β 1 . Now apply (2.22).




10     The result that γ 6 > 0 requires a restriction on εT,τ∗ . A sufficient condition for γ 6 > 0 is that
εT,τ∗ εφ,p ≤ 1. From Roy's Identity and the definition of φ following (2.13), we have εφ,p = ϕ x c < 1, where
ϕx c is the share of x in consumption spending. If policy is always perfect or if the government is less than
fully responsive to changes in the optimal tax, then εT,τ∗ ≤ 1, and the result follows.


                                                                                                        13
       The means by which a country is made cleaner or dirtier works through its impact on
                               ^
domestic relative prices. When β > 0 (or when p^ w > 0) the relative price of the pollution
intensive good rises. Holding the abatement intensity constant, an increase in the relative
price of X stimulates the output of X, and hence increases pollution via this composition
effect. Second, for given levels of the pollution tax, an increase in the price of X increases
                                                                       ^
the cost of abatement activity and this also increases pollution. When β < 0 (or when p^ w <
0) just the opposite occurs.
        While all countries in our sample will respond similarly to a change in world prices,
their response to a change in trade frictions depends on their comparative advantage. This
feature of our theory provides a method for identifying the composition effect created by
freer trade. It suggests that some of the variation in our pollution data could be explained by
a country’s openness, but only after we have conditioned on those country characteristics
that determine comparative advantage.
        It is important to recognize that a fall in trade frictions or change in world prices alters
both the scale of economic activity and income per capita in addition to those changes
mentioned above. As a result, the full impact of a reduction in trade frictions is not captured
                      ^       ^
by the coefficient on β . The β term is a trade-induced composition effect, holding scale
and per capita income fixed. A full accounting of the impact of further openness would have
to take into account the induced scale and technique effects as well as any trade-induced
composition effect. Totally differentiating (2.17) with respect to β, holding all else except
trade frictions constant yields:
                                    ^         ^         ^
                                     z = γ1S – γ3I + γ7β^
        A fall in trade frictions results in an increase in economic activity and this scale effect
increases pollution. There will also be an increase in real per capita income creating a
technique effect. And finally, there is the composition effect discussed previously. We will
not attempt to measure how a reduction in trade frictions alters either the scale of economic
activity or income per capita in our empirical work. The scale of the economy and real per
capita income are influenced by many factors in addition to openness to trade. Identifying
the separate influence of trade on growth and on static income levels is the subject of an
already voluminous, and somewhat controversial, literature. Our strategy is to provide a
direct estimate of the composition effect created by an increase in openness by controlling for
scale and per capita income. We also provide estimates linking the scale of economic activity


                                                                                                14
and income levels to pollution concentrations. We then use economic theory to tell us how
to combine our estimates of scale, technique and (trade-induced) composition effects in order
to assess the environmental consequences of freer trade.11


The pattern of trade


        Proposition 1 tells us that looking for a simple correlation between openness and
environmental quality is unlikely to be fruitful. Rather, we have to focus on the link between
openness, comparative advantage, and pollution. Hence we need to take study the factors
determining a country's comparative advantage. In our model, comparative advantage is
determined by the interplay of relative factor endowments and differences in pollution policy,
(which are mainly due to differences in per capita income). To investigate the determinants
of comparative advantage we solve for autarky relative prices.
        Because preferences over consumption goods are homothetic and there are constant
returns to scale in production we can use relative supply and demand curves to determine
autarky prices. Recalling that p denotes the relative price of good x, let RD(p) denote the
demand for good x relative to good y. Then the autarky relative price of good x is determined
by the intersection of the (net) relative supply and demand curves

                                     RD(p) = (1–θ)χ (κ,p~ )                              (2.23)
where the gross relative supply χ = x/y is defined by (2.16), and net relative supply is
(1–θ)χ . Totally differentiating and using (2.13), we obtain an expression showing how
autarky prices vary with income and endowments:
                                                                           ^
                            – εχ,κ κ^ + εT,τ∗ εφ,I α τ εχ, ~p + ζεθ,τ I
                    ^p =                                                     ,         (2.24)
                                                     Λ
where Λ = α pεχ, ~p + ζ εθ,τ – εT,τ*εφ,p [α τ εχ, ~p + ζ εθ,τ] – εRD, p > 0.


        The pattern of trade is determined by the interaction of two influences: relative factor
abundance and pollution policy. Pollution policy in turn is influenced by income. To show
how each of these factors affect comparative advantage let us consider them separately.


11   See section 4.3.


                                                                                            15
The role of factor endowments


        Standard factor endowment theories predict that capital abundant countries should
export capital intensive goods. In our model this need not be true because pollution policy
can potentially reverse the pattern of trade. Nevertheless, capital abundance is still one of the
key determinants of comparative advantage in our model. Because X is relatively capital
intensive, an increase in κ, holding all else constant, increases Home's relative supply of X,
and lowers Home's autarky relative price of X. [Using (2.24), we obtain p^ < 0 since ε        χ,κ
> 0]. All else equal, an increase in the relative abundance of the factor used relatively
intensively in the pollution intensive sector should increase the likelihood that a country will
be an exporter of pollution intensive goods. More concretely, we can show that if the
country is sufficiently capital abundant, it must export the capital intensive (polluting) good:


Proposition 2. Suppose the world price p is fixed. Then, for a given level of income I,
there exists κ such that if κ > κ , then Home exports X. Moreover, for such a country, the
pure composition effect of trade liberalization will be to increase pollution.


Proof. For a given p and I, Home's relative demand RD(p) is fixed. Relative supply χ is
given by (2.16) for the case where the economy is diversified in both goods. For given p
and I, the unit input coefficients in (2.11) are fixed, and hence χ approaches infinity as κ
rises. Consequently, there exists some κ such that for κ > κ , χ exceeds relative demand,
and hence Home exports X. The increase in pollution via the composition effect follows
from Prop. 1.


The role of income differences


        An alternative theory of trade patterns is the pollution haven hypothesis. According
to this view, poor countries have a comparative advantage in dirty goods because they have
relatively lax pollution policy, and rich countries have a comparative advantage in clean




                                                                                             16
goods because of their stringent pollution policy.12 This result can be obtained as a special
case of our model: if all countries have the same relative factor endowments, but differ in per
capita incomes, then indeed richer countries will have stricter pollution policy and this will
lead to a comparative advantage in clean goods. When countries differ in factor endowments
as well, then we can obtain a weaker result: if a country is sufficiently rich, holding all else
constant, then it will export the clean good.
        As before, we begin by determining domestic prices prior to trade. Consider the
effects of increasing income in a country, holding relative factor abundance constant. In this
case, (2.24) reduces to

                                        εT,τ∗ εφ,Iα τ εχ, ~p + ζεθ,τ^I
                               ^p   =                                        ,         (2.25)
                                                        Λ


Since environmental quality is a normal good, we have εφ ,I > 0. Hence we conclude from
(2.25) that p^ > 0. In autarky, the relative price of the pollution intensive good rises with
per capita income if we control for relative factor abundance. Hence high income, all else
equal, tends to generate a comparative disadvantage in pollution intensive goods. More
concretely, we can show that if the country is sufficiently rich, it must export the labor
intensive (clean) good.


Proposition 3. Suppose the world price p is fixed and there exists ε such that εφ,Ι > ε >
0. Then, for a given level of the capital/labor ratio κ (and holding all else constant), there
exists I, such that if I > I, then Home exports Y. Moreover, for such a country, the pure
composition effect of trade liberalization will be to reduce pollution.


Proof: The relative price of x facing producers is ~
                                                   p = p(1 – θ) – τλ(1 – a(θ)) < p(1 – θ) –
τλ(1 – a(1)) where λa(1) < 1). Because εφ,Ι > ε , the pollution tax increases without bound
as income rises (and moreover θ rises), and hence there must exist some I for which p~ falls
to 0, in which case the output of X is 0.                The relative demand for X is, however,
independent of income. Hence for sufficiently large I, Home must import X and export Y.
The fall in pollution follows from Prop.1.

12   See Copeland and Taylor (1994) for a model that explores this issue.


                                                                                            17
       Propositions 1, 2 and 3 contain the major implications of our model. Proposition 1
tells us that international trade has an impact on environmental quality that varies with the
comparative advantage of a country. If we compare countries with similar incomes and
scale, we expect to find openness associated with higher pollution in countries with a
comparative advantage in the polluting good, and openness associated with lower pollution
in countries with a comparative advantage in the clean good. This observation suggests that
conditioning on country characteristics is important if we are to isolate trade’s composition
effect. Proposition 2 and 3 give us some limiting results concerning the determinants of
comparative advantage. Even though comparative advantage is set by the complex interplay
of income differences and relative factor abundance, these results indicate that if a country is
sufficiently rich then the pollution haven motive for trade will eventually outweigh factor
endowment considerations and this country will export the clean good in trade. Similarly, if
a country is sufficiently capital abundant then the factor endowment basis for trade will
eventually outweigh any pollution haven motive for trade and this country will export the
dirty good. The theory is perhaps at its weakest here because it does not provide a simple
definition of either sufficiently rich or sufficiently capital abundant.    But it should be
recognized that these definitions would have to be functions of the entire distribution of both
factor abundance and per-capita income in the world as a whole.



3. Empirical Strategy


       This section describes how we move from our theory to an estimating equation. To
do so we need to discuss our data, its sources and limitations (section 3.1) and then address
the links between theory and our estimating equation (section 3.2).




                                                                                            18
3.1 Data Sources and Measurement Issues


         A real world pollutant useful for our purposes would: (1) be a by-product of goods
production; (2) be emitted in greater quantities per unit of output in some industries than
others; (3) have strong local effects; (4) be subject to regulations because of its noxious
effect on the population; (5) have well known abatement technologies available for
implementation; and (6), for econometric purposes have data available from a mix of
developed and developing and “open” and “closed” economies. An almost perfect choice for
this study is sulfur dioxide.
        Sulfur dioxide is a noxious gas produced by the burning of fossil fuels. Natural
sources occur from volcanoes, decaying organic matter and sea spray.                    Anthropogenic
sources are thought to be responsible for somewhere between one-half to one-third of all
emissions (UNEP (1991), Kraushaar (1988)). Emissions in developed countries accrue to a
large extent from electricity generation and the smelting of non-ferrous ores; in some
developing countries diesel fuel and home heating are also large contributors.                  SO2 is
primarily emitted as either a direct or indirect product of goods production and is not strongly
linked to automobile use. As a result, because energy intensive industries are also typically
capital intensive, a reasonable proxy for dirty SO2 creating activities may be physical capital
intensive production processes.
        SO2 emissions can be controlled by altering the techniques of production in three
ways. By the process of flue gas desulphurization (adding scrubbers to flue stacks), by
altering the combustion process of fuels, and by a change to lower sulfur content fuels.
Therefore, readily available although costly methods for the control of emissions exist and
their efficacy is well established. In addition, in many countries SO2 emissions have been
actively regulated for some time.
        The Global Environment Monitoring System (GEMS) has been recording SO2
concentrations in major urban areas in developed and developing countries since the early
1970s. Our data set consists of 2621 observations from 293 observation sites located in 109
cities representing 44 countries spanning the years 1971-1996.13 The GEMS network was



13   We have only a handful of data points (two or three observations) for some countries. Accordingly we
do not draw any country specific conclusions for these countries.


                                                                                                    19
set up to monitor the concentrations of several pollutants in a cross section of countries using
comparable measuring devices.14          The panel of countries includes primarily developed
countries in the early years, but from 1976 to the early 1990s the United Nations
Environment Programme provided funds to expand and maintain the network. The coverage
of developing economies grew over time until the late 1980s. In the 1990s coverage has
fallen with data only from the US for 1996. WHO (1984) reports that until the late 1970s
data comparability may be limited as monitoring capabilities were being assessed, many new
countries were added, and procedures were being developed to ensure validated samples.
Accordingly, we investigate the sensitivity of our findings to the time period, but leave the
reporting of these (largely confirming results) to Appendix C.
          The GEMS data is comprised of summary statistics for several percentiles of the
yearly distribution for concentrations at each site together with highest recorded values and
both geometric and arithmetic means.            In this study we use the log of median SO2
concentrations at a given site, for each year, as our dependent variable. We use a log
transform because the distribution of yearly summary statistics for SO2 appears to be log
normal (WHO (1984)). Previous work in this area by the WHO and others has argued that a
log normal distribution is appropriate because temperature inversions or other special
pollution episodes often lead to large values for some observations. In contrast, even
weather very helpful to dissipation cannot drive the natural level of the pollutant below
zero.15
          In addition to the data on concentrations the GEMS network also classifies each site
within a city as either city center, suburban or rural in land type, and we employ these land
type categories in our analysis. A list of the cities involved, the years of operation of GEMS
stations, and the number of observations from each city is given in Appendix A.
          In moving from our theoretical model to its empirical counterpart we need to include
variables to reflect scale, technique and composition effects. As well, we have to include
site-specific variables to account for the density of economic activity and meteorological


14   The range of sophistication of monitoring techniques used in the network varies quite widely, but the
various techniques have been subject to comparability tests over the years. Some stations offer continuous
monitoring while others only measure at discrete intervals.
15    For further information on the distribution of SO2 see appendix A, and our discussion of alternative
transformations in appendix C.2.


                                                                                                     20
conditions. Our estimations will require the use of data on real GDP per capita, capital to
labor ratios, population densities, and various measures of “openness”. The majority of the
economic data were obtained from the Penn World Tables 5.6. The remainder was obtained
from several sources. A full description of data sources and our methods for collection are
provided in Appendix A together with a table of means, standard deviations, and units of
measurement for the data.


3.2 Linking Theory to the Estimating Equation


         To derive an estimating equation, assume measured concentrations at any observation
site are a function of the country specific economic determinants of emissions, E; site-
specific meteorological and density variables (V); common to world trends in abatement
technology and world prices (C); and a site-specific error ε that includes other relevant, but
unmeasured determinants of pollution, plus an idiosyncratic measurement error reflecting
human and machine error. If we take a Taylor series approximation to this general functional
form we can then write pollution concentrations at site i, city j, in country k, at time t as


                             zijktE = β EΕ ijkt + β VVijkt + β CCt + εijkt                      (3.1)


where β E,β V and β C are parameter vectors and Ε ijkt, Vijkt and Ct represent vectors of
regressors to be explained below.


Economic Determinants


         The economic determinants we include in E, follow quite directly from equation
(2.22) relating differences in emissions across countries (or differences within a country
over time) to differences in country characteristics and trade frictions. We reproduce (2.22)
below:

           ^        ^                    ^                       ^                ^
                        + γ2κ^                    ^
           z = γ1S                 – γ3I     – γ4 N       – γ5δ      + γ6p^ w + γ7β         (2.22)




                                                                                                 21
       In our empirical work we measure the scale of activity at any site, S, by constructing
an intensive measure of economic activity per unit area. This intensive measure is GDP per
square kilometer. Lacking detailed data on “Gross City Product”, we construct GDP per
square kilometer for each city and each year by multiplying city population density with
country GDP per person. This measure has two key benefits. First, it is measured in
intensive form, as is our dependent variable. To explain concentrations of pollution we need
a measure of scale reflecting the concentration of economic activity within the same
geographical area. Other possible proxies for scale fail this test: GDP per person makes no
allowance for cities of different size; GDP scaled by city population makes no allowance for
cities of different density. Only GDP per square kilometer captures differences in the flow
of economic activity per unit area across cities that vary in population size and density.
       A second benefit of our measure is that it allows for heterogeneity across cities within
the same country in the scale of economic activity. This within-country heterogeneity is key
to disentangling the technique and scale effects.
       The composition effect is captured by capital abundance, κ, as measured by a
nation’s capital to labor ratio. We implicitly assume that this ratio is the same for all cities
within a country. In our estimations we will include both a country’s capital to labor ratio
and its square. This non-linearity is appealing because theory suggests capital accumulation
should have a diminishing effect at the margin.
       We proxy our technique effect by a moving average of lagged income, I. Because
we believe the transmission of income gains into policy is both slow and reflects long run
averages, we use as our proxy for income a (one period lagged) three year moving average
of GDP per capita. We have also allowed the technique effect to have a diminishing impact at
the margin by entering both the level and the square of income per capita in all of our
regressions.
       Population size, N, appears in (2.22) because the Samuelson rule sums marginal
damage over all individuals exposed to a unit of pollution. Air pollution standards are in
most countries uniform throughout the country with the actual level of the standard either set
by, or heavily influenced by, national governments. Since policy is nation wide, our theory
would indicate that the relevant regressor arising from the Samuelson rule would be some
average number of exposed individuals taken from a mix of metropolitan and non-
metropolitan areas in the country. Exposure would also have to reflect country specific


                                                                                             22
disbursement potential and weather patterns. Since we have very little confidence in our
ability to construct a suitable proxy, we treat this factor as an unobservable component in our
error term.
         Changes in tastes or knowledge concerning pollution, plus changes in world prices
are treated as common-to-world trends and are discussed subsequently in the section on
common-to-world determinants.
         Finally our theory ties trade frictions β to pollution concentrations, but the sign of
this composition effect depends on a country’s comparative advantage.                           Comparative
advantage is in turn a function of a country’s income per capita and its capital abundance. To
capture this feature in our empirical work we proceed as follows. First, we need a measure
to reflect the extent to which international trade affects the domestic economy. We adopt for
this purpose a country’s trade intensity ratio: the ratio of exports plus imports to GDP. This
proxy accords well with our theory because a movement of β towards 1 raises the ratio of
exports plus imports to GDP for any country.
         Second, we then need to condition this impact on country characteristics.                          To
condition the impact of openness on country characteristics we interact the trade intensity
measure with our model’s predicted determinants of comparative advantage. Within our
framework the most important country characteristics determining trade patterns are a
country’s capital to labor ratio and its income per capita. Moreover, because comparative
advantage is a relative concept, we express our measures of country characteristics relative to
their corresponding world averages.16 This procedure allows us to condition the predicted
environmental impact of further openness on our theoretical determinants of comparative
advantage.
         Finally, we need to somehow account for the two possible motives for trade when
we introduce our interaction terms with country characteristics.                  In general the trade-off
between the factor endowment basis for trade and the pollution haven motive is exceedingly
complex and not amenable to simple formulation.17 Rather than imposing specific functional


16   See appendix A for details.
17   Without imposing severe restrictions on the relative factor intensities in the two industries, elasticities
of substitution in production, and elasticities of marginal damage from pollution it is not possible to state
precisely how these two potentially offsetting characteristics interact to determine a nation’s comparative
advantage.


                                                                                                           23
forms that arise from some tractable special cases of our model, we instead rely on the
results presented in Proposition 2 and 3. Because our theory does not tell us at what point
further increases in the capital to labor ratio raise pollution (via the composition effect) or
when increases in per capita income finally lower pollution (via the composition effect), we
adopt a flexible approach to estimation. We interact a quadratic in a country’s (relative)
characteristics with its trade intensity ratio.
         We then expect our interacted quadratic in relative capital to labor to imply a positive
impact of further openness for high capital to labor ratios but a negative effect for lower
levels. Proposition 2 shows that regardless of a country’s other characteristics if its capital
to labor ratio is sufficiently high relative to those of its trading partners then it must export
good X.18 Alternatively, if its capital to labor ratio is relatively low then it must import good
X. This partial result reflects the factor endowment hypothesis.
         Similarly we expect that our quadratic in relative income per capita to imply a
negative impact of further openness on concentrations for high incomes but a positive effect
for lower incomes. Proposition 3 indicates that regardless of other country characteristics, if
a country’s income per capita is sufficiently high it must import good X. Alternatively if its
income per capita is relatively low, it must export good X. This partial result reflects the
pollution haven hypothesis.


Site-specific Determinants


         Since our data are observations of ground level SO2 concentrations at sites in
various participating cities around the world it is apparent that site-specific weather and
topographical conditions may have a large bearing on concentration levels for any given level
of emissions. Unmeasured topographical features are captured in some of our estimations
through site-specific fixed and random effects. In earlier research, measured site-specific
influences such as proximity to oceans or deserts have sometimes proven useful19.                          Our


18    Strictly speaking the proposition says that if a country's capital to labor ratio exceeds some threshold
level taking income I and world price p as given then the composition effect of trade must be positive. In
fact world prices are determined by the rest of world's abundance in capital and hence our relative statement in
the text.
19   See for example Grossman and Krueger (1993).


                                                                                                           24
experience with these variables has been that they are rarely significant in determining
concentrations. In addition to site-specific fixed effects we also employ city-specific weather
variables to capture differences across cities in their natural cleansing abilities and in seasonal
influences on emissions. While weather variables are unlikely to be strongly correlated with
our economic variables their inclusion may help us obtain more accurate estimates.                     To
capture seasonal influences on the demand for fuels and hence emissions of SO2 we include
the average monthly temperature from each site. As well we have included the variation in
precipitation at the site as well to proxy for the ability of precipitation to wash out
concentrations. If precipitation is largely concentrated in one season then its ability to wash
out concentrations over the year is reduced. Seasonal influences have been found to be
important in similar studies (See for example WHO (1984)).


Common-to-World Determinants, Error Components and Excluded Variables


        We assume our error term εijkt is composed of three elements. First, a common-to-
world but time varying component λ t reflecting trends in the public’s awareness of
environmental problems, in abatement technology, and in world prices. We capture these
common-to-world components via a linear time trend. 20 Second, we include time invariant
site components θ ijk to reflect unmeasured meteorological or topographical features of a site
as well as any time invariant country-specific effects such as government or country type.
And finally we include an idiosyncratic component νijkt reflecting both human and machine
measurement error at the site. Most of these assumptions are not controversial, although the
issue of government type deserves some discussion.
        In developing our model we allowed pollution policy to be flexible and responsive to
changes in the economy. In contrast, we took the existing level of trade frictions β as
exogenous. Since trade frictions undoubtedly contain a component reflecting trade policy we
have in fact taken this part of policy as exogenous. This assumption may be problematic if
pollution and trade policies are correlated because political economy considerations, income
levels, and other factors jointly determine them. Consider for example government type.



20  In appendix C we show that our results are not affected by allowing for a full set of unrestricted time
dummies as well.


                                                                                                      25
Suppose our sample of countries was divided into two types: democracies and communist
countries. Suppose democracies are both relatively open and fairly clean, while communist
countries are relatively closed to trade and very dirty.            As a result, if we ignore the
correlation of trade and environmental policy induced by political systems, our trade intensity
measure may be correlated with our equation’s error term. All else equal, open economies
will appear cleaner because they are open rather than because they are democracies.
        In this simple case, the problem is not difficult to remedy and we do so by allowing
for a communist dummy in our estimations.21              In other cases such a simple fix is not
available. Many of the candidate measures of trade frictions or “openness” may be
contaminated by other more subtle country characteristics that jointly determine trade and
environmental policy. For example, the trade intensity variable we employ reflects country
type considerations such as proximity to markets, geographic size and natural resource
endowments and in general tends to be highest for small countries within close proximity to
their trading partners. Because our pollutant under study is well known to have serious
transboundary effects, there may be a correlation between countries with large measured
openness and SO2 regulation.22 The openness measure developed by Sachs and Warner
(1995) and measures of the black-market exchange-rate premium also suffer from similar
problems.
        Panel-data methods offer different ways to deal with the possibility of country-
specific and/or site-specific excluded variables. When such effects are viewed simply as
parametric shifts of our regression function, a suitable estimation approach is the least-
squares dummy-variable (i.e., fixed-effects) estimator that treats these effects as constants.
This approach is appropriate when the model is viewed as applying only to the countries or
observation sites in the sample but not to additional ones outside the sample. If, however,
the model is viewed as a random draw of countries or observation sites from a larger
population, it is appropriate to use a random-effects estimator to capture the level effect

21   Further, in some estimations we interact this dummy with our income per capita terms to test the
hypothesis that communist governments care little about their public’s demand for a cleaner environment.
22    For example, many countries in Europe are very open by our measure while the U.S. is not. At the
same time, European countries are much more sensitive to, and aware of, the problems caused by acid rain
than is the U.S. Therefore, there may be a cross-sectional negative correlation between SO2 concentrations
and openness as measured in our data set. Once again we must be careful about using the cross-sectional
variation in our data set. We do not want to attribute to openness or trade what is due to geography.


                                                                                                     26
through a random variable. Because this estimator treats the level effects as uncorrelated
with the other regressors, it may suffer from inconsistency due to omitted variables. By
comparison, the fixed-effects estimator does not suffer from this inconsistency problem, but
it focuses exclusively on the variation over time in our data. Acknowledging the strengths
and weaknesses of both types of estimators, our strategy is to estimate both fixed and
random effects versions of our model whenever possible. We also report results from the
Hausman test comparing these two methods.23 Occasionally we are forced to rely on the
random effects implementation alone because some of our regressors would not be identified
in a fixed effects estimation.         Both of these methods have been widely used in the
literature.24


The Estimation Equation


          Combining the economic, site-specific, and common-to-world components we
obtain:


     zijkt = β 0 + β 1GDPjkt + β 2KLkt + β 3(KLkt)2 + β 4Ikt + β 5(Ikt)2 +


                β 6Rijk + β 7Bijk + β 8MjktT + β 9MjktP + β 10Okt + β 11Okt RKLkt +


                      β 12Okt (RKLkt)2 + β 13Okt RIkt + β 14Okt (RIkt)2 + εijkt                        (3.2)


where GDPjkt is measured by real GDP/km2, KL kt is measured by the capital to labor ratio,
Ikt is one period lagged three year moving average of GDP per capita, Rijk is a dummy
indicating site ijk is in a rural location, Bijk is a dummy indicating site ijk is in a suburban
location, MjktT is average temperature in city j at time t, MjktP is the variation in precipitation
in city j at time t, Okt is measured by the ratio of exports and imports to GDP, Okt RKL kt and
Okt (RKLkt)2 are interactions of openness with country k’s relative capital to labor ratio and

23    Moulton (1987) cautions against misinterpreting the Hausman test. The fixed-effects estimator is very
sensitive to errors-in-variables. Rejection of the Hausman test could be due to either correlation between the
regressors and the group effects, or bias from errors-in-variables intensified under the fixed-effects model.
24    See for example Grossman and Krueger (1993, 1995), Seldon and Song (1995), Shafik (1994), etc.


                                                                                                         27
its square, and Okt RIktC and Okt (RIkt)2 are interactions of openness with country k’s income
per capita and its square.     In addition to these determinants we include a dummy for
communist countries in all of our estimations.



4. Empirical Results


4.1 Empirical Strategy


        Our empirical strategy has four steps. We first estimate (3.2) excluding the terms
involving openness to determine whether our simple model specification capturing scale,
composition and technique effects is useful in explaining pollution concentration levels
around the world. We then take a second step by adding several measures of “openness” to
our basic model and noting the consequences. Our purpose here is to investigate whether a
simple and definitive relationship exists between openness to international markets and
pollution concentrations (after controlling for differences across countries in scale, factor
endowments, etc.) In our third step, we include our openness interactions to allow trade’s
effect to differ across countries. Our theory would suggest that conditioning the impact of
further openness on country characteristics is the key to determining how trade affects the
pollution intensity of national output. In our fourth and final step we combine our scale,
technique and trade intensity elasticities to provide a preliminary assessment of how trade
affects SO2 concentrations.


Scale, Composition and Technique Effects


        Table 1 presents initial estimates from our random and fixed effect implementation of
(3.2). There are three important properties shown in the table.
        First, there is a comforting consistency across the regressions in both the size and
sign of the estimated coefficients. Second, at conventional levels of significance the vast
majority of all coefficients are statistically different from zero. Third, the results are almost
universally in line with the theory detailed in section 2.




                                                                                             28
         TABLE 1: THE D ETERMINANTS                OF   SO2 C ONCENTRATION

Variable                                  Fixed Effects              Random Effects
Intercept                             ,4:27278        (8:80)    ,3:57378        (12:26)
GDP/km2                                0:04659        (4:41)      0:05342        (8:62)
Capital abundance (K=L)                0:05061        (3:10)     0:03176         (2:63)
(K=L)     2
                                      ,0:00078        (4:51)    ,0:00054         (3:98)
Lagged p.c. income (I )               ,0:11068        (2:84)    ,0:13462         (4:60)
I   2
                                       0:00286        (2:98)     0:00316         (3:86)
Communist Country                                                  0:34283           (1:65)
Suburban                                                          ,0:48528         (2:69)
Rural                                                             ,0:73596           (1:90)
Average Temperature                   ,0:04400          (1:80)    ,0:06034         (5:88)
Precipitation Variation                 6:13769         (1:45)     3:73900           (0:96)
Time Trend                            ,0:03491        (6:76)    ,0:03501         (8:63)
Observations / Groups                       2621         293            2621          293
R2 (overall)                                  0:204                         0:329
Hausman Test                                              28 = 21:38
Note: T-statistics are shown in parentheses. Significance at the 95% and 99% confi-
dence levels are indicated by  and  , respectively. Dependent variable is the log of
the median of SO2 concentrations at each observation site.




           TABLE 2: I SOLATING TRADE ’ S EFFECT: A F IRST S TEP

                   Openness           Black            Avg.          Avg.       Sachs&
                     (X+M)           Market           Tariff        Quota       Warner
                      /GDP         Premium              [%]           [%]       Dummy
    Estimate      ,0:00239         0:02606       0:00088         0:00594       0:03934
    t-Stat.          (1:819)       (1:496)         (0:349)       (1:917)         (0:454)
    Obsv.               2621           2621           2369          2298            2621
    Groups               293            293             270           263            293
    R2                 0:326          0:324          0:354         0:364            0:324

    Note: The results shown were obtained through a random-effects estimation. T-
    statistics are shown in parentheses. Significance at the 95% and 99% confidence
    levels are indicated by  and  , respectively. Dependent variable is the log of the
    median of SO2 concentrations at each observation site. Note that the black market
    premium, average tariff and quota coverage variables measure the inverse of open-
    ness; their sign has thus to be reversed to interpret the direction of the estimates as
    an increase in openness.
         Consider our core variables representing scale, composition and technique effects.
In both columns of table 1 we find a positive relationship between the scale of economic
activity as measured by GDP/km2 and concentrations. Similarly, both columns report that an
increase in the capital labor ratio raises emissions - consistent with a positive composition
effect - albeit increases in this ratio have a diminishing impact much as we may expect. This
diminishing effect probably reflects a lower average pollution intensity of capital equipment
in high-income countries.          Our theory predicts that high-income countries have tighter
standards in place, and this in turn implies the pollution consequences of capital
accumulation should fall as development proceeds. Finally, the income per capita terms
indicate a strong and significantly negative relationship between per capita income levels and
concentrations. We again find a diminishing effect but it is less pronounced than that for the
capital to labor ratio.25
         From table 1 it also appears that our strategy for identifying the separate, but related,
impacts of changes in scale and technique is successful. Recall that since scale is measured
in the intensive form GDP/km2 there is within-country heterogeneity in the scale variable for
most countries. If, as we assume, pollution policy is determined by average income per
capita in a country, then variation in the scale variable across cities within the same country
can be used to separate the influence of scale from that of technique.                        Therefore the
recognition that scale should be measured in intensive form together with a theoretical
restriction linking policy to national income allows us to disentangle these two effects in our
data.
         In addition to these observations table 1 also reports that it may be important to
distinguish between communist and non-communist countries. This would appear to support
our concerns to distinguish carefully across countries according to the type of political
system. If we investigate further and interact the communist dummy with our income terms
reflecting the technique effect we find that pollution concentrations in communist countries
are much less responsive to increases in real income. This result is consistent with our
theory as it implies that εT,τ∗ is must smaller for communist countries. In the fixed effects
case, the elasticity of concentrations to an increase in per capita income in communist

25    We have estimated the turning points for both quadratics and their confidence intervals. These estimates
and their confidence intervals can vary quite widely according to the specification. Our robust finding is that
of a diminishing effect at the margin. The turning points may or may not fall outside of the sample range.


                                                                                                          30
countries has a point estimate of 0.594 but the 95% confidence interval includes zero and is
given by (-0.139,1.326). And hence we cannot reject the hypothesis of no technique effect
in communist countries! In the random effects case, the point estimate is -0.587 with a 95%
confidence interval of (-1.062,-0.111). We have excluded the communist-income interaction
terms from table 1 to avoid clutter, but include them in all subsequent regressions.
        It also appears that weather has a significant affect on concentrations. We find an
increase in average temperature reduces concentrations as we may expect, and an increase in
the concentration of yearly precipitation raises concentrations. Finally, the estimates indicate
that locations in less dense areas, either suburban or rural locations, experience less pollution
than locations at city center (our excluded category).


Isolating Trade's Effect


        We now investigate several relatively simple hypotheses regarding the effect of
international trade on pollution concentrations by adding various measures of "openness" to
the random effect implementation of our model.           We are forced to limit ourselves to a
random effect implementation because many of the candidate measures of openness are not
identified in a fixed effect implementation. The estimated coefficient for the openness
variable introduced in each regression is reported in table 2 below. All other estimates are
suppressed because the inclusion of the additional variable had very little if any impact on the
other estimates as reported in table 1.26
        The new variables are: (1) the ratio of exports plus imports to GDP (i.e. trade
intensity); (2) a measure of the black market premium in foreign exchange markets over the
1970s and 1980s (BMP); (3) the average level of tariffs on imports over 1985-88 (Tariffs);
(4) the percent of imports affected by a quota over 1985-1988 (Quotas); and (5), an indicator
variable created by Sachs and Warner (1995) reflecting a country's policy stance toward
trade (Sachs). All of these measures except for the trade intensity measure were taken from
Sachs and Warner (1995, p65-66).
        In their study of the NAFTA, Grossman and Krueger (1993) employ the trade
intensity measure and report a significant and negative relationship between concentrations


26   See appendix B for the complete set of estimates.


                                                                                             31
and trade intensity. We establish a similar result although the variable is not significant at
conventional levels. We note that the black market premium enters positively, suggesting
that moving away from world markets and restricting convertibility may be correlated with
an increase in pollution concentrations, although again this relationship is not significant at
conventional levels. There is little to report regarding the relationship between concentrations
and tariff levels, but there appears to be a positive relationship between quota coverage and
concentrations. The Sachs and Warner measure in column 5 appears to add little as well.
       Overall the estimates given in table 2 offer very little evidence of a strong relationship
between openness, however measured, and resulting pollution concentrations. It is possible
to pick and choose carefully from the table to craft a story where openness to international
markets is good for the environment. Neglecting statistical significance, we could note that
an increase in openness lowers pollution, while a rise in quota coverage or a movement away
from international markets and currency convertibility raises pollution. This reading of table
2 is, however, very selective.
       Our reading of table 2 is far less complex: the lack of any significant relationship
between concentrations and openness is exactly what we might expect to find.               After
controlling for other differences across countries, the impact of further openness on pollution
should, in theory, only reflect the induced composition effect of trade. But the sign of this
trade-created composition effect should vary with country characteristics. If we fail to
condition on country characteristics, then we are at best measuring an average,
unconditional, effect of openness. This unconditional response may be positive or negative
and will depend on the characteristics of countries in our sample.


4.2. A Second Step: Conditioning on Country Characteristics


       We now present estimates from our complete model allowing for the interaction of
country characteristics with a measure of openness. We report only interactions with the
trade intensity measure of openness because other candidate measures have either very little
time series variation or were eliminated because of insufficient data. We report the results
for our second step procedure for finding trade's effect in table 3.




                                                                                             32
       TABLE 3: I SOLATING TRADE ’ S EFFECT: A S ECOND S TEP

  Variable                              Fixed Effects            Random Effects
  Intercept                         ,3:66165      (6:71)      ,3:05851     (9:39)
  GDP/km2                            0:04263      (3:64)       0:05418     (8:08)
  Capital abundance (K=L)            0:11915      (6:04)       0:09194     (5:83)
  (K=L)2                            ,0:00149      (6:76)      ,0:00123     (6:92)
  Lagged p.c. income (I )           ,0:31075      (5:50)      ,0:29750     (7:72)
  I2                                 0:00740      (6:10)       0:00687     (6:74)
  Communist Country                                             ,0:45554       (1:16)
  C.C.  I                           1:15287      (4:48)       0:30231       (1:85)
  C.C.  I 2                        ,0:08355      (4:00)      ,0:02066       (1:38)
   =(X+M)/GDP in %                 ,0:02293      (3:34)      ,0:01078      (2:25)
   relative (K=L)                 ,0:03054      (5:69)      ,0:02290     (6:12)
   relative (K=L)2                 0:00592      (5:12)       0:00427     (5:70)
   relative income                 0:03428      (5:38)       0:02247     (4:95)
   relative income sq.            ,0:00523      (3:72)      ,0:00330     (3:19)
  Suburban                                                      ,0:43767      (2:33)
  Rural                                                         ,0:67739       (1:74)
  Average Temperature               ,0:05924       (2:42)      ,0:06161     (5:87)
  Precipitation Variation            7:96498        (1:89)       3:98493       (1:03)
  Time Trend                        ,0:03838      (6:85)      ,0:03400     (7:70)
  Observations / Groups                   2621        293            2621        293
  R2 (overall)                              0:137                      0:343
  Hausman Test                                        215 = 62:79
 Note: T-statistics are shown in parentheses. Significance at the 95% and 99% confi-
 dence levels are indicated by  and  , respectively. Dependent variable is the log of
 the median of SO2 concentrations at each observation site.

TABLE 4: S CALE , C OMPOSITION , TECHNIQUE , & TRADE ELASTICITIES

         Elasticity         Estim. Std.Err.      95%-Conf. Iv.
                         Fixed Effects Regression
         Scale              0:193     0:053     0:089 / 0:297
         Composition        1:135     0:301     0:546 / 1:724
         Technique        ,1:611 0:366 ,2:328 / ,0:894
         Trade Intensity ,0:869       0:149    ,1:161 / ,0:576
                        Random Effects Regression
         Scale              0:245     0:030     0:186 / 0:305
         Composition        0:783     0:230     0:332 / 1:233
         Technique        ,1:580 0:222 ,2:015 / ,1:146
         Trade Intensity ,0:533       0:093    ,0:715 / ,0:351
        Note: All elasticities are evaluated at sample means.
There are several features of note in the table. First, adding the openness interactions has not
undermined the model's basic predictions regarding scale, technique and composition
effects. In particular, the sign of our basic regressors is maintained and in most cases the
significance levels are enhanced by the inclusion of the openness interactions.
        Second, the inclusion of country characteristics appears to have made a large
difference to the impact openness has on pollution.         The coefficient on our measure of
openness is now highly significant whereas in table 2 it was not significant at conventional
levels. Its magnitude is now approximately ten times its former size. The interaction terms
with country characteristics are also highly significant.
        Third, the sign pattern of the interaction terms is as expected from theory. The linear
interaction term on openness and (relative) income per capita is positive in both columns and
the quadratic term is always negative. Consequently if a country has a relatively low level of
income per capita relative to the rest of the world, then – all else equal - the impact of further
openness must be to make this country dirtier. Relatively rich countries would be made
cleaner with trade. These results may reflect the ceteris paribus pollution haven hypothesis
where relative income differences alone determine the composition effect of trade. Similarly,
the linear interaction term on (relative) capital intensity is always negative and the quadratic
term always positive. Therefore, if a country has a sufficiently high capital to labor ratio
relative to the rest of the world, then the impact of further openness must be to make this
country dirtier. Capital-scarce countries would be made cleaner with trade. This sign pattern
may reflect the ceteris paribus factor-endowment hypothesis where factor abundance
differences alone determine the composition effect of trade.
        Together these results indicate that scale, technique and composition effects are still at
work determining pollution concentrations but open economy considerations also matter.
But while the sign and statistical significance of the estimates in table 3 are supportive of our
approach it is important to investigate whether the magnitude of the coefficient estimates are
in some sense plausible.


Scale, Composition and Technique Elasticities


        There are several ways to evaluate these results. One method is to examine whether
the implied elasticity estimates for scale (GDP/km2), technique (income per capita),


                                                                                              34
composition (capital to labor ratio), and trade intensity (exports plus imports divided by
GDP) lead to implausible conclusions regarding income growth or technological progress.
In table 4 below we present the elasticities implied by our estimates in table 3.                        All
elasticities are evaluated at the sample means and therefore can be interpreted as those
applying to an “average country” in our sample.                    In calculating the technique and
composition elasticities we have assumed that our “average” country’s relative position in the
world remains constant when it undergoes either income growth or capital accumulation.
          The results in table 4 are largely supportive of our theory. The estimated elasticities
are not implausibly high, and all elasticity estimates are significantly different from zero.
Moreover the signs for the scale, technique and composition elasticities are as predicted by
theory.       To investigate the plausibility of these estimates further note that neutral
technological progress of 1% would raise GDP and GDP per person by 1%. Therefore,
neutral technological progress creates a positive scale effect on concentrations, but according
to our estimates this scale effect is more than offset by a negative technique effect.27
Therefore our estimates indicate that increases in economic activity driven by neutral
technological progress lowers concentrations.
          Alternatively, if we consider an increase in GDP fueled entirely by capital
accumulation the picture is far less favorable to the environment. Our estimates indicate that
a 1% increase in the capital to labor ratio raises concentrations by about 1% all else equal.
However an increase in the capital to labor ratio will have accompanying impacts on the scale
of economic activity and on real incomes. If we make a back-of-the-envelope calculation by
taking capital’s share in the value of domestic output at 1/3, then capital accumulation leading
to a 1% increase in the capital to labor ratio creates a 1/3 percentage point increase in GDP
per capita and GDP/km2. Applying the estimates from table 4 we find that the induced
technique effect is approximately -.5 and the induced scale effect is perhaps .08. Adding the
direct composition effect to these estimates suggests that economic growth fueled entirely by
capital accumulation raises pollution concentrations.
          While these two exercises are not tests of our theory, the results are reassuringly
close to what we may have expected ex ante. More speculatively, these last two thought

27    In the fixed effects case the point estimate for such an experiment is -1.45 with a 95% confidence
interval of (-2.1, -.76). The random effects case tells a similar story with a point estimate of -1.36 with a
confidence interval of (-1.78, -.95).


                                                                                                        35
experiments may also provide a possible explanation for the Kuznets curve that many
authors have found between pollution and per capita income. If economic growth is driven
primarily by capital accumulation in the early stages of development, and primarily by
technological progress in later years, then our results indicate that pollution concentrations
may at first rise and then fall with increases in income per capita.


Trade Intensity Elasticity


         Next consider the trade intensity elasticity. The trade intensity elasticity measures the
predicted change in concentrations for a 1% change in the ratio of exports plus imports to
GDP. This measure indicates that a 1% change in the share of trade in GDP should reduce
concentrations by .53% in the random effects model and .86% in the fixed effects model.
These seem rather large in isolation, but the estimates from table 3 also indicate that
technological progress in abatement technology or changing knowledge and attitudes toward
pollution appear to be driving concentrations down by 3-4% per year.
         Note our trade intensity estimate (evaluated at the mean of our sample) is negative
and significantly different from zero in both formulations. This is a somewhat surprising
result because it indicates that trade has an overall negative composition effect rather than a
close to zero effect we may have expected. Proposition 1 indicates that the sign of the trade
intensity elasticity should reflect a country’s comparative advantage in clean versus dirty
goods.    Therefore it is not plausible that all countries in the world have a negative
composition effect. Although we have only a sample of countries it seems reasonable to
expect both positive and negative elasticities.
         As a check on our theory we calculated each country’s trade elasticity. We find that
the country specific elasticity estimates are both positive and negative. 28 About 1/3 of the
countries have trade elasticities indistinguishable from zero. We find some positive elasticity
estimates, but the majority of elasticities in our sample are negative and statistically different
from zero. These findings are roughly consistent with our theory, because our theory only
predicts that there should be a distribution of these elasticities around zero.




28   See appendix table B.2.


                                                                                              36
                                               F IGURE 1:
                         Country-specific Openness Elasticities vs. Relative Income

                1.0
                                                                                                                   DEU
                0.8
                0.6
                0.4
                0.2
                0.0                                                                          FIN
                                                                                               FRAAUS                                     CAN
                                                                                                                                            USA
               -0.2 IND                                                            HKG GBR JPN        SWE
               -0.4     CHN            BRA YUG                                         ITA   NZL DNK
Elasticity




                                         IRN                                   ESP       BEL
               -0.6                CHL                                                       NLD
                               COL       POL PRT                              VEN
               -0.8 EGY
                            PHL    PER
               -1.0                              GRC
               -1.2       IDNTHA    CSK                                             ISR
               -1.4
               -1.6
               -1.8                                                     IRL
               -2.0
               -2.2
               -2.4
               -2.6
               -2.8                         MYS
                   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8    1.0    1.2    1.4   1.6     1.8   2.0    2.2    2.4     2.6   2.8    3.0   3.2    3.4   3.6    3.8   4.0

                                                  Relative Lagged Income (World=1.0)

                                          F IGURE 2:
              Country-specific Openness Elasticities vs. Relative Capital Abundance

                1.0
                                                                                                                                          DEU
                0.8
                0.6
                0.4
                0.2
                0.0                                                                                AUS    FIN
                      IND                                                                    USA FRA
                                                                                            JPN       CAN
               -0.2                    HKG                       GBR                              SWE
                                     YUG            BRA                                    DNK  NZL
               -0.4         CHN                                                            ITA
Elasticity




               -0.6                               IRN                        ESP                 NLD BEL
                      EGY       CHL        PRT                              VEN
               -0.8                               POLCOL
                               THA
                               PHL
               -1.0                        PER CSK               GRC
                                IDN                                            ISR
               -1.2
               -1.4
               -1.6
               -1.8                                                    IRL
               -2.0
               -2.2
               -2.4
               -2.6
               -2.8                                 MYS
                   0.0         0.5         1.0           1.5          2.0          2.5        3.0          3.5          4.0         4.5          5.0

                                                 Relative Capital Abundance (World=1.0)
             Note: The elasticities shown in the above diagrams correspond to the random-effects re-
             gression presented in table 3, evaluated at corresponding sample means. Countries with
             less than five observations in the data set were excluded from the above diagrams.
        Finally we may ask what country characteristics are tied with a trade elasticity that is
negative or one that is positive. If the compositional effects of trade were primarily driven
by the simple pollution haven hypothesis we would expect a strong negative correlation
between relative income and the magnitude of the trade elasticity. In fact as shown in Figure
1, there is no such relationship between the size of a country’s trade elasticity and its relative
income level.
        Similarly, if the compositional effects of trade were primarily driven by the simplest
factor endowment hypothesis we would expect a strongly positive relationship between
relative capital abundance and the sign of a country’s trade elasticity. In fact as shown in
Figure 2, there is little apparent relationship between the strength of a country’s trade
elasticity and its relative capital abundance.
        The explanation for these finding is simple: low-income countries typically have both
low income per capita and low capital to labor ratios. The pollution haven hypothesis
suggests that a low-income economy should be made dirtier by trade, but if pollution
intensive industries are also capital intensive then whatever benefits accrue from lax pollution
regulation could be largely undone by the relatively higher price of capital in this capital
scarce country. As a result, further openness to trade will have a very small effect on the
pollution intensity of output for low-income countries. Similarly, high-income countries
have both high income and high capital to labor ratios. The former argues in favor of trade
lowering the pollution intensity of output, while the latter argues in favor of trade raising it.
It is not that the (ceterus paribus) pollution haven hypothesis is wrong, or that the (ceterus
paribus) factor endowment driven basis for trade is absent.         Rather it is that given the
relationship between income per capita and capital to labor ratios (summarized for example
by the one-sector neoclassical growth model) these two partial theories work against each
other. Consequently, the potentially very large composition effects predicted by either
theory turn out to be relatively small in practice.


4.3 The Last Step: Putting it all Together


        We argued previously (in section 2.3) that because we could not quantify the impact
of trade liberalization on either GDP or GDP per person we could not identify the impact of


                                                                                              38
trade liberalization on pollution through either the scale or the technique effect. Our empirical
strategy could at best provide an estimate of the composition effect created by trade. We
would now like to suggest that this admission of defeat was in fact a strategic retreat from the
question posed in our title - not an outright surrender. Our estimates in table 4 indicate that a
change in GDP that creates both a scale and technique effect (but leave a country’s K/L
unchanged) will lower pollution.       One possible cause for such a change is neutral
technological progress. Trade liberalization is another: taking factor endowments as fixed, a
lowering of transport costs or trade barriers raises the value of domestic output and real
income for a small open economy. The value of output and the value of income rise by the
same percentage and this creates both scale and technique effects.
       Our estimates indicate that the net effect of this trade-induced increase in output and
income will be a fall in concentrations. For example, if we use the estimates from the fixed-
effects regression from table 4, the scale elasticity for an average country is .193 while the
technique elasticity is –1.611. Taken together, they imply a net effect of -1.418 with a 95%
confidence interval of (-2.110, -0.726). The composition effect of trade for our average
country is also negative. It is apparent then that for an average country in our sample, the
full impact of further openness to international trade - through scale, technique and
composition effects - will be a reduction in SO2 concentrations!
       How large a reduction any one country reaps from a reduction in trade frictions will
of course depend on country characteristics, the impact further trade has on domestic income
and output, and how the ongoing process of globalization is affecting country characteristics
elsewhere in the world.     Since countries will differ somewhat in their particular scale,
technique and trade intensity elasticities, some may indeed be made dirtier from a reduction
in trade frictions, but we expect that trade’s effect – whether positive or negative – will be
small. After all the estimated impact of even a large trade liberalization on GDP is small, and
when this small increase in GDP is then filtered through our estimated scale and technique
elasticities the net effect is likely to be smaller still. While in theory, trade’s impact on the
pollution intensity of output can be large, in practice our estimates suggest a much more
muted response.
       These conclusions rely however on our assumption that factor endowments and
technology remain fixed when trade frictions fall. If further trade spurs capital accumulation
or if trade brings knowledge spillovers and hastens technological progress then other


                                                                                             39
calculations must come into play. Whether these trade-induced changes bring about a net
improvement in the environment will depend quite delicately on their estimated size since our
estimates indicate that they have opposing effects on pollution concentrations. There is a
burgeoning empirical literature linking openness to growth and technology adoption and we
have nothing new to add here. But clearly our estimates together with input from these other
sources might provide another method for assessing trade’s full impact.
        While the balance of our evidence suggests that freer trade is more likely to be good
rather than bad for the environment, this conclusion is subject to several provisos. Our work
has several strong maintained assumptions that may be false.           As well, our data is not
perfect, and it is important to emphasize that the pollutant we study - sulfur dioxide - is but
one of many pollutants that may be affected by trade. Clearly much more work could and
should be done along these lines. And while we are reasonably confident in our analysis
some readers may want further analysis. In order to meet these demands we present a series
of sensitivity tests in Appendix B. In this appendix we investigate whether our findings are
robust to: changes in the dependent variable (mean, median, 95%, etc.); other
transformations of the dependent variable (Box-Cox, linear); the inclusion of unrestricted
time dummies; the inclusion of resource endowments and the real price of energy; changes in
the time period of the analysis; and changes in the estimation procedure to allow for the
simultaneous determination of both income and pollution levels.            Overall the results in
Appendix B are surprisingly similar to those presented in the text. The main features of our
analysis remain intact: the technique effect remains surprisingly strong in relation to the scale
effect, and our trade intensity interactions retain their sign and significance levels.



5. Conclusion


        This paper sets out a theory of how openness to trading opportunities affects
pollution concentrations. We started with a theoretical specification that gave pride of place
to scale, technique and composition effects and then showed how this theoretical
decomposition is useful in thinking about the relationship between openness to international
markets and the environment. In our empirical section we adopted a specification directly
linked to our earlier theory. We then estimated this specification paying special attention to


                                                                                             40
the potentially confounding influences introduced by the panel structure of our data set. Our
results consistently indicate that scale, technique and composition effects are not just
theoretical constructs with no empirical counterparts. Rather these theoretical constructs can
be identified and their magnitude measured. Moreover, once measured they can play a
useful role in determining the likely environmental consequences of technological progress,
capital accumulation or increased trade. These estimates may also be useful in aggregate
CGE modeling of the effects of various free trade agreements and other trade reforms [see
for example, Ferrantino et al.,1996].
       Overall the results indicate that increases in a country’s exposure to international
markets creates small but measurable changes in pollution concentrations by altering the
pollution intensity of national output. While our estimates indicate that greater trade intensity
creates only relatively small changes in pollution via the composition effect, economic theory
and numerous empirical studies demonstrate that trade also raises the value of national output
and income. These associated increases in output and incomes will then impact on pollution
concentrations via our estimated scale and technique effects. Our estimates of the scale and
technique elasticities indicate that if openness to international markets raises both output and
income by 1%, pollution concentrations fall by approximately 1%. Putting this calculation
together with our earlier evidence on composition effects yields a somewhat surprising
conclusion: freer trade is good for the environment.




                                                                                             41
References


Ahmed, Azhari Fatahalla Mohammed, "SO2 and Nox emissions due to fossil fuel
  combustion in Saudi Arabia: a preliminary inventory" Atmosperhic Environment A 24
  (1990): 2917-2926.

Antweiler, W., "International trade and the environment: An empirical study," mimeo, UBC,
  1995.

Barrett, S., "Environment and growth," mimeo, London Business School, 1996.

Copeland, B.R. and M.S. Taylor, "North-South Trade and the Environment," Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 109 (1994): 755-87.

Copeland, B.R. and M.S. Taylor, "Trade and Transboundary Pollution,"            American
  Economic Review, 85 (1995): 716-737.

Dean, J.M “Testing the Impact of Trade Liberalization on the Environment: Theory and
  Evidence”, mimeo, John Hopkins University, 1998.

Dixit, A.K. and V. Norman, Theory of International Trade, Cambridge University Press,
  Cambridge, 1980.

Ferrantino, M. and L. Linkins, "Global Trade Liberalization and Toxic Releases," US
   International Trade Commission discussion paper, 1996.

Gale, L.R. and J.A. Mendez, "A note on the relationship between trade, growth, and the
  environment," mimeo, 1996.

Grossman, Gene M, and Alan B. Krueger, “Environmental Impacts of a North American
  Free Trade Agreement, “ in The U.S.-Mexico Free Trade Agreement, P. Garber, ed.
  Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1993.

Grossman, Gene M, and Alan B. Krueger. “Economic Growth and the Environment,
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, (1995): 353-377.

Kato, Nobuo and Hajime Akimoto, "Anthropogenic Emissions of SO2 and Nox in Asia:
  Emission Inventories" Atmospheric Environment A 26(1992): 2997-3017.

Kraushaar, Jack J. and Robert A. Ristinen, Energy and Problems of a Technical Society.
  New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1988.

Low, P. and A. Yeats, "Do 'dirty' Industries Migrate", in P. Low (ed.) International Trade
  and the Environment, World Bank, 1992: 89-104.


                                                                                      42
Moulton, Brent R., “Diagnostics for Group Effects in Regression Analysis,” Journal of
 Business and Economics Statistics, 5(1987), 275-282.

Sachs, J. and A. Warner, "Economic Reform and the Process of Global Integration",
  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, W.C. Brainard and G.C. Perry eds. (1995,Vol
  1): 1-119.

Selden, T.M. and D. Song, “Environmental Quality and Development: Is there a Kuznets
  Curve for Air Pollution Emissions?” Journal of Environmental Economics and
  Management, 27, (1994), p147-162.

Shafik, Nemat, “Economic Development and Environmental Quality: An econometric
  analysis”, Oxford Economic Papers 46 (1994), 757-773.

Shahgedanova, Maria and Timothy P. Burt, "New Data on air pollution in the former Soviet
  Union" Global Environmental Change 4 (1994): 201-227.

Tobey, J.A., "The effects of domestic environmental policies on patterns of world trade: An
  empirical test," Kyklos, 43 (1990): 191-209.

United Nations Environment Programme. Urban Air Pollution. Nairobi: UNEP, 1991.

Woodland, A.D., International Trade and Resource Allocation, North-Holland, Amsterdam,
 1982.

World Health Organization, Urban Air Pollution: 1973-1980. Published under the joint
 sponsorship of United Nations Environment Programme and the World Health
 Organization. Geneva, 1984.




                                                                                       43
Appendix A

Description of The Data Set

A.1   The Dependent Variable

The dependent variable in our study is the concentration of sulphur dioxide at observation sites in
major cities around the world as obtained through the GEMS/AIR data set supplied by the World
Health Organization. Measurements are carried out using comparable methods. Each observation
station reports annual summary statistics of SO2 concentrations such as the median, the arithmetic
and geometric mean, as well as 90th and 95th percentiles. The raw data supplied by the WHO were
processed by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and are disseminated to
the public through the EPA’s web site. We have obtained a more comprehensive version of what is
released directly from the EPA.
    We have chosen to use a logarithmic transformation of the median SO2 concentration as our
dependent variable. Figure A.1 shows that the distribution of concentrations is highly-skewed to-
wards zero when viewed on a linear scale. In this diagram, the horizontal axis shows ranges of
median SO2 concentrations in parts per million per cubic metre [ppm/m3]. As was pointed out in
the WHO (1984) report about the GEMS/AIR project, concentrations are more suitably described
by a log-normal distribution. This is apparent in figure A.2 where the horizontal axis is logarithmic.
The large number of observations in the bin at the very left of the diagram can be explained by the
measurement threshold of the measurement devices; they cannot measure arbitrarily low concen-
trations. There is also an ambient level of SO2 in the air that has natural causes.
    The composition of the data set by contributor countries is shown in the pie diagram of fig-
ure A.3. A large share of observations were from the United States, due to this country’s extensive
network of air quality measurement stations. Other large contributor countries were China, Canada,
and Japan. All in all, our analysis is based on over 2,600 observations from 293 observation stations
in 109 cities around the world; these cities are located in 44 countries. Figure A.4 reveals the time
period during which individual countries participated in the GEMS/AIR project. The countries are
ranked by length of participation. Numerous countries provide more than fifteen years of observa-
tions, among them the United States, Canada, Germany, and Japan. In addition, table A.1 lists the
cities in which the observation stations were located along with the number of stations in each city
and the minimum and maximum concentrations measured at any of the stations in a given city.

A.2   Data Sets

The data set was constructed from a variety of sources that are described in detail below and are
summarized in the following diagram:
GEMS/AIR       The primary source for our data is the AIRS Executive International database that
               contains information about ambient air pollution in nations that voluntarily pro-
               vide data to the GEMS/AIR Programme sponsored by the United Nations World

                                                 A-1
                                   Figure A.1: Distribution of the Dependent Variable (linear scale)


                                         SO2 Concentration Distribution
                         1600
                         1500
                         1400
number of observations




                         1300
                         1200
                         1100
                         1000
                          900
                          800
                          700
                          600
                          500
                          400
                          300
                          200
                          100
                            0
                                   0      0.01    0.02       0.03      0.04       0.05    0.06    0.07      0.08     0.09    0.1     0.11
                                 <0.01   <0.02    <0.03     <0.04     <0.05      <0.06   <0.07   <0.08     <0.09     <0.1   <0.11   <0.12
                                                             median concentration [ppm/m3]


                                Figure A.2: Distribution of the Dependent Variable (logarithmic scale)


                                         SO2 Concentration Distribution
                          600
                          550
                          500
number of observations




                          450
                          400
                          350
                          300
                          250
                          200
                          150
                          100
                           50
                            0
                                  -3       -2.8     -2.6       -2.4       -2.2        -2      -1.8        -1.6      -1.4    -1.2     -1
                                 <-2.8    <-2.6    <-2.4      <-2.2       <-2        <-1.8   <-1.6       <-1.4     <-1.2    <-1     <-0.8
                                                          log of median concentration [ppm/m3]




                                                                                   A-2
                Figure A.3: Composition of GEMS/Air Data Set

           The GEMS/Air Data Set Composition
                 (Number of Observations per Country)



China
                                                               United States


Canada



Japan

Poland
                                                                       Other
Brazil                                                            Argentina
                                                                    Sweden
New Zealand                                                       Phillipines
India                                                              Portugal
                                                                        Israel
Yugoslavia                                                             Egypt
Spain                                                                Ireland
Great Britain                                                     Colombia
Belgium                                                          Hong Kong
Iran                                                               Germany
Australia                                                       Netherlands




                                    A-3
                      Figure A.4: GEMS/Air Participation by Country and Time Period
                      (Countries are sorted by decreasing number of contributing years)


              GEMS/Air Participation by Country and Year
 United States
       Canada
      Germany
         Japan
    Yugoslavia
          Spain
  New Zealand
           Brazil
             Iran
    Venezuela
       Belgium
        Finland
   Netherlands
        Poland
      Thailand
    Hong Kong
          Egypt
  Great Britain
        Ireland
       Portugal
           Israel
      Australia
          China
             Italy
            Chile
        Greece
            India
     Phillipines
      Denmark
     Indonesia
     Colombia
Czechoslovakia
       Sweden
      Malaysia
        France
            Peru
  Korea, South
     Argentina
             Iraq
         Kenya
      Pakistan
   Switzerland
        Austria
        Ghana
                     71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96

                                                        Year




                                                        A-4
              Table A.1: Cities by descending maximum of annual median SO2 concentration
Country & City           n min max       Country & City           n min max     Country & City                  n min max
KOR Seoul                6 25 115        CHE Zurich               1 17 26       USA Long Beach, CA              1 1 10
ITA Rome                 3  2 103        IRL Dublin               3  4 26       USA Seattle, WA                 1 1 10
ITA Milan                2 17 100        MYS Kuala Lumpur         4  1 25       NZL Auckland                    3 1    9
YUG Zagreb               3  5   98       USA Alexandria, VA       1  5 25       IRQ Baghdad                     3 1    8
IRN Tehran               3  7   93       POL Wroclaw              3  6 24       USA Chelsea, MA                 1 4    8
CHN Shenyang             4  1   89       COL Medellin             3  1 22       USA Tampa, FL                   3 1    8
AUT Vienna               3 40   80       ISR Tel Aviv             5  1 22       COL Cali                        3 1    7
ESP Madrid               5  2   73       HKG Hong Kong            6  1 21       GHA Accra                       3 4    6
CSK Prague               3 13   65       CAN Hamilton             5  1 20       THA Bangkok                     4 1    6
BEL Brussels             4  9   64       CAN Montreal             4  1 20       USA Allen Park, MI              1 2    6
EGY Cairo                4  1   61       SWE Stockholm            5  1 20       USA St Ann, MO                  1 4    6
GBR London               3 11   58       USA Philadelphia, PA     5  1 20       USA River Rouge, MI             1 3    6
JPN Tokyo                3  5   58       USA St Louis, MO         3  3 20       DEU Munich                      1 5    5
JPN Osaka                4  5   56       CAN Vancouver            7  1 19       IDN Jakarta                     3 1    5
CHN Guangzhou            4  2   55       PAK Lahore               2 15 19       PER Lima                        3 1    5
BRA Sao Paulo            5  8   51       DNK Copenhagen           3  3 18       USA Atlanta, GA                 2 2    5
PHL Manila               3  2   50       USA Detroit, MI          2  2 18       USA Waltham, MA                 1 1    5
CHL Santiago             3 11   49       KEN Nairobi              2  7 17       PHL Davao                       2 1    4
BRA Rio De Janeiro       2 20   46       USA Chester, PA          1  6 17       ARG Buenos Aires                1 1    3
CHN Beijing              5  1   44       NZL Christchurch         4  1 16       ARG San Lorenzo                 1 2    3
CHN Xian                 4  3   41       FRA Paris                3  2 15       USA Chula Vista, CA             1 1    3
CHN Shanghai             4  1   40       SWE Oxelosund            1 11 15       USA Dallas, TX                  1 2    3
USA Boston, MA           2  3   40       USA Washington, DC       2  7 15       USA Livonia, MI                 1 1    3
DEU Frankfurt            3  5   38       USA Cicero, IL           1  2 14       USA St Petersburg, FL           1 1    3
FRA Toulouse             4 19   38       VEN Caracas              3  3 14       USA Adams Co, CO                1 1    3
NLD Amsterdam            3  6   37       SWE Nykoping             2  5 13       USA Burbank, CA                 1 1    2
IND Bombay               6  3   36       USA Chicago, IL          3  1 13       USA Los Angeles, CA             1 1    2
COL Bogota               3  1   35       USA East St Louis, IL    1  5 13       USA San Diego, CA               1 1    2
PRT Lisbon               3  1   35       POL Warsaw               3  3 12       USA Tarpon Springs, FL          1 1    2
IND Calcutta             3  4   33       USA Camden, NJ           1  5 11       ARG Cordoba                     2 1    1
GBR Glasgow              3 11   32       USA Wood River, IL       1  2 11       ARG San Miguel de Tucuman       7 1    1
ARG Mendoza              3 10   30       CAN Toronto              5  1 10       ARG Santa Fe                    1 1    1
AUS Melbourne            1  1   30       FIN Helsinki             3  1 10       ISR Ashdod                      2 1    1
IND New Delhi            3  1   30       USA Baytown, TX          1  1 10       USA Azusa, CA                   1 1    1
GRC Athens               5  7   29       USA Blue Island, IL      1  1 10       USA El Cajon, CA                1 1    1
USA New York City, NY    2  7   28       USA Denver, CO           1  2 10
AUS Sydney               3  2   27       USA Houston, TX          3  1 10
       Note: The column n is the number of observation stations in each city. The columns min and max show the
       lowest and highest measured level of the annual median SO2 concentration in each city, measured in parts per
       billion. Note that a maximum or minimum concentration of “1” is equivalent to the measurement threshold of
       the measurement device. Countries appear with their ISO-3166 codes.




                                                           A-5
                  Health Organization. This package is provided by the U.S. Environmental Protec-
                  tion Agency (US-EPA) at http://www.epa.gov/airs/aexec.html. The US-EPA kindly
                  provided a much more complete version of this dataset that included not only aver-
                  ages but also median and other percentiles of SO2 concentrations. We would like
                  to express our gratitude to Jonathan Miller of the US-EPA for providing additional
                  GEMS/Air data not contained in the public release of the database, and for patiently
                  answering our numerous technical questions. We had problems with the identifica-
                  tion of several observation stations. The longitude and latitude information provided
                  in one of the ancillary files was in some cases incorrect and was corrected case-by-
                  case based on the the description of the location.

PWT               The Penn World Tables are described in Robert Summers and Alan Heston, “The
                  Penn World Table (Mark 5): An Expanded Set of International Comparisons, 1950–
                  1988”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 106, May 1991, pp. 327–368. Vari-
                  ables obtained from this data set include GDP per capita, population, capital stock
                  per worker, and trade intensity. Note that the PWT do not contain data for Cuba;
                  thus, this country was dropped from our analysis. The PWT data are available in
                  revision 5.6 from the NBER ftp site at ftp://ftp.nber.org/pwt56/.

CIESIN            The Consortium for International Earth Science Information Network (CIESIN)
                  Global Population Distribution Database contains the total population contained
                  in each grid cell of 1  1 in the year 1990 for each country. This data set is
                  only available for this single year. It can be obtained freely from the United Na-
                  tions Environmental Programme server maintained by the U.S. Geological Survey
                  at http://grid2.cr.usgs.gov/globalpop/1-degree/description.html.
                  The CIESIN data set was augmented by population counts of major urban agglom-
                  erations that is produced by the United Nations Population Division’s 1996 Global
                  Population Estimates and Projections database on Urban Agglomerations 1950–
                  2015.1 Additional data was obtained from the U.N. Demographic Yearbook (1994)
                  and the Statistical Abstract of the United States (1994) to fill gaps in the data set.

WRI               The World Resources Institute publishes data on natural resources and physical
                  endowments of countries. Data are published in “World Resources 1994-1995: A
                  Guide to the Global Environment”, Oxford University Press, Oxford:1995, and the
                  subsequent “World Resources 1996-98” edition of this report. The WRI publishes
                  the full set of data on diskette. Information is available at http://www.wri.org/.

SACHS/WARNER The source for this data set is the NBER working paper by Jeoffrey Sachs and
          Andrew Warner acknowledged in the bibliogrpahy.

BARRO/LEE The data set contains variables from the 1994 cross-country study by Robert J.
          Barro and Jong-Wha Lee. Data are presented either quinquennially for the years
          1960-1985, i.e., 1960, 1965, 1970, 1975, 1980, and 1985, or for averages of five
          years’ sub-periods over 1960-1985. This dataset is available from the NBER web
  1
      The Director, Population Division/DESIPA, United Nations, DC2-1950, New York, NY 10017, US


                                                     A-6
               site as a zip-ped archive at http://www.nber.org/pub/barro.lee/ZIP/BARLEE.ZIP;
               for more information, read http://www.nber.org/pub/barro.lee/README.TXT.

GHCN           Weather data was provided by the Global Historical Climatology Network. In-
               formation is available on monthly average temperatures, monthly precipitation, and
               atmospheric pressure. The first GHCN data base contains mean monthly tempera-
               ture data (in tenths of degrees celsius) for 6039 stations throughout the world. The
               second GHCN data base contains total monthly precipitation data (in tenths of mil-
               limeters) for 7533 stations throughout the world. Most records (76%) end in the
               1980s. No data are available for any station after 1990. To make the data usable for
               our project, the atmospheric pollution measurement stations were matched to their
               closest meteorological observation stations. Where two stations were nearby, an av-
               erage of these two were formed. The raw data and description file are available from
               the National Climatic Data Center of the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric
               Administration at ftp://ftp.ncdc.noaa.gov/pub/data/ghcn/v1/.

IMF/IFS        The International Monetary Fund’s “International Financial Statistics” provided an-
               cillary data, mostly growth rates of real GDP and population, that were used to ex-
               trapolate data from the Penn World Tables.
OIL            Real world oil prices were obtained from the U.S. Energy Information Administra-
               tion, a branch of the U.S. Dept. of Energy. The real world oil price is calculated by
               dividing the landed costs of crude oil imports from Saudi Arabia (Arabian Light) in
               US$ per barrel by the US GDP deflator (1990=100). More information is available
               at http://www.eia.doe.gov/price.html.

A/C/T          Longitude and Latitude data for the participating cities in the GEMS/Air study were
               hand-coded by the authors and were obtained primarily from the index of “Oxford
               Concise Atlas of the World”, 2nd edition, Reed International Books, London, 1995.

A.3    Regressors

The following list of variables explains the content, method of construction, any modifications, and
source of each of them.
GDP KM         This measure is an approximation of the economic intensity of a city relative to its
               size ($/km2). It is obtained by multiplying a country’s per-capita GDP ($/person)
               by each city’s population density (people/km2). Extrapolations for per-capita GDP
               were carried out for the years past 1993 based on real growth rates obtained from
               the IMF/IFS statistics. Population densities were available only for 1990.
               Physical Unit: millions of 1995 US dollars per square kilometre.
               Dimensions: city by year.
               Sources: PWT, CIESIN.

KL             This is the capital abundance obtained from the physical capital stock per worker
               variable in the Penn World Tables.
               Physical Unit: thousands of 1995 US dollars.

                                                A-7
                    Dimensions: country by year.
                    Source: PWT.

RKL                 Relative capital abundance is variable KL divided by the corresponding world aver-
                    age for the given year, where “world average” is defined by all the countries in the
                    Penn World Tables.
                    Physical Unit: index number, world average equal to 1.0
                    Dimensions: country by year.
                    Source: PWT.

I                   This variable is the three-year average of lagged GDP per capita. That is, for a given
                    year t, It = (yt,1 + yt,2 + yt,3 )=3.
                    Physical Unit: thousands of 1995 US dollars.
                    Dimensions: country by year.
                    Source: PWT.

RI                  Relative income is variable I divided by the corresponding world average for the
                    given year, where “world average” is defined by all the countries in the Penn World
                    Tables.
                    Physical Unit: index number, world average equal to 1.0
                    Dimensions: country by year.
                    Source: PWT.

SUB, RUR            Suburban and rural location type dummy variables. The third (default) location type
                    is central city. Note that GEMS/Air measurement stations are not all directly in
                    metropolitan areas. In the GEMS/Air data set suburban and rural areas are only iden-
                    tified in the United States and China, comprising about 14% and 3% of all observa-
                    tions, respectively.
                    Physical Unit: binary variable
                    Dimension: observation site by year
                    Source: GEMS/AIR.

TI                  A country’s trade intensity is defined as the sum of exports and imports expressed
                    as a percentage of gross domestic product.
                    Physical Unit: percent
                    Dimensions: country by year
                    Source: PWT.

BMP                 Black Market Premium of foreign exchange rate. Data are available for 1970 and
                    1980. Data for other years is interpolated linearly and extraploated by projecting
                    the end-points flatly.
                    Physical Unit: percent
                    Dimensions: country by year
                    Source: Barro-Lee (as obtained from issues of the World Currency Yearbook2)
    2
        International Currency Data, Inc., 328 Flatbush Avenue, Suite 344, Brooklyn, NY 11238, U.S.A.


                                                          A-8
TARIFF   Average tariff rate on imports of intermediate goods and capital goods. This measure
         is an average for the time period 1985-88.
         Physical Unit: percent
         Dimensions: country
         Source: Sachs/Warner (originally: Barro/Lee (1994))

QUOTA    Coverage of quotas on imports of intermediates and capital goods. It is the own-
         import weighted nontariff frequency on capital goods and intermediates, based on
         licensing, prohibitions, and quotas. This measure is an average for the time period
         1985-88.
         Physical Unit: percent
         Dimensions: country
         Source: Sachs/Warner (originally: Barro/Lee (1994))

SW       Sachs/Warner measure of openness. This measure is available for the entire time-
         period of our sample. This dummy variable is 1 for open economies and 0 if either
         of the following is true: (a) the country has a black market premium over 20%; (b)
         it is a socialist country as classified by Kornai (1992, table 1.1); (c) it had a score of
         4 on the export marketing index in the World Bank study by Husain and Faruquee
         (1994, p. 238), or the QUOTA variable was greater than 0.4.
         Physical Unit: binary variable
         Dimensions: country by year
         Source: Sachs/Warner

WT       Average annual temperature.
         Physical Unit: degrees Celsius
         Dimensions: country by year
         Source: GHCN

WP       Coefficient of variation of monthly precipitation. This is calculated as the standard
         deviation of monthly precipitation in a given year divided by the monthly precipita-
         tion average in that given year.
         Physical Unit: dimensionless number
         Dimensions: country by year
         Source: GHCN

OIL      The real price of oil. Physical Unit: 1990-$ per barrel
         Dimensions: year
         Source: U.S. Department of Energy.

HCOAL    Hard coal reserves abundance.
         Physical Unit: PetaJoules per million workers
         Dimensions: country by year
         Source: WRI

SCOAL    Soft coal reserves abundance.
         Physical Unit: PetaJoules per million workers

                                            A-9
               Dimensions: country by year
               Source: WRI

C.C.           Communist Country Dummy. This variable is equal to one if the country is either
               China, Czechoslovakia, Poland, or Yugoslavia.
               Physical Unit: binary variable
               Dimensions: country (for our sample there is no time variation)
               Source: A/C/T.

TIME           Years elapsed since 1980.

Summary statistics for the major variables appear in table A.2.

                                 Table A.2: Summary Statistics
              Variable                     Dimension    Obs.   Mean Std.Dev.
              Log of SO2                   log(ppm)      2621 -2.102 0.480
              City Economic Intensity      $m per km2    2621  7.729 8.733
              Capital abundance            $k            2621 31.496 17.775
              GDP per capita, 3yr avg.     $k            2621 14.114 8.372
              Trade Intensity              %             2621 41.054 31.859
              Relative Income              World=1.00    2621  2.468 1.388
              Relative (K=L)               World=1.00    2621  2.224 1.198
              Communist Country            [—]           2621  0.147 0.354
              C.C.  Income                $k             385  3.669 2.403
              Population Density           1000p/km2     2621  0.615 0.549
              Avg. Temperature             C            2621 14.602 5.556
              Precipitation Coeff. of Var. [—]           2621  0.011 0.006
             Note: All monetary figures are in 1995 US Dollars. The interaction term for income
             with the communist countries dummy only shows the case where the the dummy is
             equal to one; thus the mean for this line is the mean for the communist countries only.
             Population density is for each city in the year 1990.




                                                     A-10
Appendix B

Detailed Results

B.1      Capital Intensity and Pollution Abatement

Figure B.1 illustrates the relationship between capital intensity and the pollution abatement costs
per unit of output ratio. A regression through the 122 data points based on the logarithmic transfor-
mations of abatement cost ratio and capital intensity reveals a positive relationship with an R2 of
0.3, indicating that a 1% increase in the capital intensity increases the abatement cost ratio by 0.7%.
Data were only available for manufacturing industries. Thus, a particularly interesting industry—
electricity generation—is not included in the sample. From other sources it is known that pollution
abatement costs and capital intensity are both extremely high in that industry.

B.2      More Results

Table B.1 reports the full set of estimates that corresponds to each of the regressions shown in ab-
breviated form in table 2.

B.3      Elasticities

Elasticities are calculated using the Delta method1 for functions of the least squares estimator. Ta-
ble B.2 presents estimated elasticities and their corresponding estimated standard errors for the trade
intensity effect. The elasticities in table B.2 were evaluated at the sample mean (based on the 2621
observations in our sample), and two 10-year averages of trade intensity, relative income and rela-
tive capital abundance based on the periods 1975-84 and 1985-94. Table B.2 shows these elasticity
calculations corresponding to the fixed-effects and random effects regression estimates shown in
table 3.




   1
       See William H. Greene, “Econometric Analysis”, third edition, Prentice-Hall: 1997, section 6.7.5, pp. 278ff.


                                                           B-1
                                                 Figure B.1: Pollution Abatement and Capital Intensity in the U.S. (1988)

                                                                                                                                                      i324
                                                                                                                                                       i333       i261
                                                                            i245                                                      i281       i263
                                                2                                                                                         i262             i286
                                                                                                                        i332
                                                                                                                                               i287                  i291
  Pollution abatement cost/output ratio [%]




                                                                               i347                                                             i331
                                                                                                             i329
                                                                           i348     i249                                                 i334
                                                 1                                                        i339 i289
                                                                                                                                                 i282
                                               0.8                                                    i345        i295
                                                                              i328i383 i226             i375             i322
                                               0.6                  i254                    i311                               i299 i214
                                                                       i396                 i342          i325i203                             i321
                                                                                   i306                                i283       i341
                                                                                                                                    i208
                                                                            i326         i373
                                                                                            i366  i336       i367
                                                                                                              i221 i374       i386
                                                                                                                                i335          i207
                                               0.4                                     i395                 i229 i285
                                                                                          i344 i372i343i356
                                                                                            i361            i264i346i206       i301
                                                                 i243     i385i252        i364i369  i362
                                                                                                    i363i209                             i204
                                                                           i275                 i307
                                                                                              i223i358    i222          i202i351
                                                                   i251                  i394 i354
                                                                                      i393i323
                                                                                   i379                                       i371
                                                          i316 i278 i399 i225                  i376i205 i304i284
                                                                                                   i242             i352
                                               0.2                                     i201 i359
                                                                        i253         i382          i349i327                i353
                                                             i259
                                                               i244
                                                                             i384 i387  i276         i228
                                                                              i279           i227
                                                           i314                i271 i273                              i213                     i211
                                               0.1
                                              0.08                                                               i365
                                                                                       i277        i241
                                                                  i391
                                              0.06

                                              0.04                                                           i357



                                              0.02                              i272        i381

                                                              i274


                                                     10          20                    40           60        80    100                    200             400      600

                                                                               Industry capital intensity [$1000/worker]

Note: Pollution abatement data are as reported in Patrick Low “Trade Measures and Environmental Quality: The Impli-
cations for Mexico’s Exports”, chapter 7 in: Patrick Low (ed.) “International Trade and the Environment”, World Bank
Discussion paper 159, The World Bank, Washington/DC, 1992, pp. 113-114. Additional capital and labour figures for
the 3-digit SIC manufacturing industries were taken from the U.S. Annual Survey of Manufacturing. The i123-type
labels next to each data point indicate the 3-digit US-SIC industry.




                                                                                                       B-2
                                    Table B.1: Full Regression Results for Table 2
Model                                              T.I.             BMP            Tariff          Quota            S&W
 =(X+M)/GDP in %                             ,0:00239
Black Market Premium                                             0:02606
Average Tariff (%)                                                                0:00088
Average Quota Equiv. (%)                                                                           0:00594
Sachs&Warner Openness Dummy                                                                                        0:03934
Intercept                                     ,3:48199 ,3:59011 ,3:63178 ,3:85865 ,3:57350
GDP/km2                                         0:05251        0:05401        0:05198        0:04787       0:05379
Capital abundance (K=L)                         0:02780         0:02464          0:04028        0:04066       0:03158
(K=L)
          2
                                              ,0:00049       ,0:00047      ,0:00056       ,0:00055       ,0:00053
Lagged p.c. income (I )                       ,0:12364       ,0:12111      ,0:16117       ,0:13222       ,0:14236
I2                                             0:00288        0:00293       0:00399        0:00306         0:00336
Suburban                                      ,0:52958       ,0:47539      ,0:57446       ,0:60130       ,0:46658
Rural                                         ,0:77979        ,0:72161        ,0:83595        ,0:87485        ,0:71291
Communist Country                             ,0:06554         ,0:03019        ,7:04588        ,6:93811        ,0:00667
C.C.  I                                       0:18941          0:18223         8:82855         8:81603          0:17998
C.C.  I 2                                    ,0:01512         ,0:01559        ,2:50989        ,2:52996        ,0:01456
Average Temperature                           ,0:05981       ,0:05937      ,0:05816       ,0:05885       ,0:05966
Precipitation Variation                        4:25874          3:71501         5:36597          5:28258           4:27441
Time Trend                                    ,0:03443       ,0:03604      ,0:04562       ,0:04185       ,0:03619
Observations                                        2621             2621             2369            2298             2621
Groups                                                293             293              270              263             293
R2 (overall)                                       0:326            0:324            0:354            0:364           0:324

     Note: T-statistics are shown in parentheses. Significance at the 95% and 99% confidence levels are indicated by  and
      , respectively. Dependent variable is the log of the median of SO concentrations at each observation site. Note that
                                                                           2
     the black market premium, average tariff and quota coverage variables measure the inverse of openness; their sign has
     thus to be reversed to interpret the direction of the estimates as an increase in openness.




                                                              B-3
                         Table B.2: Country-Specific Elasticities from Baseline Regression
                              Fixed Effects                                                Random Effects
            Sample             1975–1984            1985–1994              Sample            1975–1984            1985–1994
                  s                   s                 s                  s                 s                  s
ARG     ,0:203 0.043       ,0:137 0.039       ,0:209 0.044       ,0:106 0.026      ,0:066 0.021       ,0:108 0.027
AUS     ,0:069 0.131         ,0:067 0.131         ,0:083 0.144         ,0:036 0.091        ,0:035 0.090         ,0:042 0.101
AUT     ,0:617 0.165       ,0:595 0.215       ,0:442 0.268         ,0:376 0.101      ,0:378 0.143       ,0:288 0.182
BEL     ,0:507 0.496         ,0:462 0.505         ,0:487 0.553         ,0:342 0.334        ,0:310 0.340         ,0:320 0.373
BRA     ,0:380 0.051       ,0:429 0.055       ,0:325 0.049       ,0:226 0.035      ,0:260 0.038       ,0:186 0.033
CAN     ,0:133 0.242         ,0:209 0.217          0:035   0.293       ,0:053 0.177        ,0:104 0.161          0:063   0.208
CHE      5:042 1.407        5:003 1.403        6:185 1.665        3:515 0.847       3:494 0.843        4:317 1.004
CHL     ,0:735 0.156       ,0:718 0.155       ,1:057 0.197       ,0:372 0.102      ,0:361 0.101       ,0:562 0.130
CHN     ,0:466 0.124       ,0:333 0.089       ,0:558 0.146       ,0:224 0.086      ,0:161 0.062       ,0:269 0.102
COL     ,0:901 0.111       ,0:855 0.105       ,0:919 0.118       ,0:554 0.080      ,0:525 0.076       ,0:555 0.084
CSK     ,1:120 0.147       ,1:430 0.184       ,1:632 0.217       ,0:670 0.102      ,0:862 0.128       ,0:972 0.149
DEU      0:873 0.436         1:014 0.469         0:622   0.397        0:589 0.270        0:686 0.290        0:424   0.249
DNK     ,0:375 0.221         ,0:365 0.219         ,0:354 0.223         ,0:231 0.152        ,0:224 0.151         ,0:207 0.157
EGY     ,0:886 0.317       ,0:997 0.351       ,0:861 0.310       ,0:353 0.217        ,0:404 0.241         ,0:340 0.212
ESP     ,0:510 0.099       ,0:472 0.095       ,0:567 0.116       ,0:322 0.063      ,0:293 0.059       ,0:371 0.079
FIN      0:050   0.296       ,0:047 0.283          0:273   0.296        0:026   0.194      ,0:040 0.187          0:182   0.190
FRA     ,0:210 0.145         ,0:207 0.149         ,0:178 0.161         ,0:131 0.100        ,0:127 0.102         ,0:108 0.111
GBR     ,0:248 0.153         ,0:243 0.152         ,0:214 0.147         ,0:094 0.085        ,0:091 0.085         ,0:076 0.088
GHA     ,0:325 0.106       ,0:334 0.113       ,0:698 0.239       ,0:141 0.073        ,0:141 0.078         ,0:297 0.165
GRC     ,1:046 0.148       ,0:980 0.138       ,1:178 0.166       ,0:678 0.104      ,0:634 0.097       ,0:763 0.117
HKG     ,0:244 0.578         ,0:692 0.512          1:319   0.932        0:226   0.305      ,0:123 0.270          1:534 0.588
IDN     ,1:148 0.229       ,1:065 0.253       ,1:278 0.231       ,0:613 0.160      ,0:536 0.177       ,0:703 0.162
IND     ,0:308 0.088       ,0:299 0.086       ,0:350 0.103       ,0:144 0.061      ,0:140 0.060       ,0:161 0.071
IRL     ,1:819 0.306       ,1:732 0.290       ,1:626 0.310       ,1:136 0.195      ,1:070 0.183       ,1:005 0.193
IRN     ,0:582 0.089       ,0:499 0.119       ,0:621 0.078       ,0:333 0.058      ,0:247 0.071       ,0:376 0.055
IRQ     ,1:069 0.242       ,1:300 0.225       ,1:511 0.180       ,0:570 0.136      ,0:767 0.135       ,0:940 0.130
ISR     ,1:116 0.231       ,1:168 0.242       ,0:834 0.189       ,0:717 0.152      ,0:751 0.160       ,0:508 0.114
ITA     ,0:425 0.130       ,0:417 0.139       ,0:289 0.127        ,0:276 0.087      ,0:269 0.093       ,0:184 0.086
JPN     ,0:177 0.069       ,0:233 0.072       ,0:068 0.073         ,0:110 0.046      ,0:141 0.045       ,0:042 0.050
KEN     ,1:306 0.391       ,1:164 0.352       ,0:998 0.320       ,0:596 0.272       ,0:528 0.244        ,0:440 0.222
KOR     ,1:681 0.243       ,1:693 0.244       ,1:465 0.190       ,0:975 0.169      ,0:983 0.169       ,0:912 0.129
MYS     ,2:764 0.350       ,2:596 0.334       ,3:662 0.440       ,1:675 0.245      ,1:563 0.233       ,2:307 0.313
NLD     ,0:534 0.335         ,0:529 0.338         ,0:648 0.333         ,0:338 0.229        ,0:332 0.232         ,0:407 0.227
NZL     ,0:366 0.202         ,0:345 0.205         ,0:373 0.196         ,0:236 0.137        ,0:219 0.140         ,0:245 0.133
PAK     ,0:626 0.172       ,0:659 0.183       ,0:717 0.203       ,0:297 0.120      ,0:311 0.127       ,0:334 0.140
PER     ,0:931 0.134       ,0:902 0.130       ,0:677 0.106       ,0:540 0.092      ,0:523 0.089       ,0:386 0.074
PHL     ,0:928 0.225       ,0:932 0.225       ,1:153 0.285       ,0:455 0.155      ,0:458 0.156       ,0:566 0.198
POL     ,0:815 0.123       ,0:951 0.137       ,0:807 0.123       ,0:468 0.080      ,0:561 0.089       ,0:459 0.082
PRT     ,0:825 0.218       ,0:691 0.194       ,0:775 0.209       ,0:387 0.131      ,0:312 0.118       ,0:368 0.121
SWE     ,0:223 0.209         ,0:258 0.224         ,0:113 0.245         ,0:126 0.148        ,0:145 0.159         ,0:056 0.170
THA     ,0:917 0.263       ,0:785 0.224       ,0:992 0.283       ,0:409 0.179       ,0:355 0.154        ,0:441 0.191
USA     ,0:148 0.115         ,0:139 0.104         ,0:150 0.118         ,0:074 0.090        ,0:070 0.082         ,0:075 0.093
VEN     ,0:732 0.135       ,0:635 0.133       ,0:930 0.138       ,0:460 0.086      ,0:402 0.085       ,0:575 0.089
YUG     ,0:316 0.163         ,0:195 0.155         ,0:458 0.168       ,0:079 0.101        ,0:005 0.096         ,0:171 0.105
      Note:  and s are the estimate and standard error of the elasiticity. Significance at the 5% and 1% levels is indicated
      by a  and  , respectively. Countries appear with their ISO-3166 codes.




                                                                B-4
Appendix C

Sensitivity Analysis

We have subjected our model to a large array of sensitivity analyses. Section C.1 considers vari-
ous alternatives of our “baseline” model with respect to the regressors and properties of the sample.
Have we left our important variables? Is our model sensitive to the chosen time period? Section C.2
continues with a closer look at our dependent variable SO2 concentration. What happens if we use
a different concentration percentile rather than the median? Is there an alternative to using a loga-
rithmic transformation? Finally, section C.3 addresses the question of simultaneity of determination
of pollution concentrations and income. Can a simultaneous-equations approach provide additional
insights?

C.1   Specification

Results presented in the main part of this paper are based on a regression model shown in table 3,
hereafter referred to as the “baseline” model. To analyze the sensitivity of these results, we modify
the right-hand side of our estimating equation to address potential problems and to introduce addi-
tional regressors. The results for four additional types of models are shown in tables C.1 and C.2
for fixed-effects and random-effects estimators, respectively.
    The GEMS/Air study was carried out primarily throughout the years 1976-1991 when the
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) provided funding to the participating countries.
Before 1976 there are only few countries that provide measurements of SO2 concentrations, and
after 1991, the number of countries that report such observations drop rapidly. This is shown in
table A.4. By 1996 data are only available from the United States. To allow for a possible par-
ticipation bias due to funding, we repeat our baseline regression by excluding observations from
before 1976 and from after 1991. This procedure reduces the number of observations by roughly
500, or 20%. None of the parameters that desribe scale, composition, technique, and openness ef-
fect change sign or significance except for the scale variable. In the fixed-effect model, the signif-
icance of the weather variables changes. We now find that a higher concentration of precipitation
leads to higher pollution levels. This is consistent with our a-priori expectation that more frequent
rain washes SO2 out of the air.
    A possible objection for using data from communist countries is that (a) they are not following
a market mechanism and thus will not respond properly to changes in relative prices; and (b) con-
sumers cannot induce the government to tighten pollution regulation. In the latter case, we would
not find a technique effect. We already allowed for this possibility by isolating a communist-country
technique effect. It turned out that we cannot identify a technique effect for these countries that is
significantly different from zero. To address the unresponsiveness to market signals and allowing
for a structural difference between communist and free-market countries, we delete all observations
from communist countries and re-run our baseline regression. This procedure, which reduces the
number of observations by roughly 15%, has only a marginal impact on our estimates.

                                                 C-1
               Table C.1: Sensitivity Analysis for Specification — Fixed Effects
 Model                          Base         76-91         no C.C.       Res.                            Yr-Dum
 Intercept                  ,3:66165 ,3:71228 ,3:26725 ,3:85849
                                                                                                 ,2:97686
 Capital abundance (K=L)      0:11915     0:12270      0:11282   0:12387                         0:12613
 (K=L)    2
                                    ,0:00149       ,0:00125       ,0:00141      ,0:00155       ,0:00157
 Lagged p.c. income (I )            ,0:31075       ,0:38240       ,0:29617      ,0:30190       ,0:30690
 I2                                  0:00740        0:00840        0:00733       0:00733         0:00719
  =(X+M)/GDP in %                  ,0:02293       ,0:04171       ,0:03161      ,0:02266       ,0:02934
  relative (K=L)                  ,0:03054       ,0:02828       ,0:02665      ,0:02955       ,0:03010
  relative (K=L)2                  0:00592        0:00517        0:00530       0:00572         0:00591
  relative income                  0:03428        0:05181        0:03603       0:03352         0:03993
  relative income sq.             ,0:00523       ,0:00915       ,0:00551      ,0:00497       ,0:00635
 GDP/km2                             0:04263        0:07546        0:04141       0:03990         0:04014
 Communist Country
 C.C.  I                              1:15287       1:58590                         1:04313       0:90379
 C.C.  I 2                         ,0:08355 ,0:11097                             ,0:07471 ,0:06426
 Soft Coal (per worker)                                                                  0:00067
 Hard Coal (per worker)                                                                  0:00160
 Oil Price (real)                                                                     ,0:00298
 Average Temperature                ,0:05924        ,0:04982 ,0:06509               ,0:05670 ,0:05774
 Precipitation Variation             7:96498         10:56087  6:59359                  7:99755        10:77088
 Time Trend                         ,0:03838       ,0:04380 ,0:04377
                                                                                    ,0:04076
 Observations                             2621             2114             2236            2621             2621
 Groups                                     293              277             260              293              293
 R2 (overall)                             0:137           0:122            0:157            0:114           0:159
 Hausman Text                             62:79           510:7            39:03            83:40           52:98

Note: To conserve space, no standard errors or t-statistics are shown. However, significance at the 95% and 99% con-
fidence levels are indicated by  and  , respectively. The dependent variable is the log of the median of SO2 concen-
trations at each observation site. Models are: Base = base regression from table 3; Time = time period is shortened to
the main UNEP support period 1976-91 for the GEMS/Air project; no C.C. = communist countries are excluded; Res.
= resource variables (hard coal, soft coal) and oil price are added; Yr-Dum = year dummies are entered instead of a
linear time trend, but are not shown individually.




                                                         C-2
             Table C.2: Sensitivity Analysis for Specification — Random Effects
 Model                         Base          76-91        no C.C.      Res.                              Yr-Dum
 Intercept                 ,3:05851 ,2:96254 ,2:66190 ,3:00256
                                                                                                 ,2:34954
 Capital abundance (K=L)      0:09194     0:08162     0:09431   0:09243                          0:09195
 (K=L)    2
                                    ,0:00123       ,0:00090       ,0:00112
                                                                     ,0:00125                        ,0:00126
 Lagged p.c. income (I )            ,0:29750       ,0:31498       ,0:34492
                                                                     ,0:29789                        ,0:30274
 I2                                  0:00687        0:00705        0:00796
                                                                      0:00673                          0:00717
  =(X+M)/GDP in %                  ,0:01078        ,0:01760       ,0:01665
                                                                     ,0:01071                         ,0:01318
  relative (K=L)                  ,0:02290       ,0:02046       ,0:02132
                                                                     ,0:02186                        ,0:02267
  relative (K=L)2                  0:00427        0:00355        0:00365
                                                                      0:00407                          0:00430
  relative income                  0:02247        0:02845        0:02692
                                                                      0:02119                          0:02502
  relative income sq.             ,0:00330       ,0:00480       ,0:00410
                                                                     ,0:00291                        ,0:00394
 GDP/km2                             0:05418        0:06800        0:05333
                                                                      0:05685                          0:05391
 Communist Country                  ,0:45554         ,0:65806        ,0:18980                          ,0:19122
 C.C.  I                            0:30231          0:44469       0:18708                            0:15558
 C.C.  I 2                         ,0:02066         ,0:03433       ,0:00906                          ,0:00805
 Soft Coal (per worker)                                               0:00323
 Hard Coal (per worker)                                              ,0:00306
 Oil Price (real)                                                    ,0:00249
 Average Temperature                ,0:06161 ,0:06274 ,0:07066 ,0:06190                        ,0:06185
 Precipitation Variation             3:98493    6:59084    4:03814    4:28667                            5:00820
 Time Trend                         ,0:03400 ,0:03644 ,0:04497 ,0:03540
                                                              
 Observations                             2621             2114             2236            2621             2621
 Groups                                     293              277             260              293              293
 R2 (overall)                             0:343           0:291            0:367            0:352           0:358
 Hausman Text                             62:79           510:7            39:03            83:40           52:98

Note: To conserve space, no standard errors or t-statistics are shown. However, significance at the 95% and 99% con-
fidence levels are indicated by  and  , respectively. The dependent variable is the log of the median of SO2 concen-
trations at each observation site. Models are: Base = base regression from table 3; 76-91 = time period is shortened to
the main UNEP support period 1976-91 for the GEMS/Air project; no C.C. = communist countries are excluded; Res.
= resource variables (hard coal, soft coal) and oil price are added; Yr-Dum = year dummies are entered instead of a
linear time trend, but are not shown individually.




                                                         C-3
     In a further step, we introduce three new variables into our baseline model. Noting that there
is typically a strong home bias in fuel consumption, we suspect that countries endowed abundantly
with either hard coal or soft coal will rely to a larger extent on these fuel types. Reasons for a strong
home bias could be (a) very high transportation costs; (b) substantial import barriers; or (c) local
subsidization, directly or indirectly. Typically, soft coal contains a larger amount of sulphur than
hard coal, but we expect a relative abundance of either soft or hard coal to increase the level of
SO2. To express relative abundance of these endowments (in a Heckscher-Ohlin sense), we divide
the absolute level of endowment by the size of the workforce in each country. In the random-effects
model we find a small (albeit insignificant) positive effect of soft coal abundance on pollution and a
small negative effect of hard coal abundance on pollution. No clear results emerge from the fixed-
effects model.
     Another variable we introduce is the real price of oil. A higher price of oil should reduce the use
of (sulphur-containing) oil. In fact, we can identify such a relationship in both the fixed-effects and
random-effects model. However, on theoretical grounds the effect of a higher oil price on pollution
is not necessarily as straight-forward as the above argument implies. If a higher oil price leads to
a substitution effect and a switching from oil to other fuel types, it is uncertain if this other fuel is
“cleaner” natural gas or “dirtier” coal. The data seem to suggest that the substitution is towards
cleaner fuel types.
     In another sensitivity test we replace the linear time trend by year dummies. Since we have an
intercept in the model, we do not include dummies for the first two years (as there were very few
observations for the very first year 1971). The result is surprisingly supportive of a linear time trend.
The estimates for the year dummies (not shown in tables C.1 and C.2 in order to conserve space)
trace out a remarkably stable linear path.


C.2   Dependent Variable

In a second set of sensitivity analyses we explore the choice of our dependent variable. We have
argued before—based on the observations expressed in figures A.1 and A.2 that a logarithmic trans-
formation of the dependent variable is appropriate. However, there is a menu of different SO2 con-
centrations to choose from. We opted for the median SO2 concentration because is more “robust”
with respect to outlier observations than the arithmetic mean. The U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency kindly supplied us with a variety of concentration statistics. We explore all of them in ta-
bles C.3 and C.4 for our fixed-effects and random-effects baseline model. In addition to the me-
dian (“Base”), we use the arithmetic mean (“Mean”) and the 90th, 95th, and 99th percentile of SO2
concentrations (“P90%”, “P95%”, and “P99%”). All of these measures were transfomred into log-
arithms when they were used as a dependent variable.
    The first observation is that the intercept term is increasing from left to right, as the higher per-
centiles have higher average SO2 concentrations. Comparing the mean with the median, we find a
higher intercept for the mean. One way of reading this is that, adjusted for our regressors, the mean
exceeds the median. This appears to be simply a result of the non-normal distribution of the (linear)
SO2 cocentrations, which we saw in figure A.1 to be highly-skewed to the left.
    All five specifications produce results generate results thare are broadly in line with our previous
findings. In particular, all signs remain the same, the estimates remain significant, and the overall
magnitudes change only to a small extent. We take these results as a confirmation of the regularity

                                                  C-4
               Table C.3: Sensitivity Analysis for Dependent Variable — Fixed Effects
 Model                              Base         Mean        P90%         P95%                            P99%
 Intercept                          ,3:66165 ,3:41030 ,2:61972 ,2:10522 ,1:65467
 Capital abundance (K=L)               0:11915       0:11425        0:10939        0:10473       0:08089
 (K=L)2                             ,0:00149 ,0:00159 ,0:00159 ,0:00147 ,0:00120
 Lagged p.c. income (I )            ,0:31075 ,0:27196 ,0:27997 ,0:29345 ,0:23360
 I2                                    0:00740       0:00713        0:00758        0:00771       0:00659
  =(X+M)/GDP in %                  ,0:02293       ,0:01402       ,0:02570      ,0:02284       ,0:02155
  relative (K=L)                  ,0:03054       ,0:02401       ,0:01895      ,0:01725       ,0:01501
  relative (K=L)2                  0:00592        0:00551        0:00499       0:00428         0:00380
  relative income                  0:03428        0:01912        0:02047       0:01770         0:02000
  relative income sq.             ,0:00523       ,0:00276       ,0:00291      ,0:00225        ,0:00349
 GDP/km2                             0:04263        0:04587        0:05505       0:04885         0:03623
 Communist Country
 C.C.  I                              1:15287       0:99146        1:20225        1:21931       1:12806
 C.C.  I 2                         ,0:08355       ,0:07040       ,0:08613      ,0:08602       ,0:08445
 Average Temperature                ,0:05924        ,0:06309       ,0:06268      ,0:06767       ,0:06887
 Precipitation Variation             7:96498          6:89432         6:45666        7:01900          7:34888
 Time Trend                         ,0:03838       ,0:03964       ,0:04209      ,0:04434       ,0:04417
 Observations                             2621             2621             2621            2621             2621
 Groups                                     293              293             293              293              293
 R2 (overall)                             0:137           0:167            0:170            0:165           0:150
 Hausman Text                             62:79           97:59            126:9            131:8           89:14

Note: To conserve space, no standard errors or t-statistics are shown. However, significance at the 95% and 99% con-
fidence levels are indicated by  and  , respectively. The dependent variable is as specified in the Model line: Base
= the log of the median of SO2 concentrations at each observation site; Mean = the log of the arithmetic mean of SO2
concentrations; P90%, P95%, P99% = the log of the 90th, 95th, and 99th percentiles of SO2 concentrations.




                                                         C-5
             Table C.4: Sensitivity Analysis for Dependent Variable — Random Effects
 Model                             Base          Mean       P90%         P95%        P99%
 Intercept                          ,3:05851 ,3:13931 ,2:38088 ,2:03715 ,1:82329
 Capital abundance (K=L)               0:09194       0:09604        0:09313        0:09017       0:07120
 (K=L)2                             ,0:00123 ,0:00134 ,0:00133 ,0:00127 ,0:00109
 Lagged p.c. income (I )            ,0:29750 ,0:28014 ,0:29176 ,0:28955 ,0:22264
 I2                                    0:00687       0:00687        0:00735        0:00737       0:00639
  =(X+M)/GDP in %                  ,0:01078        ,0:00748        ,0:01406      ,0:01363       ,0:01284
  relative (K=L)                  ,0:02290       ,0:02052       ,0:01804      ,0:01731       ,0:01576
  relative (K=L)2                  0:00427        0:00425        0:00393       0:00365         0:00343
  relative income                  0:02247        0:01724        0:01928       0:01861         0:02060
  relative income sq.             ,0:00330       ,0:00258       ,0:00290      ,0:00274       ,0:00385
 GDP/km2                             0:05418        0:05156        0:05731       0:05077         0:03901
 Communist Country                  ,0:45554         ,0:39216         ,0:38129        ,0:49986         ,0:34550
 C.C.  I                            0:30231          0:37737        0:45852       0:48635         0:47876
 C.C.  I 2                         ,0:02066         ,0:02622        ,0:03289      ,0:03476       ,0:03963
 Average Temperature                ,0:06161       ,0:04965       ,0:05018      ,0:05370       ,0:05632
 Precipitation Variation             3:98493          6:96624         8:00871       8:87576         8:99548
 Time Trend                         ,0:03400       ,0:03569       ,0:03817      ,0:04021       ,0:04193
 Observations                             2621             2621             2621            2621             2621
 Groups                                     293              293             293              293              293
 R2 (overall)                             0:343           0:323            0:286            0:259           0:226
 Hausman Text                             62:79           97:59            126:9            131:8           89:14

Note: To conserve space, no standard errors or t-statistics are shown. However, significance at the 95% and 99% con-
fidence levels are indicated by  and  , respectively. The dependent variable is as specified in the Model line: Base
= the log of the median of SO2 concentrations at each observation site; Mean = the log of the arithmetic mean of SO2
concentrations; P90%, P95%, P99% = the log of the 90th, 95th, and 99th percentiles of SO2 concentrations.




                                                         C-6
of the distribution of SO2 concentrations. Recall that these numbers are annual summary statistics
that tend to mitigate the effect from single-day outliers.
    We have argued earlier that the appropriate transformation of the dependent variable is to take
the logarithm, based on our observations expressed in figure A.2. However, in table C.5 we explore
the possibility of other transformations, notably, a linear transformation and a Box-Cox transforma-
tion. All of these are based on our fixed-effects model.
    We apply a Box-Cox transformation as a generalization to our fixed-effects model (where i is
a site-specific fixed effect). The model can be specified as
                              8                                9
                              >
                              < yit , 1      for  = 1         >
                                                               =
                     yit()  > (yit , 1)= for 0 <  < 1 > = it + i + it
                              : log(y )                        ;
                                                                             X                  (C.1)
                                       it    for  = 0
which assumes that there exists a  for a transformation of the dependent variable so that it 
N(0; 1). The transformation parameter  is determined by maximizing the concentrated log-
likelihood function
                                     N                      X
                          L() = , ln ^ 2() + ( , 1) ln(yt)                             (C.2)
                                           2                             t
where                                                          0               
                                                   y () , Xb        y () , Xb
                                           1
                               ^ 2() =                                                          (C.3)
                                           N
With the results from the Box-Cox regression we can also peform two likelihood-ratio tests,
2[L() , L(0)]  2(1) and 2[L() , L(1)]  2(1), that allow us to test the Box-Cox trans-
formation against the log-linear (our baseline) model and the simple linear model.
    We find that the signs of our estimates remain stable and significant. The optimal Box-Cox
transformation parameter is approximately 0.2. When we test this specification against either the
log-linear or pure-linear case, the log-likelihood test statistics reject both the log-linear and pure-
linear specifications in favour of the Box-Cox transformation. Observe, though, that the pure-linear
model is rejected by a much larger margin than the log-linear model. Also note that the interpreta-
tion of the parameters changes and cannot be compared across the three models.

C.3     Simultaneity

Yet another concern in our work has been the possibility of a simultaneous determination of pollu-
tion and (current-period) per-capita income. We did not pursue a simultaneous-equations approach
for our main analysis because it is our belief that the likely effect of pollution on per-capita income
is rather small. This belief appears to be validated by Dean (1998), who finds no significant re-
lationship in her 2SLS procedures. Contemporaneous per-capita income only enters through our
scale variable but not through our technique variable; recall that we use lagged per-capita income
to determine the technique effect because income increases will typically take a number of years to
translate into policy changes.
    To address the simultaneity of income (y ) and pollution (z ) determination in our scale effect we
have experimented with a fixed-effects 2-stage least squares estimator using as a second estimating
equation a simple approximation of a production function

                   log(y ) =   1   log(z ) +   2   log(K ) +     3   log(L) +    4(   t , 1980)   (C.4)

                                                       C-7
             Table C.5: Sensitivity Analysis for Dependent Variable Transformation
               Model                                 Base             linear         Box-Cox
               Intercept                         ,3:66165        33:52426         4:77272
               Capital abundance (K=L)            0:11915         2:22034         0:21781
               (K=L)2                            ,0:00149        ,0:02131       ,0:00256
               Lagged p.c. income (I )           ,0:31075        ,6:49089       ,0:56817
               I2                                 0:00740         0:14208         0:01327
                =(X+M)/GDP in %                 ,0:02293        ,0:10291         ,0:02994
                relative (K=L)                 ,0:03054        ,0:37748       ,0:05071
                relative (K=L)2                 0:00592         0:05532         0:00942
                relative income                 0:03428         0:35264         0:05298
                relative income sq.            ,0:00523        ,0:05865       ,0:00836
               GDP/km2                            0:04263         0:82573         0:07352
               Communist Country
               C.C.  I                            1:15287          8:71297       1:65554
               C.C.  I 2                        ,0:08355 ,0:66355 ,0:11982
               Average Temperature               ,0:05924 ,0:55303 ,0:08790
               Precipitation Variation            7:96498   ,54:65010 7:99823
               Time Trend                        ,0:03838 ,0:67198 ,0:06789
                                                         
               Observations                            2621              2621             2621
               Groups                                    293               293             293
               R2 (overall)                           0:137              0:184           0:109
                                                                                        0:218
               LR Test    2
                               (1)                       230           2685

             Note: To conserve space, no standard errors or t-statistics are shown. However, signif-
             icance at the 95% and 99% confidence levels are indicated by  and  , respectively.
              is the transformation parameter of the Box-Cox transformation as defined in equa-
             tion (C.1). The likelihood ratio test statistics are explained in section C.2.



where K and L denote capital stock and labour force, and t is a linear time trend. In addition, we de-
compose a city’s economic intensity measure into the product of per-capita income and population
density. Taking logs of the resulting expression, we can additively separate these two effects in our
regression equation. As our measure of population density is constant over time, it does not appear
as a regressor in the fixed-effects implementation. In contrast to our baseline model, the estimated
coefficient corresponding to income is a constant-elasticity estimation of the scale effect.
    Results from the fixed-effects 2SLS regression, shown in table C.6, indicate that the parameters
in our baseline model remain stable. However, we estimate the scale effect from a city’s economic
intensity to be much higher than in our baseline model: around 2. In the GDP regression we find
that pollution has a negligible (negative) effect on per-capita income with an estimated elasticity
of 0.03, ie, a 10% increase in pollution will decrease per-capita income by 0.3%. The elasticities
for the composition and trade intensity effects (as usual evaluated at sample means) are consistent
with our other work. The technique-effect elasticity is much higher in magnitude (around –3.2).
Consistent with our other empirical work the sum of scale and technique effect remains negative.

                                                      C-8
Table C.6: Simultaneity Analysis: 2SLS Regression
 Dependent Variable                         ln(SO2 )
 log of country GDP p.c.                2:22844      (3:12)
 Capital abundance (K=L)                0:14139      (7:91)
 (K=L)   2
                                    ,0:00150         (6:92)
 Lagged p.c. income (I )            ,0:50473         (5:02)
 I2                                  0:00980         (5:89)
 C.C.  I                            0:78348         (2:77)
 C.C.  I 2                         ,0:06749         (3:10)
  =(X+M)/GDP in %                  ,0:02679         (3:94)
  relative (K=L)                  ,0:02306         (3:95)
  relative (K=L)2                  0:00420         (3:40)
  relative income                  0:02471         (3:52)
  relative income sq.             ,0:00268           (1:63)
 Average Temperature                ,0:04648           (1:93)
 Precipitation Variation             9:23458          (2:24)
 Time Trend                         ,0:05551         (9:07)
 R2                                           0.143
 Dependent Variable                         ln(GDP)
 log of SO2 concentration           ,0:02788          (2:26)
 log of capital stock                   0:46416     (24:41)
 log of labour fource               ,0:71942        (15:64)
 Time Trend                             0:00578      (4:60)
 R2                                           0.731
                         Elasticities
 Scale                                    2:228      (3:12)
 Composition                             1:483       (4:83)
 Technique                              ,3:218       (3:80)
 Trade Intensity                        ,0:518       (4:84)

Note: T-statistics are shown in parentheses. Significance at
the 95% and 99% confidence levels are indicated by  and
 , respectively. Regression is a fixed-effects modification of
2SLS (ie, site averages have been subtracted).




                              C-9
