          As the U.S. Social Security system has matured, the rate of return received by

participants has fallen. In the coming years, around the time the Baby Boom generation

retires, the system will experience a budget shortfall. Tax revenues will fall short of

promised benefits, requiring outlays from the interest earnings, and then the principal,

of the trust fund. Eventually, the trust fund will be depleted. This projected insolvency

will necessitate benefit cuts and/or tax increases, leading to further declines in the

rates of return individuals can expect.

          Many advocates of reform suggest that an answer to this problem is to privatize

Social Security. They argue that the creation of individual accounts invested in private

capital markets, and especially in the stock market, will produce better rates of return

for individuals than will Social Security. For example, Stephen Moore of the Cato

Institute recently claimed that “privatization offers a much higher financial rate of return

to young workers than the current system... if Congress were to allow a 25 year old

working woman today to invest her payroll tax contributions in private capital markets,

her retirement benefit would be two to five times higher than what Social Security is

offering”.1 Presidential candidate Steve Forbes criticized Social Security because “the

average worker retiring today receives a lifetime return of only about 2.2 percent on the

taxes he has paid into the system. Contrast this with the historic 9 -10 percent annual

returns from stock market investments... The advantages of an IRA-type approach are

overpowering.” 2

          Our goal in this paper is to challenge the following popular argument: a)


1
    Moore (1997).
2
    Forbes (1996).

                                               1
projected returns to Social Security are low relative to expected returns on stocks and

bonds, and therefore b) everyone would receive higher returns and be better off if we

moved to a privatized system where individuals could directly invest their contributions

in stocks and bonds. We argue that for households with access to diversified capital

markets, privatization without prefunding would not increase Social Security returns,

when properly measured. Privatization together with prefunding would eventually raise

the rate of return to future generations of participants, but at the cost of a lower rate of

return to early generations.

        The real economic benefit to privatization is the diversification that would be

made available to constrained households that cannot participate on their own in

diversified capital market investment portfolios. The improved rate-of-return argument

in favor of privatization thus has no force unless there are constrained households

without access to diversified capital markets. However, this group of people is not

generally recognized to be key to the popular argument just quoted. Indeed, in the

presence of such constrained households, young market-savvy workers, who according

to the popular argument should find privatization most appealing, will probably get

lower returns as a result of privatization.

        We begin in Section I by defining what privatization means and by distinguishing

that concept from diversification and from prefunding. In Section II, we ask whether

projected returns on Social Security are in fact below those anticipated from U.S.

capital markets.3 Finally, in Section III we ask whether low Social Security returns are a


3
 While we focus on the rate of return concept of money’s worth in this paper, additional measures are
evaluated in more detail in our longer study (Geanakoplos, Mitchell, and Zeldes, forthcoming).

                                                   2
valid reason to support a privatization that does not involve prefunding. We conclude

that several valid rationales can be offered to support privatization, but taken by itself,

the low rate of return on Social Security is not among them.



I. What do we mean by Social Security privatization?

        To begin, it is useful to draw a clear distinction between three terms that are

often confused: privatization versus diversification versus prefunding of Social

Security. By privatization we mean replacing the current mostly unfunded defined-

benefit Social Security old-age program with a defined-contribution system of individual

accounts held in individual workers’ names. By diversification we mean investing

funds (either from the personal accounts or from the Social Security trust fund) into a

broad range of assets. These assets might include U.S. private sector stocks and

bonds, and foreign securities, in addition to the government bonds now used

exclusively by the Social Security trust fund. At the present time, the focus is on

diversifying into stocks. By prefunding we mean reducing the sum of the system’s

implicit and explicit debt (see Table 1).4

        In the public debate these terms are often linked, but they are conceptually

different. It is easy to see why all three categories nevertheless appear together in the

public mind. Suppose the Social Security system had begun as a forced saving plan in

which all workers were obliged to set aside money for their retirement which would be

put into private accounts invested in a balanced portfolio of stocks and bonds. Then

4
 There is debate over whether prefunding should refer to a change that reduces the total government
debt rather than just the social security debt. Here we assume that any changes in social security do not
change the non-social security debt or deficit.

                                                    3
from the beginning the system would have been privatized, diversified, and completely

prefunded.

          The situation is quite different now from what it was in 1935 when the United

States Social Security system began. Social security systems in the U.S. and in most

developed economies have amassed substantial unfunded liabilities; assets on hand

are insufficient to pay for the present value of benefits that have been accrued and

promised to workers and retirees based on contributions already made.5 In the U.S. for

instance, the unfunded present value of Social Security promises totals about $9

trillion.6 While this Social Security debt is implicit rather than explicit, it is economically

significant. The U.S. will surely not decide to eliminate this implicit debt by ignoring all

of the promised benefits.

          Our tripartite decomposition is intended to emphasize that social security reform

could change any one of these three categories without changing the other two. For

example, the trust fund could invest in stocks as well as bonds, thus diversifying

without privatizing. Alternatively, workers could be given private accounts in which the

money was always invested in government bonds, thus privatizing without diversifying.

This is the case in Mexico’s new individual account system, where the government has

required that all pension assets be invested only in inflation-indexed bonds.7 It is also



5
 The concept of unfunded liability is different from that of actuarial imbalance. Actuarial imbalance is
defined as the present value of expected benefits over some period (often 75 years) minus the present
value of expected tax receipts over the same period, minus the current value of the trust fund. The U.S.
currently has a 75 year actuarial imbalance of about 2.2 percent of payroll per year, or about 2.9 trillion
dollars in present value. See Goss (forthcoming).
6
    Goss (forthcoming).
7
    See Mitchell and Barreto, 1997.

                                                     4
possible to raise system funding without involving individual accounts; taxes could be

raised or benefits cut and the proceeds could be put into a central trust fund.

Singapore’s national Provident Fund, for example, is a non-privatized, prefunded

system where the central government collects taxes sufficient to generate substantial

assets, which it then invests on the system’s behalf. Conversely, people could be

given individual accounts without prefunding of benefit promises. A privatized but

unfunded pension system has recently been established in Latvia, where payroll taxes

are collected by the government which then credits workers’ so-called “notional”

accounts with paper returns on contributions. Chile is the best-known example of a

country whose program is both prefunded and privatized: here workers hold assets in

individually-managed accounts, and debt under the old system is being reduced over

time.

        Likewise in the United States, privatization without prefunding is quite possible;

a Social Security reform that created a national 401(k)-type system of private accounts

could be implemented with no change in Social Security debt. For example, the Social

Security system could issue new explicit debt (“recognition bonds”), guaranteed by the

federal government, with payouts set exactly equal to the benefit promises that have

accrued to date under the current system. These bonds would be given to current

participants in lieu of their accrued future benefit payments. All new contributions to

Social Security would then go directly into private individual accounts.8 If the

recognition bonds were paid off in full with new government tax receipts, the debt would


8
 More gradual transitions to a system of individual accounts that leave (implicit plus explicit) debt
unchanged are also possible.

                                                     5
eventually disappear when the last of today’s workers finally died. However, the Social

Security system could instead borrow again in the future by issuing new bonds to meet

the recognition bond coupon payments, and then again and again to meet the

payments on these new bonds. Subject to some limits, the government could choose

how much interest and principal to roll over and how much to pay off. If the government

were to choose to keep the path of explicit debt equal to the path of unfunded liabilities

under the current system (the implicit debt), the result would be a Social Security

system that was privatized without being prefunded.

       In what follows we shall examine the claim that a privatized, diversified Social

Security system could deliver higher returns without any additional prefunding. We do

so in three steps. First, we analyze returns in a privatized system that confines

investments to government bonds. Next, we examine returns in a privatized and

diversified system in which investments in stocks are permitted. Finally, we analyze

returns in a privatized and diversified system and allow for the possibility that there are

some constrained households who do not currently have access on their own to

diversified capital markets.



II. Are projected rates of return on Social Security lower than those on U.S.
       capital markets?

       A starting point for projecting future returns on U.S. capital markets is to examine

historical returns. Table 2 reports the historical average of inflation-adjusted (i.e. real)

returns on stocks, bonds, and Treasury bills, as well as their variability. The average

annual real return on stocks (as proxied by the S&P 500) was 9.4 percent; the


                                              6
corresponding return on intermediate term government bonds was 2.3 percent.9

Whether these provide reasonable forecasts for future years depends in part on one’s

judgment about whether the past will predict the future.

          Cohort-specific rates of return under Social Security, from a study by Dean

Leimer, are presented in Figure 1.10 Historical data on current and past workers and

retirees, as well as projections of future contributions and benefits, are used to compute

rates of return, which we sometimes call by their more precise name, internal rates of

return (IRRs). We note first that prospective (internal) rates of return depend on a host

of predictions, including mortality, population growth, and real wage growth.11 Second,

the prospective IRR data are not those that would follow from forecasting taxes and

benefits under current Social Security rules, since that system faces insolvency or

actuarial imbalance. Instead the IRR figures for the future assume that taxes will be

increased sufficiently so that the system does not run out of money.12

9
 These are arithmetic averages of annual returns from 1926 through 1996 taken from Ibbotson and
Associates (1998). The 1994-96 Advisory Council on Social Security projected that in the future stocks
would earn a 7 percent real return, as compared to 2 percent real return on bonds.
10
     Leimer (1994).
11
   The internal rate of return (IRR) is defined as the interest rate that equates the present value of taxes
paid to the system and the present value of benefits received, by cohort. Two other “money’s worth”
measures sometimes reported are the present value ratio (PVB/PVT), or the present value of benefits
divided by the present value of taxes, and the net present value (NPV), or the present value of benefits
received minus the present value of taxes paid. The IRR and its companion money’s worth measures are
appealing because they seek to summarize in a single measure how a household might evaluate the
complex multi-year stream of Social Security payments and receipts. However the measure’s simplicity
belies the extensive assumptions and calculations needed to arrive at a single summary number. For
example, in order to conclude that workers born in 1930 anticipate a Social Security IRR of 4 percent it is
necessary to compute what that cohort paid in payroll taxes over all years of work (Leimer 1994). Not all
those born in 1930 have retired as yet, so future earnings profiles, taxes, and retirement patterns must
be forecasted. Each group’s tax payments must then be compared against the stream of Social Security
benefits actually paid out to people of that birth year. Of course, many 1930-cohort members are still
living, so future benefit payments and mortality patterns must again be estimated. For details see
Geanakoplos, Mitchell, and Zeldes (forthcoming).
12
     Leimer also provides estimates under the assumption that benefits are reduced to maintain solvency.

                                                     7
        Figure 1 shows that early cohorts under the program received very high IRRs in

real terms. Workers born in 1876 received a real return of over 35 percent per annum.

Workers born in 1900 received a 12 percent real return. The figure reveals that IRRs

fell over time for subsequent cohorts. Leimer estimated the return to be 5.7 percent for

those born in 1920, and about 2 percent for those born 1950-70. For workers born in

1975, he forecasted that IRRs would be around 1.8 percent, dropping down to 1.5

percent for those born in 1998.

        Young or middle aged workers listening to the Social Security reform debate

today could reasonably ask how their anticipated IRR from Social Security would

compare with what could be earned by investing in U.S. capital markets. Leimer’s data

indicate IRR’s of about 1.5 percent for future cohorts; theoretical models of a pure pay-

as-you-go social security system in steady state suggest that the IRR would be

expected to equal the growth of the wage base, which is currently forecasted to be

about 1.2 percent.13 Either way, it is clear that projected IRRs are well below expected

returns from investment in equities based on historical averages, and fall short of

average government bond returns in Table 2 as well. Thus, the popular rate of return

argument in favor of privatization seems to apply whether or not the investments are

diversified.

Why are projected Social Security returns low?

        Projected Social Security returns are low, not because of waste or inefficiency,

but because the system developed as a primarily unfunded, pay-as-you-go system. In



13
  For a discussion of the assumptions used to estimate future wage base growth rates as well as future
Social Security benefit and tax paths, see Advisory Council on Social Security (1997).

                                                   8
a pure pay-as-you-go system, all contributions received by the system are paid out in

the same year as benefits to someone else, and no trust fund is accumulated. This

means that there are some early beneficiaries who receive benefits even though they

have not made any contributions. The U.S. Social Security system was not started as a

pure pay-as-you-go system, because only those individuals who contributed some

money to the system were eligible for benefits. Nevertheless, the accumulated trust

fund was minimal, so that it was still the case that the present value of benefits

received by those retiring soon after 1940 far exceeded the present value of

contributions they had made.

        The key to understanding why IRRs must fall in our nearly pay-as-you-go Social

Security system is to exploit the connection between net present values (NPV) and

rates of return (IRR). Whenever the NPV for a cohort is positive, the IRR for the cohort

will be greater than the market rate, and vice-versa. Therefore, stating that early

generations received a positive net transfer from Social Security is equivalent to saying

that they received above-market rates of return on their contributions.14

        In Figure 1, we saw that the real rates of return for early cohorts (birth-year

1876-1900) ranged from 12 to 37 percent.15 Figure 2 presents estimates of cohort net

present values, derived from Leimer’s study, corresponding to these cohort rates of




14
  Comparing the present value of a cohort’s benefits and taxes is an application of the generational
accounting approach to measuring fiscal policy. See, for example, Auerbach, Gokhale, and Kotlikoff
(1994).
15
  Recall that these are real or inflation-adjusted returns -- nominal returns would obviously be even
higher.

                                                    9
return.16 The dotted line (left scale) is the net present value, in 1997 dollars, of all

contributions and benefits for individuals born in the indicated year. As expected for

the beginning of a pay-as-you-go system, the present value of benefits exceeded taxes

for the first wave of retirees. Each birth-year cohort between 1880 and 1900 (those

retiring approximately 1945 -1965) received a lifetime transfer (in 1997 present value

dollars) of between 40 billion and 240 billion dollars. The solid line in figure 2 (right

scale) is the cumulative sum of all net transfers received by cohorts born prior to and

including the indicated birth year. Cohorts born through 1900 received a cumulative

net transfer of about 3 trillion dollars.

        In part because the Social Security tax rates started out low in 1937 (the initial

tax rate was 2 percent) and gradually rose over time, the positive transfers to retirees

continued well past the first wave of beneficiaries. Those born between 1901 and 1917

received net transfers with present value of about $4.9 trillion. In addition, the 20 age

cohorts born between 1918 and 1937 are scheduled to receive a further net transfer of

$1.8 trillion, in present value. Adding up the $3 trillion, $4.9 trillion, and $1.8 trillion, we

arrive at an estimate of the total net transfer to the first 60 age cohorts of $9.7 trillion, or

roughly $10 trillion.

        What do the positive net subsidies and high returns for early cohorts have to do

with the low returns forecasted for current and future cohorts? It can be shown that the

present value across all cohorts (from the beginning of the system forward for the




16
  Leimer (1994) used the interest rates on trust fund assets (essentially intermediate-term U.S. Treasury
bonds) to convert current dollars into 1989 dollars. We convert the series into 1997 dollars using the
corresponding interest rates between 1989 and 1997.

                                                   10
infinite future) of the net transfers received must sum to zero.17 Inevitably, cohorts born

after 1937 must give up in aggregate the whole $10 trillion, discounted back to 1997

dollars.18

        In other words, since past cohorts received positive net transfers, some present

and future cohorts must receive negative net transfers. The connection described

above between net transfers and rates of return means that we can translate this

statement about net transfers into a statement about rates of return. Because past

cohorts received rates of return greater than market rates, current and/or future cohorts

must receive rates of return lower than market rates.19




17
   To see this, first consider a system that is pay-as-you-go, so that in each year aggregate taxes are
equal to aggregate benefits, i.e., benefits minus taxes equals zero. Hence, the present value of each
year’s benefits minus taxes must equal zero, and therefore the sum across all years of these present
values must equal zero as well. So long as the present value of all benefits across all years and the
present value of all taxes across all years are each finite, which must necessarily hold if the interest rate
is on average higher than the rate of growth of the economy, we can rearrange and regroup benefits and
taxes however we like. Grouping together benefits and taxes for each birth cohort, we must have, as
claimed, that the present values of net transfers (benefits minus taxes), cohort by cohort, sum to zero.
         This is also true with prefunding, and even with trust fund borrowing, provided that the trust fund
assets are invested at the same interest rate used to compute present values. In this case, the present
value of all benefits paid up to and including any year T is equal to the present value of all taxes up to
and including year T plus the present value of the year T trust fund. Allowing T to go to infinity and
assuming that the trust fund is not allowed to grow increasingly negative at rate r or faster and that the
government would not want it to grow increasingly positive at rate r or faster, the present value of net
transfers (benefits minus taxes) made to all birth cohorts must equal zero. See Geanakoplos, Mitchell,
and Zeldes (forthcoming) for more details.
         The difference between a prefunded system and a pay-as-you-go system is that in the latter, the
early cohorts must get positive transfers, leaving negative transfers for later cohorts, whereas in a
prefunded system, the early cohorts may not get any positive transfers. Our current Social Security
system has very little prefunding. The correspondingly small trust fund indeed earns a bond rate of
return, so our analysis is relevant.
18
   It is important to note that this discounting is at the real rate of interest. If, for example, the real rate of
interest is 2.3 percent per annum and inflation is 3 percent, and if the $10 trillion were paid back in one
lump sum in 30 years, then it would cost $48 trillion in 2027 dollars. The relentless power of
compounding interest is what makes the burden of the initial Social Security transfers many years ago
loom so large today.
19
  If the system had instead started as and remained a fully-funded system, then early participants would
have received market returns, i.e. zero net transfers, as would all current and future workers.

                                                        11
           How big the negative transfer must be for any one cohort born after 1937

depends on how the total transfer is spread across all the cohorts. Observe that

according to (our modifications of the numbers in) Leimer, the cohorts born between

1938 and 1977 are scheduled to receive negative transfers of about $2.5 trillion,

reducing the total projected net transfer to cohorts born before 1978 to approximately

$7.2 trillion. Of course much of this $2.5 trillion transfer has not yet occurred. The

young born in 1975, for example, have just begun to work, and so have not had time to

make any significant transfers through the Social Security system. Roughly half of the

working careers of cohorts born between 1938 and 1977 have passed by 1997. We

might guess therefore that subtracting the present value of Social Security taxes

already paid by cohorts born between 1938 and 1977 from the present value of Social

Security benefits already accrued as a result of these taxes gives about half of $2.5

trillion. That would mean that the sum of the net tax burden on all contributions made

after 1997 would equal $9.7 trillion minus $1.25 trillion, or about $8.5 trillion. In fact, the

number must be equal to the unfunded liability, which was calculated independently by

Stephen Goss at just under $9 trillion, thus providing a check on our numbers.20

          There is a simple way of estimating the transfers that might be made each year

after 1997. Suppose the total negative transfer of $9 trillion is spread equitably among

all the cohorts, in the sense that every cohort is (or will be) asked to give up the same

percentage of its earnings each year of its working career. In a steadily growing

economy, the required annual transfer in year t would then be approximately equal to

(r-g)×(unfunded liabilities at end of year t-1), where r is the riskless real rate of return

20
     Goss (forthcoming).

                                              12
and g is the growth rate of the economy (approximately equal to the sum of population

growth and technological improvement).21 Assuming that r is about 2.3 percent (as

indicated in table 2), and that g is about 1.2 percent, and using $9 trillion as the current

unfunded liability, transfers in 1997 must be on the order of $100 billion. Measured as

a percentage of Social Security taxes paid, which were about $400 billion in 1997, this

transfer represents about 25 percent of annual payroll taxes.22

        Spreading the remaining start-up cost of our pay-as-you-go Social Security

system evenly over all cohorts requires each cohort to give up about 25 percent of

every annual contribution, or 3 percentage points of the current 12.4 percent payroll

tax. In other words, implicit interest payments explain why young workers may expect

only 75 percent of their taxes back in (the present value of) benefits over their

lifetimes.23 As long as the Social Security debt is spread out over all subsequent

cohorts, returns on Social Security will be lower for every cohort than returns paid by

bonds.




21
   The transfer in period t+1 (TRANSt+1) is the amount by which contributions in period t+1 exceed the
present value of the benefits accrued as a result of those contributions. Define ULt as the unfunded
liability at time t. It can be shown (Geanakoplos, Mitchell, and Zeldes, forthcoming) that the change in
the unfunded liability between t and t+1 ()ULt,t+1) is equal to (r × ULt) - TRANSt+1. In a steady-state
economy, the unfunded liability must grow at rate g, i.e., )ULt,t+1 = g × ULt. This implies that the transfer
must be exactly (r-g) × ULt, as claimed in the text.
22
   This number is, of course, only an approximation. To get it we assumed that the real interest rate
would stay constant at 2.3 percent and that the wage base would grow steadily at rate 1.2 percent.
Among other things, both assumptions ignore demographic changes. In the current baby boom era, both
real interest rates and growth rates are higher than we assumed. If anything, however, it looks like actual
r-g is higher than we presumed, which would imply that the necessary transfers might be even more than
we suggest.
23
  As a check, consider a hypothetical worker who pays level real Social Security taxes for 40 years and
receives level real benefits for the next 20 years at an internal rate of return of 1.2 percent (an estimate
of g). If instead, his contributions were reduced by 25 percent but his benefits remained the same, then
his internal rate of return would be 2.12 percent, which is close to our estimate of r of 2.3 percent.

                                                     13
III. Are low Social Security returns a valid reason to support privatization?

        The second step in the casual argument supporting privatization seems the

easiest and most straightforward -- so much so that it is often taken for granted. If

projected returns on Social Security are significantly lower than those offered in U.S.

capital markets, doesn’t it immediately follow that we would all be better off if we were

allowed to invest Social Security contributions directly in private securities? Frequent

arguments in the popular press and some studies by advocates of privatization suggest

that this is the case.24 Yet, this conclusion is misleading for two reasons: (1) It ignores

transition costs (i.e. how do we eliminate the implicit Social Security debt); and (2) It

does not account for changes in risk borne by participants. We take up each in turn.

Transition Costs

        Let us begin by ignoring issues related to risk, such as diversification. Since the

rate of return on bonds is greater than the rate of return of Social Security, it would be

easy to increase the return for future cohorts by simply ignoring past contributions and

not paying any benefits accrued under the current system. The old Social Security

system could be shut down, and all new Social Security tax receipts could be put into

private accounts invested in bonds. Future cohorts would be able to earn market

returns. But then the entire $10 trillion cost of subsidizing the first 60 cohorts would in

effect be borne by the current middle-aged and old, who would then have paid into the

system for years and received little or nothing in return.



24
  See, e.g., Forbes (1996) and Beach and Davis (1998). Also, there are sites on the World Wide Web
that calculate for users the benefit stream they will likely receive from Social Security and compare it to
the income stream attainable from investing their Social Security contributions in private capital markets.
See, for example, the CATO Institute web site at www.socialsecurity.org/calc/calculator.html.

                                                    14
           Alternatively, one could shut down the old system and privatize, but continue to

pay all the Social Security benefits accrued to date, based on past contributions. As

we noted earlier, recognition bonds could be issued to workers and retirees for the full

amount of the unfunded liability (i.e. $9 trillion). If the government did not default on

these bonds, new taxes would have to be raised to pay interest on the recognition

bonds. If, further, the new taxes were set to keep the path over time of recognition

bond debt the same as the path of implicit debt under the current system,25 then the

new taxes would correspond exactly to the transfers we mentioned in the last section.

In other words, it can be shown that the new taxes raised would eliminate all of the

higher returns on individual accounts.26 Let us see why.

           Consider a steady-state economy growing at the constant rate g with market

interest rate r, and with a pay-as-you-go social security system begun sometime in the

distant past. As pointed out earlier, the implicit tax paid through social security in each

year is (r - g) × (the unfunded liability at the end of the previous year). If suddenly at

date t social security were privatized and transition costs were ignored (for example

because accrued benefits were never paid), the IRR on the privatized system in which

individual accounts were all held in marketed bonds would be equal to r. If instead

recognition bonds were issued, their market value at date t would have to be equal to

the unfunded liability in that year. In order to keep the debt growing at the same rate g

as the economy, taxes in the next year would have to be raised in the amount (r - g) ×



25
  In a steady-state, the required path of debt would keep constant the ratio of outstanding recognition
bond debt to GDP.
26
     For further discussion of this result, see Geanakoplos, Mitchell, and Zeldes (forthcoming).

                                                      15
(unfunded liability). The extra taxes needed to finance the payments on the recognition

bonds would thus be identical to the transfers made each year in the old social security

system. By choosing the tax rates appropriately, the tax burden could be made to fall

exactly on the same people who were contributing more to social security than they

were receiving in benefits.27 Aside from the transfers, participants in the current pay-

as-you-go Social Security system are in effect earning the bond rate of return on their

money. In a privatized system in which households invested their forced saving in

bonds, they would have to pay in new taxes exactly what they paid before in transfers.

        In other words, the rate of return on a privatized system in which all private

investment is in marketed bonds, net of new taxes needed to pay the appropriate

interest on the recognition bond debt, would be identical to the low rate of return on the

current system. This is true regardless of how large the difference is between r and g --

this difference could be 1.1 percent, 3 percent, 10 percent, or even higher!28 That is

why it is fallacious to assume that all future participants in a privatized Social Security

system could earn returns equal to those forecasted for U.S. capital markets. We thus

agree that returns to the current Social Security system are low, but we argue that there

is no costless way of improving them for all current and future workers.

        Suppose, alternatively, that taxes were raised disproportionately on current


27
  There are different ways of measuring accrued benefits, and each method would require a different tax
scheme to make taxes in a privatized system just equal to transfers in the current Social Security
system. We give one example. Suppose accrued benefits are defined on an equal present value basis,
that is suppose each dollar of contributions brings the same present value of accrued benefits
(discounted back to the point when the dollar is contributed). Suppose this ratio is .75. Then a
proportional tax of (1 - .75) × 12.4 percent = 3.1 percent would leave everyone exactly as well off in a
privatized system as he was in the current pay-as-you-go Social Security system.
28
  Higher r makes privatized returns higher but, as we have just seen, it also increases the interest
burden of the unfunded liability.

                                                    16
cohorts, and receipts were used to buy out some of the recognition bond debt, so that

the system reform increased the degree of funding.29 Then later cohorts would face

lower taxes to pay the interest on the remaining recognition bond debt. For these later

cohorts, returns on Social Security contributions, net of recognition bond taxes, would

be higher than under the current system. But for current workers, returns on a

privatized system would be lower than under the current system. Thus, transition costs

mean either that returns under a privatized system would be the same as the current

system (privatization with no prefunding), or that returns in the privatized system would

be lower than under the current system for some or all of the currently alive cohorts

and then higher for later cohorts (privatization with prefunding). The debate should be

focused on whether this is a tradeoff worth making,30 not on whether there is a free

lunch.

Risk Adjustment

           Advocates of Social Security reform might be tempted to say that people would

invest their individual accounts in stocks -- earning a higher rate of return -- rather than

in bonds. By now readers should be suspicious of arguments that promise something

for nothing. After all, we just saw that although bonds earn a higher return than the

Social Security system, privatizing and investing in bonds would give no higher return

once the new taxes needed to redeem the outstanding liabilities of the current system

were properly accounted for.


29
  A potential advantage of prefunding is that it would, according to most economists, increase national
saving. There is no reason to believe that privatization without prefunding would necessarily increase
national saving (see, e.g. Mitchell and Zeldes, 1996).
30
     As argued, e.g. by Feldstein (1997).

                                                   17
        IRR computations usually overlook the fact that workers and retirees bear

different risks in a privatized versus a publicly run Social Security system. It is

important to keep in mind that when one asset is riskier than another, it should have a

higher equilibrium expected market return; this explains why stocks on average should

earn a higher return than bonds. As a result, safer returns from a conventional Social

Security system cannot be directly compared with riskier returns anticipated from an

equities-based system, unless risk-adjustment is done to make the programs

comparable. By risk adjustment, we mean adjusting downward the expected value of

risky returns (e.g., stock returns) to recognize the increased risk associated with these

securities.

        Households that already hold both stocks and bonds in their portfolios and that

have the expertise to buy and sell stocks and bonds should value an additional dollar

of stocks the same as an additional dollar of bonds, even though stocks have a much

higher expected rate of return. If they valued an additional dollar’s worth of stocks

more than an additional dollar’s worth of bonds, they would have already sold some of

their bonds and bought stocks with the money.31 For this type of household, the risk-

adjusted rate of return on an additional dollar of stocks is identical to that on bonds.

Put differently, when considering a Social Security change that alters a small fraction of

such a household’s portfolio, it would be appropriate to compare the current Social

Security system to a privatized system in which the individual accounts were required




31
  This is not to say that such a household would put its first dollar of saving into bonds instead of stocks,
but rather after its (perhaps considerable) investment in stocks, the next dollar of stock would increase
well-being no more than another dollar of bonds.

                                                     18
to invest only in government bonds.32 And we have already seen in that case that

privatization does not bring higher returns, correctly measured.

        For a larger change in Social Security investment policy, such households could

simply use their non-Social Security portfolio to completely offset the change in Social

Security. For example, imagine a middle-aged household paying $5,000 per year in

Social Security taxes (including employer contributions), which initially were being

placed directly into a personal account (run by the government) in the U.S. Treasury

bond market. Suppose the household was also saving outside of the Social Security

account an additional $10,000 per year, $9,000 in stocks and $1,000 in treasury bonds.

Overall, the household is putting 60 percent in stocks (9,000 out of 15,000), and 40

percent in bonds (6,000 out of 15,000). If the government suddenly switched the entire

Social Security account into stocks, this household could restore the 60-40 split of its

total saving by putting $4,000 into stocks and $6,000 into bonds out of its private

saving. In fact, no matter how the Social Security account is invested, this household

will be no better or worse off. The appropriate risk-adjusted return to such a household

from a Social Security account, no matter how it is invested, is the bond return. For a

household that is already diversified, the correctly measured return from a privatized

and diversified Social Security system is no higher than the current system.33


32
 In practice, government bond returns are not equal to Social Security returns, and neither is riskless.
We ignore these issues here.
33
   This argument holds even if there is an inexplicably large equity premium, as some economists claim
there is. Suppose the excess return on stocks above bonds is much more than can be justified by the
risk differential, because many households are irrationally underinvesting in equities. In that case, we
might be tempted on paternalistic grounds to force these irrational households to hold more stock.
However, this is no simple matter. If Social Security were simply privatized, these households would
likely choose not to hold any equities in their Social Security accounts for the same reasons they held too
few stocks in the rest of their portfolio. If households were instead forced into equities in Social Security,

                                                     19
        The real economic benefit to privatization comes from the attendant

diversification that would be made available to households that cannot participate on

their own in diversified capital markets. According to economic theory, every

household whose income is uncorrelated with stock returns should include some stock

in its portfolio in order to take advantage of the higher returns stocks provide compared

to bonds and other safe assets. The first dollars invested in stocks would definitely

raise risk-corrected returns, because they would bring extra returns without adding

much risk. Subsequent dollars invested in stock continue to raise returns, but at the

cost of more and more risk, eventually lowering risk-adjusted returns. How much

money should optimally be invested in stocks depends on the wealth and risk tolerance

of the household.

        Households that are constrained in their private portfolio from holding sufficient

amounts of stock would be helped if a portion of their Social Security returns coincided

with equity returns. What type of households would fit into this category and how do

we recognize them? First, there are households that will not accumulate any wealth

outside of Social Security, but who would like to borrow money to invest in the stock

market if they could find a lender to loan them money at the bond rate.34 Second, there

are households that will invest 100 percent of their private wealth in the stock market,

and that would like to invest even more in the stock market if they could borrow at the

bond rate. Finally, there are households that will accumulate wealth outside of Social


they would likely undo this by reducing their holdings of equities in the rest of their portfolio.
34
  Given the chance, these “liquidity constrained” households would prefer to use borrowing to increase
current consumption. If borrowing could be used only to purchase other assets, however, these
households would choose to borrow and purchase stocks.

                                                      20
Security, but will choose not to invest in the stock market either because they are

uninformed about the relative returns and risks or because it is not worth it to them to

incur the fixed costs of becoming a stock market investor. Each of these groups would

benefit from owning individual accounts invested in the stock market.35 This provides

us with an economic rationale for privatization and diversification.36

          There remains the issue of how many “constrained” households there are, that

do not have sufficient access to the stock market. The second group is probably small.

The first and third groups are a subset of the people who own no stocks. Fully 59

percent of the U.S. population (in 1995) did not hold stocks in any form.37 Some of the

non-stockholders, however, are young and have not yet accumulated much Social

Security or private wealth. What we really want to know is what fraction of the

population is unlikely to hold stock in the future, when they are accumulating Social

Security wealth. While we do not have direct estimates of this, about 50 percent of the

population aged 44-54 and 60 percent of those aged 55-64 held no stock in 1995. But


35
     This assumes that the fixed costs would be lower under an individual account system.
36
   This raises the issue of whether diversification into stocks is better achieved through privatized
individual accounts or through central trust fund investments. If constrained investors tend to be
irrational or myopic in their investment decisions, then it would be more advantageous for them if the
Social Security trust fund itself undertook stock investments on their behalf. Unconstrained investors
could still keep control of all their asset holdings (inside and outside of their Social Security funds) by
compensating in their private accounts for whatever the trust fund did that was not to their taste, as we
saw above. However, households such as those who have chosen optimally to hold small amounts of
stocks, perhaps because they are risk averse, may be forced to hold too much extra in stocks in their
Social Security accounts. These households would be made worse off. The more heterogenous are
constrained households in their tolerance of risk, and the wiser we think constrained households would be
in their investment choices, the more attractive is privatization as a means of achieving diversification.
The more homogeneous are constrained households in their tolerance of risk, and the more myopic we
think constrained households would be in their investment choices, the more attractive is trust fund
investment as a means of achieving diversification.
37
   This is based on calculations using the 1995 Survey of Consumer Finances. It includes stocks held
directly, through mutual funds, and through defined-contribution pensions. See Kennickell, Starr-
McCluer, and Sunden (1997), and Ameriks and Zeldes (in progress).

                                                     21
stockownership has risen in the past and is likely to continue to rise in the future, so

this is probably an upper bound on the fraction of the population that will not hold stock

in the absence of Social Security privatization and diversification. Also, not all those

without stock would benefit substantially by holding stocks. For some, their wage

income or private business income might be sufficiently positively correlated with the

stock market that they are better off not holding any equities. Others, who hold zero

stock because they are very risk averse and face a small fixed cost, would only see a

small benefit from increased holdings of stock in their social security account. Overall,

we would guess that significantly fewer than half of households would benefit

substantially (equivalently, experience substantially higher risk-adjusted returns) from

increased social security investment in stocks.

       If there is a large number of constrained households, then Social Security

diversification would have macroeconomic consequences as well. The most important

general equilibrium effect of diversification would be an increase in the demand, and

thus in the price, of stocks and a corresponding decline in their expected return. As the

value of the stock market increased, current holders of stocks, which disproportionately

include the wealthy and older workers who have had time to accumulate stock, would

see their wealth increase. Young workers would find that they earned smaller returns

on their future stock purchases than they would have in the absence of diversification.38

       While privatization and diversification may indeed bring benefits to some


38
  Social security diversification would bring some indirect benefits to the economy, if there were many
constrained households. Unconstrained households would end up holding less stock, because some of it
would be in the hands of social security accounts held by constrained households who could not buy
stock previously. Thus unconstrained households would bear less risk. They would be inclined to shift
the mix of investment projects undertaken toward more risky ones. This might in turn raise future GDP.

                                                  22
constrained households, and perhaps some indirect benefits to the economy as a

whole, the presence of these households is not part of the currently popular rate-of-

return argument for privatization. According to that argument, all households, and

especially the youngest (“25 year-old workers”), are supposed to see higher returns

from privatizing Social Security. Yet when properly measured, rates of return for

unconstrained households will stay the same, or actually decline for young

unconstrained households.

       Another risk consideration is that the government-run Social Security system

provides insurance functions that an individual-account system probably would not

provide, including insurance for shocks to earnings, length of life, disability, and

inflation. For instance, the benefit formula is structured to provide a higher rate of

return to low lifetime earner households than to high lifetime earner households. This

is justified on the grounds that a social insurance plan can pool over the entire

population certain risks that are difficult to insure privately, particularly disability,

unemployment, and poverty. To the extent that private equivalents for these forms of

social insurance would be more costly or non-existent, privatizing the program would

increase participants’ risk exposure. Consequently, to the extent that social insurance

affords benefits that private insurance could not, this raises the risk-adjusted return on

a government-run Social Security system.

       There is another risk factor that must be accounted for as well. A publicly run

defined-benefit program incurs political risk. This occurs because current workers

cannot effectively contract with and bind as-yet-unborn cohorts of taxpayers to pay for

them when they grow old. As a result, Baby Boomers feel unsure that they will wield the

                                               23
political clout to extract rising payroll taxes from their children and grandchildren, to

support them when they are old. This is a risk that cannot be traded, so there is no way

for those more willing to bear this risk to trade with those less willing to bear it. While the

simple models described above do not have a good way to price this type of risk,

correcting for political risk would probably work in the direction of increasing the risk-

adjusted returns and relative attractiveness of a privatized system.



IV. Conclusion

       In this paper we argue that privatization, diversification, and prefunding are

distinct and should be considered as such. We also argue that it is worthwhile

separating a move toward system privatization into three steps. Suppose that individual

accounts are created, but that all benefits accrued to date from past Social Security

contributions are honored, and that the funding level of the system is held constant

(because new explicit debt is issued to cover the unfunded liability of the present Social

Security system). In the first step, consider a world with no uncertainty in which

individuals are only allowed to invest the individual accounts in government bonds.

Although the market return on bonds is greater than that projected on Social Security,

once transition costs (to pay interest on the new debt) are accounted for, the rate of

return on the two systems would be identical. We estimate that paying for the transition

costs would require about a 25 percent tax on all payments into new accounts. This

surtax would wipe out all of the extra returns attainable by holding bonds in people’s

individual accounts. Our 25 percent number depends on forecasts of future growth

rates g of the economy, and future real interest rates r. If those forecasts of r and g

                                             24
were to change, the tax would have to change. But the result that all of the gains to

privatization would disappear in extra taxes to pay off the unfunded liability is true

regardless of the specific values of r and g.

       Next, consider adding idiosyncratic risk (e.g. shocks to earnings and length of

life). If the privatized system contains no special insurance provisions and the private

market is unable to provide these, then the risk-adjusted rate of return under

privatization would be lower than under the current system.

       Thirdly, consider adding aggregate risk and allowing households to invest their

individual accounts in equities. For households that already held both stocks and bonds

elsewhere, and were thus unconstrained in their portfolio choice, the risk-adjusted rate

of return would be no higher than the risk-adjusted rate of return if the individual

accounts were held entirely in bonds. For the others, namely those who do not currently

have as much invested in equities as they might like, the risk-adjusted rate of return on

a portfolio with equities would be higher as a result of diversification into stocks, thus

providing an important rationale for diversification. Nevertheless, this return would not

be as much higher as a naive comparison of expected returns would suggest. If this

group is large, there will also be general equilibrium effects that will likely lower the

expected return on stocks, thus making worse off young households who would have

invested in stocks anyway.

       Finally, what if the system’s funding were increased at the same time as

individual accounts were created? While the increase in funding would likely raise the

rate of return on Social Security for future generations (and raise national saving in the

process), it must be kept in mind that it would do so only at the cost of lower returns to

                                             25
current cohorts.

           We argue that the Social Security reform debate should focus on (1) the tradeoff

between returns for current cohorts versus future cohorts, (2) the risk bearing benefits to

the economy of enlarging the population that holds a diversified portfolio to include

constrained households, and (3) whether diversification is better implemented via

privatized personal accounts or through trust fund investments.

           We recognize that privatization has several other important benefits, including

increased portfolio choice, reduced political risk, possibly reduced labor supply

distortions, and an intangible increased sense of ownership and responsibility. It is also

possible that privatization may improve the political feasibility of implementing

prefunding and/or diversification, thus increasing the chance of achieving the benefits to

future generations and constrained households described earlier. Indeed some find

these overwhelming reasons to favor privatization. These positives, however, must be

balanced against the loss of social risk pooling mentioned above, somewhat higher

administrative costs,39 and perhaps the social and personal costs of permitting workers

to make “unwise” portfolio choices. In any event, our main message is that the popular

argument that Social Security privatization would provide higher returns for all current

and future workers is misleading, because it ignores transition costs and differences

across programs in the allocation of aggregate and household risk.




39
     See Mitchell (1998), for an analysis of administrative costs.

                                                       26
                                       References


Advisory Council on Social Security, “Report of the 1994-96 Advisory Council on Social
      Security”, Social Security Administration, Washington, DC. 1997.

Ameriks, John and Stephen P. Zeldes. “How Do Household Portfolio Shares Vary With
      Age?” Columbia University, in progress.

Auerbach, Alan J., Jagadeesh Gokhale and Laurence J. Kotlikoff. "Generational
      Accounting: A Meaningful Way To Evaluate Fiscal Policy," Journal of Economic
      Perspectives, 1994, v8(1), 73-94.

Beach, William W. and Gareth G. Davis. “Social Security’s Rate of Return.” Heritage
     Foundation Study, January 15, 1998.

Feldstein, Martin “Transition to a Fully Funded Pension System: Five Economic Issues.”
      NBER Working Paper No. 6149, August 1997.

Forbes, Steve. “How to Replace Social Security”. The Wall Street Journal, December
      18, 1996.

Geanakoplos, John, Olivia S. Mitchell, and Stephen P. Zeldes, “Social Security Money’s
     Worth”. In Prospects for Social Security Reform, edited by Olivia S. Mitchell,
     Robert J. Myers, and Howard Young, Pension Research Council and University
     of Pennsylvania Press, forthcoming.

Goss, Stephen C. “Measuring Solvency in the Social Security System”. In Prospects
      for Social Security Reform, edited by Olivia S. Mitchell, Robert J. Myers, and
      Howard Young, Pension Research Council and University of Pennsylvania Press,
      forthcoming.

Ibbotson, R. & Associates. Stocks, Bonds, Bills, and Inflation. 1998 Yearbook.
      Chicago, IL.

Kennickell, Arthur, Martha Starr-McCluer, and Annika E. Sunden. “Family Finances in
      the U.S.: Recent Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances.” Federal
      Reserve Bulletin, January 1997.

Leimer, Dean. “Cohort Specific Measures of Lifetime Net Social Security Transfers”.
      ORS Working Paper No 59, Office of Research and Statistics, Social Security
      Administration, February 1994.

Mitchell, Olivia S. “Administrative Costs of Public and Private Pension Plans”. In
      Privatizing Social Security, edited by Martin Feldstein. NBER. 1998.

                                           27
Mitchell, Olivia S. and Flavio Barreto. “After Chile, What? Second-Round Social
      Security Reforms in Latin America”. Revista de Analisis Economico, 12(2)
      November 1997: 3-36.

Mitchell, Olivia S. and Stephen P. Zeldes. “Social Security Privatization: A Structure for
      Analysis”. American Economic Review, 86 (2) May 1996: 363-367.

Moore, Stephen. “Prepared Testimony on the Future of Social Security for this
      Generation and the Next.” House Ways and Means Committee, Social Security
      Subcommittee, U.S. Congress. Washington, D.C. June 24, 1997.




                                            28
              Table 1: Differentiating Privatization, Prefunding, and Diversification
                                         of Social Security

• Privatization: Replace existing social security system with a system of individual accounts
    held and managed by individuals.

• Prefunding: Raise contributions and/or cut benefits so as to lower the sum of explicit and
    implicit debt associated with the system.

• Diversification: Invest social security funds into a broad range of assets, including equities.


                                                   Privatization
                                 NO                                     YES

                    • Current system               • Create individual accounts

                                                   • Issue recognition bonds

                                                   • Perpetually roll over principal and enough
                                                      interest to keep path of debt same as that
                                                      of unfunded liability under current system
              NO
                          Diversification                       Diversification
                       No: Current system             No: Require individual accounts to
                                                        hold bonds
                       Yes: Borrow, invest
                         proceeds in equities         Yes: Permit individual accounts to
                         through trust fund             hold equities and bonds
 Prefunding




                    • Raise taxes / cut benefits   • Create individual accounts
                       to decrease unfunded
                       liability                   • Issue recognition bonds

                                                   • Raise taxes / cut benefits to make path of
                                                      debt lower than path of unfunded liability
                                                      under current system
              YES
                          Diversification                       Diversification
                       No: Invest trust fund in       No: Require individual accounts to
                         bonds                         hold bonds

                       Yes: Invest trust fund         Yes: Permit individual accounts to
                         in equities                   hold equities and bonds


Privatization, prefunding, and diversification are distinct concepts.
It is possible to have any one, without either of the other two.
              Table 2: Annual Inflation-Adjusted Returns on
               Stocks and Government Bonds: 1926-1996

                                              Arithmetic
                                                                      Standard
                 Asset                         average
                                                                     deviation (%)
                                              return (%)

Real S&P 500                                       9.4                   20.4

Real long-term government bond                     2.4                   10.5

Real intermediate-term
                                                   2.3                    7.1
government bond

Real short-term T-bill                             0.7                    4.2



Source: Authors’ calculations based on data from Ibbotson & Associates (1998).
                                           Figure 1:
                              Estimated Real Internal Rates of Return
                                 on Social Security Contributions
          40                                                                                              5



                                                                                                          4


          30           All birth years
                       (use left scale)                                                                   3
                                                             Birth years
                                                             1924-1976




                                                                                                              Percent
Percent




                                                             (use right scale)                            2

          20

                                                                                                          1



                                                                                                          0
          10




          0
           1876        1886         1896   1906     1916      1926         1936   1946   1956   1966   1976
                                                           Birth year

               Source: Leimer (1994) tax increase balanced budget scenario.
                                            Figure 2: Social Security Net Intercohort Transfers
                                          350                                                                                                   10000


                                          300                                                                                                   9000
Annual amount: billions of 1997 dollars




                                                   Net transfers to cohort




                                                                                                                                                        Cumulative: billions of 1997 dollars
                                          250      born in each year                                 cumulative sum:                            8000
                                                   (use left scale)                                  net transfers to all cohorts
                                          200                                                        born in and prior to each year             7000
                                                                                                     (use right scale)

                                          150                                                                                                   6000


                                          100                                                                                                   5000


                                           50                                                                                                   4000


                                            0                                                                                                   3000


                                           -50                                                                                                  2000


                                          -100                                                                                                  1000


                                          -150                                                                                                  0
                                                  1876         1886   1896   1906   1916      1926      1936        1946   1956   1966   1976

                                                                                           Birth year

                                                 Source: Leimer (1994) tax increase balanced budget scenario, and authors' calculations.
                                                 All figures are present values as of 1997.
