                                   '         (% % 




                                        
                                        
                                     
                                              
                                              


                                                !



                                          "#!$% &)*+,
                                  -..&//0001!21"$/& &3/0)*+,


                                     
                                     +4,4 33 5-63..3 7!6
                                        28$ 49+:;
                                             6$63.+<<;



                         
                !   
 "           #               
     $ %              &' (  ) ) ! & 
! $    $   *        "    "   "  +,  
-  ! !  # ,  #  #     #   . , 
/              &    ) '       
    #     & 0   *# 1      
           / ,      0    ( 
             2  '  $         

34556# $'  0         (   (      #
7    (           3       
5.6238= !8 5>5 !5"!"3.3
0">. .-"8"?03
 !
  "#!$% & "1)*+,
  6$63.+<<;
 "1 ) ;9 :+9 :,+*


                                            $%675$&7

        3 . .-"8"?!3.68=>6.!=3-7 . $@4"! 7 $1-=8"> .-3

0.-> 3!&"7.=5-""3=3-7 "70"#A  >.8>!.336238B=3-7  ..!8 !5

=. ..!8 !5.=&5 =5"!.!63"!$ >.?&."!1..= .3 -$-CD*1)E !83!$1

 3"5 !. 5."! &&" 5-?& !3.-3 !" 31 3-7  ..!8 !53$! 35".!.."

.-5"6!.=0-5-&"7836.6 !36 !5."231%"-2."!33.!$.-!5"6!.3

2=>>5.7=. ?!$ 0 $3!865!$-$->..=13."5 =.-!563"!"> #.3!."

. 8."! 5"6!.3&"8653. .-"8"?=162383!8658  .5865."!3! 2"

36&&= !86!&  8!5 33!>..=63. .!$?.3&"!333"5 $"6&3 =- 7

."!.7!."!31



 !
  & .!.">5"!"53
"3."!!73.=
9*4 =. ." 8
"3."! 499+,
 !8 
F26186
Twelfth century philosopher Rav Moses Maimonides explaining circumcision..
       “It gives to all members of the same faith, i.e., to all believers in the Unity of God, a
       common bodily sign, so that it is impossible for any one that is a stranger, to say that he
       belongs to them. For sometimes people say so for the purpose of obtaining some
       advantage ... ....It is also a fact that there is much mutual love and assistance among
       people that are united by the same sign when they consider it as [the symbol of] a
       covenant.
       [The Guide for the Perplexed, late 12th century, translated 1904. Chapter XLIX. Brackets
       are those of the translator. Italics are my own.]
                                                                                                                      1

                                                 I. INTRODUCTION
Economists have recently gained useful insights into social behavior using “social interaction”
models, which extend traditional rational choice by including the actions of other agents directly
in the objective function of individuals. These methods have allowed economists to progress in the
analysis of interactions in fields traditionally reserved for sociologists.1
        Religious sects pose a unique challenge to this agenda. These groups stubbornly defy price
theory, persisting in time-intensive activities like communal worship, sabbath observance and
dietary restrictions despite the increased shadow price of time. Yet, such groups show no sign of
disappearing and those with the most demanding practices seem to be growing fastest.2 Ultra-
Orthodox3 Jewry, the modern Anabaptist traditions (such as the Amish, Mennonites and
Hutterites) and Radical Islam are thriving, despite a multitude of time intensive requirements.
        Ultra-Orthodoxy was born as a rejection of the Western Liberal tradition, the intellectual
antecedent of rational choice theory. Its world view often stresses divine inspiration and
sometimes mysticism as criteria for making choices. It often judges actions by their intent, in
contrast to the consequentialist approach of rational choice theory. The choices made by Ultra-
Orthodox Jews pose a challenge for economists,4 as religious activity often involves voluntarily
limiting options and destroying resources. Following Iannaccone [1992], I rationalize this
behavior, applying a particular form of social interaction models to this problem, the club good5
approach. In clubs, the actions of other members appear in each-others’ objective functions but
externalities flowing from those actions are excludable, applying only to club members. This is an
accurate description of religious communities, as members benefit from the religious and social
activity of other club members through a process not mediated by prices. Those benefits have a
price, though, as an efficient club seeks to influence the activities of members by requiring them to
submit to prohibitions and sacrifices. This approach to religious behavior as a social activity does




         1
          Examples include segregation [Schelling 1971; Becker and Murphy 2000], discrimination [Loury 1977],
peer pressure in firms [Kandel and Lazear 1992], ethnic trading groups [Greif 1994] and criminal gangs [Glaeser,
Sacerdote and Scheinkman 1996]. For a survey of the social interaction literature and its relationship with
Sociology, see Weber [1978], Akerlof [1997] or Becker and Murphy [2000].
         2
             Iannaccone [1998] describes the growth of conservative sects including the rise of radical Islam (p.
1471).
         3
         Members prefer the term Orthodox, which is also claimed by the less traditional “Modern” Orthodox, or
the Hebrew term Haredi, which means trembling, or (God)-fearing. They also refer to themselves simply as Yidn.
See Heilman [1992, pp. 11-14] for a discussion.
         4
           Smith [1776] discusses religion using an approach based on individual incentives. Azzi and Ehrenberg
[1975] revived that approach introducing a return in the hereafter as a rationalization for time spent in religious
activity. For a survey see Iannaccone [1998].
         5
             See Cornes and Sandler [1986] for a clear explication of club good theory.
                                                                                                                  2

not deny the importance of faith but attempts to provide a positive theory emphasizing the mutual
insurance aspect of life in religious communities.6
         This paper has one major theme: The conventional rational choice model, augmented with
social interactions and excludability, can produce extremely large behavioral responses to
interventions. Some of these responses are opposite to the predictions of conventional
microeconomics (in which only one’s own actions and market prices are arguments in an objective
function). Understanding the intensity and direction of these responses provides an economic
explanation for several puzzling behaviors among Ultra-Orthodox Jews.
        Israel’s Ultra-Orthodox Jews are a fascinating and fast-growing sect which has held
virtual veto power over public policy for more than two decades. They represent a unique
research opportunity, since unlike gangs, cliques, and other groups defined by social interactions,
Israeli Ultra-Orthodox Jews are reliably identified in standard survey data.
         The Ultra-Orthodox pose three puzzles for a social scientist. First, their historical increase
in the stringency of religious practice represents a paradox. Ultra-Orthodoxy developed and
thrived in the19th century, during the economic emancipation of European Jews. While most Jews
responded to the accompanying increase in real wages by reducing their adherence to time-
intensive traditional practices, the Ultra-Orthodox developed a more stringent and more time-
intensive form of Judaism. That trend is currently being repeated, as religious practice again
becomes increasingly stringent and time-consuming from generation to generation.
        Ultra-Orthodox fertility rates are the second puzzle. Fertility is high, at 6.5 children per
Israeli Ultra-Orthodox woman in the early 1980s. It is also rising, reaching 7.6 children per
woman by the mid 1990s. This community is dramatically reversing the fertility transition, a rarity
in modern demographics.
        Finally, the labor supply of Ultra-Orthodox men is low and falling. By the mid 1990s labor
force participation among Israeli Ultra-Orthodox men had dropped to one-third. They remained
out of the labor force on average till age 40 in order to study full time in yeshiva, religious
seminaries which provide almost no practical training.
        In the face of poverty among their families, why do men remain in yeshiva so long? Part of
the explanation must be draft deferments, which effectively subsidize yeshiva attendance. Yet,
yeshiva attendance typically continues long after the deferment subsidy has run out, a finding
inconsistent with price theory. Nor can the entire explanation simply be a preference for studying
the holy texts. Ultra-Orthodox men outside of Israel, followers of the same denominations, rarely
remain in full time yeshiva attendance beyond age 25.
        I offer an explanation for all three puzzles based on a club good model. Club members
benefit from access to a remarkably generous mutual insurance network based on religiously
motivated charitable acts. Mutual acts of charity provide the social interaction nature of the


        6
          Glaeser and Glendon [1997] provide evidence supporting this social approach to religion, showing that
church attendance in the U.S. is predicted by the local attendance of people with similar educational levels.
                                                                                                        3

model. Access to mutual insurance is excludable, making it a club good. Religious prohibitions
can be understood as an extreme tax on secular activity outside the club which substitutes for
charitable activity within the club. A religious community lacking tax authority or unable to
sufficiently subsidize charitable activity may choose prohibitions to increase this activity among
members. Sabbath observance and dietary restrictions, for instance, can be rationalized with that
approach. In this context the increased stringency of religious practice is an efficient communal
response to rising real wages and to increased external subsidies.
         Increased fertility can be explained as an interaction of efficient prohibitions and increased
subsidies. As subsidies increase the value of community services offered to members, a club
concerned with attrition can afford to impose higher effective taxes through prohibitions. Thus
subsidies reduce real wages, causing women to reduce market activity in favor of household
activity, particularly childbearing. This “subsidized prohibition” mechanism runs Becker’s fertility
transition argument in reverse. I test this explanation using Sephardi/Ashkenazi variation in
subsidies over time, revealing a remarkable differential increase in fertility. Sephardi Ultra-
Orthodox women, who enjoy a larger increase in subsidies, increase their fertility by fully two
and a half children, over the 15-year sample period, while Ashkenazi Ultra-Orthodox women
increase their fertility by (only) one child.
        Rationalizing yeshiva attendance till age forty requires an economic explanation for
sacrifices, since years spent in yeshiva could be spent accumulating valuable human capital. I
introduce heterogeneous agents who signal their commitment to the religious club by incurring
costs or “sacrificing,” allowing the club to exclude free-riders, choosing only the most committed
among potential entrants. Yeshiva attendance signals commitment to the Ultra-Orthodox
community, or club. This approach explains how labor supply is drastically distorted by subsidies
to community members, since subsidies induce larger, more wasteful signals of commitment. This
mechanism is labeled “subsidized sacrifice.”
         I argue that the club good approach offers a unified explanation for all three puzzles, while
conventional price theory cannot, even when amplified by “social multipliers” [Becker and
Murphy 2000]. As a prelude to that discussion consider two findings at odds with price theory.
First, yeshiva attendance typically persists for five years after the draft deferment subsidy typically
expires at age 35, while price theory predicts a sharp decline in yeshiva attendance at age 35.
Second, religious observance became more time-demanding as the shadow value of time
increased. Price theory predicts a reduction in the time-intensity of religious observance. Other
explanations are considered and largely rejected in the discussion below.
         Public policy toward clubs may have severe welfare implications. The sharp increases in
both nonemployment and fertility illustrate that subsidized sacrifices and prohibitions can induce
extreme responses. Intuitively, subsidizing a signal is inherently wasteful as it erodes signaling
value, inducing a more costly signal. More generally, subsidizing any aspect of membership in a
club with a costly signal as an entry requirement induces a more expensive signal which dissipates
the initial subsidy. Equitable policy is efficient in the sense that public policy induces an inefficient
increase in the costly signal only when it favors club members over nonmembers. The fertility
increase is the result of a second mechanism by which subsidies allow clubs to increase the
                                                                                                                       4

stringency of distorting prohibitions, or norms. Here as well, I show that public policy is
distortionary because it is discriminatory.
        Section II provides background on the Israeli Ultra-Orthodox, describes the puzzle of low
employment rates and discusses several alternative explanations for that puzzle. Section III
develops an explanation based on a club good approach. Section IV applies the same analysis to
two additional puzzles, the paradoxical birth of Ultra-Orthodoxy and rising fertility. Section V
discusses the implications for welfare dependence among Israeli Ultra-Orthodox Jews. Section VI
concludes, discussing possible generalizations to other ethnic and religious groups and the
potential for extreme responses to intervention among gangs, cliques and other social groups.


                   II. BACKGROUND: ULTRA-ORTHODOXY AND YESHIVA STUDY
Ultra-Orthodox Judaism is a highly ritualistic form of observance about two centuries old.7 Its
spread dates back to the beginnings of European Jewish assimilation into secular society, in the
late eighteenth century. Ultra-Orthodox Jews today practice a tradition which preserves to a
remarkable degree the lifestyle of their villages (shtettls) in central and eastern Europe in the 19th
century. The men are bearded, wearing long black formal overcoats and black wide-brimmed hats.
The women dress modestly, with only faces and hands visible, the hair of married women covered
by wigs. Prohibitions which Jews have traditionally observed, such as dietary restrictions, sabbath
observance and sexual propriety are augmented by the Ultra-Orthodox. For example, unlike
Orthodox Jews, some Ultra-Orthodox refuse to use a delineated area (Eruv) which allows one to
carry objects on the sabbath, geographically limiting the size of a synagogue-based community.
Moreover, many traditions in use of language, diet, clothing and synagogue practice are elevated
to the status of religious imperatives among the Ultra-Orthodox. Deviations can result in
ostracism. Thus, the customs of 19th century eastern European Jewry are currently preserved quite
precisely in New York and Israel. Yet despite the conservative appearance of the culture, Jewish
Ultra-Orthodoxy is radically more stringent in its demands than traditional European Jewry and
less tolerant of deviation.8 One aspect of this increased stringency is the segregationist nature of
Ultra-Orthodoxy, which broke a longstanding tradition of unity within Jewish communities. By
making it difficult to eat with, and unacceptable to worship with Reform or even Orthodox Jews,



            7
         The origins of Jewish Ultra-Orthodoxy are well described in Friedman [1991], Heilman [1992], Katz
[1961] and Silber [1992].
            8
                “Of all the branches of modern-day Judaism, ultra-Orthodoxy is undoubtedly the most tradition-
oriented.              Its rallying cry is “All innovation is prohibited by the Torah!” a clever wordplay on a Talmudic
                       ruling first coined by Rabbi Moses Sofer in the early nineteenth century that captures the essence
                       of its conservative ideology. And yet, like other antimodern conservative movements, ultra-
                       Orthodoxy is clearly a recent phenomenon. Belying the conventional wisdom of both its
                       adherents and its opponents, it is in fact not an unchanged and unchanging remnant of pre-
                       modern, traditional Jewish society, but as much a child of modernity as any of its “modern”
                       rivals.” Silber [1992, p. 23].
                                                                                                   5

including relatives, the Ultra-Orthodox consciously reduce social contact between themselves and
the rest of the Jewish community.
         Ultra-Orthodoxy contains numerous subcommunities with a wide array of practice and
belief. For instance, Lubavitch Hassidim are openly messianic (some believed their last leader to
be the Messiah), while other Hassidim and Misnagdim (or “Lithuanians”) are not. Most are
hierarchical communities that seek the advice of their leader, either Rebbe or Rosh yeshiva, on
any decision, religious or secular. Like other sects, such as Mennonites, Amish, and radical Islam,
Ultra-Orthodox Jews reject almost all of modern culture, which they view as corrupt and
corrupting. That rejection includes modern literature, sport, music, film and television.

Mutual Insurance
The degree of mutual insurance practiced within these communities today probably surpasses that
of a traditional Indian village [Townsend 1994], and is believed to be unprecedented in Jewish
history.9 No sick member is without visitors and no single member is without an arranged match.
For example, Landau [1993] reports on tens of in-kind free loans advertised in flyers by
neighborhood rabbis in the Bayit Vegan neighborhood of Jerusalem, ranging from Torah scrolls to
wedding gowns to playpens. The same flyers list free services available, including visits to the
sick, logistic support and advice for mourners, and frozen meals for the sick, for the elderly and
for mothers after childbirth. The flyers include a request to donate time and money, but also to
identify anyone needing help. Most recipients and all volunteers and contributors are Ultra-
Orthodox. Landau [1993] also describes a well organized system of money-raising for emergency
medical expenses not covered by regular medical insurance, as well as a decentralized system of
voluntary donation and solicitation for individual hardship cases. All these charities, including
individual cases, are endorsed by a leading rabbi.. “The Rabbis' signatures attest to the veracity of
the information.” [Landau 1993, p.262].

       Charity is ubiquitous and interest-free loans abound, both in money and in kind:
       “..just as `Torah' is not a select or elitist pursuit, but embraces the entire community, so
       too `Charity' does not merely, or even mainly, follow the classical pattern of rich-to-poor
       assistance. Almost everyone in the Israeli haredi [Ultra-Orthodox] world is a recipient of
       charity, in one form or another. Yet at the same time the haredim give charity too,
       participating in cash or kindness in the cost of this universal Torah-learning.” [Landau
       1993, p. 255]
       “But the most important money-saver for the haredim is money itself: the availability of
       countless free-loan [funds].. .. where one can borrow hundreds, and in some cases
       thousands of dollars without interest. ..the administrators are all volunteers; there are no
       office expenses since there are no offices; and hence the only overheads are bad debts - of
       which there are remarkably few.” [Landau 1993, p. 259]




       9
           Menachem Friedman, quoted in Landau [1993], p. 255.
                                                                                                                   6

       How can a community solve the principal-agent problems associated with such generous
mutual insurance? I return to that question in Section III.

Subsidy
This paper examines the response of Israeli Ultra-Orthodox to subsidies. Understanding subsidies
directed at the Israeli community requires a capsule survey of their role in Israeli politics. Ultra-
Orthodox political influence is mostly due to their status as a swing voting block in parliament.
Ultra-orthodox politicians have been able to credibly threaten to vote with either large block, the
right or left, on foreign policy.10 This status has allowed disproportionate influence in every
government since the first right-center coalition was formed in 1977. Influence was translated into
a sharp increase in government support to the Ultra-Orthodox community in 1977. Support
includes stipends for married men in yeshiva, direct funding of yeshivas, reduced tuition in
preschool, elementary school and boarding schools, reduced property taxes and reduced health
insurance premiums. Ultra-Orthodox pressure has also helped increase the generosity of various
general support systems from which they benefit disproportionately, most notably child
allowances, which have become increasingly convex in the number of children.11 The Ultra-
Orthodox have pursued a contentious political agenda, attempting to impose religious restrictions
through secular law in such areas as dietary restrictions (kashrut), sabbath observance and
abortion. They have also insisted on an Orthodox definition of Judaism in Israeli civil law. This
constitutes an important and emotional issue in Israel and among Jews abroad since Israel’s “Law
of Return” grants any (recognized) Jew citizenship upon arrival.
        In 1984 a Sephardi Ultra-Orthodox party organized nationally, partially in reaction to
preferential treatment given to Ashkenazi (European) Ultra-Orthodox by the Ashkenazi-
dominated institutions and political party.12 It immediately became the largest Ultra-Orthodox
party, drawing votes from traditional Sephardi Jews who had supported non-Ultra-Orthodox
parties. It became the fulcrum of Israeli politics and rapidly translated its political leverage into
sharp increases in funding of its own system of schools and social welfare institutions.13
         The most controversial point of contact between the Ultra-Orthodox and secular society in
Israel is draft deferments and exemptions granted to full time yeshiva students. Deferment of
regular service (three years) and reserve duty (about 30 days annually in the 1980s) can be
extended and eventually converted to an exemption by remaining in yeshiva till age 41, or till age
35 with five children [Ilan 1998c]. A cap on the number of exemptions was lifted by the


        10
           Ilan [1988a] summarizes a number of studies indicating that the Ultra-Orthodox hold uniformly right-
wing views on foreign policy. This did not prevent coalition with the left wing Labour party in the early 1990s and
support of the Oslo accords, apparently because foreign policy is considered secondary to domestic religious
issues.
        11
          Ilan [1998b] estimates that an Ultra-Orthodox family with six children is eligible for 6,500 NIS ($1850)
per month in government support from all sources.
        12
             Sephardi, which literally means “Spanish,” is a common misnomer for Jews from Arab countries.
        13
             Friedman [1991, chapter 11] provides a detailed description of the rise of this political movement.
                                                                                                                    7

government in 1977. By 1988 the number of deferments reached 7.5 percent of males newly
eligible for the draft. These deferments and exemptions are granted only to full time yeshiva
students, who are liable to be drafted if they work even part time.
         As subsidies to the community increased, durations of yeshiva attendance lengthened,
deepening a serious social welfare problem. Figure I illustrates increased labor force
nonparticipation due to yeshiva attendance. The proportion of prime-aged Ultra-Orthodox men
(aged 25-54) not working because of full time yeshiva attendance rose from 41 percent in 1980
to 60 percent by 1996.14 These levels are unprecedented among Jews15 and far exceed yeshiva
attendance abroad, where young men rarely remain past age 25. The combination of increased
yeshiva attendance and rapid population growth has resulted in a sharp increase in the number of
Israeli children not supported by their father’s earnings. The Figure reports that the proportion of
Israeli children with a (labor force nonparticipant) father in yeshiva more than doubled between
1980 and 1996, from 2.7 percent to 5.9 percent.
        Families with fathers in yeshiva have very low incomes. Table I reports income by source
for households with a father (aged 25-54) in yeshiva in the mid 1990s. The average family in this
category is large, with 4.5 children at home. Their monthly income in 1995 averaged about $1150
(US) or 3,463 NIS, or 42 percent of the income of the average two-parent Israeli family16 (which
supports only 2.1 children). Measured income does not include imputed rent for a population that
generally owns its own housing. It’s worth stressing, though, that the common practice of
conditioning marriage on the provision of an apartment by parents exists precisely because young
Ultra-Orthodox couples cannot afford to pay rent. The second to last row of panel A reports that
the Israeli poverty line in 1995 for a household with 6.6 members was 3,777 NIS. Thus the
average family with a prime-aged father in yeshiva lives in poverty.17
        Families with fathers in yeshiva are extremely dependent on government support. Only 18
percent of family income is earned, almost all of that coming from the wife’s earnings. Transfers
from institutions (other than the National Insurance Institute) account for 39 percent of income.
This is almost entirely stipends granted to yeshiva attendants. Child allowances make up another
32 percent. These transfers, mostly from government, account for at least 70 percent of the
income of these families, not including pensions, disability and other National Insurance programs.


         14
            Yeshiva attendance may be somewhat, but not grossly, exaggerated. A government commission reports
that among yeshiva students suspected of violating the deferment agreement, 40 percent in violation, either by
working or by simply being in a different yeshiva. The army claims that figure to be 20 percent [Ilan 1998c]. The
violation rate in a random sample of yeshiva students is presumably lower.
         15
              Friedman [1991] describes the history of yeshiva attendance in central and eastern Europe.
         16
            Under-reporting of income would bias estimates downwards. Yeshiva nonparticipants may be more
likely to under-report income since, in principle, they face larger potential penalties than do most taxpayers: they
could lose both their stipends and draft deferments as well as having to pay taxes. In practice there is evidence that
these sanctions are not strictly enforced [Ilan 1998d].
         17
           The poverty line is meant to be compared with income net of income taxes, which is even lower than
the reported figure.
                                                                                                                     8

Comparing panels A and B reveals that, (even if the mysterious residual term in panel B is treated
as government support - which is quite likely,) the level of public support per family more than
doubled between the early 1980s and the mid 1990s.

Puzzle #1: Why remain in yeshiva so long?
Why do men chose yeshiva over work when their families are in poverty? Consider some
conventional explanations, as a prelude to the “club good” approach.
        An analysis of yeshiva as a human capital investment only amplifies the question. Table II
reports estimates of a human capital wage regression in 1979-1982 and 1993-1996. The second
column in each panel reports separate coefficients measuring the (market) return to schooling for
secular and yeshiva education. While the return to secular schooling rose in Israel over the 1980s
and early 1990s from 7.8 to 9.4 percent, the return to yeshiva education was low and possibly
decreasing, from 2.3 to 1.8 percent. Relative to secular education, which is a remarkably good
investment in Israel, yeshiva has become an increasingly poor choice.18 Yet Ultra-Orthodox men
are choosing it in increasing numbers and for longer durations of study. Not only is the choice of
yeshiva over work puzzling, so too is the choice of yeshiva over secular education.
        The first guess of most Israelis is that high rates of yeshiva attendance are due to draft
deferment rules, which tax the first hour of work for a yeshiva student with months (if not years)
of military service.19 Yet the data contradict this explanation. If a father were extending yeshiva
attendance only to exploit a draft deferral, once an exemption is granted he would leave yeshiva
for the labor force. Exemptions are achieved at age 35 for men with at least five children and at
age 41 regardless of the number of children. Those critical ages are marked with vertical lines in
Figure II, which plots Labor Force nonparticipation due to yeshiva attendance against age. Not
only does yeshiva attendance not disappear at age 41, there is no sharp decline of yeshiva
attendance rates at age 35 or 41. Table III reports that in the early 1990s, fully 46 percent of
Ultra-Orthodox men aged 41-45, and 65.5 percent of those aged 35-40 with 5 children, chose
yeshiva over work (or workseeking) despite having a draft exemption.
         The choice of studies over work is especially puzzling considering the high marginal
utility of income in a large family.20 A calculation of predicted wages based on estimates from
Table II predicts that, at age 35, a yeshiva student could earn more than twice his monthly stipend

         18
            The standard caveat about causal interpretation of regression coefficients applies. For instance, if years
of yeshiva schooling proxy for an unobserved preference for work which allows study during work hours, low
wages may reflect a compensating differential and bias the estimated coefficient downward. It seems unlikely
that the entire 7.6 percentage point gap between the returns to secular and yeshiva education can be due to such
biases.
         19
           This was the view of Berman and Klinov [1997], who recommended a change in draft deferment rules
for yeshiva study, arguing that the deferment be decoupled from the requirement not to work, either by giving an
unconditional exemption to Ultra-Orthodox Jews or by abolishing the exemption. This paper overturns our
previous logic, arguing (in Section V below) that an unconditional exemption would lead to increased distortions.
         20
           Households headed by yeshiva attendants aged 41-45 average 6.4 children at home. Average income
for households headed by yeshiva attendants aged 41-45 is 4,536 NIS/month (at 1995 prices) as compared to a
poverty line of 5,196 NIS (1993-1996 pooled sample).
                                                                                                                9

by working. That ratio would rise to about 250 percent by age 45 with 10 years of labor market
experience. A 25 year old yeshiva student could earn twice the stipend by working, would incur
perhaps a month a year of reserve duty till his exemption (generally at age 35), and would gain
returns to experience which would increase future earnings. Compounding the puzzle, beginning
in their late thirties, a typical Ultra-Orthodox couple will have children marrying. That rarely
occurs without the parents guaranteeing minimal financial security by purchasing an apartment for
the young couple, since the groom will be in yeshiva and the couple will be too poor to pay rent.
Since the two sets of parents typically split the cost of apartments, an Ultra-Orthodox man at age
40 faces the prospect of buying 7 or 8 half-apartments, (at a minimum of $50,000 per child) over
the next two decades.
        Could extended yeshiva attendance be due to preferences, which is to say the sheer love
of learning, or to the unique norms21 of the Ultra-Orthodox community? That explanation is
inconsistent with the behavior of Ultra-Orthodox in much wealthier communities abroad. In those
communities, who are often followers of the same rebbe, men seldom attend yeshiva past their
mid-twenties. For example, in the Montreal Hasidic community only 6 percent of men aged 25 or
older attend yeshiva full time [Shahar et al 1997]. A taste- or norms-based explanation would also
require rapidly changing tastes. Durations of yeshiva study are currently much longer in Israel
than they were as recently as the early 1980s (see Figure II) and even those durations were
unprecedented among the Ultra-Orthodox in central and eastern Europe [Friedman 1991].22
        Perhaps the puzzle can be solved with a hybrid explanation, involving offer wages and
norms? Granted, offer wages for Ultra-Orthodox are probably higher abroad than in Israel, but
could they be high enough to explain entry into the labor force 15-20 years earlier? Introducing
the subsidy inherent in draft deferments still leaves a puzzle: A thirty six year old Ultra-Orthodox
man in Israel already exempt from the draft and soon facing the prospect of raising $350,000 to
pay for apartments chooses to remain in Yeshiva for 5 more years on a $400 a month stipend,
rather earning over twice that amount by working. In contrast, a twenty five year old Ultra-
Orthodox man in Montreal, with much smaller obligations, chooses to work. Casual empiricism,
combined with a reasonable marginal utility of income, suggest that the difference in wages
between Ultra-Orthodox men in Montreal or Brooklyn and those in Israel is much too small to
explain the difference in employment rates.
        The empirical failure of conventional labor supply theory motivates the club good
approach, drawn from the Economics of Religion, in the following section. I examine the testable
implications of this approach for the birth of Ultra-Orthodoxy and for fertility in Section IV.




        21
             See Akerlof and Kranton [2000]for an economist’s view of social norms and identity.
        22
         Another possibility is that Ultra-Orthodox men from abroad come to Israel for yeshiva, biasing the
comparison. This was important in the early 1980s, when about one quarter of Israeli yeshiva nonparticipants were
North American. That proportion dropped to 7 percent by 1995/96, which is too small to significantly bias the
comparison. Thus, the increase in yeshiva nonparticipation among Israeli natives is actually understated in Figure
I.
                                                                                                                  10

                            III. EFFICIENT PROHIBITIONS AND SACRIFICES
Solving the puzzle of Ultra-Orthodox labor supply requires revisiting another puzzling
phenomenon: prohibitions and sacrifices among religious sects. This section reviews Iannaccone’s
[1992] model of efficient religious prohibitions and sacrifices, then extends it to explain the
response of labor supply to subsidies.
         Prohibitions and sacrifices are common among religious groups. Prohibitions refer to
forbidden behaviors, such as dietary restrictions, sabbath observance, dress codes, head shaving,
marital fidelity, restrictions on sexual behavior, or refusal of medical care. Sacrifices, in contrast,
involve irreversible acts such as destruction of resources. A biblical example is burnt offerings. In
the recent history of European Jewry, a circumcision irreversibly labeled a child as Jewish, an act
that might put his life at risk by destroying the option of pretending to be a gentile. A vow of
fidelity or abstinence is also a form of sacrifice, since it represents a permanent restriction of
activities. Years of volunteer activity required of Mormons can be though of as a sacrifice of time,
especially considering the foregone opportunity to accumulate human capital. Limiting choices
and destroying or relinquishing resources is puzzling to an economist, yet people voluntarily join
groups which enforce prohibitions and require sacrifices.
         A social interaction model offers an explanation for these phenomena. Group members
derive utility from time spent in religious activities, R, and from secular goods, S. They also gain
utility from group “quality,” Q, the average amount of time that other members spend doing R,
which is an externality for other members. Formally,




N is exogenous, for now. For example, praying is much more satisfying the more participants
there are, especially when the 10th man arrives to make a prayer quorum (minyan). The same is
true of studying,23 observing the Sabbath and other time-intensive activities.24 They are much
more enjoyable if the neighbors do them as well.25
       Perhaps the most important externalities to religious activity in the Ultra-Orthodox
community are from religious acts of charity or mutual aid, which provide mutual insurance. We
observe remarkable altruism in donation of both time and money to community charities, which


        23
             Heilman [1983] stresses the camaraderie and fraternal aspects of informal study groups, or lernen.
        24
          On the time intensity of Jewish religious observances, see Chiswick [1995]. She discusses efforts by the
Conservative, Reform and Reconstructionist movements in the U.S. to create time-efficient Jewish experiences to
accomodate the increasing shadow price of time among Jews.
        25
           This interactive structure is common to many empirical applications. For example, Landers et al [1996]
find evidence of signalling behavior through choice of hours in law firms with revenue sharing among partners.
                                                                                                                   11

provide insurance to community members in the form of job search, spouse search, and transfers
of food, clothing, medical services and money. (Jewish law requires a minimum donation of 10%
of income to charity, though the donation of time is probably more valuable for the Ultra-
Orthodox. This analysis emphasizes the importance of time-intensive charity in group quality and
omits charitable donations from Q for simplicity.) 26
       Community members gain insurance from charitable acts of others in times of need. These
are nonmarket transactions, in the sense that they are not mediated by prices. These acts are often
unobserved, (anonymous charity is traditionally most esteemed,) which would frustrate the
organization of a market mechanism. This logic should be familiar to observers of other groups in
which members benefit from the (sometimes unobservable) actions of others, such as families,
workplaces, University departments, kibbutzim, teams in sport and military units.27
        All these examples of externalities, particularly mutual insurance, are excludable. That is,
they can be limited to club members. This property distinguishes a club good from a general social
interaction model, a distinction that becomes important below.
         Members maximize utility subject to time and budget constraints. An allocation of time, T,
is split between religious activity, R, and work hours, H. Income is earned at wage rate w and
entirely spent on consumption of the secular good S, at price p. In a competitive equilibrium
religious activity will be inefficiently low, as individuals ignore the benefits of their activities to
others, as illustrated in Figure III.28 The labor supply curve to the right indicates the competitive
equilibrium choice of work hours, H=T-R, at the wage w/p. The curve to the left indicates the
efficient labor supply schedule that a social planner would choose. She would prefer less work
and more religious activity (at R*).29

Efficient Prohibition
Welfare of group members can be improved by increasing the average level of R, either by
subsidizing it or by taxing the alternative use of time, H. Religious groups often encourage R with


           26
            Mutual insurance may explain the attraction of sects more generally in an economy with growing
inequities. In a sample of developed countries in the 1980s, Gottschalk and Joyce [1998] find income inequality in
Israel to be second only to that in the United States.
           27
                Ben-Porath [1980] approaches Sociology with a similar broad definition of nonmarket exchange.
           28
                Formally, the full income budget constraint is wT = pSi + wRi and the social welfare optimum is given
by R* in


where the two terms are the marginal rates of substitution between religious activity and consumption and
between group quality and consumption, respectively. The competitive equilibrium choice of R ignores this last
term.
           29
           Group quality, Q, serves to amplify the labor supply elasticity in the upward sloping segment of the labor
supply (Figure III) if R and Q are complements. A change in wages has both the conventional direct effect on
leisure (hours worked) and an indirect effect in the same direction through its effect on Q (which is just R in a
symmetric Nash equilibrium.). This is the “social multiplier” effect emphasized by Becker and Murphy [2000].
                                                                                                             12

eternal promises and the respect of one’s peers. Yet R may be hard to subsidize if it is
unobservable, like anonymous charity. Alternatively, consider a community that can literally
control the price level faced by members through a tax. To achieve the social welfare optimum
they would lower the real wage by imposing a tax - = p* - p, which induces a choice of R* > R.

        A group without tax authority could impose and enforce prohibitions on types of secular
consumption, thus inducing members to work less and spend more time at religious activities.
Religious prohibitions can be understood as extreme but enforceable forms of taxation on secular
activity. These may make all club members better off. More generally, contact with the secular
world substitutes for club activities. Thus prohibitions that limit these contacts induce members to
spend more time in religious and other club activities that have positive externalities. Exclusion
from access to insurance or to other club services is a viable form of enforcement.30
         This logic provides a rationalization for many forms of religious prohibition. For example,
Sabbath restrictions induce members to spend time together on the Sabbath, dietary restrictions
decrease the ability of group members to socialize with nonmembers,31 and so forth. This also
explains the use of dress codes, which aid enforcement by making community members readily
identifiable. As in the military, being caught out of uniform triggers sanctions.
        Groups that place many restrictions on secular activities are often termed “sects” by
sociologists [Weber 1946]. Adam Smith [1776], in his chapter on Church and State, uses that
term to describe 18th century Christian sects. He proposed that secular “gaiety” be subsidized in
order to undermine the influence of sects with “disagreeably strict” moral codes. Smith could just
as well have been describing the birth of Ultra-Orthodoxy in the late 18th century, as described in
Section IV below.
        An efficient club may attempt to reduce enforcement costs by lobbying the government to
apply the appropriate restrictions, even extending them to the entire population. For instance the
Ultra-Orthodox in Israel have pursued legal methods to a) restrict retail trade and even travel on
the Sabbath; b) enforce dietary restrictions; c) outlaw civil marriage and d) not recognize
conversions conducted by other Jewish religious streams under the Law of Return. Of course,
nonmembers (the non-Ultra Orthodox community) will object to taxes on S as they do not benefit
from the induced increase in club quality.
        The induced friction between club members and nonmembers resulting from a political
agenda, for instance, may cause antagonism towards club members. An interesting implication is
that secular antagonism toward the Ultra-Orthodox could be desirable and efficient for that
community if it discourages secular activity by club members. Antagonism provides another


        30
           Kandel and Lazear [1992] analyze peer pressure as an enforcement mechanism in firms where workers
effort have external effects on the productivity of others.
        31
          That insight is not new. Hyman [1992] cites a French review of Jewish village life published in 1852,
        "how [can we] combine together prescriptions that had as their goal the prevention of and mixing of the
        races with the sentiments of fraternity necessary vis-a-vis fellow countrymen and non-Jewish friends?"
        [Archive israélites 13 (1852): 228, italics my own.]
                                                                                                                     13

mechanism by which higher levels of religious activity are induced by taxing secular alternatives.
In that sense this is a theory of efficient intolerance. Efficient mutual antagonism between two
clubs is an immediate extension.32

Efficient Sacrifice
Sacrifices (irreversible acts like circumcision, burnt offerings, and donation of time) cannot be
explained as efficient prohibitions with the logic above, since they don’t tax a secular good. They
can be explained as a sort of initiation rite which signals unobserved type [Camerer 1988].
        Applying a simplified form of Iannaccone’s [1992] model, I introduce unobserved
heterogeneity by having high wage (type 2) and low wage (type 1) individuals. High wage
individuals choose less religious activity as it is relatively more expensive for them, i.e., R2 < R1.
(Heterogeneity could alternatively be in preference for religious activities at the margin.
Heterogeneity in wages is chosen only to simplify the exposition.)
        High wage - low R individuals would like to join the high R club and benefit from their
high average level of religious activity (Q1 = R1). Members of the high R (low wage) club would
rather not admit the high wage types, as the reduction in the average level of religious activity will
reduce club quality. Since access to the externality is excludable, the high R (low wage) group can
solve this free rider problem by organizing a club with a costly initiation rite, or sacrifice, which
will successfully exclude low R (high wage) individuals from joining, keeping Q1 high, at R1 .
Unlike R, the sacrifice benefits no-one except through its role as a signal. Though type is
unobserved, a well-designed initiation rite will force individuals to signal their type by their
willingness to sacrifice time.
        Figure IV illustrates the imposition of an efficient sacrifice of time and the resulting
increase in utility for the low wage club.33 (For a formal derivation see Appendix 1.) The
horizontal axis shows the allocation of time between work hours, religious activity and sacrifice.
The vertical axis measures utility. The two higher curves represent the utility of high wage types
and the two lower curves the utility of low wage types. High wage types in a low Q (Q 2 )
environment choose point A2. Low wage types in a low Q (Q2) environment choose A1 at a
higher level of R than high wage types. Low wage types improve their outcome by establishing a
club which admits only members who sacrifice an amount of time *. By excluding high wage
types they achieve the higher level of utility at B1, where the sacrifice of time is more than
compensated by higher quality (Q =Q1). A sacrifice inducing only low wage types to sacrifice is a
separating equilibrium. The efficient sacrifice is the smallest  that induces separation, leaving
high wage types indifferent between high Q and sacrifice (B2), and low Q without sacrifice (A2).
        The low wage, high R group is better off with the institution of a sacrifice and will accept
anyone who makes the sacrifice into the group, since a sacrifice reliably signals a high level of
religious activity. This setup is analogous to other forms of costly sacrifices which signal type,


        32
             Of course, mutual antagonism may not be desirable for unaffiliated bystanders.
        33
             Figures IV and V are constructed by simulation using the function U(S,R,Q) = [S + (RQ(1-))](1/).
                                                                                                                 14

such as initiation rites in the military, hazing in fraternities, Spence signaling in schooling, or
frivolous engagement gifts [Camerer 1988].

Subsidy and Sacrifice
In the presence of sacrifice, a subsidy to the club is largely wasted as it induces a larger sacrifice,
further distorting labor supply. Figure V illustrates this amplified distortion. The unsubsidized
separating equilibrium is described by points A2 and B1 (as in Figure IV). A subsidy enhances the
utility of club membership, which would shift the point B2 vertically upwards and destroy the
separating equilibrium if the sacrifice K were unchanged. To protect the club from low R free-
riders the efficient sacrifice * is increased to *’= * +  which is just enough to keep high
wage types from joining. (They are indifferent between joining (at C2) and not joining (at A2)).
That is, a subsidy induces a countervailing increase in the optimal sacrifice of , a tax on club
members which further distorts labor supply.
        To illustrate the extreme distortion due to subsidizing an exclusive club, consider a subsidy
which potential entrants value more than club members. In that case the efficient countervailing
increase in sacrifice, , will be exactly enough to dissuade entry of high wage types, but makes
club members worse off with the subsidy than they were without it. (This is not the case illustrated
in the Figure, in which club members have a net benefit from the subsidy. Their utility is higher at
the new optimal choice (C1) than it was at the old (B1).)
         This modest insight is an innovation on Iannaccone [1992]. In the Ultra-Orthodox context,
such a subsidy could come in the form of transfers or pro-Ultra-Orthodox legislation. Military
service, a tax on nonmembers from which club members are exempt, has the same distortionary
effect. It exacerbates the free-rider problem by making the club more attractive.

Yeshiva Attendance as Sacrifice
Now reconsider the labor supply puzzle of Section II. Could yeshiva attendance have an element
of sacrifice in it? It is a time-intensive activity which provides negligible training for work. Thus
an efficient way to separate high from low wage types is by asking them to forgo years of
employment (or secular education). Furthermore, this explanation is consistent with the cross-
national and historic pattern of yeshiva attendance. Simply put, in Brooklyn, perhaps 3-5 years of
yeshiva after high school are sufficient to signal commitment to the community and solve the free-
rider problem. In Israel, if a man leaves yeshiva “early,” at age 35, it’s unclear if he is really
committed (i.e. a low wage type) or if he has remained in yeshiva up till now merely to avoid
military service and collect other subsidies. So he must remain a few more years after his draft
exemption, typically five more, to signal his commitment.34 Comparing the subsidized community




        34
            Yoram Weiss raised a question associated with this explanation, namely that by age 40 the community
is so familiar with an individual that there should be little left to signal. A possible answer comes from the
attitudes of students: A typical older kollel (yeshiva) students’ explanation for his yeshiva attendance is that it
insulates him from the corrupting influences of the secular world. When asked if at the age of 40, with 6 children,
he was still a candidate for defection or backsliding, he answered: “Of course, I haven’t been tested till I leave.”
                                                                                                                  15

in Israel to that in New York or Montreal, this argument implies that the effect of subsidies has
been to delay entry into the labor force by 15-20 years!
        The yeshiva-as-sacrifice explanation is also consistent with the historical pattern of yeshiva
attendance in Israel. Comparing panels A and B of Table I for families of adult yeshiva students
indicates that the level of subsidy (the sum of transfers from institutions and the “residual”) more
than doubled between the early 1980s and the mid 1990s. As subsidies per capita increased,35
yeshiva attendance increased by half (Figure I). The analysis described in Figure V shows exactly
that pattern: Increased subsidy exacerbates the free-rider problem and induces increased sacrifice,
raising the average age of yeshiva completion to 40.36
        An alternative explanation for self-sacrifice expressed by the Ultra-Orthodox is that
hardship builds character in preparation for later challenges in life.37 This explanation suffers from
an empirical difficulty. Why would the current, highly-subsidized Ultra-Orthodox community in
Israel require more character-building than the less-subsidized community abroad or the same
community when they were less subsidized two decades earlier in Israel?38

Testable Implication: Differential Growth Rates of Yeshiva Attendance
The hypothesis that increased nonparticipation due to yeshiva attendance is due to subsidized
sacrifice has a testable implication. Recall that subsidies to Sephardi Ultra-Orthodox families
increased beginning in 1984, with the arrival of their own political party, while support for
Ashkenazi Ultra-Orthodox was already high by the late 1970s. Since the mid 1980s subsidies have
increased for both groups but more quickly for the former. The subsidized sacrifice mechanism
predicts that yeshiva attendance should have increase faster for Sephardi Ultra-Orthodox than for
Ashkenazi since the early 1980s.
       Table IV reports yeshiva attendance by origin for Ultra-Orthodox Jews in the early 1980s
and the mid 1990s. Sephardi Ultra-Orthodox Jews had lower yeshiva attendance rates in the early


         35
              See Berman and Klinov [1997] for other evidence of increased subsidy.
         36
             Forty is also the age at which a signal of commitment may be the most valuable, as a father will soon
depend on the community to raise funds for apartments to allow his children to marry. Friedman [1991] reports on
articles in the Ultra-Orthodox press documenting the stress faced by middle-aged Yeshiva graduates who must
finance their children’s marriage. Landau [1993] reports on a massive philanthropic effort to provide fathers with
such funds. Before their bankruptcy the Reichmann brothers reportedly provided thousands of dollars to Ultra-
Orthodox newlyweds [Landau 1993]. In conversation, a number of sources estimated that a needy Ultra-Orthodox
father could solicit about $30,000 in a fund-raising tour of the diaspora, with the proper letter from a rebbe.
         37
           This argument dates back at least as far as the Musar movement of the Lithuanian Yeshiva tradition. It
was supported, with some qualification, by Rabbi Avraham Yeshaya Karelitz of Kossov, the Hazon Ish, the
foremost leader of Ultra-Orthodoxy from the end of the Second World War till his death in 1953 [Kaplan 1992].
         38
            Yet another candidate explanation is that yeshiva is a costly signal of status in a tournament where the
prizes are good marriage partners. This approach is formalized in the “prestige-is-status” model of Cole et al
[1992]. This may be a good explanation for the function of yeshiva in traditional Jewish communities up till the
mid 18th century, where either wealth or scholarship were necessary to be part of the elite [Katz 1961, p. 23]. Yet
this approach cannot explain the current puzzle of men remaining in yeshiva 20 years after marriage.
                                                                                                                 16

1980s than did the Ashkenazi, a pattern consistent with a lower rate of subsidy. They increased
their yeshiva attendance (and decreased labor force participation) by 17.9 percentage points over
a little more than a decade! That increase is 10.3 percentage points faster than the increase in
attendance by the Ashkenazi group. These “difference in difference” estimates are shy of
statistical significance but certainly consistent with the prediction that faster increases in subsidies
induce massive reductions in labor supply.
        To summarize, the club good model is capable of rationalizing the puzzling drop in labor
supply among Israeli Ultra-Orthodox men. The faster drop among Sephardi Ultra-Orthodox is
consistent with its testable implication. Subsidies have sharply reduced labor supply. The model
implies that any action which makes membership more attractive induces an increase in sacrifice
and will probably further reduce labor supply. The discriminatory nature of these policies makes
them inefficient,39 as they induce increased sacrifice by making membership more attractive.


    IV. TWO MORE PUZZLES: THE BIRTH OF ULTRA-ORTHODOXY AND RISING FERTILITY
While the club-good approach was chosen to explain the labor supply puzzle, it can be extended
to provides insight into two other puzzling aspects of Ultra-Orthodox behavior. This section first
examines the paradoxical birth of Ultra-Orthodoxy: Why did a time-demanding form of religious
practice develop during a period of rising wage opportunities? I then turn to the anomaly of high
and rising fertility rates, in contrast to the fertility transition experienced by most ethnic groups in
the modern world.

Puzzle #2: The Birth of Ultra-Orthodoxy
Most European Jews reacted to the rising wage opportunities provided by secular emancipation in
the 18th and 19th centuries by shifting to less time-demanding forms of religious practice, ranging
from assimilation to Reform Judaism. In contrast, Orthodoxy and Ultra-Orthodoxy increased the
stringency of time-intensive religious practice. The Ultra-Orthodox were not only conservative
about rejecting new forms of consumption (footnote 8), but amplified existing restrictions (such
as the dietary restrictions), changed existing customs (dress codes, speaking Yiddish) into
religious acts, and isolated themselves from the larger Jewish community.40 Historians interpret


        39
           This essentially argues against state law favoring any religious group. It relates to Iannaccone’s [1997]
more general point that competition between religious groups reduces their ability to be prohibitive and intolerant.
The question dates back to Smith’s debate with Hume over the welfare effects of state-supported religions.
“[Hume] argues that religious laissez-faire generates powerful negative externalities, as religious suppliers
promote superstition and hostility toward the members of all competing religions, leading ultimately to civil strife
and political instability...”[Iannacconne 1997 p. 112]. Smith argues that free entry induces competition, which
forces entrants and incumbents to be tolerant of each other. The absence of religious strife in the U.S., which
separates church and state, is interpreted as supporting evidence. Berman [2000] develops this point in the Israeli
context.
        40
          For example, a religious pronouncement called the “Pesach Din,” (Hungary 1865) by a group of Ultra-
Orthodox leaders forbade their followers from entering a synagogue which included any of a number of
innovations typical of German Orthodoxy (for example, German spoken during the service, a stage at the front of
                                                                                                                    17

increased stringency of practice as “retrenchment,” a protective reaction to emancipation.41 That
view is supported by the parallel history of Jews from the Muslim world. They did not develop
Orthodoxy or Ultra-Orthodoxy until faced with the option of assimilation into secular Western
culture upon arrival in Israel in the mid 20th century.
Yet the historian’s explanation is the economists’ paradox. Political and economic
emancipation arrived together for 19th century European Jewry, offering higher wages through
access to the gentile world. After thousands of years of community solidarity and relatively stable,
uniform religious practice in Europe, why would a subculture split off to adopt a more time-
intensive form of practice precisely when the value of time increased? It would seem that
retrenchment in a more stringent fortress of practices would only encourage attrition.
         The logic of prohibitions as efficient taxes can explain defensive retrenchment. As wages
rise, so does the optimal tax rate. In Figure III an increase in the wage w to w’ implies an
increase in the efficient tax from -= p-p* to -’= p-p**, because of the convexity of the labor
supply curve.42 In order to induce a given increase in R, larger taxes are necessary at higher wages
as the income effect makes labor supply less responsive to wages.
        Interpreting prohibitions as taxes, this mechanism provides an explanation for the puzzling
birth of Ultra-Orthodoxy. Despite increased real wages, a movement called Orthodoxy evolved in
the late 18th century which increased the stringency of religious observance, demanding more time
of their adherents than did traditional Judaism. Hassidism developed at about the same time as a
more time-intensive and spiritual form of Judaism. A radical group of Orthodox formed the
Misnagdim (literally, the opponents - of Hassidism) or “Lithuanians,” who demanded even greater
stringency. Hassidim and Misnagdim together form the current Ultra-Orthodox, who are
distinguished from the rest of Judaism by the stringency of time-intensive prohibitions and
sacrifices demanded of members. The argument above suggests that these increases in the time-
demands of religious practice can be interpreted as an efficient mechanism for defending the
quality of communities against the increasing shadow price of members’ time.
        The model also provides some insight into the speed at which religious practice diffused in
response to increased real wages. Imagine heterogeneity in wages and a club that expels
individuals who fail to comply with the prohibitions. As wages rise, the proportion of individuals
who prefer untaxed wages to club affiliation is likely to also increase. High wage individuals
would choose to self-insure through savings and find market alternatives for mutual insurance and


the hall rather than in the center, male choirs, a structure resembling a steeple.)
         41
           See, for example, Friedman [1991], Heilman [1992], Katz [1961] and Silber [1992]. As evidence,
Heilman presents quotations from various Ultra-Orthodox leaders of the time. Katz [1961], Ellenson [1992] and
Silber [1992] make the same claim about Orthodoxy. German Orthodoxy and especially Hungarian Orthodoxy
certainly had elements of increased segregation in them and increased stringency of religious prohibitions. Silber
[1992] interprets early Ultra-Orthodoxy as an extreme offshoot of Hungarian Orthodoxy.
         42
           In the diagram the horizontal distance between the labor supply curves also contributes to the size of
the optimal consumption tax. The gap between the curves does not always increases monotonically in H, as
drawn.
                                                                                                                 18

other services formerly provided by the club. Attrition is accelerated by increased stringency of
prohibitions. This attrition may take the form of assimilation, with associated migration to cities,43
or of joining a less stringent club (with a lower level of externalities or “social cohesion”).44 Thus,
this mechanism of simultaneous attrition and retrenchment rationalizes the development of all four
cultural movements, assimilation, Reform , Orthodoxy and Ultra-Orthodoxy45 as diffuse reactions
to an (ideologically neutral) increase in real wages.
        Are there alternative explanations for the birth of Ultra-Orthodoxy? Unlike the official
histories of other sects, the Ultra-Orthodox do not attribute their origin to an epiphany. They
describe their movement as a reaction to the birth of Reform Judaism and the accompanying
danger of assimilation.46 This explanation differs from that of the historians only in that it has
protagonists, namely the insidious Reformers and Assimilationists.
        That idea that prohibitions increase with wages is consistent with the widespread belief
that the stringency of religious practice continues to increase among the Ultra-Orthodox. Many
observers have remarked that the current generation is more stringent than their parents. The
description of Ultra-Orthodoxy as the protective reaction of a traditional community against the
incursion of markets is common to other religious sects, a theme I return to in the conclusions.
        The other line of defense Ultra-Orthodoxy developed against the incursion of markets was
the expansion of yeshiva study, first among Lithuanians and later among Hassidim. The prototype
was the Volzhin yeshiva in Lithuania, established in 1802 as a boarding school and supported by
donations from outside the community. Teenage boys studied the holy texts and commentaries in
an effort to protect themselves from corrupting secular influences [Friedman 1991, p. 11]. In
contrast, secular studies beyond literacy and numeracy at a junior high school level are viewed as
a necessary evil. The fact that widespread Yeshiva study is contemporaneous with emancipation is
consistent with the idea that signals of commitment were not necessary until emancipation
allowed heterogeneity to express itself through selective attrition.

Destruction
In hindsight, the agenda of preserving a traditional way of life had tragic consequences. Unlike
millions of European Jews, the Ultra-Orthodox rejected the option of emigration (mostly to
America) in the beginning of the 20th century, stating explicitly that America was too attractive a
secular culture. Likewise, the Ultra-Orthodox declined to join the generally secular Zionist


        43
          Migration to cities among central European Jews was indeed concentrated among the wealthy and
more secular [Herman Schwab Jewish Rural Communities in Germany (London: Cooper, 1956), cited in Hyman
1993].
        44
            The prediction of this model that wage opportunities are intrinsically lower for the more observant is
only true in this simple version of the model. More generally (an in Iannaccone [1992]) all that’s necessary is that
the observant have a greater preference for religious activity over consumption at the margin.
        45
             Conservative Judaism would eventually evolve as a middle ground between Reform and Orthodoxy.
        46
           Haim Sofer writes “Faith is endangered on all sides..” [so].. “Rabbis should find ways to cling to even
the most inconsequential traditions.” in Silber [1992], p. 48. This process is also well described in Katz [1995].
                                                                                                                       19

migration to Israel in the 1930s. As a consequence, more than any other segment of Judaism, the
Ultra-Orthodox were trapped in Europe to be nearly annihilated by the Nazis.
        In the aftermath of the Holocaust, Ultra-Orthodox Jews established communities of
survivors, with centers in New York, Jerusalem, Bnei Brak (in metropolitan Tel Aviv),
Amsterdam and London. These communities regard themselves as a pious elite, charged with the
sacred duty of perpetuating the correct form of devotion by reestablishing their shattered
European cultural tradition.47 Simon [1978] compares their view of other Jews to the view Black
Muslims hold of other blacks: they pity those who lack the moral strength to preserve a sacred
tradition against the forces of secular assimilation.

Puzzle #3: Increasing Fertility
Subsequently, Ultra-Orthodox Jews have enjoyed a cultural and demographic renaissance. Of all
the cultures of central and eastern European Jewry, that of the Ultra-Orthodox is undoubtedly the
most faithfully preserved. Their demographic success is due to extremely high birth rates. Table V
reports the total fertility rate48 of Israeli Ultra-Orthodox women, which reached approximately
seven and a half children per woman in the mid 1990s.49 Moreover, while fertility declined
between 1980 and 1995 for other Jews, Muslims and Christians in Israel, the fertility of Ultra-
Orthodox women rose by about a child per woman. This increase is statistically significant and
consistent with conventional wisdom within the Israeli Ultra-Orthodox community. In contrast to
the fertility transition experienced by most every other demographic group in the world, the Israeli
Ultra-Orthodox not only maintain high fertility rates, but are increasing them.
         How can we explain the fact that Israeli Ultra-Orthodox are bucking both the local and the
international trend of fertility decline? The standard explanation of economists’ [Becker
1960,1991], is that fertility decreases with women’s wages because of the increased shadow cost
of raising children (including the cost of child quality). Yet real wage offers probably rose for
Ultra-Orthodox women between 1980 and 1996. Real wages increased by about half over this
period in Israel, so decreased fertility among other Jews, Christians and Muslims is consistent with
the standard theory, while the increased fertility of Ultra-Orthodox women is not.
        The club good approach, with efficient prohibitions, can solve this puzzle as well. As in
the analysis of increased stringency of religious practice above, the efficient consumption tax,                       -
= p*-p, increases in real wages because of the convexity of the labor supply curve in Figure III.
Interpreting prohibitions as a tax, increased prohibitions can partially mute increased wages,


         47
          This fervent desire for cultural preservation was acknowledged by the first Israeli government in an
agreement to allow about 400 yeshiva students, many of them refugees from destroyed European yeshivas,
exemption from military service so that the study of the Talmud could be nurtured [Friedman 1991, Landau 1993].
         48
          Total fertility is the sum of current age-specific fertility rates. It is the predicted number of lifetime
births a woman would have if she experienced current age-specific fertility rates over her lifetime.
         49
           Fertility is calculated from LFS data by estimating births using the category “woman’s own children
aged 0-1" divided by two. In principle this category may also contain adopted children, though the comparison
with Population Registry birth figures in Table V indicates only a tiny discrepancy.
                                                                                                                       20

leaving the value of an Ultra-Orthodox woman’s time largely unchanged. That explanation is
consistent with the conventional wisdom that stringency of practice increased over this period.
         A muted substitution effect can explain why fertility did not decline for Ultra-Orthodox
women as it did for others. To explain increased fertility requires more work. A possible
mechanism is one in which transfers allow an efficient increase in prohibitions by easing an
attrition constraint. If a club is concerned about attrition, its efficient level of prohibition will be
influenced by the effect of prohibitions on club size. Attrition is a natural concern if it involves
family members or if there are returns to scale in club activities, such as mutual insurance. Since
transfers allow a club to augment the quality of its services, they also reduce the attractiveness of
attrition, allowing prohibitions to be (efficiently) increased in order to induce more substitution of
religious activity for work hours. Thus, increased transfers may have a positive substitution effect
on fertility through increased prohibitions.50 Section II reported on increased transfers to the
Ultra-Orthodox community as their political power grew in the 1980s, so that the timing of
subsidies is consistent with this explanation.

Testable Implication: Differential Subsidy and Fertility Growth
The differential increase in subsidy within the Ultra-Orthodox community provides an opportunity
to test this explanation. Transfers to Ashkenazi Ultra-Orthodox Jews increased sharply in 1977,
while transfers to the Sephardi Ultra-Orthodox lagged behind till 1984, when they increased
discretely as well. The theory predicts that fertility will increase faster among the Sephardi Ultra-
Orthodox over the 1980s and 1990s when their subsidies increased more quickly.
       Table VI reports fertility rates of Ultra-Orthodox Jews by ethnic origin (adding a few
intermediate years to the sample of Table V in order to gain precision.) The total fertility rate of
Sephardi Ultra-Orthodox women was 4.57 in the early 1980s. It rose by more than two and a half
children by the mid 1990s to reach 7.24 children per woman!
        The velocity of this remarkable increase in fertility may be unparalleled in current
demography. It dwarfs even the 0.89 child increase in total fertility experienced by Ashkenazi
Ultra-Orthodox women over the same period. The difference between the Sephardi and
Ashkenazi fertility increase is 1.78 children per woman and is statistically significant, indicating
that fertility increases sharply with subsidies among Ultra-Orthodox Jews.

Alternative Explanations

         50
            Formally, the attrition constraint is incorporated into the optimal taxation problem illustrated in Figure
III as follows. Let  be the transfer from government to the club and N be the number of members. The club’s
social welfare maximizer chooses the efficient tax - to maximize U(S,R,Q) for members where p* =p+-;

                                                                      and subject to the no-attrition constraint

V(-, , w, p)  V( 0, 0, w, p), expressed in indirect utility. Then            if the attrition constraint binds (and the

complementarity between Q and S doesn’t far exceed that between Q and R). Interpreting
prohibitions as consumption taxes, subsidies induce clubs to increase their efficient levels of prohibition.
                                                                                                                 21

A number of alternative explanations for rising fertility are plausible, a priori. The Ultra-Orthodox
often raise the most poignant of these, that communities and families are attempting to
compensate for the losses of the Holocaust, a kind of extension of the custom of naming a child
for deceased relatives. That sentiment cannot be refuted. Yet it cannot explain the even larger
increases in fertility among Sephardi Jews, who did not directly experience the Holocaust.
        Some commentators have speculated that the increased generosity of child allowances or
improved fertility technology may account for increased fertility among the Ultra-Orthodox. Yet
these effects would apply to all Israeli women, and Table V demonstrates that other Israeli
women experienced declining fertility during this period. Muslim women, like the Ultra-Orthodox,
have relatively low income and have traditionally had large families. The gap between Muslim and
Ultra-Orthodox total fertility rates was only half a child in 1980, yet it grew to 3 children by
1995/96.
          An alternative explanation for increased fertility which is consistent with faster fertility
growth among the Sephardi Ultra-Orthodox is that increased subsidies had an income effect,
which is generally assumed to be positive [Becker 1991]. Moreover, the community also used
government funds to expand access to low cost child care facilities, further reducing the price of
child-rearing. How much of the differential fertility growth between Ultra-Orthodox and other
women in Israel can be accounted for by transfers? Precise accounting would require knowledge
of income and substitution elasticities as well as information on a myraid of well-concealed
subsidies and transfers.51 Yet an economists’ interpretation of the modern fertility transition
stresses that substitution effects through wages dominate income effects on fertility. Thus, it is
hard to see how we can avoid looking for a substitution effect to explain the sharp increase in
fertility, especially considering the exceptional increase among Sephardi Ultra-Orthodox women.
The club good approach provides that mechanism, through increased prohibitions as an effective
tax on wages, both in response to rising wages and through the effect of transfers in easing an
attrition constraint on the level of prohibitions.
        Alternatively, fertility may be subject to large positive social-multiplier effects of within-
group interactions in fertility [Becker and Murphy 2000], which might be stronger for the tight-
knit Ultra-Orthodox community than for other groups. The role of social interactions in
accelerating fertility transition has been emphasized by demographers [Bongaarts and Watkins,
1996]. While that argument is inherently hard to refute empirically, the other evidence for club-
like behavior among the Ultra-Orthodox invites emphasis on the role of subsidies in amplifying
prohibition and inducing increased fertility.
        Finally, what about explanations in which individuals have no choice? Perhaps an
authoritarian community leader maximizes an objective function in which fertility and religious

        51
           A related possibility is that transfers aimed at children induced traditional Sephardi families with many
children to join the Ultra-Orthodox. Sagi and Weinstein [1999] report anecdotal evidence from social workers of
conversion to Ultra-Orthodoxy among Sephardi families. New converts can account for at most 1/3 of the
Sephardi Ultra-Orthodox in the second period, which would require the unrealistic projected fertility rate of at
least 12 children per woman to generate the apparent fertility growth in Table VI through composition effects
alone.
                                                                                                                  22

practice have large weights, subject to a budget constraint which is relaxed by subsidies. That
view is inconsistent with the comparison of the Israeli and Diaspora communities. The latter have
more resources (they transfer funds to the former), yet have much lower levels of yeshiva study.
History also provides evidence of individuals exercising choice. Abandonment of Ultra-
Orthodoxy was widespread during the economic crisis at the end of the last century [Friedman
1991]. Evidence of individuals exercising choice argues for an approach requiring that individuals
behave in a manner compatible with individual incentives.
        In summary, both of the additional puzzles presented in this section, increased stringency
of practice and increased fertility; can be rationalized as the efficient response of a club to a
changes in wages and transfers. This approach provides a unified explanation for both these
puzzles as well as for the initial puzzle of falling labor supply.


                      V. DEMOGRAPHIC AND ECONOMIC IMPLICATIONS
Consider now the implications of Ultra-Orthodox population growth and economic dependency.
Figure VI reports population growth from 1979 through 1995 and uses a simulation to project
population growth through 2025. (For details see Appendix 2.) The Israeli Ultra-Orthodox
population doubled from about 140,000 in 1979 to about 290,000 in 1995.52 At current fertility
rates it will reach a half million by the year 2010 and a million by 2025.53
        Table VII reports the Ultra-Orthodox population share, which is projected to increase
from 5.2 percent in 1995 to 12.4 percent in 2025, by which time 22.5 percent of Israeli children
will be Ultra-Orthodox. Those proportions probably underestimate the future Ultra-Orthodox
population share as they do not take into account: a) the trend decrease in fertility among other
population segments; and b) migration to Israel of Ultra-Orthodox Jews, which accounted for
about 10 percent of the community’s population growth between 1979 and 1995.
        When combined with nonemployment and low human capital accumulation, this rate of
population increase implies a future of welfare dependence for the Israeli Ultra-Orthodox
community. That condition cannot be quickly remedied by current yeshiva students entering the
work force. As reported in Table II, the wages of yeshiva graduates are quite low, for lack of
human capital accumulation. In order to maintain even the modest standard of living described in
Table I, at current levels of yeshiva attendance and fertility, outside support of the community
would have to continue to increase at 4-5 percent annually, or double each 16-18 years, a growth
rate much higher than Israel’s rate of per capita output growth. At current levels of transfers and


         52
         These estimates do not include Ultra-Orthodox living in boarding schools, who are not sampled in the
LFS. Those accounted for an additional 9000 individuals in 1983 (about 5 percent of the Ultra-Orthodox).
         53
            These projections take into account only natural population increase, without considering net migration
and net conversion. Population increase is slightly faster in the measured period (1979-1995) than in the
projection, despite a lower fertility rate, suggesting that migration and conversion made a net positive contribution
to Ultra-Orthodox population growth, though the data do not allow a precise calculation. What is clear from the
Figure is that natural increase is the dominant force in Ultra-Orthodox population growth..
                                                                                                            23

taxes the Ultra-Orthodox population growth rate will render Israel’s welfare system insolvent and
bankrupt municipalities with large Ultra-Orthodox populations.54 The status quo is not sustainable
without transferring an increased proportion of output to welfare programs or increasing
donations from abroad at a geometric rate. Berman and Klinov [1997] and Berman [2000] argue
that neither support from Jews abroad nor transfers from the government are likely to increase
fast enough. Over the next decade the Ultra-Orthodox mutual insurance system faces collapse, as
it did in the great abandonment of the faith in the late 19th century [Friedman 1991].
        It is worth stressing that approximately 120,000 children live in households headed by a
yeshiva attending father. Most of these families are in poverty. How then to transfer funds to
these families, without exaccerbating existing distortions through subsidized sacrifices and
subsidized prohibitions? Berman and Klinov [1997] point out that conditioning draft deferment
and stipends on not working is an enormous tax on the first hour of work. Yet, easing the
conditions of deferment and exemption, (such as the reduction in exemption age to 25 proposed
in the coalition agreement of June 1999) would increase the already inequitable subsidy to the
Ultra-Orthodox. That implies an increase in the compensating sacrifice, probably not in the form
of increased yeshiva attendance but in some other inherently distortionary form.
        An efficient reform would increase equity, in the sense that it improves the utility of
nonmembers as much as it improves the utility that they could gain by joining. A subsidy which
increases the return to joining for a nonmember will be canceled and wasted by a counteracting
increase in the optimal sacrifice. In this case equity and efficiency dictate the same policy reform.
Pareto-improving subsidies are possible by replacing current distortionary subsidies with
compensating, equitable support policies for all low income individuals and an equitable allocation
of military service. With large enough equitable transfers the welfare of the Ultra-Orthodox
community could be improved in the short term. More importantly, the resultant return to self-
sufficiency by the Ultra-Orthodox could prevent a medium term collapse of the mutual insurance
system that sustains this tradition.


                                            VI. CONCLUSIONS
In describing a phenomenon as central to economics as labor supply and fertility, conventional
microeconomic theory cannot explain the behavior of Ultra-Orthodox Jews. The club good
approach succeeds. In the presence of positive social interactions with excludable access to their
associated externalities, subsidies can induce extreme responses in labor supply and in fertility. It
explains prolonged yeshiva attendance as an efficient sacrifice distorted by subsidy, and explains
increased fertility as the result of consumption taxes through prohibitions, amplified by subsidies.
       The logic of mutual insurance clubs suggests a novel economic interpretation of 19th
century European Jewish history. In the absence of insurance markets, or government to




       54
            Dahan [1998] analyzes the effect of Ultra-Orthodox demographics on Jerusalem’s municipal finances.
                                                                                                                  24

safeguard their rights, Jews relied heavily on their village communities55 for mutual insurance, a
practice facilitated by traditional religious law. Emancipation brought the incursion of markets
into these communities, increasing wages and making time-intensive mutual insurance system less
attractive. Most Jews eventually reacted by assimilating or by adopting a less time-consuming
form of religious practice. Emancipation also allowed the option of defection, either by replacing
mutual insurance with self-insurance through savings or by migrating to towns and cities. That
created a “lemons” problem of selective attrition for the mutual insurance club. In reaction an
augmented form of religious mutual insurance club developed. Ultra-Orthodoxy. It demanded
costly signals of commitment, isolating itself from the general community. It also augmented
prohibitions to compensate for the increasing attractiveness of working and consuming, which
distracted members from charitable activities that benefitted the club. By lucky accident of history
and supportive government policy, that 19th century drama continues to play itself out in Israel
under the light of 20th century data collection.
        Is this merely an intriguing result, like potatoes as a Giffen good, particular to a specific
group in an unusual historic setting? I think not. The incursion of markets into traditional societies
in the form of high real wages is a universal experience, spanning history and continuing into the
present. Kuran [1999] describes an analogous transition from communalist to individualist social
structures in 19th and 20th century Islam.56 Ultra-Orthodoxy is a backlash to that transition.
Traditional Jewish communities may have been unusual in the extent of externalities to community
activity, such as mutual insurance, but not in their existence. For example, Weber [1946] traces
mutual support among U.S. Protestant “Sects” such as Baptists and Quakers to the historical
roots of those communities in 17th century Europe. The anabaptist sects, such as the Amish,
Mennonites and Hutterites are even more isolationist, with much stronger systems of mutual
insurance. Nor is mutual insurance always tied to religious groups. Beito [1993] reports in 1920,
before the “New Deal,” over 16 percent of adult Americans belonged to secular fraternal
insurance societies, most of which dispensed mutual aid.
        In the 19th century, in the face of emancipation and attraction of a market-oriented
culture, Jewish religious practice diffused into assimilation and Reform at one extreme and Ultra-
Orthodoxy at the other. In the 20th century the same forces confronted traditional Islam, leading
to assimilation, Islamic modernism (Salafiyya) and radical Islam.57 Like Jewish Ultra-Orthodoxy,
both Sunni and Shi’ite Islamic fundamentalism are more stringent than traditional Islam. They too
regard secular influence as dangerous and corrupting. I intend to pursue that analogy in future
research, especially in countries where religious radicals are subsidized.



        55
          Ninety percent of Jews in German-speaking central Europe and the majority in central and western
Europe lived in villages with less than 200 inhabitants or small towns in the early 19 th century. [Hyman 1992]
        56
          Greif [1994] contrasts the communalist (he uses the term “collectivist”) legal institutions of the
Magrheb traders to individualist institutions of the Genoese.
        57
           See, for example, the description of Mawdudi’s Orthodoxy in India in Aziz [1967, pp. 208-213], or the
description of the Muslim Brotherhood throughout Islam in Dekmejian [1995, p. 19] and in Faksh [1997, pp. 8-
10].
                                                                                                           25

        Particularly intriguing is the connection of fundamentalism to fertility. Much of the
strength of fundamentalism is derived from increasing population shares, not only in Israel but
throughout the Muslim world. An economic explanation of fertility transition is that increased
wages of women lower fertility by raising the shadow price of child-raising. Do other
fundamentalist groups forestall demographic transition by using prohibitions to tax real wages?
Does radical Islam dramatically increase fertility by augmenting prohibitions when subsidies are
extracted from government, as the Israeli Ultra-Orthodox have done? The contribution of these
induced fertility effects to political instability throughout the Islamic world is intriguing.
        Besides religious sects, many social groups have benefits to social interaction which are
excludable to nonmembers. These groups might usefully be thought of as clubs, perhaps as mutual
insurance clubs. Akerlof’s [1997] work on “social distance” recounts poignant tales from the
classics of ethnography: A capable working class youth conforms to a norm of low education to
avoid being perceived as disloyal to the “corner boys.” A pregnant teenager who had aspired to a
good secretarial job chooses “between lonely ambition and poverty among friends” and has the
baby.58 In both cases the implicit sanction faced is exclusion from a relationship of loyalty or
friendship. Workplaces with peer pressure, criminal gangs, clubs of welfare mothers, families,
communes, collectives and academic departments are just a few examples of social groups in
which access to the benefits of interaction is excludable so that norms involving efficient
prohibitions and costly but socially efficient signals are to be expected.
        Subsidies to the Ultra-Orthodox club exacerbate distortionary sacrifices and prohibitions,
causing reductions in labor supply and increases in fertility possibly unmatched in the labor and
demographics literatures. Other clubs may also have extreme reactions to interventions and to
changes in outside conditions. For example, gangs have prohibited behaviors, dress codes and
sacrifices in the form of violent initiation rites.59 An intervention increasing the self-esteem of
teenagers or decreasing their need for protection, could reduce the attractiveness of gangs (which
offer esteem and protection). That would reduce the costly prohibitions on achievement and
costly sacrifices of personal development which gangs can afford to impose on their membership.
Alternatively, policies which reinforce mutual support clubs in which members benefit from the
achievement of others, such as families, may induce extreme increases in student achievement.


                                     APPENDIX 1: SUBSIDIZED SACRIFICE
This appendix presents a formal version of the discussion of efficient sacrifice and subsidized sacrifice in
Section III. As before,




        58
             Examples are from Whyte [1955] and Rainwater [1970], respectively.
        59
             Akerlof and Yellen [1994], page 177.
                                                                                                            26

but there are no prohibitions and N is decided by the entry and exit decisions of individuals.
        The time constraint is
(2)     T = H + R + K,
where K  (0, ) is a voluntary sacrifice. Individuals who choose K= join the high R club and enjoy Q1.
         An efficient sacrifice, , must be just small enough to ensure that low wage types prefer to
sacrifice and remain in their own, high R group. Expressed in an indirect utility function, that condition is
(3)     V(p, w1 , Q1 , K=)  V(p, w1 , Q2, K=0).
It must also be large enough that high wage types prefer not to sacrifice and remain in the low R group,
(4)     V(p, w1, Q2, K=0) > V(p, w1, Q1 , K=).
         With enough type 2 (high wage) people, a  will exist that separates types into low and high R
groups as long as for a given Q, a) R2(..,Q) < R1(..,Q) and b) type 2 people have a lower shadow price of Q
than do type 1 people [Iannaccone 1992, Proposition 2]. The optimal  imposes the smallest cost on the
low wage - high R group which induces separation. The smallest possible  which keeps the low R people
out of the high R group is * such that (if high wage types choose not to join when indifferent)
(5)     V(p, w2, Q2 , K=0) = V(p, w2, Q1 , K=*).
Consider a model with an income subsidy in it, where the budget constraint is
(6)     I + wHi = pS
Let income be composed of initial income and a subsidy  received only by club members
(7)     I = I0 +  .
        Now the condition defining the lowest possible sacrifice required to exclude high wage types is
(8)     V(p, I0 , w2, Q2 , K=0) = V(p, I0 , w2, Q1 , K=*) .
For a subsidy  > 0 this condition becomes
(9)     V(p, I0 , w2, Q2 , K=0) = V(p, I0+, w2, Q1 , K=*+     ) .
That is, any subsidy  induces a countervailing increase in the optimal sacrifice of   , a tax on group
members which further distorts labor supply.


                            APPENDIX 2: DEMOGRAPHIC CALCULATIONS
Ultra-Orthodox families are identified as families in which at least one male reports his last school attended
as yeshiva. This classification implies Ultra-Orthodox, as opposed to Modern Orthodox yeshiva, which is a
separate educational stream.
        Fertility calculations in Tables V, VI, and VII and in Figure VI count births using the Israel
Labour Force Survey (LFS) question “own children aged 0-1 at home.” These may include a small number
of adopted children, though the comparison with fertility rates for Jewish women as recorded in the
population registry (Table VI) indicates only tiny discrepancies.
                                                                                                              27

         The total fertility rates in Table A1 are calculated using six age-specific fertility rates for women
aged 18 through 54. These age-specific fertility rates are reported in panel A of Table A1 and in Figure
VII. They indicate that the increase in fertility among Ultra-Orthodox women occurred mostly for women
over thirty, while Ultra-Orthodox have higher fertility than other women at all relevant ages.
         The LFS has a rotating panel of families. They are sampled for two adjacent quarters, left out for
two quarters and then resampled for two quarters. My samples include all rotation groups in the first
quarter of the year and only incoming rotations in the other four quarters. When years are combined to
generate a sample, all rotation groups are included in the first quarter of the first year and only incoming
rotations are included in subsequent quarters.
          Demographic projections in Figure VI and Table VII are calculated using age-specific predicted
fertility and mortality rates. Predicted fertility rates are calculated using the estimated coefficients in Table
A1, Panel B, which reports regression of births (as defined above) on a quartic in age. (Beginning in 1995
the LFS reports age for adults of all ages, including the previously suppressed 18-24 category.) The quartic
is a more precise predictor than seven age categories. Mortality figures are from the Population Registry,
as reported in the 1993 Statistical Abstract of Israel. The base population for the projection is the 1995/96
sample. Projected population (1996-2025) is calculated by iteratively calculating age and gender specific
cells using 1995/96 LFS figures as a base.
          Upper and lower bounds for population projections are calculated using the upper and lower
bounds of 95 percent confidence intervals for predicted age-specific fertility rates to predict births. While
this is likely to be the major component in the projection’s variance, these bounds understate the true 95
percent confidence interval as they do not reflect: sampling variance in age-specific populations for women
of childbearing age in the base year; projection variance in age-specific populations of women of
childbearing age; variance in actual mortality; and variance in actual fertility.
        Measured population (1979-1995) is based on all individuals in families. The LFS provide
sampling weights only for adults (aged 15 and over since 1986 or 14 and over previously). Children are
weighted using their mother’s sampling weights when available and that of the head of household when
mother’s sampling weight is not available for all children in the household. The same method is used to
estimate age-gender specific cells in the 1995/96 base for the population projection.


BOSTON UNIVERSITY
AND NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH



                                              REFERENCES
Akerlof, George A. “Social Distance and Social Decisions,” Econometrica, LXV (September, 1997), 1005-
        1027.

________, and Rachel E. Kranton “Economics and Identity,”Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.

________, and Janet L. Yellen, “Gang Behavior, Law Enforcement and Community Values,” in Values
       and Public Policy, Henry J. Aaron, Thomas E. Mann and Timothy Taylor, eds. (Washington D.C.:
       Brookings Press, 1994).
                                                                                                        28

Aziz, Ahmad, Islamic Modernism in India and Pakistan, (London: Oxford University Press ,1967).

Azzi, Corry and Ronald G. Ehrenberg, “Household Allocation of Time and Church Attendance,” Journal of
       Political Economy, LXXXIII (1975), 27-56.

Becker, G.S., "An Economic Analysis of Fertility," in A.J. Coale (ed.) Demographic and Economic Change
        in Developed Countries, Princeton N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1960.

_________ A Treatise on the Family, (Cambridge: Harvard University Press 1991).

_________ and Kevin M. Murphy, “Social Forces, Preferences and Complementarity,” in Social Markets
       and the Social Economy, (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2000).

Beito, David T, “Mutual Aid, State Welfare and Organized Charity: Fraternal Societies and the
        ‘Deserving’ and ‘Undeserving’ Poor, 1900-1930,” Journal of Political History, V(1993), 419-434.

Berman, Eli “Subsidized Sacrifice: State Support of Religion in Israel,” Contemporary Jewry, XXI,
       (Winter, 2000).

_______ and Ruth Klinov, “Human Capital Investment and Nonparticipation: Evidence from a Sample
       with Infinite Horizons (Or: Mr. Jewish Father Stops Going to Work),” Jerusalem: The Maurice
       Falk Institute for Economic Research in Israel, Discussion Paper No. 97.05, 1997.

Ben-Porath, Yoram (1980) “The F-Connection: Families, Friends and Firms and the Organization of
       Exchange,” Population and Development Review 6, 1-29.

Bongaarts, John and Susan Cotts Watkins (1996) “Social Interactions and Contemporary Fertility
       Transitions,” Population and Development Review 22(4): 639-682 (December).

Central Bureau of Statistics, Statistical Abstract of Israel, Jerusalem (various years).

Camerer, Colin, “Gifts as Economic Signals and Social Symbols,” American Journal of Sociology XCIV
       (1988): S180-214.

Chiswick, Carmel Ullman, “The Economics of American Judaism,” Shofar, XIII (1995), 1-19.

Cole, H.L. , G.J. Mailath and A. Postlewaite, “Social Norms, Savings Behavior and Growth,” Journal of
        Political Economy, C(1992) 1092-1125.

Cornes, Richard and Todd Sandler The Theory of Externalities, Public Goods and Club Goods, (New
        York: Cambridge University Press, 1986).

Dekmejian, R. Hrair, Islam in Revolution, Fundamentalism in the Arab World (Syracuse: Syracuse
       University Press, 1995.)

Dahan, Momi,“The Haredi Population and Local Government, Part I - The Distribution of Income in
       Jerusalem,” Jerusalem Institute for Israel Studies, Jerusalem, 1998.
                                                                                                        29

Ellenson, David, “German Jewish Orthodoxy: Tradition in the Context of Culture,” in Jack Wertheimer
        (ed.) The Uses of Tradition (Cambridge: Harvard 1992).

Faksh, Mahmud A., The Future of Islam in the Middle East, Fundamentalism in Egypt, Algeria and Saudi
       Arabia. Westport, Conneticut: Praeger, 1997.

Friedman, Menachem, The Haredi (Ultra-Orthodox) Society — Sources, Trends and Processes, Jerusalem:
       The Jerusalem Institute, Research Series #41, 1991.

Glaeser, Edward L., Bruce Sacerdote and Jose A. Scheinkman, “Crime and Social Interactions,” Quarterly
        Journal of Economics, CXI (2) (May 1996) 507-548.

__________ and Spencer Glendon, “The Demand for Religion,” Harvard University mimeo, 1997.

-Gottschalk, Peter and Mary Joyce, “Cross-national Differences in the Rise of Earnings Inequality–Market
        and Institutional Factors” Review of Economics and Statistics LXXX (1998), 489-502.

Greif, Anver, "Cultural Beliefs and the Organization of Society: A Historical and Theoretical Reflection on
        Collectivist and Individualist Societies," Journal of Political Economy, CII (1994) 912-950.

Heilman, Samuel C., The People of the Book: Drama, Fellowship and Religion, (Chicago: University of
       Chicago Press, 1983).

____________, Defenders of the faith: inside Ultra-Orthodox Jewry, (New York : Schocken Books, 1992).

Hyman, Paula E., “Traditionalism and Village Jews in 19th -Century Western and Central Europe: Local
       Persistence and Urban Nostalgia,” in Jack Wertheimer (ed.), The Uses of Tradition, (Cambridge:
       Harvard 1992).

Ilan, Shachar, “To the Right of the Right” Ha’Aretz, March 11, 1998a (Hebrew).

________ , “The Yeshiva-Bocher Basket: 17 Thousand Shekel Gross” Ha’Aretz, March 2, 1998b,
       (Hebrew).

________ , “Deceit” Ha’Aretz, May 19 (Hebrew), 1998c.

________ , “The Rewards of Trespass” Ha’Aretz, May 26 (Hebrew), 1998d.

Iannaccone, Laurence R. “Sacrifice and Stigma: Reducing Free-riding in Cults, Communes, and Other
       Collectives,” Journal of Political Economy, C(1992), 271-291.

_________ “Toward an Economic Theory of Fundamentalism,” Journal of Institutional and Theoretical
       Economics, XV (1997), 100-116.

_________ “Introduction to the Economics of Religion,” Journal of Economic Literature, XXXVI (1998),
       1465-1496.
                                                                                                       30

Kaplan, Lawrence, “The Hazon Ish: Haredi Critic of Traditional Orthodoxy,” in Jack Wertheimer (ed.),
        The Uses of Tradition, (Cambridge: Harvard 1992).

Kandel, Eugene and Edward P. Lazear, “Peer Pressure and Partnerships,” Journal of Political Economy,
        100(4), (1992), pp 801-817.

Katz, Jacob, Tradition and Crisis: Jewish Society at the End of the Middle Ages (New York: Free Press of
        Glencoe, 1961)

Kuran, Timur, Islam and Economics, Chapters 3 and 4:"Islam and Underdevelopment,” University of
       Southern California, unpublished manuscript, 1999.

Landau, David, Piety and Power, The World of Jewish Fundamentalism. (New York: Hill and
       Wang,1993).

Landers, Renee M., James B. Rebitzer and Lowell J. Taylor, “Rat Race Redux: Adverse Selection in the
       Determination of Work Hours in Law Firms,” American Economic Review, LXXXVI (June 1996)
       329-348.

Maimonides, Moses, The Guide for the Perplexed, (1904 Translation from the 12th century Arabic Dalalat
      al-Hairin by M. Friedländer, 2nd edition, New York: Dover, 1956).

Rainwater, Lee, Behind Ghetto Walls: Black Families in a Federal Slum, Chicago: Aldine, 1970.

Sagi, Rahel and Zvi Weinstein, “Peilut Proyekt Shikum Schunot baMigzar haHaredi,” Israel Ministry of
        Construction and Housing, July 1999.

Schelling, Thomas C., “Dynamic Models of Segregation,” Journal of Mathematical Sociology I (1971)
        143-186.

Shahar, Charles, Morton Weinfeld and Randal F. Schnoor, Survey of the Hassidic and Ultra-Orthodox
        Communities in Outremont and Surrounding Areas, (Outremont, Quebec: Coalition of Outremont
        Hassidic Organizations, 1997).

Silber, Michael K., “The Emergence of Ultra-Orthodoxy: The Invention of a Tradition,” in Jack
        Wertheimer (ed.), The Uses of Tradition, (Cambridge: Harvard 1992).

Simon, Rita James, Continuity and Change: A study of two ethnic communities in Israel, (Cambridge
       University Press, Cambridge, 1978).

Smith, Adam, An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations (Reprint of 1776 version)
        (New York: Modern Library, 1965).

Townsend, Robert M, “Risk and Insurance in Village India,” Econometrica, LXII(1994), 539-91.

Weber, Max, “The Protestant Sects and the Spirit of Capitalism,” in H.H. Gerth and C. Wright Mills
       (translators and editors), From Max Weber: Essays in Sociology, (New York: Oxford, 1946).
                                                                                                       31

__________, “Economy and Society (Berkeley, California: University of California Press, 1978).

Whyte, William F., Street Corner Society, 2nd edition, (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1955.)
                                                                                                                             32

                                      TABLE I
     SOURCES OF INCOME FOR HOUSEHOLDS HEADED BY PRIME-AGED MALES, 1980S & 1990S

                                                                     Households headed by married..
                                                                    a
                                                  Ultra-Orthodox             Ultra-Orthodoxa
                                                  prime-age male          prime-age male Labor           prime-age males
                                                 LF nonparticipants         Force participants
A. 1993-1996                                         in yeshiva
Monthly household income (1995 NIS)                    3,463                        6,207                      8,240
   (3NIS = $1 in 1995)                                  (86)                        (231)                       (67)
Of which (%)
 Salary income                                           17.8                       74.4                       81.2
   of which:                                             (1.4)                      (1.7)                      (0.3)
    Husband’s salary                                      .02                       56.4                       59.6
    Wife’s salary                                         17.2                      16.4                       18.2
 Transfers from institutions (%)                         38.9                        1.7                        2.8
 Child allowance (%)                                     31.8                       19.7                        7.4
 Other Sourcesb nec (%)                                   3.5                        2.0                        3.5
 Residualc                                                7.8                        2.3                        5.1
Children                                                  4.5                        4.2                        2.1
Household Members                                         6.6                        6.5                        4.6
Poverty Line in 1995 NIS                                 3,777                      3,735                      2,930
(based on household members)
Observations                                              397                        174                      10,143

B. 1979-1982
Monthly household income (1995NIS)                     1,787                     3,747                       4,480
   (3NIS = $1 in 1995)                                  (73)                     (141)                        (27)
Of which (%)
  Salary income                                         33.3                     83.1                         88.2
   of which:                                            (2.7)                    (1.4)                        (0.2)
    Husband’s salary                                     1.5                     65.7                         70.4
    Wife’s salary                                        31.8                    13.7                         15.6
  Transfers from institutions (%)                        8.3                      0.8                          0.9
  Child allowance (%)                                   24.0                     12.1                          6.6
  Other Sourcesb nec (%)                                 4.4                      1.7                          2.4
  Residualc                                             30.1                      2.4                          1.9
Household Members                                        5.3                      6.0                          4.5
Observations                                             188                      179                        10,014
a. Ultra-Othodox families are identified in the Labour Force Survey (LFS) as families in which at least one male reports his last
school attended as yeshiva. b. “Other Sources” include income from pensions, transfers from abroad, social insurance programs
and self employment income. c. Residual is the difference between gross income and income from all reported sources. Source:
microdata from the CBS, Israel Income Survey, which excludes the self-employed. (3.4% of Ultra-Orthodox prime aged males
were self-employed in LFS 1993-1996). Children and household members are calculated from LFS. Poverty line in 1995 was
830 NIS per month x number of standard persons per household as calculated by the National Insurance Institute formula.
                                                                                                                    33

                                                     TABLE II
                              HUMAN CAPITAL WAGE REGRESSION
LHS Variable: Log hourly wage
                                          1993-1996                                       1979-1982
Education                     0.078          —                 —             0.074           —               —
                             (0.003)                                        (0.002)
Regular education              —             0.094           0.094            —                 0.078      0.078
                                            (0.002)         (0.002)                            (0.002)    (0.002)
yeshiva education              —             0.018           0.012             —                0.023      0.015
                                            (0.005)         (0.007)                            (0.015)    (0.016)
yeshiva                        —              0.73            0.94             —                 0.40       0.63
                                             (0.12)          (0.22)                             (0.22)     (0.30)
Experience                    0.041          0.034           0.034           0.030              0.030      0.030
                             (0.003)        (0.002)         (0.003)         (0.003)            (0.003)    (0.003)
Experience x yeshiva            __             __            -0.007            __                 __       -0.006
                                              ----          (0.006)           ----               ----     (0.006)


Observations                  9,401          9,401           9,401           7,713             7,713       7,713
R2                            0.237          0.272           0.272           0.203             0.215       0.215


a. All specifications also include a quadratic term in experience, year indicators, an indicator for currently married
and an indicator for Jewish.
b. The sample includes observations from micro data of the CBS Israel Income Surveys. 168 individuals report
yeshiva as last school attended in the 1993-1996 sample and 142 do so in the 1979-1982 sample. Includes prime-
aged males who reported at least one hour worked in the previous week, were not recent immigrants, and reported
years of schooling. Hourly wage is measured in 1995 NIS.
c. Experience was calculated as (age – education – 6) for yeshiva graduates and non-Jews and as (age – experience
– 9) for Jews. To the extent that yeshiva graduates and non-Jews serve in the military their labor market experience
will be overestimated.
d. See Table A2 for descriptive statistics and Berman [1998] for a full set of coefficients.
e. Source: microdata from the CBS, Israel Income Survey. The self-employed are excluded from the microdata..
                                                                                                           34

                                                   TABLE III
     FULL TIME YESHIVA ATTENDANCE RATES OF ULTRA-ORTHODOX MEN
                                                   1993-1996


         Age                      All Household Heads                     of which: Household Heads with
                                                                               at least five children

        25-29                            77.4 %
                                           (2.6)
        30-34                              66.4                                       79.8 %
                                           (2.7)                                       (3.6)
        35-40                              57.2                                        65.5
                                           (3.0)                                       (3.7)
        41-44                              46.1                                        54.1
                                           (4.2)                                       (5.1)
        45-54                              24.5                                        41.1
                                           (3.3)                                       (7.1)
         54+                               6.3
                                           (1.2)


a. Standard errors in parentheses
b. Figures in bold italics are for draft exempt men.
c. Source: 1993/96 LFS sample.
d. See note to Figure 2 for a definition of full time yeshiva students.
                                                                                                            35

                                                TABLE IV
        FULL-TIME YESHIVA ATTENDANCE RATES BY ORIGIN: 1980-1996
                                              Men aged 25-54

       Period              Sephardia             Ashkenazia          Native Israeli               All
                                                                         Parentsa          Ultra-Orthodox
                                  b
    1980-1984                38.0 %                 46.8                   55.1                  45.4
                              (3.0)c                (2.2)                  (5.1)                 (1.7)
         obs.                  260                   520                    98                    880


    1994-1996                 55.9                  54.4                   70.4                  57.8
                              (3.1)                 (2.5)                  (3.8)                 (1.8)
        obs.                   255                   386                    147                   796


      Change                  17.9                   7.6                   15.3                  12.4
                              (4.8)                 (3.6)                  (6.8)                 (2.6)
 Difference in difference:
  Sephardi - Ashkenazi                              10.3
                                                    (6.0)
  Sephardi -                                                                7.5
  Ashkenazi & Native                                                       (5.7)
Source: LFS, 1980-1984, 1994-1996.
a. “Sephardi”Jews are identified by own or fathers’ birthplace in Africa or Asia. “Ashkenazi” Jews are
identified by own or fathers’ birthplace in Europe, America or Oceania. Native born parents are generally
Ashkenazi, especially in the 1980s, since the majority of Sephardi Jews arrived in Israel after 1950. Origin
is defined according to country of birth or the country of birth of parents. In 1980-1984, Ashkenazi Jews
make up 59% of the sample, 29% are Sephardi and 11% cannot be classified as they have native Israeli
parents. In the 1994-96 sample 44% are Ashkenazi, 30% Sephardi and 25% children of native Israelis. The
latter are mostly Ashkenazi, especially in the early 1980s.
b. An attendance rate is the ratio of yeshiva nonparticipants (who list full time yeshiva study as their reason
for nonparticipation) to Ultra-Orthodox Jews. Ultra-Orthodox Jews are identified in the survey as
individuals living in a household in which at least one male declares his last school attended as yeshiva.
c. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors in parentheses.
                                                                                                                36

                                   TABLE V
                TOTAL FERTILITY RATES OF ISRAELI SUBPOPULATIONS
A. Source: Labour Force Survey
       Period            Full Population              Jews              Ultra-0rthodox         All other Jews
                                                                             Jewsc
     1980-1982                 2.99a                   2.76                   6.49                   2.61
                              (0.04)b                 (0.04)                 (0.31)                 (0.04)
         obs.                 31347                  27635                   1040                   26569


      1995/96                   2.66                   2.53                   7.61                   2.27
                               (0.04)                 (0.05)                 (0.30)                 (0.05)
         obs.                 27866                  22776                   1021                   21755


       Change                  -0.33                  -0.23                   1.13                  -0.34
                               (0.06)                 (0.06)                 (0.44)                 (0.06)

B. Source: Population Registry
       Period            Full Population              Jews                Christians              Muslims
        1980                    3.14                   2.76                   2.66                   5.98
      1995/96                   2.90                   2.57                   2.19                   4.65
       Change                  -0.24                  -0.19                  -0.47                  -1.33

a. Total Fertility Rates in Panel A are calculated from micro data using the Israel Labour Force Survey (LFS)
question “own children aged 0-1 at home.” These may include a small number of adopted children. Age
specific fertility rates are calculated for 6 age categories for women aged 18 through 54. Details are reported
in Appendix Table A1.
b. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors in parentheses.
c. Ultra-Orthodox Jews are identified in the survey as individuals living in a household in which at least one
male declares his last school attended as yeshiva.
      LFS samples include all unique rotation groups the first time they are observed. Population Registry
figures are from the Statistical Abstract of Israel 1982 and 1997. The full population total fertility rate in the
LFS is less than that of the Population Registry due to undersampling of the Muslim population in the LFS.
                                                                                                               37

                               TABLE VI
          FERTILITY BY RELIGIOUS AFFILIATION AND ETHNIC ORIGIN
A. Ultra-Orthodox Jews
        Period               Sephardi              Ashkenazi            Native Israeli           All Ultra-
                                                                           Parents               Orthodox
     1980-1984                 4.57                   6.91                   8.70                   6.28
                              (0.36)                 (0.32)                 (0.72)                 (0.23)
         obs.                   613                   764                    194                   1574

     1994-1996                 7.24                   7.80                   7.85                   7.57
                              (0.50)                 (0.42)                 (0.54)                 (0.27)
         obs.                   417                   560                    321                   1310

       Change                  2.67                   0.89                  -0.84                   1.30
                              (0.62)                 (0.53)                 (0.90)                 (0.35)
 Difference in difference:
  Sephardi - Ashkenazi                                1.78
                                                     (0.82)

B. Non-Ultra-Orthodox Jews
       Period             Sephardi                 Ashkenazi            Native Israeli            All non
                                                                           Parents            Ultra-Orthodox
     1980-1984                 2.84                   2.44                   2.27                   2.63
                              (0.05)                 (0.05)                 (0.13)                 (0.03)
         obs.                 19607                  16570                   2451                  38909

     1994-1996                 2.50                   2.09                   2.17                   2.26
                              (0.06)                 (0.06)                 (0.12)                 (0.04)
         obs.                 12557                  11679                   3333                  28133

       Change                  -0.34                  -0.35                 -0.10                  -0.37
                              (0.08)                 (0.08)                 (0.18)                 (0.05)

      Total Fertility Rates are calculated from micro data using the Israel Labour Force Survey (LFS). See
notes to Table V. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors in parentheses. Ultra-Orthodox Jews are
identified in the survey as individuals living in a household in which at least one male declares his last school
attended as yeshiva. Definitions of ethnic groups are described in notes to Table IV.
                                                                                                     38

                                TABLE VII
             POPULATION PROJECTIONS FOR ULTRA-ORTHODOX JEWS
                                              (THOUSANDS)

                                All Ages                               Children (ages 0-17)
    Period        Ultra-       All Israelis      Percent      Ultra-        All Israelis   Percent
                 Orthodox                         Ultra-     Orthodox                       Ultra-
                                                Orthodox                                   Orthodox
    1995            280           5370            5.2           150            1860           8.1
    2010            510           6600            7.7           280            2140           13.1
     2025           990           7970            12.4          570            2540           22.5

     Based on 1995/96 LFS sample. Projections for 2010 and 2025 are calculated by iteratively
applying fertility and death rates to the 1995/96 base populations of Ultra-Orthodox and all Israelis.
For details see Appendix A.
                                                                                                        39

           TABLE A1 AGE-SPECIFIC FERTILITY RATES BY SUBPOPULATION
A. Age groups (for Total Fertility Rate calculations in Tables V and VI)

                               Ultra-Orthodox Jews                    Non-Ultra-Orthodox Jews
    Age Group             1980-1982             1995/96            1980-1982             1995/96
      18-24                 0.184                0.190                0.086                0.036
                           (0.017)              (0.018)              (0.003)              (0.002)
       25-29                0.426                0.413                0.183                0.153
                           (0.023)              (0.026)              (0.004)              (0.005)
       30-34                0.304                0.394                0.133                0.147
                           (0.027)              (0.027)              (0.004)              (0.005)
       35-39                0.252                0.278                0.067                0.079
                           (0.041)              (0.030)              (0.003)              (0.004)
       40-44                0.052                0.151                0.014                0.021
                           (0.019)              (0.026)              (0.002)              (0.002)
       45-49                0.006                0.019                0.003                0.002
                           (0.004)              (0.010)              (0.001)              (0.001)
       50-54                   0                    0                0.0004               0.0006
                              (-)                  (-)              (0.0003)             (0.0004)
   observations             1040                  954                 26595                21755
    Root MSE                0.267                0.272                0.190                0.168
B. Quartic Regression Predicting Births, 1995/96 (for projections, Figure VI & Table VII.)
             Variable                    Ultra-Orthodox Jews                     All Women
              Age                                0.365                              0.191
                                                (0.043)                            (0.006)
               Age2                            -0.0099                              -.0054
                                               (0.0014)                           (0.0002)
               Age3                            0.000083                           0.000047
                                              (0.000014)                         (0.000002)
             constant                            -3.85                              -2.01
                                                (0.427)                            (0.07)
          observations                            954                              24546
    Root Mean Squared Error                      0.270                             0.194
         Total Fertility Rates are calculated from micro data using the Israel Labour Force Survey
(LFS) question “own children aged 0-1 at home.” These may include a small number of adopted
children. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors in parentheses. Ultra-Orthodox Jews are
identified in the survey as individuals living in a household in which at least one male declares his
last school attended as yeshiva. LFS samples include all rotation groups in the first quarter of the
year and only incoming rotations in the other four quarters.
                                                                                                          40

             APPENDIX 3: DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS FOR EARNINGS EQUATIONS
                            SAMPLE OF EMPLOYED MALES AGED 25-54
                                              1993-1996                          1979-1982
                                       Mean          Std. Dev.              Mean        Std. Dev.
    Hourly wage                         27.4             20.2                17.3           14.0
    Log hourly wage                     3.11             0.64                2.65           0.64
    Years of education                  12.8             3.6                 11.5           3.7
      of which: yeshiva                 20.2             7.5                 15.6           4.1
      Non-yeshiva                       12.7             3.4                 11.4            3.7
    yeshiva                            0.019            0.135               0.019          0.135
    Experience                          16.6              9.0                16.8           9.7
      of which: yeshiva                 12.1             9.2                 16.7           10.0
      Non-yeshiva                       16.6             9.0                 16.8            9.7
    Age                                37.9              8.2                 37.2           8.4
      of which: yeshiva                 38.2             7.2                 38.4           8.3
      Non-yeshiva                       37.9             8.2                 37.1            8.4
    Experience-squared                 354.9            330.6               376.4          381.2
    Currently married                   0.82             0.39                0.91           0.29
    Jewish                              0.88             0.32                0.96           0.21
                                         9,401 observations                 7,713 observations

a. Micro data, Central Bureau of Statistics, Israel Income Surveys, 1979-1982, 1993-1996. Includes prime-
aged males who reported at least one hour worked in the previous week, were not recent immigrants, and
reported years of schooling. Hourly wage is measured in 1995 NIS.
b.168 prime aged males report yeshiva as last school attended in 1993-1996 sample. 142 report yeshiva as last
school attended in 1979-1982.
c. Experience was calculated as (age – education – 6) for yeshiva graduates and non-Jews and as (age –
experience – 9) for Jews. To the extent that yeshiva graduates and non-Jews serve in the military their labor
market experience will be overestimated.
d. Weighted using household sampling weights.
                                                                                                   41




                                       FIGURE I
                    YESHIVA STUDENTS AND THEIR CHILDREN: 1980-1996


Men are classified as full time yeshiva students if they are labor force nonparticipants, report their
reason for nonparticipation as studies and report their current school attended as yeshiva. The Ultra-
Orthodox nonparticipation rate is higher. Between 90 and 99% of Ultra-Orthodox nonparticipants list
studies as their reason for nonparticipation. Children are classified as “Father in yeshiva” if they
reside in a household in which the head of household or her spouse is a full time yeshiva student.
Source: LFS micro data. See Appendix for details of weighting procedure.
                                                                    42




                                  FIGURE II
            FULL TIME YESHIVA ATTENDANCE AMONG ULTRA-ORTHODOX MEN



See note to Figure I.
                                       43




             FIGURE III
OPTIMAL TAXATION THROUGH PROHIBITION
                                                                                                          44




                                              FIGURE IV
                                          EFFICIENT SACRIFICE


The figure illustrates the incentive of a low wage group to exclude members of a high wage group from their
club. A nonselective club will have low quality and provide low wage members with low utility at A1.
Imposing a required sacrifice of time * on club members is sufficient to induce exclusion of of high wage
individuals (who are indifferent between points B2 and A2) , allowing the establishment of an exclusive club
for low wage individuals with higher utility at B1. The induced separating equilibrium is (B1, A2).
                                            FIGURE V
                               SUBSIDY INDUCES INCREASED SACRIFICE
                                                                                        κ
The figure illustrates the effect of subsidy in the efficient sacrifice. B1 and A2 describe the equilibrium in
Figure IV. The introduction of a subsidy to club members is reflected in the upward shift of the leftmost
utility curves for both high and low wage types. To exclude high wage members the low wage club must
compensate for the increased attractiveness of the club by raising * to *’, which preserves the
indifference of high wage types between joining and remaining outside (comparing C2 to A2). The new
separating equilibrium is (C1, A2).
                                                                                                                 45
                                                                                                     46




                                     FIGURE VI
                         ULTRA-ORTHODOX POPULATION: 1979-2025
                                PROJECTION USING 1995/96 FERTILITY RATES


a. Measured population (1979-1995) is based on all individuals in families with at least one adult
male who reports last school attended as yeshiva, in the Israel Labour Force Survey (LFS).
b. Projected population (1996-2025) is calculated by iteratively forecasting age and gender specific
cells using 1995/96 LFS averages as a base. Age-gender specific mortality rates are from the
population register, 1992. Age-specific fertility is predicted using a regression of births on women’s
age in the 1995/96 LFS. See Appendix 2 for details.
c. Upper and lower bounds for population projections are calculated using the upper and lower
bounds of 95% confidence intervals for predicted age-specific fertility rates to predict births. While
this is likely to be the major component in variance of a projection, these bounds are smaller than the
true 95% confidence interval for population as they do not reflect: sampling variance in age-specific
populations for women of childbearing age in the base year; projection variance in age-specific
populations of women of childbearing age; variance in actual mortality; and variance in actual
fertility.
                                                                                                    47




                                          FIGURE VII
            BIRTH RATES: ULTRA-ORTHODOX AND ISRAELI AVERAGE, 1995/96

a. Births rates are measured using the LFS category “own children aged 0-1", which applies to all
women aged 15 or older.
b. Upper two lines represent births to Ultra-Orthodox women. Lower two lines refer to all women
c. Smooth lines represent fitted values from a regression of births on age, age2 and age3 .
