I.    Introduction

        Occupational segregation by sex exists in virtually all countries (see, for example, Francine

Blau, Marianne Ferber, and Anne Winkler 1998). In pathbreaking work in the early 1970s,

Barbara Bergmann (1971, 1974) focused the attention of economists on the pervasiveness of

occupational segregation by sex and race, and provided a highly persuasive analysis of its negative

consequences for male-female and white-black wage differentials. Since then, occupational

segregation by sex has been repeatedly cited by scholars as a major determinant of the gender pay

gap.1 Empirical investigations suggest that from 12 to 37 percent of the gender wage gap in the

United States can be explained by occupational segregation (Ronald Ehrenberg and Robert Smith

1997; Macpherson and Hirsch 1995; Sorensen 1990).2 While it is unclear to what extent this

disparity reflects occupational crowding of women (Bergmann 1974) versus skill differences

across male and female jobs (Solomon Polachek 1981), there can be little doubt that the extent of

occupational segregation is an important indicator of women’s economic status in the labor

market.

        Differences in the distribution of women and men across a wide number of occupational

categories may be summarized by a segregation index which gives the percentage of women (or

men) who would have to change jobs for the occupational distribution of the two groups to be the

same (Otis Duncan and Beverly Duncan 1955). Historical evidence suggests that for the United

States, after a period of declining segregation from 1870 to 1900 (Nancy Bertaux 1991), the level

of this index was substantial and relatively stable throughout the first half of the 20th century at

about 66 to 68 percent (Edward Gross 1968, Jerry Jacobs 1989). Beginning in 1960, however,

the index began to fall, declining by 3.1 percentage points over the decade (Francine Blau and

Wallace Hendricks 1979). After 1970, this trend accelerated markedly, with a drop of 8.5

1
  For reviews, see Francine Blau (1984) and Elaine Sorensen (1990). More recent evidence comes from Francine
Blau and Lawrence Kahn (1997), Barbara Reskin and Patricia Roos (1990) and David Macpherson and Barry
Hirsch (1995).
2
  A much larger effect is suggested in a study by Erica Groshen (1991) which uses highly detailed occupational
categories. On the other hand, Macpherson and Hirsch (1995) estimate that occupational segregation explains as
little as 5 percent of the gender wage gap based on a fixed effects model.
                                                                                                                  2



percentage points between 1970 and 1980 (Andrea Beller 1985; Suzanne Bianchi and Nancy

Rytina 1986).3

        It was not clear a priori whether the pattern of decreasing occupational segregation would

continue into the 1980s. On the one hand, a number of factors that contributed to the decrease in

segregation undoubtedly persisted. Women's labor force attachment continued to increase and

gender differences in patterns of educational attainment (e.g. college attendance, fields of

specialization) continued to narrow (Blau, Ferber, and Winkler 1998). On the other hand, the

federal government's enforcement of anti-discrimination laws and regulations was scaled back in

the 1980s (Jonathan Leonard 1989).4 In addition, some have expressed concern that continued

inflows of women into recently integrated jobs would eventually result in these jobs becoming

newly segregated as female; and, indeed, there is some evidence that this occurred during the

1970s (Barbara Reskin and Patricia Roos 1987; Reskin and Roos 1990; Myra Strober 1984;

Rosemary Wright and Jerry Jacobs 1994). A continued or intensified pattern of "resegregation"

into the 1980s could have resulted in a deceleration in the decline in segregation, and possibly

even a reversal of this trend.

        This study uses data from the 1970, 1980 and 1990 Censuses to ascertain trends in the

extent of occupational segregation in the United States over the 1980s and compare them to the

1970s experience. We seek to answer two questions. First, did the decrease in segregation
continue into the 1980s and was similar progress achieved? Second, how similar were the

underlying shifts in the sex composition of occupations and in the employment patterns of

workers that produced the observed reduction in each of these two periods? Our detailed analyses

of this latter question shed new light on the sources of the 1970s changes as well.

        While some research suggests that occupational segregation declined in the 1980s (e.g.,

Joyce Jacobsen 1994; Macpherson and Hirsch 1995), ours is the first detailed comparison of the
3
  This figure was obtained by Bianchi and Rytina (1986) using census data and 1980 occupational categories.
Similarly, Beller (1985) found an average annual decrease of .74 percentage points over the 1972 to 1981 period
using data from the Current Population Survey and 1970 occupational categories.
4
  In the U.S., the major anti-discrimination legislation is Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 which is
enforced by the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC).
                                                                                                                3



experience over the two decades using comparable data from each of three Censuses.5 Although

there were substantial changes in the Census occupational classification scheme between 1970 and

1980, comparison of 1970 and 1980 occupational distributions is possible based on a Census

Bureau publication which utilized a sample of double-coded 1970 questionnaires to produce the

1970 distributions in 1980 occupational categories (U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the

Census 1984a). Fortunately, there was little modification in the Census occupational classification

system between 1980 and 1990 (U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census 1992). In

all, we are able to report results across 470 detailed occupations for all Census years.



II.   Causes of Occupational Segregation, Integration, and Resegregation

        Economic theory suggests that occupational segregation may be due to either supply- or

demand-side factors, or a combination of both. The major supply-side theory is the human capital

explanation which holds that since women generally anticipate shorter and less continuous work

lives than men, it will be in their interest to choose occupations which require smaller human

capital investments and have lower wage penalties for time spent out of the labor market

(Polachek 1981). Similarly, women may select occupations which are more compatible with the

performance of their household tasks (Gary Becker 1985). Supply-side effects may also be due to

what has been labeled "societal discrimination" which occurs when women are socialized to enter

traditionally female pursuits and/or face barriers to obtaining education and pre-job training in

traditionally male fields (e.g., Blau, Ferber, and Winkler 1998). On the demand side,

discrimination against women, based either on the tastes of employers, coworkers or customers

(Gary Becker 1957) or on employers' perceptions that women are on average less well qualified

for male jobs (e.g., Dennis Aigner and Glen Cain 1977) may contribute to occupational

5
  A recent study by Mary King (1992) found that occupational segregation increased from 1980 to 1988. However,
the long time period considered by King (1940-1988) required her to drop a considerable number of occupational
categories in order to obtain comparability in occupational classifications. In addition, her work was based on a
comparison of Census and Current Population Survey (CPS) data, and there is evidence that even when the same
occupational categories are employed, levels of segregation indexes computed from these two data sources are not
strictly comparable (Beller 1985).
                                                                                                                   4



segregation. Such occupational differences arise when employers discriminate against equally

qualified women in hiring, placement, access to on-the-job training programs or promotion for

traditionally male jobs.

        Some empirical evidence has been obtained for each type of explanation, suggesting that

both supply- and demand-side factors play a role in producing the segregation which we observe

in the U.S. labor market.6 Similarly, it is likely that both supply- and demand-side shifts

contributed to the reduction in occupational segregation which occurred in the 1970s. Labor force

attachment among women, especially younger women, increased over the 1970s (James Smith

and Michael Ward 1984; Claudia Goldin 1990) raising their incentives to invest in job-oriented

training. At the same time, perhaps in part due to their longer expected worklife, women

increased their representation in college and graduate and professional schools and in traditionally

male fields of study (Jerry Jacobs 1995; Blau, Ferber, and Winkler 1998).

        On the demand side, enforcement of the government's anti-discrimination laws and

regulations most likely lowered the barriers to women's entry into formerly male pursuits (Andrea

Beller 1982). Furthermore, this process may well have been reinforced by feedback effects. That

is, women's incentives to invest in job-oriented human capital would be enhanced by their

perception that labor market discrimination against them had diminished, and the reluctance of

employers to hire women in traditionally male jobs would decline in response to their perceptions

that women's labor force attachment and job skills had increased.

        Most of these supply- and demand-side factors extended into the 1980s, suggesting that

occupational segregation would continue to decline during this period. However, as noted above,

enforcement of equal employment opportunity legislation declined during this period, while there
6
  For example, support for the human capital model is provided by empirical evidence that a substantial portion of
the lower pay in female jobs is accounted for by differences in the skills required in male and female occupations
(Macpherson and Hirsch 1995); see also Polachek (1981). On the other hand, research by Paula England (1982)
does not support the human capital explanation. If women select male or female jobs based on their willingness to
undertake extensive on-the-job training investments, we would expect earnings profiles of women in male jobs to
start below those in female jobs but to be more steeply sloped; this has not been found to be the case. In addition,
evidence has been obtained which is consistent with discrimination in access to on the job training (e.g., Greg
Duncan and Saul Hoffman 1979; Anne Royalty 1996) and in promotion (e.g., Robert Cabral, Marianne Ferber and
Carole Green 1981).
                                                                                                        5



was the possibility of an increased tendency toward resegregation of formerly male and integrated

occupations into female occupations.

           The reasons for resegregation may be tied to the factors that initially produce segregated

occupations. Discrimination may still prevent women from entering many traditionally male jobs,

and cause them to "crowd" into those areas where, for whatever reason, the barriers have been

lowered. Women may also be attracted to jobs which they know other women have successfully

entered, assuming, perhaps erroneously, that an extremely low representation of women in an

occupation signals that there is a high degree of discrimination, or that it is difficult for individuals

with family responsibilities to work in those jobs. Finally, Bergmann’s (1974) crowding model

suggests that a significant influx of women into a formerly male area will reduce relative wages by

expanding the supply of labor.7 This would have the effect of discouraging male incumbents from

remaining in, and new male workers from entering, the occupation.

           Resegregation is not a new phenomenon. The currently predominantly female occupations

of elementary school teacher, secretary, and bank teller, for example, were all initially

predominantly male (Alice Kessler-Harris 1982; Strober 1984; Myra Strober and Carolyn Arnold

1987). Indeed, without some resegregation—a process which brings new occupations into the

"female" sector—it is unlikely that a stable degree of occupational segregation by gender could

have persisted for so long in the face of rising female labor force participation. However, the

particular circumstances of the 1970s may have increased the rate at which women entered new

occupations which would eventually become female.

           Technological change in the form of the telecommunications revolution appears to have

facilitated the entry of women into a number of male jobs by lowering skill requirements. This

seems to have occurred with the computerization of a number of occupations during the 1970s,

including, for example, insurance adjusters, examiners and investigators, where women's

representation increased from 30 percent in 1970 to 60 percent in 1980, and typesetters and

compositors, where women's share rose from 17 percent in 1970 to 56 percent in 1980. Both
7
    See also Strober (1984).
                                                                                                                   6



occupations were at least 70 percent female by 1990. In addition, it may be that the affirmative

action pressures of the 1970s were applied unevenly, resulting in considerably greater access of

women to some traditionally male jobs than to others. At the same time, the large increases in

female labor force participation rates during the 1970s8 combined with declines in the demand for

labor in a number of traditionally female occupations9 would be expected to make women

workers particularly responsive to any new opportunities. Since resegregation takes time to work

itself out, some of the occupational integration observed during the 1970s may have been illusory,

or at least transient, rather than permanent. The consequence would be a slower pace of progress

during the 1980s as the continued entry of women into a number of formerly male areas resulted

in increasing overrepresentation of women in these jobs. Thus, the extent of resegregation is an

important empirical question which we examine below.



III. Empirical Results

A.    Trends in the total labor force

        In this section we present the trends in the extent of occupational segregation over the

1970s and 1980s. The magnitude of gender differences in occupations is most commonly

measured by an index of segregation developed by Duncan and Duncan (1955), and, for

comparability with other studies, we employ that measure here.10 In any year, the index is

computed as:


(1)               S t = ( 0.5) ∑i mit − f it




8
  The female labor force participation rate increased from 43.4 percent in 1970 to 51.6 percent in 1980 and 57.5
percent in 1990 (Blau, Ferber, and Winkler 1998).
9
  For example, job opportunities declined in a number of clerical jobs (e.g., typist, telephone operator,
stenographer, and tabulating machine operator) due to technological change (Heidi Hartmann, Robert Kraut, and
Louise Tilly 1986).
10
   For a consideration of alternative segregation measures, see Robert Hutchens (1991).
                                                                                                                 7



where mit (fit) is the proportion of the male (female) labor force employed in occupation i at time

t. This measure, generally expressed as a percentage, indicates the proportion of women (or men)

who would have to change occupations for the occupational distribution of men and women to be

the same. A value of zero indicates complete integration (i.e., the distribution of women across

occupations is the same as that of men, or, equivalently, the female share of each occupation is

identical to the female share of the total labor force), while a value of 100 percent indicates

complete segregation (i.e., women and men work in completely separate occupations).

        For this analysis, the employment distribution of all male and female workers in each year

was computed across 470 detailed occupational categories for which it was possible to obtain

comparable data. Each of the included occupations consists of a 3-digit Census category or, in a

very small number of cases, a combination of closely related categories. Together these 470

occupations account for the entire labor force in each year. See Appendix Table A-1 for a listing

of occupations and percent female in 1970, 1980, and 1990.11

        Our results, reported in Table 1, show that the index of segregation fell in both periods,

declining from 67.68 in 1970 to 59.25 in 1980 and 52.98 in 1990. Although the index fell

somewhat less in absolute terms over the 1980s than over the 1970s, the relative decline was

fairly similar in both decades (10.6 percent in 1980s and 12.5 percent in 1970s).12 Certainly, the

decrease of 6 to 8 percentage points in each of the two decades was considerably larger than the 3

percentage point fall that occurred during the 1960s (Blau and Hendricks 1979). Our findings of

declining segregation over the 1970s and 1980s broadly match results in other studies (e.g.,

Macpherson and Hirsch 1995; Jacobsen 1994). Our study is, however, the first to use census data

11
   Note that the occupations in Appendix Table A-1 are listed in the same order as in census publications. The
Census (U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census 1984a) lists 486 detailed occupations for which data
are available in 1970 and 1980. We were required to condense these into 470 occupations due to (1) zero
employment in seven very small occupations in 1970, and (2) incomparability of occupation schemes between 1980
and 1990, resulting in a loss of nine additional occupations. As we note in the text, the included occupations
account for the entire labor force in all years. While forcing one historical period to take on the occupational
classifications of another may be problematic over an extended period of time, due to the double-coding of the 1970
data and the short period of time considered here, this is not a problem in this study.
12
   The figures we obtain for the level and change in the index over the 1970-80 period are essentially the same as
those reported by Bianchi and Rytina (1986) using the full set of 1980 Census occupations.
                                                                                                                  8



throughout and a consistent set of occupations across all years. This consistency is extremely

important to an investigation of trends, since the amount of segregation captured in each year may

differ depending on the occupational categories employed. Further, census data provide large

samples which not only increase the accuracy of our estimates but also permit us to distinguish a

larger number of occupations.13

        Thus, it appears that the widely noted decline in occupational segregation which occurred

in the 1970s did indeed continue into the 1980s and that, moreover, the rate of change in the

index was only slightly slower in the second decade. However, a recent paper by William

Carrington and Kenneth Troske (1997) suggests that the interpretation of the Duncan index as a

measure of occupational segregation may be biased when the number of individuals in any given

occupation is small, since in this case even random allocations of individuals across occupations

may generate relatively high levels of dissimilarity purely by chance. This might not appear to be

an issue when the large sample sizes available in census data are employed to estimate the index.

However, as noted above, the 1970 (but not the 1980 or 1990) estimates are based on a subset of

the initial Census sample which was double-coded using the 1980 as well as the 1970 occupation

codes, and, in some cases, sample sizes in particular occupations are fairly small. To test for

biases due to small cell size, we reestimated the segregation indexes excluding in all years

occupations in which there were fewer than 50 or fewer than 100 workers. (This was only an

issue in 1970, as the smallest cell sizes in 1980 and 1990 were 332 and 253, respectively.)

Fortunately, although this resulted in the exclusion of a fair number of occupations, estimated

trends in segregation were virtually identical.14 Thus, this issue does not appear to be a concern

for our study.

13
   Using CPS data and without limiting the analysis to the same occupations in all years, Macpherson and Hirsch
(1995) obtain the following values for the segregation index: 68.5 in 1973/74, 62.8 in 1980, and 55.5 in 1990.
Using a consistent set of 238 occupations in the 1970 and 1980 Censuses and 1990 CPS, Jacobsen (1994) reports
that the index falls from 62 in 1970 to 55 in 1980 and 51 in 1990.
14
   Using the sample of 305 (218) occupations with cell sizes no less than 50 (100) in 1970, the segregation index is
65.73 (62.89) in 1970; 57.23 (54.63) in 1980; and 50.55 (47.98) in 1990, yielding decreases in the segregation
index of 8.50 (8.26) over the 1970s and 6.68 (6.65) over the 1980s. See also Blau (1977) for an additional
discussion of this issue.
                                                                                                    9



       When considering the mechanism that produces a decrease in the segregation index, we

normally think first of a change in sex composition within an occupation, as occurs when women

enter predominantly male jobs in large numbers or, less frequently, men enter predominantly

female occupations. However, as Victor Fuchs (1975) first pointed out, changes in the degree of

segregation may also occur as a byproduct of shifts in the occupation mix of the economy which

affect the relative size of predominantly male, predominantly female, and integrated occupations.

So, for example, a secular decline in employment in predominantly male manufacturing

occupations would cause a decrease in the index, even if "within occupation" segregation

remained unchanged. Alternatively, an increase in the relative importance of predominantly female

service occupations in the overall economy could mask the effects of increasing integration within

occupations.

       In order to better understand the similarities and differences in the sources of observed

changes in the index over the 1970s and 1980s, we decompose the change in the index over each

period into (1) a “sex composition effect” due to changes in sex composition within occupations,

holding the size of occupations constant, and (2) an “occupation mix effect” due to changes in the

occupational mix of the economy, holding sex composition within occupations constant (Blau and

Hendricks 1979; Fuchs 1975). We begin by noting that if Fit (Mit) is the number of females

(males) in occupation i in year t and Tit = Fit + Mit is the total employment in occupation i in year

t, then equation (1) may be rewritten as:


                                  q it Tit     pit Tit
(2)             S t = (0.5) ∑i              −
                                 ∑ i qit Tit ∑ i pit Tit



where pit = Fit / Tit is the proportion women comprise of each occupation’s employment and qit =

(1 - pit) = Mit / Tit is the proportion men comprise of each occupation’s employment.

       The sex composition and occupation mix effects are then defined as follows:
                                                                                                      10



                                                   q T          p T 
(3)             Sex Composition Effect = ( 0.5) ∑i i 2 i1 − i 2 i1  − S1
                                                  Σ i qi 2 Ti1 Σ i pi 2 Ti1 


                                                       q T          p T 
(4)             Occupation Mix Effect = S 2 − (0.5) ∑i i 2 i1 − i 2 i1 
                                                      Σ i qi 2 Ti1 Σ i pi 2 Ti1 


where S1 and S2 denote the segregation index, as defined in equation (2) above, in the beginning

and end years, respectively.

        The sex composition effect gives the change in the index that would have occurred if the

size of each occupation had remained fixed at its initial level, so that all variation in the index

between the two years would be due to changes in sex composition within occupations. The

occupation mix effect indicates the change in the index that would have occurred taking end year

sex composition of each occupation as given, so that all variation in the index between the two

years would be due to changes in the size of occupations. It should be noted that this is an index

number formulation and thus suffers from the traditional index number problems. First, the

selection of any particular set of weights is arbitrary and the results obtained may differ depending

on the weights selected. Second, for the sex composition and occupation mix effects to sum to the

total change in segregation requires the use of an inconsistent set of weights. An alternative

approach would be to use consistent weights and allow for an interaction effect. We have chosen

to do the former in order to simplify the presentation of our results. Fortunately, however, our

findings are robust to the allowance for interaction effects and the use of either beginning or end

year weights to compute the sex composition and occupation mix effects.

        The results of the decomposition of the change in the segregation index for the total labor

force are shown in Table 1. They indicate that most of the reduction in occupational segregation

in both the 1970s and the 1980s was due to changes in sex composition within occupations—76
                                                                                                                  11



percent in the 1970s and 68 percent in the 1980s—but that the changing occupational mix of the

economy took on somewhat greater importance in the latter decade.15

        One question that arises regarding the observed changes due to shifts in the sex

composition of occupations is to what extent they represent shifts in female or male employment.

To address this question, distributions of men and women by sex composition of occupation are

shown in Table 2. Results are presented both when the sex composition of each occupation is

defined on the basis of percent female in the occupation in the current year (IA, IIA, IIIA) and

when sex composition is defined based on percent female in the occupation in the initial year of

each period (IB, IIB). It is the latter that sheds light on the movements of men and women into

occupations traditionally held by the other sex. Occupations are classified as “male,” “female,” or

“integrated” based on the divergence between sex composition in the occupation and in the labor

force as a whole. Specifically, in each year t, an occupation is classified as male if pit < (Pt - .10)

and female if pit > (Pt + .10), where pit is the proportion that women comprise of employment in

occupation i and Pt is the proportion that women comprise of the labor force (equal to .380 in

1970; .425 in 1980; and .457 in 1990). The remaining jobs are classified as integrated.

        In both periods, the decrease in occupational segregation due to changes in sex

composition of occupations was primarily due to shifts in the distribution of women into initially

male jobs rather than of men into initially female jobs. Given the pay differentials which have been

observed between male and female occupations, this is probably not surprising. Between 1970 and

1980, the percentage of men employed in occupations which were classified as male in 1970

declined by only 1 percentage point, while the percentage of women in occupations which were

initially female fell by about 9 percentage points. Most women moved into jobs that were initially

male, as opposed to integrated occupations. Similarly, over the 1980s, the percentage of men in

15
  As noted above, these results are robust to changes in weighting schemes. Using end year weights, the sex
composition effect is equal to -7.02 and -4.39 for the 1970s and 1980s, respectively. The occupation mix effect for
the two decades is -1.40 (1970s) and -1.88 (1980s) when calculated using beginning year weights. The small
remainder of the total change in the segregation index in each period (that is, the total change minus sex
composition and occupation mix effects estimated using consistent weights) is attributed to an interaction of sex
composition and occupation mix effects.
                                                                                                   12



initially male occupations fell by 1.6 percentage points, while the percentage of women in initially

female occupations decreased by 5 percentage points.

       Of course as women and, to a lesser extent, men move into sex atypical occupations, the

sex composition of these jobs changes. The cumulative effect of such movements may be seen by

comparing the distribution of men and women across occupations classified by their sex

composition in 1970 with their distribution across occupations classified by their sex composition

in 1990. The picture that emerges is of a substantial decline in segregation. Between 1970 and

1990, the percentage of all women working in female occupations fell from 78 to 64 percent,

while the share of men employed in male occupations fell from 79 to 72 percent.

       Taking a higher cut-off for sex typical occupations, as exemplified in Table 3, shows far

more dramatic changes. The share of male employment in highly (80 percent or more) male

occupations fell from 71 percent in 1970 to 43 percent in 1990, while the share of female

employment in highly (over 80 percent) female occupations fell from 55 percent to 37 percent.

Thus, while in 1970 the majority of men and women worked in jobs where individuals of the same

sex comprised the overwhelming majority of workers, by 1990 this was true of only about one

third to two-fifths of each group.

       The results in Table 2 raise some question regarding the sources of the occupation mix

effect since we see no evidence of a decrease in overall employment in jobs which were initially

female over the 1970s or the 1980s, and only a small decrease in employment in initially male

jobs. However, Table 3 sheds light on this issue and indicates a decline in the share of total

employment in the most heavily segregated male and female occupations (0-10 and 91-100

percent female in the 1970s, and 0-20 and 81-100 percent female in the 1980s). The result of

these shifts was that the occupation mix effect worked to reduce segregation in both periods, as

the most highly segregated occupations declined in importance relative to those that were less

highly segregated.
                                                                                                                     13



B.    Trends across major occupational groups

         While trends in occupational segregation at the economy-wide level are interesting in their

own right, to understand the nature of these shifts better as well as to identify any important

differences between the experiences of the 1970s and the 1980s, it is desirable to clarify the role

of major occupation groups and specific detailed occupations in producing these changes. To do

this, we follow Bertaux (1991) and disaggregate the sex composition and occupation mix effects.

That is, as may be seen in equations (3) and (4), each of these effects may be obtained at the level

of the individual occupation and then summed over occupations to obtain its value for the labor

force as a whole. Thus, to see the role of major occupations in producing the overall change, we

simply obtain subtotals of each effect at the level of the major occupation category, or, within

major occupation, by initial sex composition of the occupation.16 This permits us to learn how

much of the total change was due to changes in sex composition or size of occupations within

each major occupational category. To further capture the nature of the shifts that occurred, we

also present illustrative results by detailed occupation.

         To guide our interpretation of these results, it is helpful to clarify a couple of points about

the segregation index and what influences the change in the segregation index and its components,

the sex composition and occupation mix effects. First, in a given year, a job in which women

comprise the same proportion of total employment as their share of the labor force contributes

zero to the segregation index. Controlling for the size of the occupation, the further the departure

of percent female in the occupation from this non-segregation norm (in either direction), the

greater is the contribution of the occupation to the segregation index. Thus, an increase in percent

female in predominantly male jobs or a decrease in percent female in traditionally female jobs will

generally cause a negative sex composition effect (working to decrease the segregation index).

However, it is important to realize that when the share of women in the labor force is increasing,

as has occurred during our period, we essentially have a “moving target.” An initially female job

16
   Bertaux (1991) reports results for specific occupational categories, but the principle is the same. We also present
illustrative results by detailed occupation below.
                                                                                                     14



in which percent female remains constant, or rises by less than the increase in women’s

representation in the labor force as a whole, therefore contributes a negative sex composition

effect, since it is coming closer to the (rising) non-segregation norm. Conversely, an initially male

job in which percent female does not increase, or rises by less than the increase in women’s

representation in the labor force as a whole, causes a positive sex composition effect (working to

increase the segregation index) as it gets further from the (rising) non-segregation norm.

Consequently, in addition to examining the contribution of each major occupation category to the

sex composition effect, in the results presented below we additionally break this down by initial

sex composition of the occupation to see which of these processes is at work. The results for the

occupation mix effects are similarly disaggregated to illustrate the role played by declines in

predominantly female versus predominantly male jobs.

       Second, as equations (2)-(4) indicate, the contribution of an occupation to the change in

the segregation index and the sex composition and occupation mix effects depends on its size. The

sex composition effect holds changes in the size of occupations constant, but, for example, a

given increase in the representation of women in an occupation will have a greater effect the

larger the initial size of the occupation. And, similarly, a given growth rate of occupational

employment will have a greater impact on the occupation mix effect, the larger is occupational

employment in the initial year. The same is true for major occupational categories: their

contribution to the overall change in the segregation index or the sex composition and occupation

mix effects will depend on their size. This greater weighting of larger occupations is appropriate

for evaluating the impact of changes in their sex composition or size on the overall amount of

segregation, since shifts in larger occupational categories result in larger employment

redistributions of men and women across categories. However, it is also of interest to compare

the 1970s and 1980s with respect to differences across major occupations in the extent of changes

in sex composition per se, regardless of the impact on measures of segregation, since this permits

us to identify areas where women have found doors increasingly open up to them, as well as areas

where they have not. We examine this issue in the next section where we present the results of
                                                                                                                    15



descriptive regressions analyzing the extent of changes in percent female within occupations by

major occupation group.

           Our results for the disaggregated segregation measures are presented in Table 4 which

shows the contribution of each major occupation to the sex composition and occupation mix

effects in each period and further disaggregates these effects within major occupations by initial

sex composition of the occupation. In Tables 5 and 6, we present illustrative listings of individual

occupations which made especially large contributions to the sex composition or occupation mix

effects.

           Looking first at the sex composition effects in Panel A of Table 4, we see that, in both the

1970s and the 1980s, the bulk of the negative sex composition effect was attributable to changes

in the representation of women within white collar occupations—especially the managerial,

professional, sales, and administrative support categories—and service jobs. Blue collar

occupations, as well as technicians and farming, played a relatively small role. Calculations based

on Table 4 indicate that the relative contribution of the various major occupations to the overall

sex composition effect was remarkably similar in the 1970s and 1980s, with the only notable shift

being an increase in the importance of changes in the sex composition of sales occupations in the

latter decade.17

           Further inspection of Table 4 shows that, in both periods, the contribution of the

managerial category was almost entirely due to an increase in the representation of women in

predominantly male jobs, including managers and administrators (not elsewhere classified),

accountants and auditors, and public relations managers, among others (Table 5).

           The pattern for professional and sales jobs was more mixed. In the 1970s, the bulk of the

contribution of the professional category was due to a decrease in the degree of segregation of

female jobs, especially elementary school teachers, where the representation of men increased

substantially, and occupations like registered nurses, where the very high percentage women
17
  For 1970 - 1980, the percentages of the sex composition effect attributable to these major occupations were: 20
(managers); 13 (professionals); 17 (sales); 13 (administrative support); and 30 (services). For 1980 - 90, the figures
were: 17 (managers); 11 (professionals); 23 (sales); 16 (administrative support); and 29 (services).
                                                                                                         16



comprise of all workers fell very slightly or failed to increase (Table 5). In contrast, a rise in the

representation of women in male jobs accounted for most of the effect attributed to professional

occupations in the 1980s. Despite the dominant effect of increasing integration of male

professional jobs, registered nurses again contributed a relatively large (negative) effect as

women’s representation fell a bit more during the 1980s. This illustrates that, when women’s

share of the labor force is rising, large female occupations in which percent female simply

increases at less than the rate for the labor force as a whole can have a large impact on the index.

        The opposite pattern prevailed for the sales category, with an increase in the

representation of women in male jobs accounting for most of the contribution of this category in

the 1970s, but diminished segregation within female jobs accounting for most of the effect in the

1980s. Although the relative impact of shifts in male and female jobs differed in the two decades,

there is considerable overlap in the list of specific occupations involved (Table 5). Moreover, it

should be noted that the effect of male jobs remained large in absolute value in the 1980s.

        In both decades, the sizable negative contribution to the sex composition effect of

administrative support and service jobs principally reflected a decrease in the degree of

segregation in female jobs relative to women’s share of the labor force. However, the negative

effect of the increasing representation of women in predominantly male jobs was fairly substantial

for administrative support jobs in the 1970s and for service occupations in both periods. The

magnitude of these effects and that obtained for sales jobs, as noted above, are comparable to the

contribution of the changing sex composition of male jobs in the professional category. This latter

finding underscores the usefulness of our decomposition of the sex composition effect, since this

is really the only way to assess the quantitative importance of observed changes in the sex

composition of male jobs in any particular major occupational category for the degree of

segregation in the labor force as a whole.

        As noted above, sex composition effects in other categories, including blue collar,

technical and farm jobs, were considerably smaller. While it is important to note that the

magnitude of these effects reflects the size of these occupations, as well as the degree of change in
                                                                                                       17



their sex composition, in the case of craft and operator jobs, changes in the sex composition of

male occupations actually worked to increase segregation (see Table 4). These results support the

general perception that change has been particularly slow in blue collar occupations. Further

evidence of this will emerge in the regression analysis in the next section.

       Summarizing our findings for the sex composition effect, we have seen that the

contribution of major occupational categories may be traced to either male or female jobs. It is, of

course, the former which we traditionally think of as indicating expansions in opportunities for

women. Integration of male jobs has occurred throughout the occupational distribution. The

quantitatively largest effects in both decades were for executive and managerial jobs, but

professional, sales, and service jobs also made substantial contributions in both periods, as did

administrative support jobs in the 1970s. The largest effects for female jobs were in administrative

support and service jobs, in both decades; in professional jobs, in the 1970s; and in sales jobs, in

the 1980s. In some cases, this was due to increases in men’s representation in female occupations.

In others, however, it represented rough stability in women’s proportion of already heavily female

occupations in the face of their rising share of the labor force; in some instances, women’s

representation, already in the high 90s, could not increase much further. Nonetheless, these results

are of interest because they indicate the areas from which women were released (in the aggregate

sense), so that their share of employment in male jobs could increase. Moreover, they identify the

extent to which this release was accomplished by constant or declining percentages of women

within female occupations as compared to reductions in the size of such jobs (i.e., changes in

occupation mix).

       The results in panel B of Table 4 indicate that the favorable occupation mix effect in both

the 1970s and 1980s was due to the declining relative importance of female administrative support

jobs, male farm, craft and laborer jobs, and both male and female operative jobs. There were some

differences between the two periods however. A decline in female service occupations was

important in the 1970s, but less so in the 1980s, while the contribution of administrative support

and craft jobs grew in the 1980s and that of farm occupations declined.
                                                                                                     18



       Table 6 provides examples of the specific occupations involved in these shifts. The list of

female administrative support occupations which made the largest contributions spans a partly

overlapping set of female clerical occupations for the two decades, including typists, bookkeepers,

telephone operators, and secretaries. The application of computers and of information processing

and related computer technologies have been linked to the decline of female occupations like

these (Hartmann, Kraut, and Tilly 1986; Jeremy Rifkin 1995).

       The relative contraction of highly segregated male and female blue collar occupations

likely reflects the widely noted decline in the relative importance of blue collar jobs which has

been attributed to the impact of technological change as well as competition from low-cost

imports (e.g., Lawrence Katz and Kevin Murphy 1992). The individual jobs making the largest

contributions include the female occupation of textile sewing machine operator in both decades,

as well as a variety of male occupations.

       The negative contribution of service occupations in the 1970s reflects in part the relative

decline in private household employment, including private household cleaners and child care

workers. This development, while continuing into the 1980s, had a considerably smaller impact in

that decade. Moreover, additional tabulations indicate that the decline of such jobs was partly

offset by the rapid growth of other female service occupations, including child care workers

(except private household) and nursing aides, orderlies and attendants. And, Table 6 shows that

growing employment in nursing also worked to increase the occupation mix effect. Taken

together, these results suggest that the expansion of the demand for health services and child care

have worked to increase segregation due to the highly segregated nature of some of the related

occupations.

       As we saw above, a driving force behind the negative occupation mix effect was the

movement of total employment out of highly segregated male and female occupations into less

segregated ones, with the net effect being to reduce the segregation index. While some of this

reallocation occurred within major occupation categories, we can identify in Table 4 broad

occupation groups which had positive overall occupation mix effects, including executive and
                                                                                                                   19



managerial workers, professional and technical workers, and, for the 1980s, sales jobs. Consistent

with this, we see in Table 6 that a number of the detailed occupations which made large

contributions to the positive occupation mix effects for these broad occupations were not highly

segregated initially.18 In addition, a number of the initially male jobs which grew in relative size

also experienced large increases in percent female. In the next section, we present some evidence

that suggests, at least for the 1980s, women were especially likely to enter occupational

categories with above average rates of employment growth.



C.    Analyzing the Trends in Sex Composition within Occupations

        As we noted earlier, while the disaggregation of the segregation indexes presented above

is useful for identifying the contribution of major occupation categories to the observed changes,

it is influenced by the size of each major occupation. So, for example, technical occupations

contribute relatively little to the sex composition effect, but it is unclear whether this reflects the

relatively small size of this category, less than 3 percent of total employment in each decade, or

lesser progress in integrating male jobs. A further limitation of what we can learn from the

approach pursued above is that major occupation categories may differ in other characteristics

that limit the scope for changes in sex composition within them. For example, it has been

suggested that slow employment growth in blue collar jobs is one reason for the lesser progress in

integrating male occupations in these categories. Or, as another example, a relatively small

contribution of male administrative support jobs in the 1980s could simply reflect that there are

relatively few male occupations in the category. To address these types of questions, we estimate

a descriptive regression model of the change in percent female within occupations over the 1970s

and 1980s.


18
  Based on a more extensive listing of occupations than is shown in Table 6, examples of such occupations
include, in the 1970’s, managers and administrators (nec), financial managers, accountants and auditors,
elementary school teachers, and social workers, and, in the 1980’s, managers and administrators (nec),
management-related occupations (nec), elementary school teachers, health technicians, legal assistants, computer
programmers, and salaried supervisors and proprietors in sales.
                                                                                                                     20



         To facilitate comparisons in the magnitude of the regression coefficients across equations

for the two periods (1970-80, 1980-1990), the dependent variable is defined as the change in the

proportion female in an occupation between 1970 and 1980 (1980 and 1990) minus the change in

the proportion female in the total labor force over the same period.19 Variables representing initial

sex composition of the occupation, growth of employment within the occupation, and major

occupation group are employed as explanatory variables. As above, we define the sex

composition of an occupation in terms of deviations of the proportion female within the

occupation (pit) from the female proportion of the labor force as a whole (Pt) in the initial year.

Table 7 gives definitions and means (for the 1970-80 and 1980-90 periods) for all variables used

in the regression analysis, and presents the regression results.

         As may be seen in the table, the patterns of change in sex composition are quite similar in

the 1970s and 1980s.20 All else equal, percent female consistently increased more in occupations

which were male or integrated at the start of the period than in initially female occupations, a

pattern that, in the absence of resegregation, works to reduce segregation. Above average growth

in employment in an occupation is found to have a positive and significant effect on that

occupation’s representation of women in the 1980s, but not in the 1970s.

         Controlling for initial sex composition of the occupation and employment growth over the

period, women increased their representation in most of the white collar categories and in service

jobs relative to operator, laborer, and farm jobs (the omitted category).21 Relatively large and

significant coefficients are obtained for the managerial and administrative support occupational
19
   Note that each observation summarizes information about many individuals within an occupation, so there is a
potential heteroscedasticity problem common to grouped data. Consequently, we have weighted the regression by
the square root of the total size of the occupation in the beginning year (William Greene 1997). Additionally, since
the occupations are the same in both years, the regressions were estimated using a SUR (Seemingly Unrelated
Regressions) model. This allows the error terms to be correlated across equations, generating more efficient
estimates than OLS (Greene 1997). Results from OLS estimation do not differ significantly.
20
   The vector of coefficients are jointly significantly different across years, but this is driven mainly by the
individually significant differences of a few coefficients. Specifically, the positive effect of integrated occupations
decreased by the latter decade. In addition, the differences in coefficients for employment growth and for
professional, technical and craft jobs, as described in the text below, are found to be significant at the 10 percent
level.
21
   Our findings for the 1970s are consistent with trends reported on the basis of tabular analysis by Beller (1985)
and Bianchi and Rytina (1986).
                                                                                                       21



dummy variables in both periods. Especially large effects were also obtained for sales jobs in the

1970s and for professional jobs in the 1980s. The coefficient for technical jobs is positive in both

periods, though statistically significant only in the 1970s. Women were found to be even less

likely to enter craft jobs than other blue collar occupations, although this difference was not

significant in the 1980s. While there has been speculation that slower growth in blue collar jobs

might help to explain women's lesser penetration into these areas, it can be seen that these

differences persist even after controlling for employment growth.

       Integrated occupations appear to have had a diminished effect on the increase in percent

female over the 1980s compared to the 1970s. Since it is a rapid increase in the representation of

women in integrated jobs which is most likely to result in resegregation, this finding would

suggest that resegregation occurring entirely within the period would be quantitatively less

important in the 1980s than in the 1970s. And, we do indeed find this to be the case in results

presented below.

       We saw above that the 1980s differed from the 1970s in having a somewhat smaller

decrease in the segregation index as well as a smaller share of its decline being due to the sex

composition effect. The regression results presented in Table 7 shed some light on this. The great

similarity in the pattern of changes in the representation of women in occupations in the two

periods means that the process tends to be self-limiting to some extent. For example, an increase

in women’s representation in male jobs potentially has the largest beneficial effect on reducing the

segregation index, and, as we have seen, the coefficient on predominantly male occupations was

about the same in each decade. However, precisely because of the progress made in reducing

segregation in the 1970s, the number of male occupations declined, from 294 in 1970

(encompassing 53 percent of total employment) to 273 in 1980 (comprising 49 percent of all

workers). This means that even if women continue to enter male jobs at the same rate, the impact

on segregation will be reduced. This is compounded by the fact that women’s entry was not

distributed evenly throughout male occupations, but rather was concentrated in particular white

collar and service categories. The consequences of this may be illustrated by the managerial
                                                                                                                   22



category which had the largest coefficient in both decades. In 1970, 21 out of the 25 detailed

occupations included in the managerial category were predominantly male; by 1980, this was true

of only 12. Clearly a given coefficient on executive and managerial jobs will have a smaller impact

on reducing segregation in the 1980s relative to the 1970s.

         The similarity of the changes in occupational composition over the two decades also

suggests that segregation or resegregation may be a factor in the declining rate of change in the

segregation index and the smaller sex composition effect in the 1980s. That is, perhaps sex

composition effects were less important during this period in part because, as more and more

women entered particular male or integrated jobs, some of these jobs resegregated as female

occupations. While we have seen that the coefficient on integrated occupations was a bit smaller

in the 1980s than the 1970s, if women continued to enter the occupations which became newly

female in the 1970s, the cumulative effect of resegregation could indeed be larger in the 1980s.

Those cases in which increases in the representation of women work to increase rather than to

decrease segregation act as a "drag" slowing the fall in the segregation index.

         There is some evidence consistent with this view. Appendix Table A-1 identifies the

initially male or integrated occupations which became predominantly female between 1970 and

1980 (marked with superscript “a”) or between 1980 and 1990 (marked with superscript “b”).22

In the 1970s, there were twenty-one such occupations which, as may be seen in Table 8, jointly

accounted for a sex composition effect of 0.31. In other words, in the absence of such

resegregation, occupational segregation would potentially have fallen an additional 4 percent

(0.31/8.43 = 0.037). Similarly, nine additional occupations resegregated between 1980 and 1990,

contributing to a sex composition effect for the 1980s of 0.23. This is lower than the figure for the

1970s, but it also corresponds to 4 percent (0.23/6.27 = 0.037) of the actual decline in the index


22
   The 1970-80 change in percent female for chief communications operators from 81.8 to 34.4 does not appear
credible. Dropping this occupation from the list of those which resegregated in the 1980s would alter the 1970s
change in the segregation index attributed to these jobs to -0.006 and their 1970s sex composition effect to -0.034.
It would, however, have little effect on the results for the 1980s; it is these results which are emphasized in our
discussion.
                                                                                                                   23



over the 1980s. These results suggest that resegregation had only a moderate effect of roughly the

same magnitude in percentage terms on the overall segregation trends in each of the two decades.

         The estimated impact of resegregation in the latter decade is increased, however, if we

recognize that the consequences of resegregation in the 1970s reached into the 1980s. Seventeen

of the twenty-one occupations which resegregated in the 1970s continued to experience above

average increases in the representation of women in the next period, contributing to a sex

composition effect of 0.19 from 1980 to 1990. Taking these effects into account raises our

estimate of the effect of resegregation for the 1980s to 0.42 (0.23 + 0.19) or 7 percent of the

actual 1980s decline. In addition, while occupation mix effects are minor for the within period

effects of resegregating occupations, twelve occupations which resegregated over the 1970s

experienced especially rapid employment growth in the 1980s, resulting in an occupation mix

effect of 0.54 in the latter period.23 It is not clear, however, that this occupation mix effect should

be included in the estimate of the effect of resegregation in the 1980s. As we saw above, the

negative effect of occupation mix in the 1970s and 1980s was due to below average employment

growth in highly segregated male and female occupations and above average growth in more

moderately segregated occupations. As may be seen in Appendix Table A-1, occupations which

resegregated in the 1970s tended to fall into the moderately segregated category in the 1980s.

Thus, while at the occupation level we estimate a positive occupation mix effect for these jobs,

their expansion was part of a redistribution of employment away from the most highly segregated

female occupations which, on balance, contributed to a reduction in segregation. Note that zero is

the smallest value the occupation mix effect may take for an expanding occupation—and that will

occur only if the percent female within the occupation exactly equals the percent female in the

labor force as a whole.

         Overall, we conclude that the effect of resegregation over the 1970s and 1980s was to

moderately reduce the fall in the segregation index by 4 to 7 percent in each decade, based solely
23
  The occupations making the largest contribution to the occupation mix effect were management-related
occupations (nec), investigators and adjusters (except insurance), transportation ticket and reservation agents,
insurance adjusters, examiners, and investigators, and computer operators.
                                                                                                     24



on the sex composition effects of these jobs. Were we to further include occupation mix effects,

our 1980s estimate would be raised to 15 percent. Thus while resegregation is a process which

has had discernible effects, these effects have not been extremely large. This does not mean,

however, that we should be unconcerned about this phenomenon. Unless women succeed in

entering a broader range of formerly male jobs, resegregation could become a larger problem in

the future.



IV.     Conclusion

        This paper investigates whether the dramatic trend towards reduced occupational

segregation in the United States which began in the 1970s continued into the 1980s. We found

that the trend did continue at only a slightly slower pace. Moreover, the underlying shifts in the

sex composition of occupations and in the occupation mix of the economy which produced the

reduction in segregation were remarkably similar in the two decades. Changes in sex composition

within occupations—principally due to the entry of women into traditionally male jobs—

accounted for two-thirds to three-quarters of the decline in segregation. Overall, these shifts had a

profound impact on the employment situation of both sexes. While, in 1970, 71 percent of men

and 55 percent of women worked in jobs where individuals of the same sex comprised the

overwhelming majority (80 percent or more) of workers, by 1990 this was true of only about two-

fifths of men and one third of women.

        Using a technique suggested by Bertaux (1991) in a study of changes in occupational

segregation in the United States at the close of the nineteenth century, we were able to provide a

more detailed picture than previous studies of the role of major occupational categories in

accounting for these aggregate results for 1970 to 1990. In line with expectations based on earlier

work, we found that women have had considerably greater success in entering previously male

white collar and service occupations than blue collar categories. In both decades, the largest sex

composition effects for integration of male occupations were for executive and managerial

occupations. However, a new insight provided by this approach was that the roles of
                                                                                                     25



administrative support occupations in the 1970s and sales and service jobs in both decades were

of considerable quantitative importance, comparable in size to the shifts in professional jobs which

have received considerably more attention. This is particularly interesting in that it reflects a

continuation of a pattern which prevailed in previous episodes of declining segregation, both in

the late 1800s (Bertaux 1991) and for the modest declines of the 1960s (Blau and Hendricks

1979). While it has been speculated that slower growth in blue collar jobs might help to explain

women's lesser penetration into these areas, regression analyses indicate that these differences

persist even after controlling for employment growth.

        In assessing our results it is important to note the limitations of what can be learned in

studies like these. First, calculations based on Census occupational categories are likely to

underestimate the full extent of employment segregation of women, since employers’ job

categories are far more detailed than those used by the Census. Thus, it is possible that some

Census listings combine individual job categories which are predominantly male with some which

are predominantly female producing apparently integrated occupations. Moreover, it has been

found that, even in occupations where both sexes are substantially represented, workers are often

segregated at the firm level (William Bielby and James Baron 1986; Francine Blau 1977; William

Carrington and Kenneth Troske 1995; Groshen 1991). For example, restaurants often employ

only waiters or waitresses, but not both (David Neumark 1996). Furthermore, women are often

clustered at the lower level of hierarchies within occupations. These dimensions of employment

segregation cannot be observed using Census data, and it is unknown the extent to which their

magnitude has changed over time, possibly affecting our estimated trends.

        Second, while there is considerable evidence that occupational segregation is related to the

gender pay gap, it is less certain how the occupational shifts of the 1970s and 1980s affected

women’s pay relative to men’s. Based on the estimated effect of occupational sex composition in

earnings regressions, it has been found that reductions in occupational segregation had a relatively

modest effect on trends in the gender gap over the 1970s and 1980s (e.g., Francine Blau and

Andrea Beller 1988, Macpherson and Hirsch 1995; June O’Neill and Solomon Polachek 1993).
                                                                                                   26



However, such estimates do not take into account the labor market-wide effects of declines in

segregation which potentially open additional employment opportunities to women and reduce

overcrowding. This may raise women’s wages in both male and female jobs. Further, the negative

effects of occupational segregation are not limited to the gender wage gap. Occupational

segregation may adversely affect the economic status of women by reinforcing exaggerated

notions of gender differences in capabilities, preferences and social and economic roles. If so,

reductions in segregation are likely to mitigate these effects.

       Finally, our results do not of course imply that occupational segregation by gender is no

longer a problem in the United States. We have emphasized the substantial declines in segregation

which have occurred over the 1970s and 1980s. These decreases are all the more significant in

that they follow an extremely long period in which there was little evidence of significant

improvement. However a segregation index of 53 percent for 1990 is still substantial and the

further reduction of segregation remains an important goal. Our finding of similar changes in

occupational sex composition over the two decades suggests that women did not find doors that

had opened for them in the 1970s closing to them in the 1980s. At the same time, this similarity

potentially poses some problems for the future. As women continue to enter the same areas,

resegregation, which we found to have relatively moderate effects in the 1970s and 1980s,

becomes an increasing possibility. Continued progress towards reducing occupational segregation

will require that women succeed in entering a broader range of traditionally male occupations

and/or a greater flow of men into traditionally female occupations.
                                                                                                27



                                        REFERENCES

Aigner, Dennis J. and Glen G. Cain. 1977. “Statistical Theories of Discrimination in Labor
Markets.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 30(2): 175-187.

Becker, Gary S. 1957. The Economics of Discrimination. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Becker, Gary. 1985. “The Allocation of Effort, Specific Human Capital, and the Differences
Between Men and Women in Earnings and Occupations.” Journal of Labor Economics 3(1, Part
2): S33--S58.

Beller, Andrea H. 1982. “Occupational Segregation by Sex: Determinants and Changes.” Journal
of Human Resources 17(3): 371-392.

Beller, Andrea H. 1985. “Changes in the Sex Composition of U.S. Occupations, 1960-1981.”
Journal of Human Resources 20(2): 235-50.

Bergmann, Barbara R. 1971. “The Effect on White Incomes of Discrimination in Employment.”
Journal of Political Economy 79(2): 294-313.

Bergmann, Barbara R. 1974. “Occupational Segregation, Wages and Profits When Employers
Discriminate by Race or Sex.” Eastern Economic Journal 1(2): 103-10.

Bertaux, Nancy E. 1991. “The Roots of Today’s ‘Women’s Jobs’ and ‘Men’s Jobs’: Using the
index of Dissimilarity to Measure Occupational Segregation by Gender.” Explorations in
Economic History 28(4): 433-459.

Bianchi, Suzanne M. and Nancy Rytina. 1986. “The Decline in Occupational Sex Segregation
During the 1970s: Census and CPS Comparisons.” Demography 23(1): 79-86.

Bielby, William T. and James N. Baron. 1986. “Sex Segregation Within Occupations.” American
Economic Review 76(2): 43-47.

Blau, Francine D. 1977. Equal Pay in the Office. Lexington, MA: Lexington Books.

Blau, Francine D. 1984. “Occupational Segregation and Labor Market Discrimination,” in
Barbara F. Reskin (ed) Sex Segregation in the Workplace: Trends, Explanations, Remedies, pp.
117-43. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.

Blau, Francine D. and Andrea Beller. 1988. “Trends in Earnings Differentials by Gender, 1971-
1981.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 41(4): 513-529.

Blau, Francine D., Marianne A. Ferber, and Anne E. Winkler. 1988. The Economics of Women,
Men, and Work. Upper Saddle River, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 3rd ed.
                                                                                               28


Blau, Francine D. and Wallace E. Hendricks. 1979. “Occupational Segregation by Sex: Trends
and Prospects.” Journal of Human Resources 14(2): 197-210.

Blau, Francine D. and Lawrence Kahn. 1997. “Swimming Upstream: Trends in the Gender Wage
Differential in the 1980s.” Journal of Labor Economics 15(1, Part 1): 1-42.

Cabral, Robert, Marianne A. Ferber and Carole A. Green. 1981. “Men and Women in Fiduciary
Institutions: A Study of Sex Differences in Career Development.” Review of Economics and
Statistics 63(4): 573-80.

Carrington, William J. and Kenneth R. Troske. 1995. “Gender Segregation in Small Firms.”
Journal of Human Resources 30(3): 503-533.

Carrington, William J. and Kenneth R. Troske. 1997. “On Measuring Segregation in Samples with
Small Units.” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 15(4): 402-409.

Duncan, Greg J. and Saul Hoffman. 1979. “On-the-Job Training and Earnings Differences by
Race and Sex.” Review of Economics and Statistics 61(4): 594-603.

Duncan, Otis Dudley and Beverly Duncan. 1955. “A Methodological Analysis of Segregation
Indexes.” American Sociological Review 20: 210-217.

Ehrenberg, Ronald G. and Robert S. Smith. 1997. Modern Labor Economics: Theory and Public
Policy. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley Longman, Inc., 6th ed.

England, Paula. 1982. “The Failure of Human Capital Theory to Explain Occupational Sex
Segregation.” Journal of Human Resources 17(3): 358-370.

Fuchs, Victor R. 1975. “A Note on Sex Segregation in Professional Occupations.” Explorations
in Economic Research 2: 105-11.

Goldin, Claudia. 1990. Understanding the Gender Gap: An Economic History of American
Women. New York: Oxford University Press.

Greene, William. 1997. Econometric Analysis. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 3rd ed.

Groshen, Erica L. 1991. “The Structure of the Female/Male Wage Differential: Is it Who You
Are, What You Do, or Where You Work?” Journal of Human Resources 26(3): 457-472.

Gross, Edward. 1968. “Plus Ca Change...? The Sexual Structure of Occupations Over Time.”
Social Problems 16(2): 198-208.

Hartmann, Heidi I., Robert E. Kraut, and Louise A. Tilly, eds. 1986. Computer Chips and Paper
Clips: Technology and Women's Employment. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
                                                                                               29


Hutchens, Robert M. 1991. “Segregation Curves, Lorenz Curves, and Inequality in the
Distribution of People Across Occupations.” Mathematical Social Sciences 21(1): 31-51.

Jacobs, Jerry A. 1989. “Long-Term Trends in Occupational Segregation by Sex.” American
Journal of Sociology 95(1): 160-173.

Jacobs, Jerry A. 1995. “Gender and Academic Specialties: Trends among Recipients of College
Degrees in the 1980s.” Sociology of Education 68(2): 81-98.

Jacobsen, Joyce P. 1994. “Trends in Workforce Sex Segregation, 1960-90.” Social Science
Quarterly 75(1): 204-211.

Katz, Lawrence F. and Kevin M. Murphy. 1992. “Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987: Supply
and Demand Factors.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107(1): 35-78.

Kessler-Harris, Alice. 1982. Out to Work: A History of Wage Earning Women in the United
States. New York, N.Y.: Oxford University Press.

King, Mary C. 1992. “Occupational Segregation by Race and Gender, 1940-1988.” Monthly
Labor Review 115(4):30-37.

Leonard, Jonathan. 1989. “Women and Affirmative Action.” Journal of Economic Perspectives
3(1):61-75.

Macpherson, David A. and Barry T. Hirsch. 1995. “Wages and Gender Composition: Why Do
Women’s Jobs Pay Less?” Journal of Labor Economics 13(3): 426-471.

Neumark, David, with the assistance of Roy J. Blank and Kyle D. Van Nort. 1996. “Sex
Discrimination in Restaurant Hiring: An Audit Study.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 111(3):
915-941.

O’Neill, June and Solomon Polachek. 1993. “Why the Gender Gap in Wages Narrowed in the
1980s.” Journal of Labor Economics 11(1, Part 1): 205-228.

Polachek, Solomon W. 1981. “Occupational Self-Selection: A Human Capital Approach to Sex
Differences in Occupational Structure.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 63(1): 60-69.

Reskin, Barbara F. and Patricia Roos. 1987. “Status Hierarchies and Sex Segregation,” in
Christine Bose and Glenna Spitze (eds) Ingredients for Employment Policy, pp. 3-21. Albany,
N.Y.: State University of New York Press.

Reskin, Barbara F. and Patricia Roos. 1990. Job Queues, Gender Queues: Explaining Women's
Inroads into Male Occupations. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
                                                                                               30


Rifkin, Jeremy. 1995. The End of Work: The Decline of the Global Labor Force and the Dawn of
the Post-Market Era. New York: G. P. Putnam’s Sons.

Royalty, Anne Beeson. 1996. “The Effects of Job Turnover on the Training of Men and Women.”
Industrial and Labor Relations Review 49(3): 506-521.

Smith, James P. and Michael P. Ward. 1984. Women's Wages and Work in the Twentieth
Century. Santa Monica, CA: The Rand Corporation.

Sorensen, Elaine. 1990. “The Crowding Hypothesis and Comparable Worth.” Journal of Human
Resources 25(1): 55-89.

Strober, Myra H. 1984. “Toward a General Theory of Occupational Sex Segregation: The Case
of Public School Teaching,” in Barbara F. Reskin (ed) Sex Segregation in the Workplace: Trends,
Explanations, Remedies, pp. 144-156. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.

Strober, Myra H. and Carolyn L. Arnold. 1987. “The Dynamics of Occupational Segregation
among Bank Tellers,” in Clair Brown and Joseph A. Pechman (eds) Gender in the Workplace, pp.
107-148. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution.

U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census. 1984a. Census of the Population: 1980
Detailed Occupation of the Experienced Civilian Labor Force by Sex for the United States and
Regions: 1980 and 1970, Supplementary Report PC80-S1-15. Washington, D.C.

U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census. 1984b. 1980 Census of the Population:
Earnings by Occupation and Education, Subject Report PC80-2-8B. Washington, D.C.

U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census. 1992. Census of the Population: 1990
Detailed Occupation and Other Characteristics from the EEO File for the United States,
Supplementary Report CP-S-1-1. Washington, D.C.

Wright, Rosemary and Jerry Jacobs. 1994. “Male Flight from Computer Work: A New Look at
Occupational Resegregation and Ghettoization.” American Sociological Review 59(4): 511-36.
                       Table 1. Indexes of Segregation (percent), 1970-1990


                                       A. Level of Segregation
                                                  1970                  1980                      1990
Index of Segregation                              67.68                 59.25                    52.98


                                      B. Change in Segregation
                                                  1970-80                               1980-90
Total                                              -8.43                                 -6.27

Due to:                                Absolute            % of total       Absolute             % of total
    1) Sex Composition                   -6.42               76.2               -4.28                68.3
    2) Occupational Mix                  -2.01               23.8               -1.99                31.7


Notes: See text for definitions of the segregation index and its components.

Sources: U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, Census of the Population: 1980
Detailed Occupation of the Experienced Civilian Labor Force by Sex for the United States and Regions:
1980 and 1970, Supplementary Report, PC80-S1-15 (March 1984); U.S. Department of Commerce,
Bureau of the Census, Census of Population: 1990 Detailed Occupation and Other Characteristics from
the EEO File for the United States, Supplementary Report, CP-S-101 (March 1992).




                                                                                         occtab_rev_Jul98.doc 9/1/98
   Table 2 . Distribution of Workers by Sex Composition of Occupational Category (percent)

                                                        Sex Composition of Occupation

                                            Male           Integrated        Female              Total

   I. 1970 Definition
      A. 1970
         Men                                78.5             10.3              11.2            100.0
         Women                              12.7              9.3              78.0            100.0
         Total                              53.5              9.9              36.6            100.0
      B. 1980
         Men                                77.5             10.5              12.0            100.0
         Women                              19.9             11.2              68.9            100.0
         Total                              53.0             10.8              36.2            100.0
   II. 1980 Definition
       A. 1980
          Men                               72.9             14.5              12.5            100.0
          Women                             15.7             14.0              70.3            100.0
          Total                             48.6             14.3              37.1            100.0
       B. 1990
          Men                               71.3             14.2              14.6            100.0
          Women                             20.1             14.6              65.3            100.0
          Total                             47.9             14.4              37.8            100.0
   III. 1990 Definition
        A. 1990
           Men                              71.8             15.2              13.0            100.0
           Women                            19.7             16.1              64.2            100.0
           Total                            48.0             15.6              36.4            100.0

Notes: In each indicated year (t), an occupation is classified as male if pit < (Pt - .10) and female if pit >
(Pt + .10), where pit is the proportion that women comprise of occupational employment and Pt is the
proportion that women comprise of the labor force as a whole (equal to .380 in 1970, .425 in 1980, and
.457 in 1990). The remaining jobs are classified as integrated. For example, the number in the first row
and first column says that in 1970, 78.5 percent of male workers were in occupations which were
predominantly male (as defined in 1970); the number in the fourth row and first column says that in
1980, this percentage was 77.5.




                                                                                        occtab_rev_Jul98.doc 9/1/98
          Table 3. Distribution of Workers by Percent Female in Occupational Category

                                           Women as a Percent of Total in Occupation
                         0-10      11-20      21-40    41-60    61-80     81-90     91-100        Total
 I. 1970 Categories:
    A. 1970
       Men               50.0       21.4       14.4     5.5       5.1       2.5      1.0          100.0
       Women              3.2        5.8        9.2     8.1      18.5      21.3     33.9          100.0
       Total             32.2       15.5       12.4     6.5      10.2       9.7     13.5          100.0
    B. 1980
       Men               48.4       22.2       14.5     4.9       5.8       2.9      1.3          100.0
       Women              5.1        9.5       12.4     7.9      17.5      20.1     27.6          100.0
       Total             30.0       16.8       13.6     6.2      10.8      10.2     12.5          100.0
 II. 1980 Categories:
     A. 1980
        Men              36.8       16.1       27.5    11.2       5.1       2.6      0.7          100.0
        Women             2.1        4.0       15.0    15.6      17.4      21.5     24.4          100.0
        Total            22.1       10.9       22.2    13.1      10.3      10.6     10.8          100.0
     B. 1990
        Men              34.9       14.0       29.3    11.9       5.9       3.1      1.0          100.0
        Women             2.6        4.3       19.1    16.0      17.9      18.7     21.3          100.0
        Total            20.2        9.6       24.6    13.8      11.3      10.2     10.3          100.0

 III.1990 Categories:
     A. 1990
        Men              28.9       13.9       31.5    14.2       8.3       2.6      0.6          100.0
        Women             1.6        2.9       17.1    16.8      25.1      18.7     17.8          100.0
        Total            16.4        8.8       24.9    15.4      16.0      10.0      8.4          100.0


Notes: The table reads as follows: the number in, for example, the first row and first column of the table
indicates that in 1970, 50 percent of male workers were in occupations which were between 0 and 10
percent female (as defined in 1970); the number in the fourth row and first column indicates that this
percentage was 48.4 in 1980.




                                                                                     occtab_rev_Jul98.doc 9/1/98
  Table 4. Breakdown of the Contribution of Major Occupation to the Sex Composition and Occupation Mix
                 Effects by Male, Female and Integrated Occupations, 1970-80 and 1980-90

                                                  1970 - 1980                              1980 - 1990
Occupational Category                  Male Integrated    Female   Total         Male Integrated    Female        Total

A. Sex Composition Effect                                          -6.42                                          -4.28
Executive and managerial               -1.21    -0.02      -0.02   -1.25        -0.95       0.20        0.02      -0.73
Professional specialty                 -0.24     0.15      -0.73   -0.83        -0.41       0.04       -0.09      -0.47
Technicians                            -0.14     0.00      -0.04   -0.19        -0.02       0.03       -0.04      -0.02
Sales occupations                      -0.75    -0.01      -0.36   -1.12        -0.39       0.07       -0.64      -0.97
Administrative support                 -0.30     0.18      -0.74   -0.85        -0.15       0.04       -0.56      -0.67
Service occupations                    -0.46    -0.01      -1.48   -1.94        -0.33       0.05       -0.96      -1.24
Farming                                -0.19     0.02      0.01    -0.16         0.02       0.00        0.00       0.02
Precision production                   0.23      0.03      -0.06    0.19         0.14       0.02       -0.04       0.12
Operators and fabricators              0.15      0.02      -0.34   -0.18         0.09       0.01       -0.22      -0.13
Handlers and laborers                  -0.02      n.a.     -0.08   -0.10        -0.13        n.a.      -0.05      -0.19

B. Occupation Mix Effect                                           -2.01                                          -1.99
Executive and managerial               0.71      0.01      0.00     0.72         0.22       0.06        0.19       0.46
Professional specialty                 0.01      0.04      0.47     0.53         0.28       0.07        0.43       0.78
Technicians                            0.09      0.00      0.23     0.32         0.16       -0.02       0.16       0.30
Sales occupations                      -0.13    -0.01      -0.05   -0.19         0.36       0.01        0.18       0.56
Administrative support                 -0.01     0.08      -0.37   -0.30         0.05       -0.06      -1.35      -1.36
Service occupations                    0.06      0.02      -0.43   -0.34         0.19       0.01       -0.18       0.02
Farming                                -0.47     0.00      -0.01   -0.48        -0.16       0.00        0.02      -0.14
Precision production                   -0.33    -0.05      -0.14   -0.52        -1.04       0.01        0.03      -1.00
Operators and fabricators              -0.58     0.01      -0.71   -1.28        -0.86       -0.25      -0.29      -1.39
Handlers and laborers                  -0.36      n.a.     -0.10   -0.45        -0.10        n.a.      -0.13      -0.22

Notes: See Table 2 for the definition of male, female and integrated occupations. This designation corresponds to the
first year of the indicated period. n.a. = not applicable; that is, there are no integrated detailed occupations in this
major occupation.




 occtab_rev_Jul98.xls Table 4 9/1/98
                                    Table 7. Results of Weighted SUR Regressions

                Dependent Variable = (Change in proportion female in occupation) minus
                             (Change in proportion female in labor force)

                                                                             1970-1980                         1980-1990
                                                                         Coeff.                            Coeff.
Independent Variables                                                  (Std. Err.)   Mean                (Std. Err.)   Mean
Predominantly male occupation in initial year                           0.076 **    0.535                 0.071 **    0.486
    = 1 if percent female within occupation < 28.0                     (0.007)                           (0.005)
    in 1970 and < 32.5 in 1980, and 0 otherwise.
Integrated occupation in initial year                                   0.087 **           0.099          0.051 **           0.143
     = 1 if percent female within occupation is                        (0.009)                           (0.006)
     between 28.0 and 48.0 in 1970 and between
     32.5 and 52.5 in 1980), and 0 otherwise.
Growth of occupational employment                                      -0.001              0              0.020 **           0
   = growth rate of employment within                                  (0.005)                           (0.004)
   occupation (1970-1980 or 1980-1990) minus
   growth rate of the total labor force.
Executive and managerial                                                0.080 **           0.075          0.082 **           0.100
   = 1 if executive, administrative, managerial or                     (0.011)                           (0.007)
   management-related occupation, and 0
   otherwise.
Professional specialty                                                  0.023 *            0.110          0.057 **           0.118
    = 1 if professional specialty occupation, and 0                    (0.009)                           (0.007)
    otherwise.
Technicians                                                             0.045 **           0.023          0.013              0.030
    = 1 if technicians or related support                              (0.017)                           (0.011)
    occupation, and 0 otherwise.
Sales occupations                                                       0.055 **           0.101          0.022 **           0.099
    = 1 if a sales occupation, and 0 otherwise.                        (0.009)                           (0.007)
Administrative support                                                  0.066 **           0.166          0.061 **           0.169
   = 1 if an administrative support, including                         (0.009)                           (0.006)
   clerical, occupation, and 0 otherwise.
Service occupations                                                     0.020 *            0.128          0.028 **           0.131
    = 1 if a service occupation, and 0 otherwise.                      (0.009)                           (0.006)
Precision production                                                   -0.020 *            0.141         -0.002              0.131
    = 1 if a precision production, craft, or repair                    (0.008)                           (0.006)
    occupation, and 0 otherwise.
Constant                                                               -0.081 **           1.000         -0.084**            1.000
                                                                       (0.007)                           (0.005)
Adjusted R-squared                                                                                  .478

   * Significant at the 5 percent level on a two tailed test.
  ** Significant at the 1 percent level on a two tailed test.

Notes: Standard errors are in parentheses. Number of observations (occupations) is 470. Regressions are weighted by the square root
of cell size in the initial year. The omitted occupation category is operative, laborer, and farm occupations. Equations are estimated by
Seemingly Unrelated Regressions (SUR) techniques.




                                                                                                              occtab_rev_Jul98.doc 9/1/98
