1 Introduction
A recurrent theme in policy debates regarding social welfare programs is the
relationship between benets and the disincentives to work (Mott (1992)).
In the case of unemployment insurance, there is a great deal of evidence suggesting that it tends to increase both the duration of unemployment and the
probability of becoming unemployed.1 Moreover, work by Katz and Meyer
(1990), Corak (1993) and Meyer and Resenbaum (1995) nd evidence that
workers adjust their labor supply so that unemployment insurance may subsidize part year work. Despite this micro-econometric evidence, there does
not seem to be a direct relationship between unemployment insurance benets and the recent secular rise in the unemployed in the OECD2 . Lindbeck
(1995) has pointed to social norms and the sluggish response of individual
labor supply to changes in incentives as a potential source of supply side
hysteresis that may help explain this secular trend.
The goal of this paper is to build upon this idea, and see whether recent
trends in the use of UI in Canada can be explained using a simple adaptive
learning model. In a standard labor supply framework one supposes that
changes in worker alternatives results in an immediate behavioral response.
Moreover, whether or not the individual has had experience with these alternatives is irrelevant to his or her choice. However, there is a large body
of evidence demonstrating that experience context does matter for human
decision making.
This implies for example that a worker, even one who knows and understands the parameters of unemployment insurance, is likely to behave very
dierently from an individual who has received unemployment insurance in
the past, and hence has had direct experience with the state of unemployment. This distinction is hi-lighted in psychological models of learning where
laboratory evidence suggests that a person's behavior in choice situations
changes with repeated experience.3 With sucient experience behavior converges to what can be identied as the utility maximizing choice.
It is well recognized in the economics literature that it takes time for individuals to nd an optimal response, and hence short run supply elasticities
See for example Topel (1983), Meyer (1990) for the United States, and Ham and Rea
(1987) and Green and Riddell (1993) for Canada.
2 See for example Layard, Nickell and Jackman (1991).
3 The learning literature is very large and so a complete citation is not possible. See
Wickens (1992) for a useful overview. Bandura (1986) is classic reference on social learning.
1

3

are likely to be smaller than long run elasticities.4 This issue that we wish to
address in the study is the importance of this lagged adjustment in the case
of labor supply responses to changes in the unemployment insurance (UI)
parameters. A number of studies have shown that individuals adjust their
labor supply as a function of the parameters of the system in the predicted direction. However, in the case of the Canadian unemployment system, UI use
and unemployment increased steadily from 1971 until 1990, though during
this period benet level were constant or falling (see gures 1 and 2).
The hypothesis we wish to explore is that workers did not immediately
respond to the large increase in benets that occurred in 1971. Rather,
when workers experienced unemployment for the rst time, due to natural
turnover or a recession, this would expose them to the UI insurance and
cause them to begin exploring ways to use the UI system as a subsidy to
part year work. This was possible due to a number of the rule changes that
occurred in 1971. First, coverage of the unemployment insurance system was
expanded from 68% to 96% of the work-force. The number of weeks of work
needed to qualify for benets was reduced from 30 weeks in a two year period
to 8 weeks in a single year. The maximum number of weeks during which
benets could be received was increased to 28 or 44 weeks, depending on the
regional unemployment rate (in high unemployment regions benets are more
generous). The replacement rate was increased from 57% of previous earnings
to 66% (or 75% if claimant had dependents). The eect is summarized by
the subsidy rate (replacement rate*number of weeks of benets/number of
weeks needed to qualify), and is illustrated in Figure 1 for the period 1946
to 1992.
Given the much shorter qualication period, this creates an incentive to
for individuals to tailor their behavior to the parameters of the system, resulting in what many Canadians aectionately called the lotto 10/42. Work
10 weeks and win 42 weeks of paid holidays. The immediate impact of these
changes are readily visible in Figure 2, illustrating the evolution of use and
cost of the UI system. In 1972 there was a dramatic increase in both the
number of recipients of UI and the total cost of the program. However both
of these indexes continued to increase over the 1972-1992 period, with the
uctuations in outlay explained by the business cycle (for reference the unemSee Alchian (1950) for a nice dicussion of adjustment to utility maximizing behavior.
The fact that costly adjustment results in dierent long run and short run elasticities of
response is an old idea that goes back to at least Marshall (1948).
4

4

ployment rate is also illustrated in Figure 2). The cost of the unemployment
insurance system as a fraction of total labor income increased from about
3% in 1972 to 5% in 1991, a 66% increase. This occurred even though the
disincentives for use were either constant or decreased.5
To see how conditioning may help explain this observation consider a cohort of workers that were working fullyear in 1971, the date of the large
scale change to UI. Over time more and more workers from this cohort will
have experience unemployment and possibly received some UI. We nd that
the probability that an individual will receive UI increases when he or she
has had experience with the system in the past, implying that the fraction
of workers receiving UI should also increase over time, even though the parameters of the system are unchanged.6 This also creates a hysteresis eect
during recessions. A recession increases the number of workers who leave
fullyear employment and experience unemployment and UI. The conditioning or learning eect that we identify implies that at the end of the recession
the equilibrium number of workers who are unemployed should be greater,
and hence the economy does not return to its pre-recession equilibrium level
of employment. This may account for the rising trend in the unemployment
rate illustrated in Figure 2.
To ensure that we are identifying a behavioral change rather than a structural change in the economy we follow the behavior of individual workers using a large administrative data set. In addition to the usual controls, we are
able to control for individual eects, year eects and industry eects. Using
a random coecients probit we nd that rst time treatment with the unemployment insurance system permanently increases future use. In the next
section we present a discussion of the model. Section 3 presents that data,
while section 4 provides some simple results using a dierence-in-dierences
approach. Section 5 discusses the estimation strategy, while the results are
discussed and summarized in sections 6 and 7.
The earnings replacement rate of UI was reduced to 60% in 1978 (from 66% in 1971),
57% in 1990, and 55% in 1993; the minimum qualifying period was extented to 10 weeks
in 1978 (from 8 weeks in 1971), and to 12 weeks in 1990.
6 Heckman and Borjas (1980) call this eect occurence dependence.
5

5

2 The Eect of Unemployment Insurance on
Recipiency
For purposes of exposition it is useful to present a simple formal model that
captures many of the incentive eects of UI. Suppose that at time t all workers
are completely characterized by their base productivity denoted t, and the
value of home production denoted by ut: The base productivity of a person is
a composite variable representing the market value of education, occupation
choice and innate skills. Since this variable represents a market value, it will
vary over time due to onthejob training, technical change etc.
In addition to a worker's base productivity, the wage of a worker is also
aected by business cycle shocks, including seasonal shocks. Letting t denote the size of this shock in period t, suppose that the wage of a worker is
given by:
wt =  t +  t :
(1)
Abstracting away for the time required for search, individuals choose employment if and only if the wage is greater than the value of home production
or wt  ut. Let E () = f(; u) j  +   ug denote the set of worker characteristics that would result in full time employment in the absence of an
unemployment insurance system, while O () denotes the set of worker characteristics who are out of the labor force.
Workers who are receiving UI are supposed to be actively searching for
work, and hence should respond positively to the question Are you searching
for a job. Now suppose that search costs are negligible so that individuals
can nd work immediately, then the introduction of UI can result in an
increase in measured unemployment as follows. To simplify matters as much
as is possible suppose that once an individual has x weeks of insured earnings,
she or he is eligible for y weeks of benets equal to a fraction of the previous
wage. An individual with characteristics (; u) considers one of the following
three options (with the t subscripts dropped for convenience):
1. Work fullyear at a wage of w =  + :
2. Exit the labor force to receive a benet of u:
3. Work the number of periods necessary collect UI and then collect the
6

benets until exhaustion before beginning to work again7. Letting  =
x=(x + y ) be the fraction of time the worker must be employed to earn
y weeks of benets we have that the return to the individual is given
by ui =   w + (1 , )(u +  w) = ( + (1 , ) )w + (1 , )u: Let us
call a worker that follows this strategy a part year worker.
Individuals choosing to work part year are from the set of characteristics:
U (; ; ) = f(; ; u) j ui  max fw; ugg :

(2)

Notice that individuals with these characteristics are taken from both the set
E and O; hence the addition of a UI system creates an incentive for some
full time employees to work part year, while some individuals who are out
of the labor market, enter to work part year. Thus we have the following
observation.

Observation If workers receiving unemployment insurance report that they

are looking for work, then the addition of an unemployment insurance
system increases both measured unemployment and labor force participation.

This observation is consistent with the nding of Card and Ridell (1993)
that though unemployment grew in Canada during the 1980's, so did labor
force participation, particularly by women. An actual example is employment
in the arts. In Canada there a great deal of sectorial employment, such as
summer theater companies, that permits the entry of businesses that survive
because its employees are able to receive UI during the winter months. The
implications of parameter changes are summarized in the following proposition.

Proposition 1 Decreasing the entry requirement,
placement rate, , has the following eects:

; or increasing the re-

1. Participation in the labor force increases.
Given the linearity of the system, it is not dicult to show that if agents choose to
cycle in and out of UI then they will only work the minimum number of periods needed
to qualify. Exactly the same form of behavior is optimal with the more complex system
one observes in practice, though with uctuating labor demand they may work for more
periods, to qualify for a greater number of periods of benets.
7

7

2. Number of individuals receiving unemployment insurance per year increases.

Proof. This result follows immediately
from the observation that for   0
and  0 then U (; ; )  U (; 0; 0) ; with strict membership if (; ) 6=
0

( ; 0 ) :
Our data are a panel of individuals, and hence we cannot follow changes
in employer behavior. It is worth emphasizing that the supply side behavior
described here must also be consistent with changes in demand side behavior.
Firms, particularly those employing seasonal workers, are also learning about
and adapting to changes in UI parameters. The model illustrates that an
increased generosity of UI decreases the cost of seasonal labor supply, and
hence increases the number of seasonal jobs. Due to data limitations we are
not able to look at this question, however our analysis is not inconsistent
with changes in employment pattern by rms in response to UI changes.

2.1 Hysteresis

When the major change to the unemployment insurance system occurred
in 1971, this increased the incentives for individuals to subsidize partyear
employment with UI. Figure 2 shows that the rate of use of UI increased
sharply between 1971 and 1972. It then followed an upward trend between
1972 and 1992 even though the underlying incentives (subsidy rate) were
constant or declining. In this paper we present evidence that individuals
permanently changed their behavior after a bout of experience receiving UI.
While the immediate impact eect of the change in rules is consistent
with the standard economic model of incentives, the fact that use of the
system increased over time while benets if anything decreases is not. The
foundations for that model are based upon Savage (1972)'s theory of decision
making where it is assumed that each agent understands the consequences
of each action. As both Knight (1921) and Simon (1956) have emphasized,
individuals are not able in general to explore all possibilities before making
a decision, but rather consider the consequence of actions that they perceive
as salient for the current the decision.
The two most important mechanism for learning are experience and social learning. In the many laboratory studies of human behavior we nd that
individuals adjust their behavior in the direction of increased rewards, but
this response is not immediate. Rather individuals modify their behavior
8

with repeated trials with a given situation.8 In the context of the unemployment insurance system, this implies that the possibility of cycling in and out
of the unemployment insurance system is not salient for the decision making of individuals who work full time. However, individuals who lose their
jobs, for what ever reason, would then apply for UI and become aware of the
parameters of the system, and hence adjust their behavior appropriately.
In a recent study sponsored by Human Resources Canada, Bloom, Fink,
Lui-Gurr, Bancroft and Tattrie (1997) nd evidence that even in 1995, displaced workers who had been working full time for many years had less
knowledge of the parameters of the UI system than did repeat users.9 This
study of the consequence of a re-employment subsidy for worker behavior
nds that the re-employment bonus had little impact for repeat UI users,
while there was some preliminary evidence that displaced workers might alter their behavior as a consequence of the supplement. Together these results
suggest that even in 1995, there were signicant dierences in the knowledge
and response rates of rst time UI users compared to repeat users.
In our study of workers from 1971 until 1992, we look for evidence of
a hysteresis eect. That is we explore the extent to which displaced workers adapt their behavior as a consequence of experience with UI, and as a
consequence of this experience are more likely to become a repeat UI users.
One reason that the behavior of displaced workers and repeat UI workers
is dierent may be due to selection eects. We deal with this problem by
exploiting the panel aspect of the data, combined with the large sample size
to correct for individual dierences in unobserved characteristics.
If experience with the system does indeed alter one's behavior, then after
the initial increase in benets, we would expect the equilibrium unemployment rate to increase over time as more people experience unemployment.
The eect would be particularly evident during a recession, where we would
expect that the equilibrium level of unemployment to ratchet up after each
downturn. This is what we observe in gure 2.
As Bandura (1986) has emphasized, social learning has an important
impact on behavior. In the context of UI, we would expect the impact of
individual learning to be lower for those social groups that have high levels of
UI recipiency. In those groups individuals learn about UI from their friends
8 This literature is too vast adequately cite here. One textbook that provides a useful
overview of the literature is Wickens (1992). See MacLeod (1998) for a formal economic
model of this phenomena.
9 Chapter 7.

9

and spouses, and hence are able to adapt their behavior given full knowledge
of the alternatives. An implication is that if we can identify coherent social
groups with signicant UI recipiency, then the treatment eect from the rst
spell of unemployment for a member of such a group should be smaller. One
implication for our data set is that the learning or treatment eect should
be smaller is areas with high repeat use, such as the Maritime provinces,
compared to low unemployment provinces such as Ontario or Alberta.
The next section describes the administrative data set used in this study.
Section 4 uses a dierenceindierences approach to see if previous experience has an eect on the probability of use. Section 5 describes a random
eects probit model in which the probability of using UI is modelled as a
function of a dummy variable indicating if the worker has experienced at
least one spell of UI in the past. If the coecient of this parameter is positive, then this implies that the probability of receiving UI has permanently
increased after this experience.

3 Data and Descriptive Statistics
We analyze the dynamics of UI recipiency in Canada using a large longitudinal data set for the years 1972 to 1992. To create this data set, we combine
the Status Vector File of Employment Immigration Canada (EIC) from
1971 to 1993 with income tax data from the T4 Supplementary File of
EIC from 1972 to 1991.
These two data sets are complementary. The Status Vector File contains
data pertaining to all unemployment insurance claims established by each
claimant whose Social Insurance Number (SIN) ends in the digit '5' (10
percent of the population). It also contains some demographic information
such as the age and sex of the claimant as well as the UI region in which the
claim was led. The drawback of this le is that it has very little information
on what happens to claimants before and after their UI claims.
By contrast, the T4 Supplementary File provides no demographic information on workers but it contains records of all sources of T4 income for
workers whose SIN ends in the digit '5'.10 It also provides information on
the location and industry of the employer that issued the T4. This le can
be used to identify whether a UI claimant received some labor income before
and after each UI spell. By combining the two les, it is thus possible to
10

The T4 tax form is the Canadian counterpart to the U.S. W2 form.

10

reconstruct a detailed longitudinal history of UI and labor income recipiency
from 1972 to 1991 for a large sample of workers. Note, however, that the
sample only includes individuals who established at least one UI claim between 1971 and 1993.11 This is a potential source of selection biases that we
address in the empirical analysis.
More precisely, we extract from the Status Vector File all claims that
eventually led to the payment of regular UI benets in the rst week of
payment. We exclude workers ling claims for special benets (seasonal,
sickness, maternity, etc.) from the analysis. We use the benet period commencement of each claim to identify the year in which the UI spell started.
Once we have identied all the years from 1972 to 1992 in which at least one
spell started, we merge this information to the information contained in the
T4 Supplementary File. From this le we know when a person rst received
T4 income. This enables us to identify a year of entry in the sampling
universe for each UI claimant.
Table 1 indicates that for close to half of the male UI claimants (slightly
less for women), the year of entry is simply the year in which the T4 le
starts, that is 1972. For most of these workers, the year of entry is really a
year of entry in the sample as opposed to a year of entry in the work-force.
For the rest of the sample of claimants, what we call the year of entry may
either be a true year of entry in the work-force or the year of re-entry for
people who earned some T4 income before 1972 but no T4 income in 1972.
Table 1 nevertheless indicates that the age of entry of half of the claimants
(age at which T4 income is rst recorded) is 20 or less. This suggests that
most of the 50.7 percent of men and 48.6 percent of women whose year of
entry is 1973 or later are not re-entrants in the work-force.
Why is it so important to know when a claimant rst entered the workforce? The answer is that if we want to nd out how previous use of the
system aects how long it takes before the person receives UI again, we need
to know how long it took before the person used UI for the rst time. Since
dierent people join the work-force at dierent times, we need to have some
idea of when the person entered the workforce to compute the duration before
the rst UI spell. Our measure of entry is imperfect since some students earn
T4 income during summer jobs even if they have not made a permanent
11 A comparison between our administrative data set and the 1981 Canadian Census
indicates that over 50 percent of the population established at least one clain between
1971 and 1993. This fraction is as high as 75 percent for some younger cohort of males
(those born in 1951).

11

transition to the work force. We nevertheless feel this is the best we can do
with the available data. We will discuss these issues again in Section IV.
We also use information from the T4 Supplementary File to compute a
coarse measure of eligibility to UI. The point is that someone who has not
worked at any time during year t and year t-1 can never qualify for a new
UI benet period starting during year t. This UI eligibility variable can thus
be used to correct for potential estimation biases likely to arise when people
exit the workforce temporarily or permanently because of early retirement,
illness, etc.
Once the year of entry has been identied in the T4 File, this information
is merged to the information about demographic characteristics and UI spells
from the Status Vector File. The two les are combined into a yearly panel
data le. There is one observation per person in the panel for each year
(from the year of entry to 1992). For each observation we know whether
the individual received some T4 income and whether he or she initiated a UI
spell during the year. Note that we do not keep the observation in the sample
when the person is under 15 or over 65 years old. We also exclude people
born before 1912 or after 1972. The resulting sample contains 10,253,535
observations for 618,911 men who have started a UI spell at least once in
the years 1972 to 1992. The comparable sample of women contains 8,074,326
observations for 494,697 women.
A few statistics on the composition of the men's sample are reported in
Table 2. The average age in the sample is slightly under 35. The regional
composition of the sample more or less reects the relative weight of each
province in the national population. Note however, that Quebec and especially the Maritimes are over-represented. This simply reects the fact that a
larger fraction of workforce have received UI at least once in these provinces
than in provinces west of Quebec.
The table also shows that men in the sample received at least some T4
income in four years out of ve and started a UI spell in one year out of
ve. These proportions are slightly smaller for women. The probability of
receiving a UI claim is disaggregated by provinces and by year in the second
column of Table 2. Once again, there are important EastWest dierences
as people in Quebec and the Maritimes are more likely to start a UI spell
than people in other provinces. Not surprisingly, the probability of starting
a spell of UI is also counter-cyclical.
12

4 Longitudinal Analysis: Dierence-in-Dierences
Estimates
The descriptive statistics reported in Table 2 do not exploit the longitudinal
aspect of the data, nor do they give any indication on how, for example,
the past history of UI recipiency is related with the current probability of
starting a UI spell. In what follows we present some descriptive statistics
that highlight the dynamic aspects of UI recipiency.
One advantage of working with a large data set like ours is that it is easy
to control for observed characteristics by dividing the sample in homogeneous
groups of people and doing the analysis separately for each group. In what
follows we select three cohort of men and three cohorts of women to present
some descriptive evidence focusing on the longitudinal aspect of the data.
The six cohorts consist of men born in 1931, 1941, and 1951 respectively.
The three particular birth years are selected so that people are old enough
to be in the workforce in 1972 and young enough to still be in the workforce
in 1992.
If learning eects are important, a given experience with the UI system
should have a larger impact on the future probability of receiving UI for
people who had no previous experience with the UI system than for people
who had some previous experience. One simple measure of the magnitude of
learning eects is thus obtained by comparing the evolution in the probability
of UI recipiency of one group of workers that have no previous UI experience
with an otherwise comparable group of workers who have had some previous
experience.
More concretely, consider a xed cohort of workers at the beginning of
the 198183 recession. Some of these workers have received UI in the past
while some others have not. Focusing on the 198183 period is an interesting
natural experiment since it exposed many workers to unemployment
and UI recipiency for the rst time in their careers. If learning is important,
the post-recession probability (e.g. 1984-86) of these workers to receive UI
should be higher than the probability that would have prevailed if they had
never been exposed to UI. Although this hypothetical probability cannot
be directly observed, a control group of workers that were exposed to UI
before the recession can be used to calculate the change in the probability of
receiving UI between the recession (198183) and the postrecession period
(198486) that would prevail in the absence of learning eects. The point
13

is that since these workers have already been exposed to the system, a new
exposure during the recession should not have any additional eect on the
future probability of receiving UI. The change in probability for workers that
have been exposed before is thus net of learning eects.
This suggests a simple dierenceindierences estimator of the eect
of learning on the probability of using UI. Panel A of Table 3 reports separate
dierencein-dierences estimates of the eect of learning for the cohorts of
men and women born in 1931, 1941, and 1951. Column 1 to 3 indicate the
probability of receiving UI at least one during the periods 1981-83, 1984-86,
and 1987-89, respectively. These probabilities are simple empirical frequencies for all individuals of the relevant cohorts in the administrative data.
While this probability decreases sharply in the post-recession years for workers who had been exposed to UI before the 1981-83 recession (rows 1b, 2b,
and 3b), it remains relatively stable, at least for the 1984-86 period, for workers who had never received UI before the recession. Relatively speaking, a
rst exposure to UI during the recessions increases the probability of receiving UI in the future. These results suggest that part of the upward trend
in the use of UI is due to the fact that exposure to the system permanently
increases the probability of future use.
One potential problem with this exercise is that, by denition, all individuals in our administrative data set have to receive UI at least once between
1972 and 1992. By denition, individuals who had not experienced UI before
1981 have to do so between 1981 and 1992. Otherwise, they would not be
included in the sample. One way to think about this problem is that we are
missing observations for individuals who never collect UI. This problem is
easily xed since the size of this residual category is the dierence between
the total size of the corresponding population and the number of individuals
included in the administrative data. For instance the number of men born
in 1931 included in our data set represent about a half of the total population of men born in 1931 enumerated in the 1981 Canadian Census.12 We
can thus recompute the probabilities of receiving UI for individuals with no
previous experience by incorporating the information from the Census in the
calculations.
These corrected probabilities are reported in Panel B of Table 3. The
12 Of course, these caculations take account of the fact that the public use les of the
1981 Census are a 2 percent sample of the population, while the administrative data set
is a 10 percent sample.

14

corresponding dierence-in-dierences estimates suggest that a rst exposure
to UI permanently increase the probability of future use in a three years period by 7 to 11 percentage points, which is quite signicant from an economic
point of view.

5 Estimation by Random Eect Probit
In order to look more formally at the dynamics of UI recipiency, consider the
following model for the probability that individual i starts a spell of UI in
period t:
Pr(Uit = 1jUit, ; xit; Lit ) = F ( i + t + Uit, + x0it +  Lit +(x0it  )Lit ); (3)
where i = 1; ::; N , t = 1; ::; T , F(.) is a cumulative distribution function.
In this paper, we simply assume that F(.) is a unit normal. The cumulative
distribution function F(.) is increasing in its arguments. An increase in
arguments such as i or x0it will thus increase the probability that individual
i starts a spell of UI in period t. The arguments in the function F(.) are listed
below:
1

1

0

1

 Uit : dummy variable equal to one if individual i starts a UI spell during





year t,
i : time invariant random eect,
 t : aggregate time eect,
xit : vector of covariates including the age of person i; the parameters of
the UI system in individual i's region at time t and industry dummies.
Lit : a variable indicating whether or not individual i has learned how
to use the UI system at time t. In the simplest version of the learning
model, this variable is one if the individual has received unemployment
insurance in the past, and zero otherwise.

In what follows, we refer to Lit as a learning variable although, more
generally, it can simply be viewed as a variable indicating whether the person
has ever collected UI in the past. The parameter  relates the learning
variable to the probability of receiving UI, while the vector of parameters 
0

1

15

indicates whether variables in the vector xit (such as the replacement rate
of UI) have a dierent impact on UI recipiency for people who have learned
than for people who have not learned. In other words,  captures possible
interactions between learning eects and variables such as the parameters of
the UI system.
To understand why learning eects can be interpreted as hysteresis
eects in the use of UI, consider the simple case in which  is equal to zero.
From the denition of the learning variable Lit , it is clear that receiving UI
for the rst time switches the learning variable Lit from 0 to 1 and thus
permanently increases the probability of receiving UI, provided that  is
positive. This basic property of learning eects remains when  is dierent
from zero except that the size of the hysteresis eect then depends on the
value of variables such as replacement and subsidy rates of the UI system.
One diculty in isolating the importance of learning eects is that many
other factors may explain why the history of UI recipiency of a given person i,
(Ui ; :::; Uit, ); may help predict whether the person will receive UI in period
t. To see this, note that except for the learning term  Lit + (x0it  )Lit ,
equation (3) is a standard statistical model for a binary variable with panel
data (see Chamberlain (1980), Heckman (1978), and Heckman (1981a)). In
such models, there are two reasons why the history of UI recipiency of a given
person i, (Ui ; :::; Uit, ); may help predict whether the person will receive UI
in period t. First, certain individuals may be more likely to be unemployed
and to receive UI because they are lessskilled and/or they have a high
marginal valuation of leisure. These factors are summarized by the random
person eect i. Since this random eect is by denition xed for a given
person i over time, it increases the probability that the person will receive UI
in any time period. As a result, previous use of UI will be strongly correlated
with present use of UI since some people are always likely to receive UI (high
i ), while some people are not (low i ). This could give the misleading
impression that previous use of UI is a cause of the present use of UI. This
is called the problem of unobserved heterogeneity.
The history of UI recipiency of a given person i may also help predict
whether the person will receive UI in period t because of the presence of the
lagged dependent variable Uit, in equation (3). Note that in the estimation
we consider models that include further lags of Uit, . We call this particular form of state dependence an adjustment lag. It is natural to expect an
adjustment lag in the data for a variety of reasons. For instance, it is well
known that the rate of job separation is higher in the rst year on a job than
1

1

0

1

1

1

0

1

1

1

1

16

1

in subsequent years (see ?). In other words, a job separation is more likely
to occur at time t if there was also a separation at time t , 1 than otherwise. Since UI recipiency is positively correlated with job separations, a UI
spell is more likely to be observed in year t if Uit, = 1 than if Uit, = 0.
Alternatively, workers who have lost some specic human capital because
of permanent job displacement may be more likely to be unemployed than
if they still had that specic human capital. A UI spell due to permanent
job displacement may thus increase the future probability of receiving UI.
They key dierence between an adjustment lag and learning is that the adjustment lag only temporarily aects the probability of receiving UI, while
learning eects are permanent.
It should thus be clear that the mere fact that the history of UI recipiency
(Ui ; :::; Uit, ) may help predict whether the person will receive UI in period
t is not a proof of the existence of learning eects. The econometric challenge consists in isolating learning eects from the presence of unobserved
heterogeneity and adjustment lags. We discuss the econometric strategy in
detail below.
The increase in use of UI may also be due to structural change both over
time and by industry. One explanation for the changes may be due to a shift
from industries employing workers fullyear, to industries that encourage
partyear work. To deal with this potential explanation we include a full set
of time and industry controls. Thus if a worker is unemployed for the rst
time, and then moves into an industry that has a great deal of partyear
workers, then even though the use of UI goes up, the estimated learning
parameter in this case would be zero.
It is not possible to rule out learning on the part of the rm and worker
together. Since UI is not experience rated in Canada, it is possible that
rms have an incentive to learn along with the worker the best way to use
the UI system to subsidize partyear work. However, if this eect is occurring
across all rms over time, then the time controls would tend to eliminate any
measured learning eects. Given this set of controls, any positive learning
eect is evidence that experiencing a spell of UI has the eect of increasing
future use. Given that we do not observe all the factors that aect a worker's
decision, our results can be expected to underestimate the importance of
learning and slow behavioral change.
One nal remark is that the variable Lit is only a crude measure of learning. People may also learn how to use the UI system through friends and
family. This yields the interesting prediction that the relative role of past
1

1

1

17

1

UI experience in learning how to use the system should be less important in
regions and/or industries in which the use of UI is widespread. One testable
implication of this learning model is thus that the coecient should be lower
in high UI regions such as the Maritimes or Quebec than in low UI regions
such as Ontario or Alberta.

5.1 Estimation methods

Under the assumption that F(.) is a unit normal, the probability that individual i will start a spell of UI in period t can be rewritten as:
Prob(Uit = 1jUit, ; Lit ; xit; i) = ( i + t + zit0 !);

(4)

1

where:

zit0 ! = Uit,1 + x0it + 0 Lit + (x0it 1 )Lit :
(5)
The probability of observing a sequence (Ui1; :::; UiT ) of UI spells is thus

equal to:

T
Y
t=1

( i + t + zit0 !) ,U (1 , ( i + t + zit0 !)U :
(1

it )

(6)

it

This probability is the essential building block of the likelihood function
to be maximized. There are two important issues, however, that need to
be addressed before the model can be estimated. First, the probability in
equation (6) is conditional on a particular value of the random eect i. Since
the random eect is not observed, we need to integrate over its distribution to
obtain an unconditional probability of observing the sequence (Ui ; :::; UiT ):
Z Y
T
( i + t + zit0 !) ,U (1 , ( i + t + zit0 !)U dG( i);
(7)
1

(1

it )

it

t=1

where G(.) is the cumulative distribution function of the random eect i.
The log-likelihood function of the model is then obtained by summing up
the log of (7) over all the observations:
N
X
i=1

log

Z Y
T
t=1

(

0 (1,U
i +  t + zit ! )

it )

(1 , (

18

!

0 U
i +  t + zit ! ) dG( i ) :
it

(8)

Since we have already assumed that the cumulative distribution function
F(.) was normal, it seems natural to follow authors like Heckman (1981b) and
assume that G(.) is also normal. In general, evaluating the log-likelihood
function (8) requires some numerical integration, which is computationally
burdensome in a large panel data set like the one used here. We thus follow
the initial suggestion of Lehman and Manski (1981) of randomly drawing
values of i to evaluate the likelihood function. See also Gourieroux and
Monfort (1993) for a recent survey of simulation-based estimation methods.
To see the basic idea of the simulated maximum likelihood (SML) method,
rst rewrite the random eect i as i = +  ui, where ui is a standard
normal random variable and  is the standard deviation of i. The loglikelihood function (8) can then be approximated by randomly drawing K
values uei ; :::; ueKi of ui:
1

N
X
i=1

log[ 1

K

K Y
T
X
( ( + t + zit0 ! +  uej )(1,U ) (1 , ( + t + zit0 ! +  uej )U )]:
it

it

j =1 t=1

(9)
We will refer to the estimates obtained by maximizing equation (9) as
SML estimates. It is well known (Lehman and Manski (1981), Gourieroux
and Monfort (1993)) that SML estimates are only consistent when the number of draws K goes to innity. We thus use K=20 in the empirical analysis
presented below.13
The second important estimation issue arise because of the nature of
the administrative les that we used to construct the data set used for the
estimation. Since the Status Vector only contains information on workers
who le a UI claim at least one, we have no demographic information on
workers who never led a claim. We thus have to correct for the potential
sample selection biases that could result from the way the nal sample is
constructed.
One way of handling this selection problem would be to use the parameters of the model to compute the probability that a worker experiences
at least one spell of UI during the sample period. A resulting conditional
log-likelihood function could then be maximized. It would yield consistent
We noticed in several empirical experiments that there were only small dierences
between the estimates obtained with 5, 10, 20 or 100 random draws (results from these
experiments are available on request).We are thus conservative in using a K as large as 20.
13

19

estimates of the parameters.14
The simpler correction for sample selection we use here consists in including people who never received UI in the sample. Although this cannot
be done directly because of the limitations of the administrative data les,
some external data sources can be used to estimate the fraction of people who
never received UI. More precisely, we use the 1981 Canadian Census to compute the total number of individuals who earned some labor income in 1980
by age, sex, and province of residence. We also use our merged T4-Status
Vector le to calculate the corresponding number of individuals who worked
in 1980 and received UI at least once between 1972 and 1992. We then use
the two sets of numbers to compute an estimate of the fraction of all wage
earners in 1980 who received UI at least once between 1972 and 1992. We
nally use these estimated fractions to generate a random sample of non-UI
recipients who look exactly like UI recipients except that we set their Uit 's
to zero in all periods. We then maximize the log-likelihood function (9) over
a sample composed of the subsample of UI-recipients who earned some wage
income in 1980 and the articial subsample of non-UI recipients who also
earned some wage income in 1980.15
A further advantage of the SML method is that it is straightforward
to incorporate heterogeneity in other parameters than the intercept . It
seems natural to introduce heterogeneity in the learning parameter  since
a rst experience with UI may have dierent eects on dierent workers. To
introduce heterogeneity in the learning parameter, write:
0

0i = 0 +   vi ;

where vi is a standard normal variable and  is the standard deviation of  i .
The log-likelihood function can now be approximated by randomly drawing
K values uei ; :::; ueKi of ui and K values vei ; :::; veiK of vi :
N
P
log[ K P (QTt ( + t + zit0 ! +  uej +  vej Lit ) ,U
(10)
i
j
0
j
j
U
(1 , ( + t + zit ! +  ue +  ve Lit ) )]:
0

1

1

1

=1

=1

(1

=1

it )

it

We used this approach in a previous version of this paper and found results that are
very similar to those reported here.
15 This procedure is still potentially biased since people must have worked in 1980 to
enter the sample. The evidence presented in the previous version of this paper suggests,
however, that this type of selection bias has only a small eect on the estimates.
14

20

Note that ui and vi will be positively correlated if the learning eect and
the probability of a rst experience with UI are both larger some workers than
others. Following Gourieroux and Monfort (1993), the correlation between
the heterogeneity in the learning eect and in the intercept is introduced by
redening  i as
0

0i = 0 + r1 ui + r2 vi ;

q
where r =  = , r =  ,  = ,  is the correlation between the
heterogeneity in the learning eect and in the intercept, and the error component vi is now dened as the part of the heterogeneity in the learning eect
which is uncorrelated with the heterogeneity in the intercept. This model
with correlated heterogeneity in the intercept and in the learning eect is
easily estimated by replacing  uej +  vej Lit with  uej + (r uej + r vej )Lit
in equation (10), drawing K independent values for both uej and vej , and
numerically maximizing the resulting log-likelihood function.
Though our model is a random eect model, it is important to point out
that it takes implicitly into account of the correlation between the person
eect i and the explanatory variables related to previous use of UI (Uit,
and Lit ) since we are jointly modelling the probability of receiving UI in all
sample years.
1

2

2

1

2

1

5.2 Results

Given the numerical burden associated with maximizing the loglikelihood
function, we only perform the estimation over a randomly selected subsample of the main sample . In order to obtain estimates precise enough for
several demographic groups in each province, we randomly select a 1in5
sample for Newfoundland, Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, and Saskatchewan,
a 1in6 sample for Manitoba, a 1in8 sample for Alberta, a 1in20 sample
for British Columbia, and a 1in50 sample for Quebec and Ontario. Prince
Edward Island, Yukon and Northwest Territories are excluded from the estimation since these regions cannot be identied separately in the public use
release of the 1981 Census micro data.
For both men and women in each province, we further divide the sample
in three subsamples based on the year of birth. The rst demographic subsample includes individuals born before 1946 who were all old enough to be
in the labor force in 1972. The second sample is a sample of babyboomers
21

born from 1946 to 1955 while the third sample of individuals born after 1955
were unlikely to have entered the workforce in 1972. We also limit our analysis to observations that satisfy the eligibility rule of having received some
T4 income during the current or the previous year. Using this selection rule
limits potential biases caused by people who permanently exit the labor force
for various reasons. We have also estimated our models without this selection
rule and found very similar results.
We rst estimate separate models for each of the six demographic groups
(two genders and three cohorts) in each province. In each of the 54 random
eect probit models, we include the learning variable, the rst four lags of
the dependent variable (Uit, to Uit, ), a full set of year dummies, industry dummies, age and age squared. We decided to include four lags of the
dependent variable after observing that the estimated eect of further lags
was rarely statistically dierent from zero. Table 4 reports estimates from
models in which unobserved heterogeneity is only included in the intercept.
Unobserved heterogeneity is introduced in both the intercept and the learning coecient in Table 5. We do not include any interactions between the
learning variable and other variables in these simple models. The parameter
 is thus implicitly set to zero.
Estimates of the learning parameter  are reported in Table 4A. While
the estimated eect is on average positive, some interesting patterns seem to
emerge from the Table. A rst pattern is that learning eects tend to be large
and positive for men born before 1946 but much smaller and often negative
for women and younger men.16 In addition, learning eects are largest in
Ontario, Saskatchewan, Alberta, and British Columbia, four provinces in
which the use of UI is less pervasive than in the rest of the country.
These two patterns of results are consistent with the role of social versus
individual learning mentioned earlier in the text. The more widespread the
use of UI is in a region at a point of time, the less previous experience
with UI will aect the propensity to use UI. The point is simply that when
everybody else uses the system, a rst experience with the system will not
teach a person anything he or she did not already know through family or
friends. The results reported in Table 4A thus support the view that younger
1

4

1

0

Interestingly, there was a substantial decline in the employment rate of older men in
Canada relative to the United States during the 1970s and 1980s. From the mid-1970s to
the late 1980s, the employment rate of men age 55 to 64 declined by 7 percentage points
in the United States but by 12 percentage points in Canada. This dierence is consistent
with learning eects being larger for older men than for other groups in the workforce.
16

22

cohorts of men and women living in areas where the use of UI is more wide
spread already knew how the system worked before receiving UI for the rst
time. It is hard to see how other theories of occurrence dependence such as
models of addiction or other sources of vicious circles could explain the
pattern of results reported in Table 4A. For example, if people get addicted to
UI in the way they get addicted to cigarette smoking, there is no reason why
the eect of rst time use of UI would vary across cohorts and regions. By
contrast, the substitutability between individual and social learning provides
a simple rationalization for the patterns observed in the data.
It is important to point out, however, that there is a lot of persistence in
the propensity to use UI that has little to do with learning. The four lagged
values of the dependent variable are positive and statistically signicant for
all demographic groups in all provinces. To give an idea of the magnitude of
the eects, we report the sum of the estimated coecients on the four lags
of the dependent variable in Table 4B. The sum of these four coecients is
on average much larger than the size of the estimated learning eects. This
suggests that labor market shocks can have relatively large eects on the
propensity to use UI that will persist over several years.
The average learning eect becomes substantially larger when unobserved
heterogeneity is also introduced in the learning eect in Table 5. In Table
5A, the average learning eect is positive for all provinces and all age groups.
For all practical purpose, the estimated learning eect is positive for each individual demographic group in Ontario and in Western Canada. The results
reported in Table 5A thus reinforce our previous conclusion about the substitutability between individual and social learning. Note also that the sum
of the coecients on the four lags of the dependent variable is smaller in
Table 5B than in Table 4B. There is also some variation in this sum across
provinces and demographic groups, suggesting there may be problems in
identifying the learning eect separately from the eect of the lags of the
dependent variable.
We have thus reestimated a more constrained version of the model in
which the lagged dependent variables as well as age and year dummies are
constrained to have the same eect in the nine provinces. For each of the
three groups of men and women, this constrained model is estimated on a
pooled sample of the nine provincial samples used in Table 4. We also include
a set of province dummies to allow for dierences in the intercept in each
province.
One further advantage of working with a pooled sample is that we can
23

exploit the variation of the parameters of the UI system over regions and over
time to estimate the eect of these parameters on the propensity to use UI.
We combine these UI parameters into a single subsidy rate of UI dened
as the replacement rate multiplied by the ratio of the maximum number of
weeks of eligibility of someone who has only worked the minimum number of
weeks required to qualify over the minimum number of weeks to qualify. An
increase in the subsidy rate tends to increase the fraction workers who work
part-year and regularly collect UI (Section 2). It should thus have a positive
eect on the probability of receiving UI. One interesting hypothesis we can
also test in this setting is whether the subsidy rate has a larger eect on
people who had some previous experience with the UI system than on people
who never had such experience. In terms of equation (3), this means that the
component of the vector of parameters  corresponding to the subsidy rate
(one of the element of xit ) should be positive. To insure that the estimated
value of this parameter does not simply reect omitted trends or regional
dierences in the size of the learning eect, we also interact the learning
variable with the full set of year and province dummies.
The random eect probit estimates of the pooled models for men are
reported in Table 6. The results for women are reported in Table 7. In
both cases, we estimate models with unobserved heterogeneity in both the
intercept and the learning coecient. Given the large number of parameter
estimates reported in Tables 6 and 7, we only discuss few broad patterns in
the results. The main conclusions that emerge from these Tables are:
1

1. With few exceptions, there is no longer much of a tendency for the
learning eect to be smaller in the Maritimes and in Quebec than in
other provinces. This means that the pattern found in Tables 5A and
6A may be a spurious consequence of the fact that it is hard to separately identify the learning eect from the eect of lags of the dependent
variable. An alternative interpretation is that it is inappropriate to restrict the eect of lags of the dependent variable to be constant across
provinces.
2. The subsidy rate always has a positive and signicant eect on the
probability of receiving UI. These eects are quite small, however, in
economic terms. According to the parameter estimates, the impact of a
100 percent increase in the subsidy rate on the probability of receiving
UI is 2 to 3 percentage points for most of the estimated specications.
24

The eect of the subsidy rate does not tend to be systematically larger,
however, for individuals who have been exposed to UI in the past than
for individuals who have not been exposed.
3. There is no systematic pattern in the learning eect over time except
for the cohort born in 1946-55 for which it trends upward.
4. The variance of the heterogeneity components is signicantly larger
than zero in most of the specications. Furthermore, the error components reecting heterogeneity in the intercept and in the learning eect
are positively correlated for men. This is consistent with the simple
model of employment and unemployment presented in Section 2 (the
probability of receiving UI for a rst time and the eect of a rst exposure are both larger for marginal than for non-marginal workers). This
correlation is negative, however, for older cohorts of women but tends
to become more positive for younger cohorts. We thus conjecture that
the negative correlation is due to dierences in labor force participation
behavior of older cohorts of men and women.
Taken together, the results reported in Tables 4 to 7 suggest that one's
rst experience with UI has a permanent eect on the future probability of
receiving UI. This is especially clear for older cohorts of men. This pattern
of results is partly consistent with the idea that individual or social learning
about the parameters of the UI system has an impact on employment and
unemployment behavior. It could also be consistent, however, with other
sources of hysteresis coming from the supply side of the market.
The main results are very robust to the choice of estimation procedure.
For example, we have re-estimated the main specications using a linear
probability model with xed eects. To eliminate the xed eect, we take rst
dierences and instrument the lagged dependent variables and the learning
variables with further lags of the UI variable.17 The results reported in
Appendix Table 1 are very similar to the SML estimates of the random eect
17 A simplied version of the linear probability model is U = U
,1 + x0 + 0 L +
+  . The xed eect is eliminated by taking rst dierences: U = U ,1 +
x0 + 0L +  .
Since  is correlated with U ,1 (by construction), both U ,1 and L can be
correlated with it. Consistent estimates can nevertheless be obtained by instrumenting
U ,1 and L with further lags of the UI variables (U ,2 , U ,3 , etc.).
it

i

it

it

it

it

it

it

it

it

it

it

it

i

it

it

it

it

25

it

it

probit model. In particular, the learning eect tends to be larger for older
cohorts than for younger ones.

5.3 Summary of the Findings: How Big Are the Learning Eects?

Both the dierenceindierences approach and the random eect probit
model suggest that learning plays a signicant role in the probability of receiving UI. Simple calculations suggest that learning eects are large enough
to explain a large fraction of the 22.5 percentage point gap in unemployment rates between Canada and the United States that emerged in the early
1980s.
To see this, rst notice that both the dierenceindierences and the
random eect probit estimates indicate that a rst exposure to UI increases,
on average, the future probability of receiving UI by 34 percentage points a
year. This is easily seen for the dierenceindierences models for which a
rst exposure increases the probability of future use by around 10 percentage
points over a 3 years period (Table 3), or at least 34 percentage points a
year.18 .
In the case of the random eect probit model, the eect of learning on
the probability of receiving UI depends on workers' type (unobserved heterogeneity) as well as on the size of the learning parameter. Consider a learning
parameter of 0.2 (average of the parameters in Table 5) and a variance of
unobserved heterogeneity in the intercept of 0.27, which is the average estimated variance for women. In this case, the eect of learning on the future
probability of receiving UI varies from 5 percentage points for lessskilled
workers (5th percentile of the distribution of unobserved heterogeneity) to
1 percent for highlyskilled workers (95th percentile of the distribution of
unobserved heterogeneity). The average eect is around 3 percentage points,
which is comparable to the dierence-indierences estimates.19
Since over 50 percent of individuals in the sample period eventually receive UI at least once, learning eects can potentially explain a 1.5-2 perSince many workers receive UI more than once over a 3 years period, the yearly
probability exceeds a third of the probability over a 3 years period.
19 Using a variance of unobserved heterogeneity smaller than 0.27 yields the same average
eect of learning. It simply reduces the eect for lessskilled workers and increases the
eect for highlyskilled workers, leaving the average eect virtually unchanged.
18

26

centage points increase in the probability of receiving UI.20 . If there was a
onetoone mapping between UI and unemployment, as Figure 2 suggests,
this would mean that learning eects account for most CanadaU.S. unemployment rate gap that emerged in the 1980s.21.

6 Concluding Remarks
We nd that rst time use of the unemployment insurance system in Canada
increases the probability of future use. This eect is a potential explanation
for the increasing share of UI spells accounted by repeated users22 . As workers
are exposed to UI for the rst time for a variety of reasons, they learn about
the functioning of the system and adjust their behavior accordingly. For
highly-skilled workers, this rst exposure to the system may not aect their
behavior very much since it is not protable for them to work partyear
except perhaps during a short adjustment period. By contrast, for lessskilled workers working partyear may be an attractive long run option. For
these workers, a rst experience may thus have a large eect on the future
probability of receiving UI.
We also nd some support for the view that the eect of rst time use
is a learning eect since the estimated eect tends to be lower for people
who are more likely to know how the UI system operates (young workers and
people living in high unemployment regions). We also nd that adjustment
lags over several period account for an important part of the dynamics in UI
recipiency.
In this framework, the evolution of UI recipiency over time depends jointly
on the evolution of the employment and income process and on the evolution
The 50 percent gure is obtained by comparing the number of people in the sample
to total population counts in the 1981 Canadian Census.
21 There is a small slippage in these calculations since the yearly probability of starting
a spell of UI (the variable we analyze) is not the same as the weekly probability of collecting UI which corresponds more closely to the unemployment rate. This means that
our estimate of 1.5-2 percentage points is biased up since one is more likely to collect UI
during a year than during a given week. On the other hand, learning may also increase the
duration of UI spells, which would bias the results in the other direction. A further bias
is the fact that our crude measure of learning may well underestimate the full learning
eects because of social learning, etc.
22 See Lemieux and MacLeod (1995) for evidence on the distribution of UI recipients by
frequency of use.
20

27

of the probability of receiving UI conditional on being eligible (the takeup
rate). In future research, it would interesting to see how the dynamics of UI
recipiency can be broken up into these two components.
Though we have only reduced form results they do have some potentially
important implications of the design of social welfare programs. First, the
behavior that we have observed is consistent with individuals responding to
the incentives provided by the system. The fact that experience is required
for a change in behavior is consistent with laboratory studies of learning. It
also suggests that studies based on cross-section estimates of supply responses
underestimate the long term impact of the disincentive eects of social welfare
programs.
In Canada's case, the increased divergence of the Canadian and American
unemployment rates has long been a source of concern. The study of Card
and Ridell (1993) is unable to identify the source of the dierence based upon
a standard supply and demand analysis. The lagged adjustment eects identied in this study may provide a coherent explanation for this eect. Given
the size of the 1971 changes to the UI system, even as benets decreased in
the subsequent 20 years, workers unfamiliar with the system may still modify
their behavior after a spell of unemployment several years after the change
because they had never considered part year work as an option. If subsequent
research supports this conjecture, this has potentially important implications
for the design of social welfare programs. Specically it would imply that the
feedback between a policy change, and its ultimate impact on the economy
may be very slow, and hence it suggests that it may be very costly to learn
about and correct policy errors. Moreover, once individuals have adjusted
their behavior to the system, one is likely to face a similar lagged adjustment in the reverse direction as individuals take time to learn and respond
to the new parameters. Canada has recently tightened signicantly its UI
rules. It will be interesting to see how the Canada-US unemployment rate
gap responds as a consequence.
Secondly, it highlights the importance of coverage in determining the impact of changes in a program. Rule changes that eect current recipients
can be expected to have an immediate impact because the individuals experience the rule change. However for program rule changes that involve an
increase in the target population our results suggest that it may take some
time before the new individuals at risk respond fully to the new incentives.23
23

Another example of this eect occurs for the foodstamp program in the US where

28

In summary these results suggest that great care must be taken if we are
to properly interpret the relationship between changes in incentives at the
individual level, and the subsequent impact on the economy as a whole.

References

Alchian, Armen A., Uncertainty, Evolution and Economic Theory, Journal of Political Economy, June 1950, 58 (3), 21121.

Bandura, Albert, Social Foundations of Thought and Action, Englewood
Clis, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall Inc., 1986.

Bloom, Howard, Barbara Fink, Susanna Lui-Gurr, Wendy Bancroft, and Doug Tattrie, Implementing the Earnings Supplement

Project: A Test of a Re-Employment Incentive, Ottawa, Ontario,
Canada: Social Research and Demonstration Corporation, 1997.

Card, David and W. Craig Ridell, A Comparative Analysis of Un-

employment in the United States and Canada, in Davie Card and
Richard H. Freeman, eds., Small Dierences that Matter: Labor Markets
and Income Maintenance in Canada and the United States, Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press, 1993.
Chamberlain, Gary, Analysis of Covariance with Qualitative Data, Review of Economic Studies, 1980, 47, 225238.
Corak, Miles, Unemployment Insurance Once Again: The Incidence of
Repeat Participation in the Canadian UI Program, Canadian Public
Policy, June 1993, 19 (2), 162176.
Currie, Janet, Welfare and the Well-Being of Children Fundamentals of
Pure and Applied Economics 59, Chur, Switzerland: Harwood Academic
Publishers, 1995.
various estimates nd that between 40% to 65% of eligible households do not participate
in the program. One important reason for this is that individuals did not know they are
eligible. See Currie (1995), pages 89-90, for a dicussion of the literature. See also the
recent work by Yelowitz (1997).

29

Gourieroux, Christian and Alan Monfort, Simulation-Based Infer-

ence: A Survey with Special Reference to Panel Data Models, Journal
of Econometrics, 1993, 59, 534.
Green, David A. and W. Craig Riddell, The Economic Eect of Unemployment Insurance in Canada: An Empirical Analysis of UI Disentitlement, Journal of Labor Economics, January 1993, 11, S96S147.
Ham, John and Samuel Rea, Journal of Labor Economics, July 1987, 5,
325351.
Heckman, James J., Simple Statistical Models for Discrete Panel Data
Developed and Applied to Test the Hypothesis of True State Dependence Against the Hypothesis of Spurious State Dependence, Annales
de l'INSEE, 1978, 30, 227269.
, The Incidental Parameters Problem and the Problem of Initial Conditions in Estimating a Discrete Time-Discrete Data Stochastic Process,
in Charles F. Manski and Daniel McFadden, eds., Structural Analysis
of Discrete Data with Econometric Applications, Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 1981.
, Statistical Models for Discrete Panel Data, in Charles F. Manski
and Daniel McFadden, eds., Structural Analysis of Discrete Data with
Econometric Applications, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1981.
and George Borjas, Does Unemployment cause future unemployment? Denitions, questions and answers from a continuous time model
of heterogeneity and state dependence., Economica, 1980, pp. 247283.
Katz, Lawrence F. and Bruce D. Meyer, Unemployment Insurance,
Recall Expectations, and Unemployment Outcomes, Quarterly Journal
of Economics, November 1990, 105 (4), 9731002.
Knight, Frank H., Risk, Uncertainty, and Prot, New York, NY: Hart,
Schaner, and Marx, 1921.
Layard, Richard, Stephen Nickell, and Richard Jackman, Unemployment:Macroeconomic Performance and the Labour Market, Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press, 1991.
30

Lehman, S.R. and Charles F. Manski, On the Use of Simulated Fre-

quencies to Approximate Choice Probabilities, in Charles F. Manski
and Daniel McFadden, eds., Structural Analysis of Discrete Data with
Econometric Applications, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1981.
Lemieux, Thomas and W. Bentley MacLeod, State Dependence and
Unemployment Insurance, Technical Report 4, Human Resources Development Canada 1995.
Lindbeck, Assar, Welfare State Disincentives with Endogenous Habits
and Norms, Scandinavian Journal of Economics, December 1995, 97
(4), 477494.
MacLeod, W. Bentley, Thought or Reex?, January 1998. Paper presented to a joint session of the American Economics Association and
Association for Comparative Economics, Chicago.
Marshall, Alfred, The Principles of Economics, New York, NY: Macmillan,
1948.
Meyer, Bruce, Unemployment Insurance and Unemployment Spells,
Econometrica, July 1990, 58, 757782.
Meyer, Bruce D. and Dan T. Resenbaum, Repeat Use of Unemployment Insurance, December 1995. mimeo, Northwestern University,
Evanston, Il.
Mott, Robert, Incentive Eects of the U.S. Welfare System: A Review,
Journal of Economic Literature, March 1992, 30 (1), 161.
Savage, Leonard J., The Foundations of Statistics, New York, N.Y.: Dover
Publications, 1972.
Simon, Herbert A., Rational Choice and the Structure on the Environment, Psychological Review, 1956, 63 (2), 129138.
Topel, Robert H., On Layos and Unemployment Insurance, American
Economic Review, September 1983, 73, 541559.
Wickens, Christopher, Engineering Psychology and Human Performance,
2nd ed., New York, N.Y.: HarperCollins Publishers Inc., 1992.
31

Yelowitz, Aaron S., Did Recent Medicaid Reforms Cause the Caseload

Explosion in the Food Stamp Program?, 1997. mimeo University of
California, Los Angeles.

32

