1. Introduction

        For decades economists have argued that there are substantial benefits to holding an
internationally-diversified investment portfolio. Nearly thirty years ago, Grubel (1968) and Levy and
Sarnat (1970) demonstrated that, given the relatively low correlation of equity returns across markets,
investors could increase the return on their portfolios while minimizing risk by holding a combination of
domestic and foreign market indices. The potential benefits from investing abroad have become even more
compelling over time as the pool of international investment opportunities has expanded to include
emerging markets and newly privatized firms in Asia, Europe and Latin America.
        Despite the benefits of global diversification, evidence on home bias suggests that investors in
industrialized countries have been reluctant to hold more than a fraction of their wealth in foreign assets
(French and Poterba (1991) and Tesar and Werner (1995)). While investors have increased their holdings
of foreign stocks in recent years, the fraction of the portfolio invested abroad remains far less than the share
implied by standard models of optimal portfolio choice. At the end of 1996, the share of national equity
portfolios invested in foreign stocks was 11.2 percent in Canada, 5.3 percent in Japan, 18.2 percent in
Germany, 22.5 percent in the United Kingdom and 10 percent in the United States (Tesar and Werner
(1997)). The extent of home bias in bond portfolios tends to be even larger than in equity portfolios.1
        One possible explanation for home bias is that investors obtain indirect international diversification
benefits by investing in multinational firms. Previous studies have generally concluded that multinational
firms do not provide diversification benefits. Jacquillat and Solnik (1978) regressed the returns of
multinationals from nine countries on the set of market indices and found that multinational returns tended
to covary most with the firm's home market. Senchack and Beedles (1980) contrasted the risk, returns and
betas of portfolios of multinationals with portfolios of domestic and international stocks and found that
multinationals did not deliver diversification benefits. These studies presume that the appropriate domestic
benchmark is the market portfolio. While in theory the value-weighted index of domestic stocks should
reflect the full benefits of investing in the home market, the construction of a fully efficient market index is
problematic (Roll (1977)).
        In this paper, we employ mean-variance spanning techniques to test whether the addition of
multinationals and international equities to a broad-based portfolio of domestic stocks significantly shifts
the portfolio frontier. This method imposes no restriction on the asset weights in either the domestic




                                                       1
portfolio or the portfolio of domestic and international equities. The extent to which the set of domestic
assets spans the set of international investment opportunities could fall along a continuum of possibilities.
At one extreme, maximum diversification benefits could be achieved without holding any international
assets if the set of domestic assets completely spans the set of international assets. At the other extreme, if
the set of domestic assets spans an insignificant portion of the set of international assets, then international
diversification is required to obtain maximum diversification benefits. The central question considered in
this paper is the extent to which a portfolio of domestic equities can provide the potential benefits of
holding international equity.
        We make three contributions to the literature on the benefits of global diversification. First, we test
whether the addition of multinationals (headquartered in the investor's country of origin) to the set of
domestic equities provides diversification benefits, controlling for the effects of industry classification and
firm size. We examine this hypothesis from the perspective of investors in Canada, France, Germany, Italy,
Japan, the United Kingdom and the United States over the 1984-1992 time period. We split the time period
into two subsamples to control for possible effects due to the October 1987 market crash. In general we
find that we cannot reject the null hypothesis that the addition of multinational corporations to the
benchmark set of domestic assets fails to shift the portfolio frontier, confirming the findings of the
literature. There is weak evidence that U.S. multinationals may have provided diversification benefits in the
full sample and the post-1987 subsample. Thus, some home bias due to indirect diversification through
multinationals could possibly be rationalized for the United States.
        Our second contribution is to examine whether the addition of international stock market indices
shifts the portfolio frontier that is comprised of both domestic and multinational equities. In contrast to the
findings for multinationals, we find that in most countries and in most time periods the addition of an
international market index to the set of domestic stocks -- inclusive of multinationals -- significantly shifts
the portfolio frontier. While this result may not come as a surprise to those who believe in the benefits of
diversification, our findings contradict the notion that investors from industrialized countries must turn to
emerging markets to capture substantial gains from investing internationally (De Santis (1993)).
        Our third contribution is to quantify which markets have, ex post, provided the largest marginal
diversification benefits from the perspective of investors in each of the seven countries in our sample. While
the mean-variance tests provide information about the statistical significance of the shift in the portfolio


1
  The exception is the United Kingdom with foreign bond holdings at 37.5 percent of the portfolio in 1995. The
allocation of bonds to "foreign" and "domestic" categories is particularly problematic for the United Kingdom due
to the location of the eurobond market in London.



                                                       2
frontier as assets are added to the benchmark set, the tests do not provide information about magnitude of
the shift in an economic sense. To give some economic content to the magnitude of the shift in the
efficiency frontier, we calculate the percentage change in consumption required to make the investor
indifferent between holding the utility-maximizing portfolio based on the benchmark set of domestic assets
and the utility-maximizing portfolio based of the set of domestic and international equities. We find that in
some cases there are sizable utility gains from adding foreign markets to the set of domestic assets, though
which market provides the largest benefits changes depending on the investor’s country of residence. We
also find that capturing the largest gains from diversification often involves holding a short position in some
available assets and a long position in the other assets. Finally, we find that the utility gains from
international diversification for U.S. investors are surprisingly small, again helping to rationalize home bias
in U.S. investment portfolios.

        Section 2 discusses the generalized method of moments mean-variance spanning tests. The utility
metric used to quantify the economic benefits of diversification is presented in Section 3. Section 4
discusses our data set. Our results on the diversification benefits of multinational firms is presented in
Section 5 and the results on the marginal benefits of adding country indices are presented in Section 6.
Section 7 concludes.

2. Generalized Method of Moments Mean-Variance Spanning Test


        Throughout, we will refer to the set of domestic equities as the “benchmark" assets and the set of
expanded investment opportunities as the “extended-set" of assets. We perform mean-variance spanning
tests to determine if the portfolio frontier of the combination of the benchmark and extended-set assets is
statistically different from the portfolio frontier of the benchmark assets. In particular, the test asks whether
the inclusion of assets in the extended-set into the full set of assets restricts the set of discount factors that
"price" the benchmark assets alone (Hansen and Jagannathan (1991)). The advantage of the spanning test is
that it does not require specification of a risk-free rate of return. The disadvantage, however, is that
rejection of the null hypothesis that the portfolio frontiers are equivalent does not imply that the marginal
diversification benefits are economically significant. We will address this problem in Section 3 by
providing a utility measure of the benefits of an outward shift of the portfolio frontier.
        We follow the methodology described in De Santis (1993) and Bekaert and Urias (1996) to test for
mean-variance spanning. Assuming frictionless markets, a common restriction on asset pricing models is
(2.1)           E[R t +1m t +1 ] = ι




                                                        3
where Rt+1 is a n-dimensional vector of gross asset returns, mt+1 is a random variable and ι is a vector of
ones of dimension n x 1.2 Explicit assumptions regarding the parameterization of mt+1 gives equation (2.1)
an economic interpretation. For example, specifying the random variable mt+1 as a linear function of the
return on the market portfolio yields the Capital Asset Pricing Model. Alternatively, if mt+1 is specified as
the intertemporal marginal rate of substitution, the consumption CAPM is obtained.
         Following De Santis and Bekaert-Urias, let mt+1 be a candidate discount factor for Rt+1 and assume
mt+1 is a linear projection onto Rt+1 such that
(2.2)              m t +1 = c + [R t +1 − E(R t +1 )]′ β + ε t +1
where c is a constant, εt+1 is the error term of the regression and is uncorrelated with Rt+1 by assumption. In
general, β cannot be estimated because mt+1 is unobserved. Nevertheless, if mt+1 is required to price Rt+1,
then substitution of equation (2.2) into equation (2.1) yields the unconditional asset pricing restriction.
                                                     ′
(2.3)             E R t +1  [R t +1 − E(R t +1 )] β + c  - ι = 0
                                                           
                                                 [                  ]
        Partition Rt+1 such that R t +1 ≡ R ′B, t +1 R ′E, t +1 and partition β such that β ≡ [β′B β′E ] . The dimensions
                                                                    3
of RB and RE are (nB x 1) and (nE x 1), respectively. The null hypothesis that Rt+1 is priced by the subset of
nB assets in RB,t+1 implies that RE,t-1 is redundant for asset pricing. Therefore, under the null hypothesis, the
coefficients in βE are equal to zero and the unconditional asset pricing restriction may be rewritten as:
(2.4)                             [                      ]
                  m t +1 = c + R B, t +1 − E(R B, t +1 ) β B + ε t +1
                                                        ′

Conditional on a given value of c and that RB,t+1 is a subset of Rt+1, the restriction in equation (2.4) implies
that the portfolio frontier constructed from the benchmark assets is tangent to the portfolio frontier
constructed from the benchmark assets and extended-set assets at the point corresponding to the highest
Sharpe ratio.
          The two-fund separation theorem states that any frontier portfolio can be obtained as a linear
combination of any two distinct frontier portfolios. Therefore, if the portfolio frontiers implied by Rt+1 and
RB,t+1 are tangent at two distinct points, then the two frontiers must coincide at all points. Let h T βB          ( )
denote the 2nB sample moment conditions that are obtained as a generalization of equation (2.4),
                                  R c + R
                                   t +1  1
                                                  [                        ′
                                                                            ]
                                                   B, t +1 − E (R B, t +1 ) β B,1  
                                                                                    
(2.5)                    ( )
                   h T βB = E 
                                                                                    
                                                                                        =0
                                         
                                                     [                      ]
                                  R t +1 c 2 + R B, t +1 − E (R B, t +1 ) ′ β B, 2  
                                                                                      
where βB = [β′B,1 , β′B, 2 ] . Denote b B = [b′B,1 , b′B,2 ] as the vector of estimators of βB subject to the restriction
that the coefficients corresponding to the extended-set assets are equal to zero. The vector b B is the
solution to

2
  The derivation of the theoretical bounds for the first two moments of mt+1 are presented in Hansen and
Jagannathan (1991) and the computational steps are discussed in De Santis (1993).
3
  RB and RE correspond to the benchmark portfolio of nB assets and the extended-set portfolio of nE assets.




                                                                        4
                   arg min b B = argmin h T (β )′ WT h T (β )
(2.6)
                  subject to βE = 0
where βE = [β′E,1 , β′E,2 ] and WT is an optimally chosen weighting matrix.4 The null hypothesis is that the
frontiers coincide at all points (i.e. βE = 0 ). Under the null hypothesis, the generalized method of moments
(GMM) test of over-identifying restrictions has a chi-square distribution with 2nE degrees of freedom. The
order of the Newey-West correction used in the GMM algorithm is equal to 4(T / 100 ) 9 (Newey and West
                                                                                                  2




(1992)).
(2.7)                    ( )
                           ′
                                      ( )
                 T h T bB WT h T bB  ~ χ 2 (2n E )
                                      
The alternative hypothesis is that βE ≠ 0 . Rejection of the null hypothesis implies that the variation in the
returns of the benchmark assets does not explain the variation of the returns of the benchmark and
extended-set assets. Failure to reject the null hypothesis provides evidence that the benchmark set of assets
spans the risk-return opportunities offered by the extended set of assets.


3. Measuring the Utility Gains from International Diversification


           Rejection of the null hypothesis that the benchmark portfolio of domestic assets spans the
extended-set portfolio does not provide information about the magnitude of the shift in the efficiency
frontier, nor does it provide insight into whether the shift is economically significant. To give the shift in the
portfolio frontier an economic interpretation, we calculate the gains in lifetime utility associated with
expanding the portfolio to include the extended set of assets (Cole and Obstfeld (1991), Lewis (1996)). The
utility gain is measured as the percentage reduction in permanent consumption that makes an individual
indifferent between the optimal portfolio when the investor can hold assets from the benchmark and the
extended-set and the optimal portfolio when the investor is restricted to holding assets from the benchmark
set only.5
         Let Ct denote permanent consumption at time t of an individual holding the optimal portfolio of
benchmark assets and let Ct* denote the permanent consumption at time t of an individual holding the
optimal portfolio of benchmark and extended-set assets. The utility gain, δ, is given by the relationship
(3.1)            U 0 (C0 ) = U 0  C*0 (1 − δ) .
                                               


4
 See DeSantis (1993), Bekaert and Urias (1996) and Campbell, Lo and MacKinlay (1997).
5
  The utility-gain metric has two shortcomings. First, the spanning test presented in Section 3 is the test of the
hypothesis that the asset-pricing kernel is the same for the two sets of assets. If the asset-pricing kernel is not valid
across the two sets of assets, then the utility-gain metric, which is a function of the mean and variance of the
portfolios, is also not valid. Second, we do not consider the variance of the utility-gain metric. Despite these
shortcomings, this metric provides an economically intuitive measure of the distance between portfolio frontiers.



                                                            5
         Following Lewis (1996), we use the Epstein-Zin-Weil utility function specification which allows
the risk-aversion parameter, γ, to differ from the inverse of the elasticity of intertemporal substitution
parameter, θ.
                                      [ (              )](
                                                                            1 (1− θ )
                                                         1− θ ) 1− γ
                  U t = c (t1−θ ) + β E t U t +11                     
                                                  −γ
(3.2)                                                                                   for γ, θ > 0; γ, θ ≠ 1
                                                                     
The utility maximizing portfolio is obtained by maximizing the utility function given in equation (3.2)
subject to the portfolio frontier of available assets. The portfolio returns are assumed to be jointly log-
                                                                                                            
normally distributed such that ln (rB, t ) ~ N µ B − σ 2B , σ 2B  and ln (rBE, t ) ~ N µ BE − σ 2BE , σ 2BE  , where
                                                     1                                          1
                                                    2                                        2              
rB,t and rBE,t are the vector of net returns on the benchmark portfolio and the vector of net returns on the
portfolio that includes the benchmark and extended-set assets, respectively. The expected utility of
consumption for an investor who is holding the optimal benchmark portfolio may be written as
                                                                                              −(1 (1−θ ))
                                                             
                  E t U(Ct ) = Wt 1 − β exp(1 − θ) µB − γσ2B 
                                                          1
(3.3)
                                                       2     
and the expected utility of consumption for an investor who is holding the optimal portfolio of benchmark
and extended-set assets may be written as
                                                                                                 −(1 (1−θ ))
                                                                
                  E t U(C t ) = Wt 1 − β exp(1 − θ) µBE − γσ2BE 
                                                            1
(3.4)
                                                         2      
where Wt is equal to the individual’s wealth at time t and is assumed to be exogenous.
         Figure 1 illustrates the utility gain from adding the extended set of assets to the portfolio of
benchmark assets. Without the extended set of assets the investor maximizes utility subject to the portfolio
frontier of benchmark assets. The optimal portfolio is obtained at the tangency labeled TB. If the set of
available assets is expanded to include both the benchmark and extended-set assets, the investor increases
utility by choosing the optimal portfolio at TBE. The utility gain is measured as the percentage reduction in
permanent consumption that makes an individual indifferent between the optimal portfolio at TBE and the
optimal portfolio at TB, as given in equation (3.1).
         The mean and variance of the optimal portfolios at TB and TBE are obtained by equating the
marginal rate of substitution and the marginal rate of transformation. The marginal rate of substitution is
obtained by taking the total differential of the utility function.




                                                                              6
                                                                                −1
                                                                                      −
                                                                                          (1−θ )
                     − 1                       1 2   (1−θ ) (1−θ )
                 Wt        1 − β exp (1 − θ) µ − γσ  
                     1 − θ                      2    
                                             
                 x (- β)exp (1 − θ) µ − γσ 2 (1 − θ) dµ
                                         1
                                       2     
(3.5)                                                                                −1        (1−θ )
                                                                                           −
                       − 1                       1 2   (1−θ ) (1−θ )
                 + Wt        1 − β exp (1 − θ) µ − γσ  
                       1 − θ                      2    
                                                     1 
                 x (- β)exp (1 − θ) µ − γσ 2 (1 − θ) - γ  dσ 2 = 0
                                         1
                                       2             2 
Simplifying equation (3.5) yields
                dσ 2 2
(3.6)                = .
                 dµ γ
From Ingersoll (1987), the marginal rate of transformation along the portfolio frontier is
                 dσ 2 2Aµ − 2B
(3.7)                =
                  dµ        ∆
where A = ι′Σ −1ι , B = ι′Σ −1 z , ∆ = AC − B 2 , C = z′Σz , Σ is the covariance matrix of returns and z is the
vector of mean asset returns. Equating equations (3.6) and (3.7) yields the mean of the optimal portfolio.
                       ∆ B
(3.8)           µ* =      −
                      γA A
From Ingersoll (1987), the variance of the optimal portfolio is
                       A(µ *) − 2Bµ * + C
                             2
(3.9)           σ2 * =                      .
                                ∆
        The utility gain from diversification is inferred from the means and variances of the two optimal
portfolios, as given by equations (3.8) and (3.9). Following Lewis (1996), combining equations (3.1), (3.3)
and (3.4) yields a measure of the utility gain from expanding the available set of assets from the benchmark
assets to include the extended-set assets.
                                                                   (1 (1−θ ))
                                                           
                 δ = 1 - E 0 U C*0  E 0  U C0    
                                                      
                                                                                 (1 (1−θ ))
                                             * 1 2*   
(3.10)                  1 - β exp (1 − θ) µ B − γσ B   
                                                           
                   =1-  
                                                    2
                                                                    
                        1 - β exp (1 − θ) µ* − 1 γσ 2*   
                                              BE
                                                     2 BE   
                                           

The values of µ*B and µ*BE are obtained from equation (3.8) using the appropriate values of Σ and z .
Similarly, the values of σ 2 * and σ 2 * are obtained from equations (3.9), again using the appropriate
                              B            BE

values of Σ and z .




                                                               7
        For the utility specifications in equations (3.3) and (3.4), the admissible combinations of γ and θ
are restricted such that the discount factor, β, is less than one (see Lewis (1996)).
                                              
                  β −1 > exp (1 − θ) µ − γσ 2 
                                          1
 (3.11)
                                        2     
We consider the utility gain from diversification for two values of the risk-aversion parameter (γ = 2 and γ
= 5) and an elasticity of intertemporal substitution parameter of two (θ = 2).6 There is little consensus in
the literature about the "true" magnitudes of risk aversion and intertemporal substitution. Our measures are
intended as being suggestive of the possible gains from diversification and the parameter values are chosen
so that our measures can be compared to estimates in other studies.


4. Data Description


        We consider the benefits of diversification – through the addition of multinationals or the addition
of foreign market indices – from the perspective of investors from Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan,
the United Kingdom and the United States. For each country in the sample, firm-level data is used to
construct portfolios by industry classification, firm size and domestic/multinational status. The number of
domestic portfolios ranges from 14 for Italy to 21 for the United States. All of the data is extracted from
Datastream, a proprietary database. In instances where Datastream is not the primary source of the data,
the primary source is cited. With the exception of Japan, the sample of equities includes firms that are
currently traded or were previously traded.7 International equities that are cross-listed on the domestic
market are eliminated from the sample of domestic firms. The time series are sampled weekly and the data
sample spans the time period from January 4, 1984 to December 30, 1992. The sample is divided into two
subsamples of equal size, January 1984 to June 1988 and July 1988 to December 1992.


4.1 Domestic Portfolios
        Within each country, equities are classified according to industry, firm size and domestic/
multinational status. The four industry classifications are consumer goods and services, energy and
utilities, finance and real estate, and industrials. A firm’s size is determined based on its relative market
capitalization within its industry. The three classifications are small, medium and large. In addition, each


6
  Lewis (1996) discusses the relationship between the risk-aversion parameter and the elasticity of intertemporal
substitution parameter. She reports findings for a broader set of parameter values for an investor who holds a
portfolio of market indices.
7
  Our sampling of Japanese companies from the Datastream database yielded no delisted or bankrupt firms and no
firms were allocated to the "other" industry classification (see Appendix A). The possibility that there were
delistings and bankruptcies in Japan that are not covered by Datastream would cause our results to overstate the
benefits of holding Japanese stocks.



                                                       8
equity is classified as a domestic or a multinational equity. Therefore, each country’s portfolio includes a
maximum of twenty-four categories: half of the categories are domestic equities and half of the categories
are multinational equities. A brief overview of the data-set construction is provided in this section. Details
of the equity classification methodology and construction methodology of the time series of portfolio
returns are explained fully in Appendix A. A listing of the multinational firms in each country is provided
in Appendix B
           A summary by country of the category characteristics is presented in Tables 1.1 through 1.7. The
first column of each of the tables shows the number of firms per category. For example, there are 787
small, domestic, consumer-goods-and-services firms in Canada covered by the Datastream database.
Notice that no country has firms in all of the categories. The United States has the most non-empty
categories with 21. For each category, a value-weighted portfolio is constructed by drawing a random
sample from the set of available firms within each category. The maximum size of the random sample is
30.8 Column two reports the number of firms in the sample portfolio. For example, the sample portfolio for
the small, domestic, consumer-goods-and-services category in Canada contains 30 firms. The weights
within the sample portfolio change over time as the market capitalization of the component firms changes.
This ensures that the sample portfolio for each category is value weighted over the full time series of
returns.
           A summary of the sample mean returns, the sample standard deviations of returns, and the mean
return per unit risk for each category over the full sample (January 4, 1984 to December 30, 1992) is
reported in columns three through five of Tables 1.1 through 1.7. Tables 2.1 through 2.7 report the
summary statistics for the two subsamples. The return series for each category incorporates the price
appreciation of its component parts and the disbursement of dividends.9


4.2 International Indices
           In a subset of testing scenarios, the extended-set portfolio contains international market indices
from the countries other than the benchmark country. The Datastream total-return index for each sample
country is used to construct a time series of weekly returns for each index. The total-return index is a
value-weighted index that includes dividend reinvestment. Dividend disbursements are incorporated into the
index return through the most recent dividend yield on the component security.



8
  Ideally, one should create portfolios based on the entire set of firms within each country-industry-size class.
Unfortunately, Datastream does not provide clear documentation of the status of many international firms. We
therefore drew a random sample from each country-industry-size class and used alternative sources to verify the
status of each firm in our random sample.
9
  Datastream incorporates the dividend payment by multiplying the return due to price appreciation by the most
recent dividend yield.



                                                       9
           The sample means and standard deviations of the return series for each country-specific index are
reported in Tables 3.1 and 3.2. The summary statistics are presented for the full nine-year sample and the
two subsamples. Table 3.1 reports the summary statistics in the local currency and Table 3.2 reports the
returns in US dollars. Notice that the mean return decreases from the first subsample to the second sample
for all countries. The largest decreases are obtained for the Japanese and Italian indices. The Japanese
mean weekly return decreases more than 69 basis points, from 0.525 percent per week to -0.168 percent
per week.10 The large decrease in the mean return on the Japanese index reflects the large decrease in the
market capitalization of the Japanese equity market during the second subsample. The mean weekly return
on the Italian index decreases nearly 49 basis points, from 0.546 percent per week to 0.057 percent per
week.
           The volatility of the return on each index, as measured by the standard deviation of the weekly
return, decreases from the first subsample to the second subsample for every country-specific index except
Japan. The standard deviation of the weekly return on the Japanese index increases from 2.56 percent per
week to 2.90 percent, an increase of approximately thirteen percent. The increased volatility of the
Japanese index is not surprising given the large decrease in the market capitalization of the Japanese equity
market. For the six indices whose standard deviations decrease, the average decrease is twenty-two percent
of the standard deviation. The standard deviation of the Canadian index exhibits the largest decrease of
32.8 percent, from 2.16 percent per week to 1.45 percent per week. The Italian index exhibits the smallest
decrease of fifteen percent, from 2.68 percent per week to 2.28 percent.
           The correlation structure of the returns on the international indices is presented in Table 4 for the
full nine-year sample and the two subsamples. The majority of correlations increase from the first
subsample to the second subsample. The largest increases in correlation include an increase in the
correlation between France and Germany from 0.43 to 0.73, an increase between France and Italy from
0.34 to 0.51, an increase between France and the UK from 0.39 to 0.55 and an increase between Germany
and Italy from 0.29 to 0.51. The average increase in correlation between the first and second subsamples is
0.106. The largest decreases in correlation are between Canada and the UK (0.61 to 0.48) and between the
UK and the US (0.46 to 0.33). The average decrease across the subsamples is 0.11. Because the changes in
the correlation structure are mixed, the change in diversification opportunities across samples is not readily
apparent.


4.3 Exchange Rates
           The time series of exchange rates for the seven sample countries are the Datastream weekly
exchange rates. The mean and standard deviation of the sample exchange rates are presented in Table 5.


10
     One basis point is one one-hundredth of a percent. Therefore, 100 basis points in equal to one percent.



                                                           10
For ease of comparison, the exchange rates are stated in pounds per foreign-currency unit. From the first
sample to the second sample, the Canadian dollar and the U.S. dollar depreciate against the pound. The
mean Canadian exchange rate decreases by 4.8 percent, from 0.515 pounds per Canadian dollar in the first
subsample to 0.49 pounds per Canadian dollar in the second. The percentage decrease in the mean U.S.
exchange rate is much larger than Canadian decrease. The U.S. exchange rate decreases from 0.688 pounds
per U.S. dollar to 0.58 pounds per U.S. dollar, a 15.6 percent decrease.
        From the first subsample to the second subsample, all other currencies appreciate against the
pound. The Deutsche mark exhibits the largest percentage increase in the mean exchange rate of 14.8
percent, from 0.30 pounds per Deutsche mark to 0.344 pounds per Deutsche mark. The percentage increase
in the mean exchange rate of the Japanese yen is slightly lower at 14.7 percent, from 0.377 pounds per 100
yen to 0.432 pounds per 100 yen. The percentage increase in the mean exchange rate for the French franc
and the Italian lire are 8.4 percent and 2.9 percent, respectively.
        With the exception of the French franc, the standard deviation of the exchange rate for each
currency decreases by an average of thirty-two percent. The standard deviation of the pound-U.S. dollar
exchange rate exhibits the largest decrease of 53.7 percent, from 0.93 to 0.43. The pound-French franc
exchange rate shows a small increase in standard deviation of 3.2 percent, from 0.0074 to 0.0077.
        To implement the spanning test, the returns on the extended-set assets are converted into the
currency of the benchmark portfolio. For example, if the benchmark country is France and the Germany
and UK indices are the assets in the extended-set portfolio, the time series of returns for the German and
UK indices are converted into French francs using the appropriate exchange rates. The returns on the
benchmark portfolio are not converted because the returns on the French assets are stated in the local
currency. The strength of the data set is the flexibility to specify any of the sample countries as the
benchmark country. As a result, the benefits of diversification are evaluated from the perspective of an
investor in each country.



5. Do Multinationals Provide Diversification Benefits?


        Given their international exposure, equity in multinational corporations is often suggested as an
indirect means of obtaining international diversification benefits free of the impediments and transactions
costs that may be associated with buying equity in foreign markets. In this section, we examine the
diversification benefits of multinational equities from two perspectives. First, multinational equities are
added to a portfolio of domestic equities. Setting up the spanning test in this way reveals the marginal
benefit of adding multinationals to a portfolio of purely domestic stocks. The second test adds multinational
equities to a portfolio that contains domestic equities as well as international equity market indices. This
test reveals the marginal diversification benefits of multinational equities relative to all assets available to


                                                       11
the investor. If, for example, the returns of multinational firms tend to "mimic" international markets, the
null hypothesis of spanning would be rejected in the first test but not necessarily in the second. If on the
other hand, multinationals provide diversification benefits that are different from the benefits provided by
international markets, the null hypothesis of spanning could be rejected in the second case.
         The significance of the spanning test and the associated utility gain are considered jointly. If the
null hypothesis is rejected, we conclude that the portfolio frontiers are statistically significantly different.
Conditional on the rejection of the null hypothesis, we evaluate the relative magnitude of the utility gain. If
the spanning test fails to reject the null hypothesis that the benchmark portfolio spans the set of broader
assets, measurement of the utility gain is meaningless because we cannot conclude with a high level of
statistical significance that the portfolio frontiers are, in fact, different.
         In the first set of tests, the benchmark portfolio is the set of domestic equities and the set of
multinational-corporation equities is specified as the extended-set portfolio. The results of the tests are
reported in Table 6.1. Three sets of results are reported for each country, a test over the full sample and a
test over each of the subsamples. Of the 21 spanning tests reported in Table 6.1, only four tests suggest a
rejection of the null hypothesis at a significance level of less than ten percent. In France, Italy, Japan and
the U.K., the tests fail to reject the null hypothesis that the benchmark portfolio spans the portfolio
comprised of the benchmark and extended-set equities regardless of the sample period. In Canada and
Germany, the null hypothesis of spanning is rejected in the full sample at the 7.8 percent and 1.37 percent
levels of significance, respectively. The null hypothesis is not rejected in these two countries, however, in
either of the two subsamples. In general, the data from markets other than the United States suggest that
multinationals have not provided diversification benefits for domestic investors. In the United States,
however, there is weak evidence that multinationals may have provided some diversification benefits. The
null hypothesis of spanning is rejected at the 6.84 percent level in the full sample and at the 5.89 percent
level in the second subsample.
         Table 6.1 also reports the utility gains resulting from the shift in the efficiency frontier as
multinationals are added to the set of domestic assets. In Canada and Germany, the magnitude of the utility
gain from adding multinationals ranges from 2.5 to 5.7 percent, depending on the investor’s degree of risk
aversion. (Recall that the portfolio shift is only significant in the full sample.) The US investor receives the
largest utility gain from adding multinational equities. For the full sample, the relatively less risk-averse US
investor (γ = 2) has a utility gain of 15.33 percent and a utility gain of 8.52 percent if the investor is more
risk-averse (γ = 5). The utility gains over the second subsample range from 14.3 to 24.6 percent. The
finding that U.S. investors could have obtained sizable benefits from holding multinationals may provide
part of the explanation for home bias in the U.S., though it does not resolve the puzzle for other countries.
         In the second set of tests (Table 62.), the combined set of domestic equity and international equity
market indicies are specified as the benchmark portfolio and the set of multinational-corporation equities is
specified as the extended-set portfolio. The international market indices are added jointly as an equally-


                                                          12
weighted portfolio. All returns are in unhedged and in local currency units. This test yields the
diversification benefits of multinational equities relative to all available assets, both domestic and
international. Weak evidence for the diversification benefits of multinational equities -- over and above
those attained in international markets -- is found only for Canada and Germany and in both of those cases,
the result holds only in the full sample. Taken together with the results in Table 6.1, our findings suggest
that multinationals offer little diversification benefits in most countries. To the extent that there is weak
evidence of diversification benefits through multinationals in the United States, these benefits result from
the "international" dimension of multinational firms.


6. International Diversification Benefits of Market Indices

        In this section, we examine the benefits of adding international stock market indices to a
benchmark portfolio of domestic stocks. To ensure that the domestic portfolio captures all of the possible
diversification benefits available on the domestic market, multinationals are included in the benchmark
portfolio. Because the benchmark portfolio contains the domestic and multinational equities, the spanning
test is the statistical test of the marginal gain from adding an index or set of indices to the domestic
portfolio. We consider the benefits of diversification from the perspective of investors domiciled in each of
the seven countries covered by our study. Because empirical evidence suggests that only a small fraction of
cross-border investment is hedged against exchange rate risk, we consider unhedged returns on the foreign
component of the portfolio.
        Each country’s index is added separately to the set of domestic assets in order to consider the
diversification benefits of each country index in isolation. The test results for the individual indices are
reported in columns one through seven of Tables 7.1 through 7.7. Note that the spanning test is not
reported for the market index of the country under consideration. The market index is a linear combination
of the domestic equities and is, therefore, redundant by definition.11
        The indices are also added jointly to the set of domestic assets in order to consider the
diversification benefits of the market indices as a group. The market indices are added under two
alternative specifications. The first specification combines the six indices into an equally-weighted
portfolio.12 The results of the spanning tests with respect to the addition of the equally-weighted index are



11
   Specifically, the covariance matrix for the set of assets comprised of the benchmark set of assets and the
domestic market index is singular and, therefore, the test statistic is undefined.
12
   The equally-weighted portfolio includes all of the indices accept the index for the country under consideration.
Therefore, the equally-weighted portfolio contains six indices. For example, the equally-weighted portfolio for the



                                                        13
reported in column 8, which is labeled “Equal-Wt Index.” The second specification does not restrict the
portfolio weights on the market indices. In this case, the extended-set portfolio contains six separate assets.
This specification allows the indices to be held in various proportions, including short positions, along the
portfolio frontier. Because the portfolio weights are unconstrained, the diversification benefits associated
with this specification are found to be substantially larger than the diversification benefits from the addition
of the equally-weighted index. The results of the spanning tests with respect to the addition of set of market
indices are reported in column 9, labeled “All Indices.”
        Before turning to the specific results, an important feature of the data is worth noting. The returns
in the Canadian market are low relative to the returns of all other markets over the full sample and in each
of the subsamples. As reported in Table 3.2, the return per unit risk for Canada is by far the lowest of the
sample countries for the full sample and the first subsample and has one of the lowest return per unit risk
ratios in the second subsample. As a result, if the composition of the portfolio is not restricted, an investor
is likely to short the equities with a low return per unit risk and invest the proceeds in other available assets.
Thus, investors from Canada can obtain substantial gains from international diversification through holding
short positions in the domestic market and going long in other markets. Conversely, investors from other
markets may obtain substantial diversification benefits from adding the Canadian index to their portfolio,
taking short positions in Canada and long positions in the other available assets.


US Investor
        The US equity market is the largest equity market in the world so reviewing the results for this
market is an appropriate place to begin. Table 7.7 reports the results of the spanning tests and associated
utility gains for an investor holding an initial portfolio of US domestic and multinational equities. Columns
one through six report the results from the addition of each country-specific index to the benchmark
separately and columns eight and nine report the results from the addition of the equally-weighted index and
the six indices added as a group. In spite of being the largest equity market in the world, the null hypothesis
that the US benchmark portfolio spans the portfolio comprised of the benchmark and extended-set equities
is rejected across the board for all test specifications over the full sample. Over the two subsamples, the
null hypothesis is rejected seven out of twelve times.
        At first glance, the results of the spanning tests appear to imply that a US investor obtains
significant benefits from international diversification. The magnitude of the utility benefits of

spanning test of German domestic equities contains the market indices for Canada, France, Italy, Japan, the UK
and the US.



                                                         14
diversification, however, are somewhat modest. The utility gain over the full sample from adding Germany,
Italy and Japan separately is less than one percent of permanent consumption. The gains from adding
Canada, France and the U.K. range from one to three percent of permanent consumption. In every case the
utility gains from adding the market indices separately or as a group are less than the marginal benefit of
adding multinationals. The utility gain from adding the Canadian index is achieved by constructing a
portfolio that includes a short position in the Canadian index. This implies that, rather than invest heavily
in Canadian equities, US investors would be better off if they held a large short position in the Canadian
market. Given the poor performance of the Canadian market over the sample period, the result that large
utility gains may be obtained from shorting the Canadian index and leveraging a subset of the US portfolio
is not surprising.
        The largest utility gains from adding the international-equity indices are obtained from adding the
markets jointly with unrestricted weights. In the full sample, the utility gains are 7.92 percent when the
coefficient of risk aversion is equal to 2 and drops to 4.12 percent when the degree of risk aversion
increases to 5. The gains are achieved by holding a short position in some of the international indices and
long positions in others.
        The results of the spanning tests and the corresponding utility gains for the two subsamples are
similar to the full sample results. One difference is worth noting, however. The utility gains over the full
sample are generally smaller than the utility gains over each of the subsamples. This result is obtained
because of sample-specific investment opportunities. The Japanese market is a good example of this
phenomenon. The Japanese market dramatically increased in value over the first subsample and then
dramatically decreased in value over the second subsample. The change is evident in the summary
information presented in Table 3.2. The return per unit risk for Japan in the first time period is 0.2585, the
highest of all of the countries in our study. In the post-July 1988 period, however, the return per unit risk is
-0.0349, the lowest of all of the countries. As a result, the weight on the Japanese index in the utility-
maximizing portfolio for a US investor is positive in the first subsample. To take advantage of the decline
in the value of Japanese equity during the second subsample, the utility-maximizing portfolio contains a
short position in the Japanese index. Similar sample-specific investment opportunities are available for the
other portfolio specifications. Therefore, the increased utility gains in each of the subsamples are a result of
sample-specific opportunities that can not be duplicated over the full sample.
        To summarize, if a US investor were to take a stepwise approach to portfolio diversification, the
largest utility gain comes from the inclusion of US multinational equities. Multinationals do not, however,
exhaust the gains from international diversification. U.S. investors could have obtained sizable additional



                                                      15
benefits from the addition of international-equity indices although the magnitude of the benefits varies
across countries and across the subsamples. In many cases, the utility benefits were a result of taking large
short positions in foreign markets, which may not be a feasible strategy for most investors.


UK Investor
        Table 7.6 reports the results of the spanning tests and associated utility gains for an investor
holding an initial portfolio of UK equities. The results for the individual country-specific indices are
reported in columns one through five, and column seven. Columns eight and nine report the results for the
equally-weighted index and the unrestricted set of six indices, respectively. The null hypothesis that the UK
benchmark portfolio spans the portfolio comprised of the benchmark and foreign market indices is rejected
across the board for all test specifications over the full sample and the second subsample at the five percent
level. The first subsample contains only 81 observations and, as a result, the null hypothesis is rejected only
for France and the US at the ten percent level of significant.
        Focusing on the results for the full sample and the second subsample, the utility gains for the UK
investor vary across markets. The smallest utility gain over the full sample is an increase of 0.18 percent of
permanent consumption from the addition of the French index. The largest gain from an individual index is
8.25 percent for the Italian index. The utility gains for the equally-weighted index and the unrestricted set
of six indices are larger than the gains from any individual index. The gains range from approximately 2
percent to 14 percent, depending on the parameterization of γ and θ. The utility gains over the second
subsample are roughly of the same magnitude of those in the full sample. The utility gains range from zero
percent (γ = 2,θ = 2) for the French index to 12 percent (γ = 2,θ = 2) for the Japanese index. The second
subsample utility gains are largest for the unrestricted set of indices. Analogous to the findings for the US
investor, the large utility gains of the UK investor are achieved by holding very large short positions in the
benchmark and extended-set equities.




                                                      16
Japanese Investor
        The returns on the Japanese equities that are summarized in Tables 1.5 and 2.4 may be upwardly
biased because the data reported by Datastream includes only currently-traded Japanese equities.13 The bias
of the data results in an investment strategy that leverages against the structure of Japanese returns to
obtain large utility gains. Over the full sample and first subsample in which the Japanese returns are
relatively high, an investor domiciled in Japan constructs a portfolio with a long position in Japanese
equities and a short position in the other available assets. Over the second subsample in which Japanese
returns are poor, a Japanese investor holds a short position in a subset of Japanese equities and a long
position in the remaining Japanese equities and the other available equities. This data feature is responsible
for many of the significant diversification gains associated with the Japanese benchmark portfolio.
        The null hypothesis that the Japanese benchmark portfolio spans the portfolio comprised of the
benchmark and extended-set of international equities is rejected for all test specifications over the full
sample and each of the subsamples (see Table 7.5). The single exception is the failure to reject the null
when “all indices” are added in the second subsample. The results indicate that international diversification
by a Japanese investor significantly shifts the portfolio frontier and that the associated utility gains are
relatively large. The results should be considered with caution given the aforementioned bias in the
Japanese data.
        In the first subsample, the addition of the Canadian index to the Japanese benchmark portfolio
yields the largest utility gain of any of the individual indices. This result is due to the fact that the Canadian
index was a poor performer over this time period while Japanese equities performed relatively well. A
Japanese investor (with excellent foresight!) would take advantage of the structure of returns by holding a
short position in a subset of Japanese equities and the Canadian index and by holding a long position in the
remaining Japanese equities. Because the Canadian index and the Japanese equities both yielded relatively
low returns in the second subsample, the strategy to short the Canadian market yields sub-optimal utility
gains. The utility gains from this strategy are still sizable (11 percent of permanent consumption) but are
smaller than the gains of holding large long positions in other, better-performing markets.
        Over the full sample, the addition of each of the five international indices separately yields smaller
utility gains than the addition of the equally-weighted index or the set of six international indices. The
greater utility gain associated with the equally-weighted index indicates that the investor is better off by
investing in a broad international index than by selectively investing in any of the country-specific indices.

13
  There were few bankruptcies in Japan during the time period studied here so the extent of bias could be small.
The Japanese index is not constructed from our firm-level data and therefore does not contain survivorship bias.



                                                       17
The ability to adjust the portfolio weights for the group of international indices more than doubles the
utility gain.
         Like the results for the U.S., the utility gains over the two subsamples are larger than the utility
gains over the full sample. This is again due to the ability of the investor to take advantage of sample-
specific investment opportunities. The largest utility gains are associated with a short position in
international equities and a sub-set of Japanese equities and a long position in the remaining Japanese
equities. subsampleThese portfolios yield substantial utility gains, however, the feasibility of such a
portfolio is questionable. It is also unlikely that such extreme strategies would perform well in out-of-
sample tests.


Canadian Investor
         In the full sample and the first subsample, the null hypothesis that the domestic portfolio spans the
extended-set portfolio is rejected for each of the country-specific indices separately, and for the equally-
weighted international market index (see Table 7.1). Over the full sample, the largest benefits come from
the addition of France and the United Kingdom to the set of domestic stocks. Again the largest gains are
due to the addition of the set of six international indices, which allow the investor to take long and short
positions in different markets. The fact that Canadian returns were relatively low during this sample period
has already been noted. The optimal strategy for Canadian investors is to hold a long position in the
international market indices and hold short positions in the domestic market. Viewed from this perspective,
the home bias in Canadian portfolios becomes even more puzzling.
         In the full sample, the null hypothesis that the domestic portfolio spans the extended-set portfolio is
rejected at the one percent significance level for each of the country-specific indices, for the equally-
weighted index and the set of all indices. The largest benefits from an individual country index come from
the addition of France and the United Kingdom to the set of domestic stocks. Again the largest gains are
due to the addition of the set of six international indices, which allows the investor to take long and short
positions in different markets. Six of eight tests in the first subsample and three of eight tests in the second
subsample are rejected at the five percent significance level. The fact that Canadian returns were relatively
low during the sample period has already been noted. The optimal strategy for Canadian investors is to hold




                                                      18
a long position in the international market indices and hold short positions in the domestic market. Viewed
from this perspective, the home bias in Canadian portfolios becomes even more puzzling. 14


French, German and Italian Investors
        For investors from France, Germany, and Italy (Tables 7.2 through 7.4), the null hypothesis of
spanning can be rejected in almost all cases at the five percent level of significance. The exceptions are the
addition of France and Italy to the German portfolio during the first subsample and the addition of the set
of all indices in the firs subsample for the set of domestic French assets. Due to the truncated sample for
Italy during the first subsample, only two of the eight spanning tests are rejected at the five percent
significance level. The utility gains for France are relatively small, with one notable exception. In both
subsamples, the addition of Japan to the set of French domestic equities yields dramatically high utility
gains. Again, this is due to the exploitation of sample-specific properties of Japanese returns and involves
large leveraged positions.
        Similarly in Germany, the utility gains are relatively small with the exception of the addition of
Canada in the full sample and Japan in the second subsample. The utility gains from adding the Canadian
index are obtained by shorting the Canadian index, and the gains from adding the Japanese index are
obtained by holding a long position in the Japanese index. Surprisingly, the addition of the Italian index in
the second subsample increases German utility by a moderately large 5.16 percent for the coefficient of risk
aversion is equal to 2. subsampleFor Italy, the largest utility gains are due to the addition of Japan to the
benchmark portfolio, 34.07 percent (γ = 2,θ = 2) and 28.67 percent (γ = 5,θ = 2) for the first subsample
and 4.06 percent (γ = 2,θ = 2) and 1.60 percent (γ = 5,θ = 2) for the second subsample.



7. Conclusion


        Three key conclusions may be drawn from our research. First, ex post, there is weak evidence that
investment in multinationals could have provided diversification benefits for U.S. investors over the 1988-
92 period. Thus, U.S. home bias during this period could be explained by the indirect international
diversification opportunities available to investors at home. Second, the addition of international assets
provided further benefits to a benchmark portfolio that includes domestic stocks as well as the stocks of
multinationals. The utility gains from diversification vary depending on the assets added to the benchmark

14
   Until recently, Canada has maintained some controls on the level of ownership of foreign stock. It is not clear
that the restrictions were binding, however, because the amount of Canadian holdings of foreign equity was well-
below the legal limitations (see Tesar and Werner, 1994).



                                                       19
portfolio. Often the largest gains are obtained from the addition of the equally-weighted index and the set of
six international indices rather than from the addition of a single foreign market. This result is not
surprising given the vast literature on the benefits of international diversification. Third, the utility gains
from international diversification are in some cases very substantial but are often obtainable only by
holding large long or short positions. If investors face substantial costs in taking short positions, the gains
from international diversification may be limited. The sources of the gains from diversification vary across
samples and, as a result, a strategy for future portfolio allocations is not readily apparent.
        In future work, we plan to utilize this data set to explore a number of other issues related to the
benefits of global diversification. First, tests of the spanning hypothesis and an analysis of the associated
utility gains for international diversification subject to short-selling constraints would be useful. This test
specification would determine if an investor subject to reasonable allocational constraints could obtain
sizable utility gains from international diversification. Such an analysis may indicate that the large utility
gains are overstated if the investor cannot leverage the portfolio. Second, current research indicates that
investment in emerging markets yields substantial diversification benefits. Expanding the set of available
assets to include the emerging market indices would be interesting in the testing framework presented
above. The results would indicate the magnitude of the utility gains and the portfolio allocations needed to
obtain the gains in utility. Finally, all of the results here are based on ex post sample returns. In future
work, we plan to examine the benefits of global diversification in a framework that takes into account the
investor's uncertainty about future returns.




                                                       20
                                               References

Bekaert, Geert and Michael S. Urias, 1996, “Diversification, Integration and Emerging Market Closed-
End Funds”, Journal of Finance 51 (3), (July), pp.835 – 869.

Bohn, Henning and Linda L. Tesar, 1997, “The U.S. International Investment Portfolio and Mean-
Variance Optimization”, University of California, Santa Barbara Working Paper.

Campbell, John Y, Andrew W. Lo and A. Craig MacKinlay, 1997, The Econometrics of Financial
Markets, Princeton University Press, Princeton , New Jersey.

Canada Stockwatch, URL: http://www.canada-stockwatch.com/, January 1997.

Cole, Hal, and Maurice Obstfeld, 1991, “Commodity Trade and International Risk Sharing: How Much Do
Financial Markets Matter?” Journal of Monetary Economics 28, (August) pp.3 – 24.

DeSantis, Giorgio. 1993, "Asset Pricing and Portfolio Diversification: Evidence from Emerging Markets",
World Bank Discussion Paper 28 (3), (September), pp. 145 – 168.

Epstein, L.G., and S.E. Zin, 1989, “Substitution, Risk-Aversion and the Temporal Behavior of
Consumption and Asset Returns: A Theoretical Framework”, Econometrica 57 (July), pp.937 – 969.

French, Kenneth R., and James M. Poterba, 1991, “Investor Diversification and International Equity
Markets”, American Economic Review 81 (May), pp.222 – 226.

Grubel, Herbert G., 1968, "Internationally Diversified Portfolios: Welfare Gains and Capital Flows,"
American Economic Review 58 (December), pp. 1299-1314.

Hamilton, James D., 1994, Time Series Analysis, Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey.

Hansen, Lars P. and Ravi Jagannathan, 1991, “Implications of Security Market Data for Models of
Dynamic Economies,” Journal of Political Economy 99 (2), (April), pp.225 – 262.

Harvey, Campbell R., 1993, "Portfolio Enhancement Using Emerging Markets and Conditioning
Information", World Bank Discussion Paper 28(3), (September), pp. 110 – 144.

Heston, Steven L. and K. Geert Rowenherst, 1994, "Does Industrial Structure Explain the Benefits of
Intenational Diversification?" Journal of Financial Economics 36 (August), pp. 3-27.

Ingersoll, Jonathan E., Jr., 1987, Theory of Financial Decision Making, Rowman and Littlefield, Savage
Maryland.

Jacquillat, Bertrand and Bruno Solnik, 1978, "Multinationals are Poor Tools for International
Diversification," Journal of Portfolio Management (Winter), pp. 8-12.

Jobson, J.D., and Bob Korkie, 1989, “A Performance Interpretation of Multivariate Tests of Asset Set
Intersection, Spanning and Mean-Variance Efficiency”, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis
24, pp.185 – 204.



                                                    21
Levy, Haim and Marshall Sarnat, 1970, "International Diversification of Investment Portfolios," American
Economic Review (September), pp. 668-675.

Lewis, Karen K., 1996, “Consumption, Stock Returns, and the Gains from International Risk Sharing,”
University of Pennsylvania and NBER Working Paper.

MacKinlay, A. Craig, and Matthew P, Richardson, 1991, “Using Generalized Methods of Moments to Test
Mean-Variance Efficiency,” Journal of Finance 46, pp.511 – 528.

Newey, Whitney K., and Kenneth D. West, 1992, “Automatic Lag Selection in Covariance Estimation,”
University of Wisconsin, Madison, Mimeo.

Roll, Richard, 1977, "A Critique of the Asset Pricing Theory's Tests, Part I: On the Past and Present
Testability of the Theory," Journal of Financial Economics 4, pp. 129 – 176.

Senchack, Andrew J. and William L. Beedles, 1980, "Is Indirect International Diversification Desirable?"
Journal of Portfolio Management 6 (2), pp. 49-57.

Standard & Poor’s, 1996, Standard Corporate Descriptions, Standard & Poor’s, New York, NewYork.

Tesar, Linda L. and Ingrid M. Werner, 1994, “International Equity Transactions and U.S. Portfolio
Choice”, in The Internationalization of Equity Markets, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, p.185 –
227.

                       , 1995, “Home Bias and High Turnover”, Journal of International Money and
Finance 14, pp. 467-492.

___________________, 1997, "The Internationalization of Securities Markets Since the 1987 Crash,"
University of Michigan Working Paper.

Worldwide Branch Locations of Multinational Companies, 1994, David S. Hoopes, Editor, Gale Research
Inc., Washington, D.C.




                                                    22
Figure 1: Utility Improvement from Expanding the Set of Available Assets

 Expected
 Portfolio                             U(Ct*)          U(Ct)
 Return                                                                            Portfolio Frontier of
                                                                                   Benchmark and
                                                                                   Extended-Set Assets

                                                                                   Portfolio Frontier of
                                                                                   Benchmark Assets

                         TBE
                                       TB




                                                                       Standard Deviation
                                                                       of Portfolio Return




                                                  23
Table 1          Summary Statistics by Country by Firm Classification

Unless otherwise noted, the sample period is from January 4, 1984 to December 30,
1992. The returns are stated in percent return per week in the local currency. The
return per unit risk is the sample mean return divided by the sample standard
deviation.

Table 1.1        Summary Statistics by Firm Classification, Canada

                                            Sample       Sample
               Number in        Number in   Mean         Standard     Return Per
               Population       Sample      Return       Deviation    Unit Risk
 Canada Domestic

    CGS small            787           30       0.2402       3.1570       0.0761
       medium             11           11       0.1585       2.0118       0.0788
         large             4            4       0.2816       4.1681       0.0676
    EU small              48           30       0.1881       1.6969       0.1108
       medium              4            4       0.1973       1.7483       0.1129
         large             1            1       0.1782       1.8378       0.0970
    FIR small            194           30       0.0179       2.2442       0.0080
       medium              7            7       0.1921       2.2896       0.0839
         large             3            3       0.2427       2.6660       0.0910
    IND small            793           30       0.0141       2.6104       0.0054
       medium             19           19       0.0519       2.5153       0.0206
         large             7            7       0.0843       2.7178       0.0310

 Canada Multinationals

    CGS small               2           2       0.0711       3.9837       0.0178
       medium               1           1       0.3095       2.9187       0.1060
         large              2           2       0.2685       2.7603       0.0973
    IND small               2           2       0.2175       3.8401       0.0566
       medium               1           1       0.1574       3.0907       0.0509
         large              2           2       0.1984       3.4481       0.0575




                                                  24
Table 1.2        Summary Statistics by Firm Classification, France

The sample period of French firms is truncated to the period from July 17, 1985 to
December 20, 1992.

                                            Sample       Sample
                Number in       Number in   Mean         Standard     Return Per
                Population      Sample      Return       Deviation    Unit Risk
 France Domestic

    CGS small            331           30       0.3581       3.0879       0.1160
       medium             19           19       0.2541       2.9752       0.0854
         large             4            4       0.3633       3.9628       0.0917
    EU small              10           10       0.3819       4.3724       0.0873
       medium              0
         large             1            1       0.5116       4.3379       0.1179
    FIR small            175           30       0.0846       1.8781       0.0451
       medium             21           21       0.2073       2.8262       0.0734
         large            10           10       0.2095       3.6842       0.0569
    IND small            278           30       0.2819       3.4988       0.0806
       medium             12           12       0.2908       3.5968       0.0808
         large             3            3       0.3380       4.7876       0.0706

 France Multinationals

    CGS small               1           1       0.1371       5.3929       0.0254
       medium               3           3       0.1524       3.5836       0.0425
         large              3           3       0.4280       3.4211       0.1251
    IND small               2           2       0.3086       3.8238       0.0807
       medium               9           9       0.3957       3.5498       0.1115
         large              2           2       0.4194       3.3737       0.1243




                                                  25
Table 1.3        Summary Statistics by Firm Classification, Germany


                                            Sample      Sample
              Number in        Number in    Mean        Standard      Return Per
              Population       Sample       Return      Deviation     Unit Risk
 Germany Domestic

    CGS small            394          30       0.1735      2.3841        0.0728
       Medium             37          30       0.1313      2.5503        0.0515
        Large             20          20       0.1383      3.1787        0.0435
    EU small              45          30       0.1944      1.3762        0.1412
       Medium             10          10       0.2346      2.2531        0.1041
        Large              6           6       0.2920      3.2841        0.0889
    FIR small            197          30       0.1873      2.4521        0.0764
       Medium             23          23       0.2928      3.3447        0.0875
        Large             10          10       0.1201      4.3504        0.0276
    IND small            675          30       0.1766      2.5770        0.0685
       Medium              3           3       0.0350      2.6462        0.0132
        Large              0

 Germany Multinationals

    CGS small              0
       Medium              1            1      0.2379      3.1087        0.0765
         Large             1            1      0.2629      3.1224        0.0842
     EU small              0
       Medium              0
         Large             1            1      0.2778      3.0336        0.0916
     FIR small             0
       Medium              0
         Large             2            2      0.3115      3.4514        0.0903
    IND small              8            8      0.1692      3.0739        0.0551
       Medium              5            5      0.1675      2.9151        0.0575
         Large             3            3      0.1540      3.0799        0.0500




                                                 26
Table 1.4        Summary Statistics by Firm Classification, Italy

The sample period for Italian firms is truncated to the period from January 15, 1986
to December 30, 1992.

                                             Sample        Sample
                   Number in    Number in    Mean          Standard     Return Per
                   Population   Sample       Return        Deviation    Unit Risk
 Italy Domestic

    CGS small              52           30       0.1267        2.6004       0.0487
       Medium              10           10       0.1686        3.4516       0.0488
        Large               4            4       0.0131        3.9345       0.0033
    EU small                8            8       0.1912        2.8147       0.0679
       Medium               2            2       0.2230        3.6862       0.0605
        Large               1            1       0.2664        4.5834       0.0581
    FIR small              92           30       0.0810        3.1770       0.0255
       medium              11           11       0.1738        3.6227       0.0480
         large              2            2       0.2455        3.6444       0.0674
    IND small             116           30      -0.0575        3.1246      -0.0184
       medium              11           11       0.0240        3.0499       0.0079
         large              2            2      -0.0557        4.3326      -0.0129

 Italy Multinationals

    IND small               0
       medium               1            1       0.0324        4.9322       0.0066
         large              3            3       0.0183        4.2780       0.0043




                                                   27
Table 1.5        Summary Statistics by Firm Classification, Japan


                                            Sample      Sample
                   Number in    Number in   Mean        Standard     Return Per
                   Population   Sample      Return      Deviation    Unit Risk
 Japan Domestic

    CGS small            503           30      0.2042       3.0438      0.0671
       medium             44           30      0.1917       2.8543      0.0672
         large            14           14      0.2058       2.9709      0.0693
    EU small              22           22      0.3055       3.8713      0.0789
       medium              4            4      0.2563       4.0181      0.0638
         large             3            3      0.2894       4.5289      0.0639
    FIR small            186           30      0.2775       3.3746      0.0822
       medium              9            9      0.4806       4.5079      0.1066
         large             6            6      0.4663       4.6552      0.1002
    IND small           1047           30      0.3427       3.5109      0.0976
       medium             43           30      0.0630       2.8653      0.0220
         large             5            5      0.0387       2.9733      0.0130

 Japan Multinationals

    CGS small               3           3      0.2269       4.0778      0.0556
       medium               4           4      0.1800       3.2821      0.0548
         large              6           6      0.1997       3.3811      0.0591
    IND small              12          12      0.1492       2.9836      0.0500
       medium              25          25      0.1176       2.9561      0.0398
         large             12          12      0.0770       3.4700      0.0222




                                                 28
Table 1.6        Summary Statistics by Firm Classification, United Kingdom

The sample period for UK firms is truncated to the period from December 17, 1986
to December 30, 1992.

                                            Sample      Sample
                   Number in    Number in   Mean        Standard     Return Per
                   Population   Sample      Return      Deviation    Unit Risk
  UK Domestic

    CGS small            548           30      0.2551       2.8449       0.0897
       medium             16           16      0.3038       2.5175       0.1207
         large             3            3      0.4219       3.1236       0.1351
    EU small              45           30      0.7676       4.5137       0.1701
       medium              3            3      0.3818       3.0976       0.1233
         large             2            2      0.3628       3.0808       0.1178
    FIR small            196           30      0.2338       3.0886       0.0757
       medium             10           10      0.2802       3.1639       0.0886
         large             5            5      0.3315       3.2493       0.1020
    IND small            507           30      0.2508       3.0863       0.0813
       medium              3            3      0.0057       3.9855       0.0014
         large             2            2      0.3081       2.5320       0.1217

 UK Multinationals

    CGS small              9            9      0.2262       3.0532       0.0741
       medium              4            4      0.2709       2.9260       0.0926
         large             3            3      0.4173       2.8050       0.1488
    IND small             24           24      0.2309       3.0376       0.0760
       medium             10           10      0.2869       2.9441       0.0975
         large             1            1      0.1979       3.5385       0.0559




                                                 29
Table 1.7        Summary Statistics by Firm Classification, United States

                                             Sample      Sample
                   Number in    Number in    Mean        Standard     Return Per
                   Population   Sample       Return      Deviation    Unit Risk
  US Domestic

    CGS small           3481           30       0.4535       3.3831         0.1340
       medium             76           30       0.4518       2.5904         0.1744
         large            17           17       0.3811       2.6721         0.1426
    EU small             609           30       0.2645       1.8616         0.1421
       medium             30           30       0.3273       1.8153         0.1803
         large             5            5       0.3773       2.3343         0.1616
    FIR small           2215           30       0.3352       2.5374         0.1321
       medium            122           30       0.3356       2.4455         0.1372
         large            20           20       0.3005       2.8592         0.1051
    IND small           3170           30       0.2022       3.4517         0.0586
       medium             55           30       0.1875       2.6620         0.0704
         large             6            6       0.1029       4.0015         0.0257

 US Multinationals

    CGS small              19          19       0.3749       2.6629         0.1408
       medium              22          22       0.4014       2.4817         0.1617
         large             15          15       0.4256       2.5398         0.1676
     EU small               0
       medium               0
         large              1            1      0.3404       2.7793         0.1225
    FIR small               3            3      0.4542       5.0945         0.0892
       medium               0
         large              4           4       0.2160       3.4676         0.0623
    IND small              77          30       0.2476       2.9035         0.0853
       medium              50          30       0.3534       2.7932         0.1265
         large             12          12       0.2168       2.0589         0.1053




                                                  30
Table 2         Summary Statistics by Country by Firm Classification by Subsample

Unless otherwise noted, the first subsample period is from January 4, 1984 to June 29,
1988 and the second subsample is from July 6, 1988 until December 30, 1992. The
returns are stated in percent return per week in the local currency. The return per unit
risk is the sample mean return divided by the sample standard deviation.

Table 2.1       Subsample Summary Statistics by Firm Classification, Canada

                    First Subsample                         Second Subsample
                January 1984 - June 1988               July 1988 – December 1992
           Sample      Sample      Return           Sample      Sample    Return
           Mean        Standard Per Unit            Mean        Standard Per Unit
           Return      Dev.        Risk             Return      Dev.      Risk
 Canada Domestic

 CGS small        0.4375      3.5875       0.1220      0.0428      2.6508       0.0162
    medium        0.2689      2.1500       0.1251      0.0482      1.8616       0.0259
      large       0.4346      4.1110       0.1057      0.1286      4.2276       0.0304
 EU small         0.2393      1.8119       0.1321      0.1368      1.5758       0.0868
    medium        0.2599      1.7872       0.1454      0.1348      1.7101       0.0788
      large       0.1859      1.9848       0.0937      0.1706      1.6824       0.1014
 FIR small       -0.1071      2.7117      -0.0395      0.1429      1.6462       0.0868
    medium        0.2136      2.3665       0.0903      0.1705      2.2148       0.0770
      large       0.2238      2.7804       0.0805      0.2616      2.5522       0.1025
  IND small       0.1661      2.9350       0.0566     -0.1378      2.2354      -0.0617
    medium        0.0990      3.0478       0.0325      0.0048      1.8403       0.0026
      large       0.1628      3.0823       0.0528      0.0059      2.3003       0.0026

 Canada Multinationals

 CGS small        0.1039      4.4124      0.0236       0.0382      3.5123       0.0109
   medium         0.3879      3.2333      0.1200       0.2311      2.5705       0.0899
     large        0.3196      3.1767      0.1006       0.2175      2.2747       0.0956
 IND small        0.5511      4.7048      0.1171      -0.1161      2.6827      -0.0433
   medium         0.3412      3.2522      0.1049      -0.0265      2.9156      -0.0091
     large        0.1148      3.6970      0.0311       0.2819      3.1854       0.0885




                                                    31
Table 2.2     Subsample Summary Statistics by Firm Classification, France

                Truncated First Subsample              Second Subsample
                 July 24, 1985 - June 1988        July 1988 – December 1992
            Sample       Sample      Return    Sample      Sample    Return
            Mean         Standard Per Unit     Mean        Standard Per Unit
            Return       Dev.        Risk      Return      Dev.      Risk
 France Domestic

 CGS small      0.5665     4.2230     0.1341        0.2215   2.0253    0.1094
   medium       0.2673     3.8179     0.0700        0.2455   2.2686    0.1082
     large      0.4878     5.1781     0.0942        0.2817   2.9138    0.0967
 EU small       0.4965     5.6536     0.0878        0.3067   3.2843    0.0934
   medium
     large      0.7132     5.5333     0.1289        0.3795   3.3374    0.1137
 FIR small      0.1036     2.2290     0.0465        0.0722   1.6124    0.0448
   medium       0.2730     3.3047     0.0826        0.1643   2.4696    0.0665
     large      0.3787     4.3955     0.0862        0.0987   3.1372    0.0315
 IND small      0.4459     4.2301     0.1054        0.1745   2.9273    0.0596
   medium       0.4485     4.6374     0.0967        0.1874   2.7135    0.0691
     large     -0.0676     5.4690    -0.0124        0.6038   4.2745    0.1413

 France Multinationals

 CGS small      0.0503     5.5928     0.0090        0.1939   5.2692    0.0368
   medium       0.3762     4.3235     0.0870        0.0058   3.0028    0.0019
     large      0.5454     4.2451     0.1285        0.3512   2.7583    0.1273
 IND small      0.3254     4.2366     0.0768        0.2975   3.5366    0.0841
   medium       0.6896     4.4271     0.1558        0.2032   2.8257    0.0719
     large      0.4002     3.9550     0.1012        0.4320   2.9402    0.1469




                                               32
Table 2.3    Subsample Summary Statistics by Firm Classification, Germany

                   First Subsample                   Second Subsample
               January 1984 - June 1988         July 1988 – December 1992
           Sample     Sample      Return     Sample      Sample    Return
           Mean       Standard Per Unit      Mean        Standard Per Unit
           Return     Dev.        Risk       Return      Dev.      Risk
 Germany Domestic

 CGS small     0.1682     2.8540    0.0589        0.1789   1.8019    0.0993
   medium      0.1316     2.7623    0.0476        0.1310   2.3250    0.0564
     large     0.1978     3.3643    0.0588        0.0788   2.9877    0.0264
 EU small      0.2391     1.4027    0.1704        0.1497   1.3506    0.1108
   medium      0.2213     2.1740    0.1018        0.2479   2.3341    0.1062
     large     0.2170     3.1146    0.0697        0.3670   3.4503    0.1064
 FIR small     0.2543     2.8285    0.0899        0.1202   2.0103    0.0598
   medium      0.3278     3.7412    0.0876        0.2577   2.9020    0.0888
     large     0.2210     4.8883    0.0452        0.0191   3.7440    0.0051
 IND small     0.1613     2.9218    0.0552        0.1918   2.1846    0.0878
   medium      0.0417     2.7432    0.0152        0.0283   2.5514    0.0111
     large

 Germany Multinationals

 CGS small
   medium      0.2389     3.0783    0.0776        0.2369   3.1454    0.0753
     large     0.2698     3.5865    0.0752        0.2560   2.5840    0.0991
 EU small
   medium
     large     0.3189     2.9364    0.1086        0.2366   3.1335    0.0755
 FIR small
   medium
     large     0.3521     3.8097    0.0924        0.2709   3.0592    0.0886
 IND small     0.0955     3.0317    0.0315        0.2430   3.1203    0.0779
   medium      0.2623     2.9877    0.0878        0.0728   2.8438    0.0256
     large     0.2013     3.3238    0.0606        0.1066   2.8212    0.0378




                                             33
Table 2.4      Subsample Summary Statistics by Firm Classification, Italy

                 Truncated First Subsample              Second Subsample
                January 15, 1986 - June 1988       July 1988 – December 1992
             Sample      Sample      Return     Sample      Sample    Return
             Mean        Standard Per Unit      Mean        Standard Per Unit
             Return      Dev.        Risk       Return      Dev.      Risk
 Italy Domestic

 CGS small       0.2328    3.4655      0.0672     0.0684      1.9776     0.0346
   medium        0.3433    4.8156      0.0713     0.0727      2.4020     0.0303
     large      -0.0682    4.3447     -0.0157     2.4020      3.6991     0.6493
 EU small       -0.1998    3.0659     -0.0652     0.4058      2.6491     0.1532
   medium        0.0282    3.6657      0.0077     0.3299      3.7008     0.0891
     large       0.1258    4.8433      0.0260     0.3436      4.4430     0.0773
 FIR small       0.2946    4.0642      0.0725    -0.0363      2.5659    -0.0141
   medium        0.1748    4.2241      0.0414     0.1733      3.2555     0.0532
     large       0.5919    4.6340      0.1277     0.0554      2.9588     0.0187
 IND small      -0.0737    3.4586     -0.0213    -0.0487      2.9329    -0.0166
   medium        0.1459    3.2665      0.0447    -0.0429      2.9293    -0.0147
     large       0.3139    5.4468      0.0576    -0.2586      3.5741    -0.0723

 Italy Multinationals

 IND small
   medium       -0.2648    6.5370     -0.0405     0.1956      3.7798     0.0517
     large       0.3813    5.3554      0.0712    -0.1810      3.5482    -0.0510




                                                34
Table 2.5     Subsample Summary Statistics by Firm Classification, Japan

                    First Subsample                   Second Subsample
                January 1984 - June 1988         July 1988 – December 1992
            Sample     Sample      Return     Sample      Sample    Return
            Mean       Standard Per Unit      Mean        Standard Per Unit
            Return     Dev.        Risk       Return      Dev.      Risk
 Japan Domestic

 CGS small     0.5524     2.8754     0.1921     -0.1440     3.1714    -0.0454
   medium      0.4529     2.6686     0.1697     -0.0695     3.0118    -0.0231
     large     0.5196     2.8886     0.1799     -0.1079     3.0246    -0.0357
 EU small      0.6236     4.0788     0.1529     -0.0127     3.6329    -0.0035
   medium      0.6527     4.2328     0.1542     -0.1400     3.7587    -0.0372
     large     0.9800     5.2122     0.1880     -0.4012     3.6033    -0.1113
 FIR small     0.7199     3.8302     0.1879     -0.1648     2.7859    -0.0592
   medium      0.9766     4.7766     0.2045     -0.0154     4.1736    -0.0037
     large     0.9461     4.8113     0.1966     -0.0134     4.4524    -0.0030
 IND small     0.6025     2.8499     0.2114      0.0829     4.0556     0.0204
   medium      0.2927     2.7464     0.1066     -0.1667     2.9675    -0.0562
     large     0.2692     2.9630     0.0909     -0.1919     2.9720    -0.0646

 Japan Multinationals

 CGS small     0.6092     4.3443     0.1402     -0.1553     3.7632    -0.0413
   medium      0.4991     3.0712     0.1625     -0.1391     3.4573    -0.0402
     large     0.5966     3.6223     0.1647     -0.1971     3.0781    -0.0640
 IND small     0.4153     2.4136     0.1721     -0.1169     3.4459    -0.0339
   medium      0.3802     2.8731     0.1323     -0.1451     3.0200    -0.0480
     large     0.3069     3.7810     0.0812     -0.1528     3.1194    -0.0490




                                              35
Table 2.6     Subsample Summary Statistics by Firm Classification, UK

               Truncated First Subsample              Second Subsample
             December 17, 1986 - June 1988       July 1988 – December 1992
            Sample     Sample      Return     Sample      Sample    Return
            Mean       Standard Per Unit      Mean        Standard Per Unit
            Return     Dev.        Risk       Return      Dev.      Risk
 UK Domestic

 CGS small     0.0992     4.0752     0.0243     0.3081      2.2896       0.1346
   medium      0.2382     3.0930     0.0770     0.3261      2.2962       0.1420
     large     0.0530     3.9889     0.0133     0.5475      2.7674       0.1978
 EU small      1.2111     6.1885     0.1957     0.6166      3.7840       0.1629
   medium      0.4043     3.6379     0.1111     0.3741      2.8996       0.1290
     large     0.3859     3.6702     0.1051     0.3550      2.8615       0.1240
 FIR small     0.5720     3.8415     0.1489     0.1186      2.7868       0.0426
   medium      0.3698     3.7598     0.0984     0.2497      2.9422       0.0849
     large     0.2892     3.8046     0.0760     0.3459      3.0463       0.1136
 IND small     0.4040     3.9340     0.1027     0.1986      2.7471       0.0723
   medium      0.3116     4.1348     0.0754    -0.0985      3.9370      -0.0250
     large     0.1995     3.3630     0.0593     0.3451      2.1862       0.1578

 UK Multinationals

 CGS small     0.3818     4.0748     0.0937        0.1732   2.6253      0.0660
   medium      0.5649     3.9594     0.1427        0.1708   2.4812      0.0689
     large     0.2972     3.8226     0.0778        0.4582   2.3703      0.1933
 IND small     0.3602     3.9925     0.0902        0.1869   2.6443      0.0707
   medium      0.2795     4.0159     0.0696        0.2894   2.4873      0.1164
     large     0.2771     4.2371     0.0654        0.1709   3.2768      0.0521




                                              36
Table 2.7       Subsample Summary Statistics by Firm Classification, US

                       First Subsample                  Second Subsample
                   January 1984 - June 1988        July 1988 – December 1992
               Sample     Sample      Return    Sample      Sample    Return
               Mean       Standard Per Unit     Mean        Standard Per Unit
               Return     Dev.        Risk      Return      Dev.      Risk
 US Domestic

 CGS small       0.5274     3.5856     0.1471        0.3796   3.1737      0.1196
   medium        0.4773     2.8905     0.1651        0.4262   2.2568      0.1889
     large       0.2793     2.8757     0.0971        0.4829   2.4537      0.1968
 EU small        0.3107     2.1219     0.1464        0.2183   1.5619      0.1398
   medium        0.3478     2.0349     0.1709        0.3068   1.5694      0.1955
     large       0.4412     2.5010     0.1764        0.3134   2.1582      0.1452
 FIR small       0.3363     2.4458     0.1375        0.3341   2.6310      0.1270
   medium        0.3168     2.6336     0.1203        0.3543   2.2472      0.1577
     large       0.2717     3.0856     0.0880        0.3293   2.6198      0.1257
 IND small       0.0426     3.7472     0.0114        0.3619   3.1284      0.1157
   medium        0.2582     3.0392     0.0850        0.1169   2.2262      0.0525
     large      -0.1170     4.4327    -0.0264        0.3228   3.5137      0.0919

 US Multinationals

 CGS small       0.3256     2.8775     0.1132        0.4241   2.4347      0.1742
   medium        0.4198     2.6995     0.1555        0.3830   2.2486      0.1703
     large       0.3825     2.6847     0.1425        0.4687   2.3911      0.1960
 EU small
   medium
     large       0.2934     2.8872     0.1016        0.3874   2.6725      0.1450
 FIR small       0.8193     7.0241     0.1166        0.0892   1.5532      0.0574
   medium
     large       0.2425     3.3554     0.0723        0.1895   3.5833      0.0529
 IND small       0.3601     3.3688     0.1069        0.1351   2.3499      0.0575
   medium        0.4643     3.1338     0.1481        0.2426   2.4067      0.1008
     large       0.2622     2.3555     0.1113        0.1714   1.7159      0.0999




                                                37
Table 3.1       Summary Statistics for the Returns on the International Indices (Local Currency)
The rates of return are stated in percent return per week in the local currency. The return per unit risk is the sample mean
return divided by the sample standard deviation.
                               Full Sample                     First Subsample                   Second Subsample
                         Jan. 1984 – Dec. 1992              Jan. 1984 - June 1988              July 1988 - Dec. 1992
                    Sample      Sample     Return      Sample      Sample     Return      Sample     Sample      Return
                    Mean        Standard Per Unit      Mean        Standard Per Unit      Mean       Standard Per Unit
                    Return      Dev.       Risk        Return      Dev.       Risk        Return     Dev.        Risk

 Canada              0.1384      1.8398      0.0752     0.1908      2.1612      0.0883      0.0860     1.4519      0.0592
 France              0.3416      2.8456      0.1200     0.4746      3.2826      0.1446      0.2086     2.3276      0.0896
 Germany             0.1992      2.4850      0.0802     0.2305      2.6819      0.0859      0.1678     2.2764      0.0737
 Italy               0.3012      2.9642      0.1016     0.5455      3.2911      0.1658      0.0569     2.5805      0.0220
 Japan               0.1784      2.7538      0.0648     0.5248      2.5621      0.2048     -0.1680     2.8972     -0.0580
 United Kingdom      0.3547      2.2281      0.1592     0.4192      2.4240      0.1729      0.2902     2.0165      0.1439
 United States       0.3030      2.1543      0.1406     0.3069      2.3979      0.1280      0.2992     1.8846      0.1588

Table 3.2       Summary Statistics for the Returns on the International Indices (US Dollars)
                              Full Sample                      First Subsample                   Second Subsample
                         Jan. 1984 - Dec. 1992              Jan. 1984 - June 1988              July 1988 - Dec. 1992
                    Sample     Sample      Return      Sample      Sample     Return      Sample     Sample      Return
                    Mean       Standard Per Unit       Mean        Standard Per Unit      Mean       Standard Per Unit
                    Return     Dev.        Risk        Return      Dev.       Risk        Return     Dev.        Risk

 Canada              0.1377      2.0136      0.0684     0.2036      2.3170      0.0879      0.0717     1.6583      0.0433
 France              0.4406      3.1318      0.1407     0.6156      3.5285      0.1745      0.2656     2.6733      0.0994
 Germany             0.3202      2.7690      0.1156     0.4069      2.7708      0.1469      0.2335     2.7704      0.0843
 Italy               0.3393      3.2903      0.1031     0.6428      3.5271      0.1823      0.0357     3.0121      0.0119
 Japan               0.3273      3.2630      0.1003     0.7751      2.9985      0.2585     -0.1205     3.4564     -0.0349
 United Kingdom      0.3786      2.7448      0.1379     0.5084      2.9987      0.1695      0.2489     2.4644      0.1010
 United States       0.3030      2.1543      0.1406     0.3069      2.3979      0.1280      0.2992     1.8846      0.1588




                                                                       38
Table 4       Sample Correlations of the Returns on the International Indices

Table 4.1     Full Sample: January 4, 1984 to December 30, 1992

            Canada   France    Germany     Italy        Japan     UK     US

 Canada      1.00     0.43       0.39      0.24         0.33      0.56   0.77
 France               1.00       0.54      0.40         0.32      0.45   0.47
 Germany                         1.00      0.38         0.30      0.43   0.43
 Italy                                     1.00         0.22      0.34   0.27
 Japan                                                  1.00      0.34   0.39
 UK                                                               1.00   0.58
 US                                                                      1.00


Table 4.2     First Subsample: January 4, 1984 to June 29, 1984

            Canada   France    Germany     Italy        Japan     UK     US

 Canada      1.00     0.43       0.39      0.23         0.36      0.61   0.79
 France               1.00       0.43      0.34         0.35      0.39   0.45
 Germany                         1.00      0.29         0.32      0.40   0.39
 Italy                                     1.00         0.21      0.29   0.24
 Japan                                                  1.00      0.32   0.46
 UK                                                               1.00   0.61
 US                                                                      1.00


Table 4.3     Second Subsample: July 6, 1988 to December 30, 1992

            Canada   France    Germany     Italy        Japan     UK     US

 Canada      1.00     0.40       0.40      0.25         0.32      0.48   0.75
 France               1.00       0.73      0.51         0.29      0.55   0.50
 Germany                         1.00      0.51         0.28      0.47   0.48
 Italy                                     1.00         0.23      0.42   0.32
 Japan                                                  1.00      0.38   0.33
 UK                                                               1.00   0.53
 US                                                                      1.00




                                                   39
Table 5         Summary Statistics for Exchange Rates

The exchange rates are stated as pounds per unit of local currency. The exchange rate for
Italy and Japan are stated per 100 units of lire and yen, respectively.

                                                                            Second
                            Full Sample         First Subsample            Subsample
                             Jan. 1984 -            Jan. 1984 -           July 1988 -
                             Dec. 1992               June 1988             Dec. 1992
                        Mean        Standard   Mean        Standard   Mean       Standard
                        Rate        Dev.       Rate        Dev.       Rate       Dev.

 Canada                  0.50248    0.05304    0.51506    0.06532     0.49038    0.03269
 France                  0.09723    0.00800    0.09376    0.00742     0.10160    0.00766
 Germany                 0.32059    0.03643    0.30001    0.03471     0.34438    0.02599
 Italy (per 100 lire)    0.04482    0.00268    0.04418    0.00319     0.04546    0.00184
 Japan (per 100 yen)     0.40163    0.05091    0.37660    0.05193     0.43193    0.03924
 United States           0.63268    0.08997    0.68776    0.09276     0.58040    0.04294




                                                  40
Table 6.1       Mean-Variance Spanning Tests and the Utility Gain from MNC Diversification
                The benchmark set is the set of domestic assets in each country. The extended set is the set of
                multinationals in that country.


                             Canada      France     Germany       Italy        Japan      UK         US

Full Sample: January 1984 - December 1992
            test statistic   19.4621 13.8068          28.1248      4.0475      18.3476   10.2991    27.6034
            p-value           0.0780  0.3132           0.0137      0.3996       0.1055    0.5897     0.0684
            #obs                 470     390              470         364          470       316        470
            df                    12      12               14           4           12        12         18
      Utility gain (percent)
            (γ=2,θ=2)           5.71   13.55              5.38       3.08         5.47      5.89       15.33
            (γ=5,θ=2)           2.50    7.04              2.58       1.29         3.78      3.55        8.52

First Subsample: January 1984 - Dec 1987
            test statistic   14.1690   9.8459         18.6841      5.1594      10.8895    6.7541    16.0336
            p-value           0.2900   0.6295          0.1774      0.2713       0.5384    0.8734     0.5902
            #obs                 235      155             235         129          235        80        235
            df                    12       12              14           4           12        12         18
      Utility gain (percent)
            (γ=2,θ=2)          11.53    19.00             9.54       4.37         7.02     18.56       20.07
            (γ=5,θ=2)           6.08    10.26             4.44       2.37         3.85     14.35       11.44

Second Subsample: July 1988 - December 1992
             test statistic    11.2047 12.3546 15.4451            1.7860 10.4148         9.8053 28.2152
             p-value            0.5115     0.4176     0.3484      0.7750      0.5796     0.6330    0.0589
             #obs                   235       235         235         235        235        235        235
             df                      12         12         14            4        12         12         18
      Utility gain (percent)
             (γ=2,θ=2)           13.49      24.21      13.64         4.66      10.30      10.93      24.58
             (γ=5,θ=2)             6.42     14.14        7.14        3.01       8.48       5.99      14.28
Notes: The sample data for France, Italy and the United Kingdom are not available for the entire time series. The
data series for France begins on July 24, 1985. The data series for Italy begins on January 15, 1986 and the data
series for the United Kingdom begins on December 24, 1986.


                                                                          41
Table 6.2       Mean-Variance Spanning Tests and the Utility Gain from MNC Diversification
                The benchmark set is the domestic assets and an equally-weighted portfolio of the six international
                indices. The extended set is the set of multinationals in that country.
                              Canada     France Germany            Italy        Japan   UK          US

Full Sample: January 1984 - December 1992
            test statistic   22.0751 16.2801         24.6120      4.3481      15.1807    8.7452    23.9776
            p-value           0.0367  0.1787          0.0386      0.3609       0.2317    0.7245     0.1558
            #obs                 470     389             470         364          470       315        470
            df                    12      12              12          12           12        12         12
      Utility gain (percent)
            (γ=2,θ=2)           3.73   12.44             4.95        0.11        2.81       1.39      12.07
            (γ=5,θ=2)           2.04    6.51             2.55        0.15        1.60       1.34       7.22

First Subsample
            test statistic     14.9551     9.7592    14.5080      2.8967       8.1803    6.7133    16.2905
            p-value             0.2439     0.6371     0.4126      0.5753       0.7709    0.8760     0.5723
            #obs                   235        154        235         129          235        80        235
            df                      12         12         12          12           12         2         12
      Utility gain (percent)
            (γ=2,θ=2)             9.56      21.54        6.70        1.17        8.67       0.75      15.92
            (γ=5,θ=2)             5.70      13.53        3.44        1.14        4.83       0.87       9.53

Second Subsample
             test statistic    13.3531 12.1170 16.9174            1.2413 13.8614 10.2333 26.6747
             p-value            0.3439     0.4363     0.2606      0.8713      0.3096     0.5955    0.0853
             #obs                   235       235         235         235        235        235        235
             df                      12         12         12          12         12         12         12
      Utility gain (percent)
             (γ=2,θ=2)           11.15      22.45      11.59         2.20       2.28       8.96      16.92
             (γ=5,θ=2)             6.28     14.66        7.31        1.45       1.47       5.58      11.20
Notes: The sample data for France, Italy and the United Kingdom are not available for the entire time series. The
data series for France begins on July 24, 1985. The data series for Italy begins on January 15, 1986 and the data
series for the United Kingdom begins on December 24, 1986.




                                                                         42
Table 7.1      Mean-Variance Spanning Tests and the Utility Gain from MNC Diversification, Canada
               The benchmark set is the domestic assets and the international index(es). The mnc assets comprise the extended set.

                                                                                                            Equal-Wt      All
                            Canada      France    Germany       Italy        Japan     UK          US        Index      Indices

Full Sample: January 1984 - December 1992
            test statistic           19.8060        19.8255    21.1321       20.0647   19.6541   23.7088     22.1807    22.0751
            p-value                   0.0708         0.0705     0.0485        0.0659    0.0739    0.0223      0.0355     0.0367
            #obs                         470            470        470           470       470       470         470        470
            df                             2              2          2             2         2         2           2         12
      Utility gain (percent)
            (γ=2,θ=2)                   4.95            5.51       5.13         5.36      4.47       4.34        4.19       3.73
            (γ=5,θ=2)                   2.29            2.49       2.24         2.38      2.05       2.38        1.99       2.04

First Subsample: January 1984 - June 1988
            test statistic            13.5852       13.0308    15.4854       15.3606   14.6768   14.8490     16.3938    14.9551
            p-value                    0.3280        0.3668     0.2160        0.2223    0.2596    0.2498      0.1739     0.2439
            #obs                           235          235        235           235       235       235         235        235
            df                               2            2          2             2         2         2           2         12
      Utility gain (percent)
            (γ=2,θ=2)                   11.14         11.24       11.19         9.69     10.41      11.23      10.05        9.56
            (γ=5,θ=2)                     6.14         6.00        6.03         5.75      5.79       6.25       5.93        5.70

Second Subsample: July 1988 - December 1992
           test statistic           11.3586         11.3516    11.5743       11.1655   11.4215   13.1472     11.6699    13.3531
           p-value                   0.4985          0.4991     0.4804        0.5148    0.4932    0.3584      0.4725     0.3439
           #obs                          235            235        235           235       235       235         235        235
           df                              2              2          2             2         2         2           2         12
     Utility gain (percent)
           (γ=2,θ=2)                   13.68          13.72       13.73        12.86     12.93      11.88      13.38       11.15
           (γ=5,θ=2)                    6.63           6.60        6.54         6.24      6.33       6.20       6.37        6.28




                                                                        43
Table 7.2      Mean-Variance Spanning Tests and the Utility Gain from MNC Diversification, France
               The benchmark set is the domestic assets and the international index(es). The mnc assets comprise the extended set.

                                                                                                            Equal-Wt      All
                            Canada      France    Germany       Italy        Japan     UK          US        Index      Indices

Truncated Full Sample: July 24, 1985 - December 1992
          test statistic    15.7800             14.2898        15.1258       12.3724   14.6595   13.5123     15.3984    16.2801
          p-value            0.2015              0.2826         0.2346        0.4163    0.2606    0.3329      0.2204     0.1787
          #obs                   389                389            389           389       389       389         389        389
          df                       2                  2              2             2         2         2           2         12
    Utility gain (percent)
          (γ=2,θ=2)           14.11               13.48           13.56        13.32     12.43      13.23      13.23       12.44
          (γ=5,θ=2)             7.20               6.85            7.01         6.86      6.20       6.76       6.59        6.51

Truncated First Subsample: July 24, 1985 - June 1988
          test statistic    9.0877                8.8908        9.8626        9.0460    8.2888     8.8734     8.4315     9.7592
          p-value           0.6954                0.7122        0.6280        0.6990    0.7622     0.7137     0.7506     0.6371
          #obs                  154                   154          154           154       154        154        154        154
          df                      2                     2            2             2         2          2          2         12
    Utility gain (percent)
          (γ=2,θ=2)           19.09                18.89          18.52        23.04     17.80      19.10      18.99       21.54
          (γ=5,θ=2)           10.29                  9.93          9.96        14.13      9.26      10.27      10.23       13.53

Second Subsample: July 1988 - December 1992
           test statistic   13.6893                 11.1288    11.9199       11.7348   12.8774   12.6823     12.1934    12.1170
           p-value           0.3210                  0.5179     0.4521        0.4672    0.3780    0.3926      0.4303     0.4363
           #obs                 235                     235        235           235       235       235         235        235
           df                     2                       2          2             2         2         2           2         12
     Utility gain (percent)
           (γ=2,θ=2)          24.47                   24.24       23.33        25.29     23.63      23.75      24.75       22.45
           (γ=5,θ=2)          14.28                   14.16       13.92        15.14     13.60      13.92      14.43       14.66




                                                                        44
Table 7.3      Mean-Variance Spanning Tests and the Utility Gain from MNC Diversification, Germany
               The benchmark set is the domestic assets and the international index(es). The mnc assets comprise the extended set.

                                                                                                            Equal-Wt      All
                            Canada      France    Germany       Italy        Japan     UK          US        Index      Indices

Full Sample: January 1984 - December 1992
            test statistic   23.1864 28.1496                   27.7492       28.1446   24.1440   26.6922     26.9885    24.6120
            p-value           0.0573  0.0136                    0.0154        0.0136    0.0440    0.0211      0.0193     0.0386
            #obs                 470     470                       470           470       470       470         470        470
            df                     2       2                         2             2         2         2           2         12
      Utility gain (percent)
            (γ=2,θ=2)           6.13    4.22                       5.17         5.29      5.19       5.15        4.91       4.95
            (γ=5,θ=2)           2.88    2.10                       2.45         2.52      2.46       2.43        2.29       2.55

First Subsample: January 1984 - June 1988
            test statistic   15.6694 17.6148                   17.1077       17.4108   13.9054   16.4307     14.6920    14.5080
            p-value           0.3340   0.2249                   0.2505        0.2349    0.4568    0.2878      0.3995     0.4126
            #obs                 235       235                     235           235       235       235         235        235
            df                     2         2                       2             2         2         2           2         12
      Utility gain (percent)
            (γ=2,θ=2)          10.83      7.02                     8.35         6.79      8.31      10.44        6.75       6.70
            (γ=5,θ=2)           4.94      3.33                     3.89         3.42      3.76       4.67        3.03       3.44

Second Subsample: July 1988 - December 1992
           test statistic   13.8242 15.9167                    15.2031       15.2859   15.2925   15.2872     16.1016    16.9174
           p-value           0.4629  0.3185                     0.3644        0.3589    0.3585    0.3588      0.3072     0.2606
           #obs                 235      235                       235           235       235       235         235        235
           df                     2        2                         2             2         2         2           2         12
     Utility gain (percent)
           (γ=2,θ=2)          12.99    13.74                      13.96        11.45     14.05      15.86      13.23       11.59
           (γ=5,θ=2)           6.97     7.25                       7.40         6.38      7.41       8.54       7.09        7.31




                                                                        45
Table 7.4     Mean-Variance Spanning Tests and the Utility Gain from MNC Diversification, Italy
              The benchmark set is the domestic assets and the international index(es). The mnc assets comprise the extended set.

                                                                                                           Equal-Wt      All
                           Canada      France    Germany       Italy        Japan     UK          US        Index      Indices

Truncated Full Sample: January 15 1986 - December 1992
          test statistic    3.9602    6.1537    6.2935                       4.3453   3.9904      4.7492     5.1622     4.3481
          p-value           0.4114    0.1880    0.1783                       0.3613   0.4073      0.3140     0.2711     0.3609
          #obs                 364        364       364                         364      364         364        364        364
          df                     2          2         2                           2        2           2          2         12
    Utility gain (percent)
          (γ=2,θ=2)           3.08       3.27      3.23                        3.18      3.76       2.98        3.28       0.11
          (γ=5,θ=2)           1.27       1.54      1.49                        1.37      1.78       1.23        1.48       0.15

Truncated First Sample: January 15 1986 – June 88
          test statistic    5.2560    5.7119     7.5593                      5.7124   4.5509      6.5773     6.4713     2.8967
          p-value           0.2620    0.2217     0.1091                      0.2217   0.3366      0.1600     0.1666     0.5753
          #obs                 129        129       129                         129      129         129        129        129
          df                     2          2         2                           2        2           2          2         12
    Utility gain (percent)
          (γ=2,θ=2)           3.86       5.42      5.50                        2.87      3.95       4.53        4.77       1.17
          (γ=5,θ=2)           1.86       3.53      3.33                        1.52      1.83       2.37        2.62       1.14

Second Subsample: July 1988 - December 1992
           test statistic   1.9519   2.0979         2.2686                   1.9636   2.6697      1.6800     2.4149     1.2413
           p-value          0.7446   0.7178         0.6865                   0.7424   0.6145      0.7943     0.6599     0.8713
           #obs                 235      235           235                      235      235         235        235        235
           df                     2        2             2                        2        2           2          2         12
     Utility gain (percent)
           (γ=2,θ=2)           4.63     3.68           3.96                    5.37      4.25       4.34        4.59       2.20
           (γ=5,θ=2)           3.01     2.11           2.26                    3.42      2.64       2.71        2.70       1.45




                                                                       46
Table 7.5      Mean-Variance Spanning Tests and the Utility Gain from MNC Diversification, Japan
               The benchmark set is the domestic assets and the international index(es). The mnc assets comprise the extended set.

                                                                                                            Equal-Wt      All
                            Canada      France    Germany       Italy        Japan     UK          US        Index      Indices

Full Sample: January 1984 - December 1992
            test statistic   12.2032 15.5102        13.7891    18.8215                18.5063    12.1229     15.8749    15.1807
            p-value           0.4295  0.2147         0.3144     0.0929                 0.1012     0.4359      0.1970     0.2317
            #obs                 470     470            470        470                    470        470         470        470
            df                     2       2              2          2                      2          2           2         12
      Utility gain (percent)
            (γ=2,θ=2)           5.17    3.14            3.96       4.49                   3.64       3.40        3.20       2.81
            (γ=5,θ=2)           2.78    1.96            2.37       2.86                   2.15       1.81        1.67       1.60

First Subsample: January 1984 - June 1988
            test statistic   9.8595    9.7344        7.5088     9.6056                10.4935    10.3018      8.4688     8.1803
            p-value          0.6283    0.6392        0.8222     0.6505                 0.5728     0.5895      0.7475     0.7709
            #obs                235        235          235        235                    235        235         235        235
            df                    2          2            2          2                      2          2           2         12
      Utility gain (percent)
            (γ=2,θ=2)          9.04       7.01          7.50       7.00                   7.52       9.80        8.12       8.67
            (γ=5,θ=2)          4.98       3.68          4.07       3.76                   3.96       5.21        4.20       4.83

Second Subsample: July 1988 - December 1992
           test statistic   12.3757 11.0778          9.1695    10.6564                11.3700    11.1557     14.2879    13.8614
           p-value           0.4160  0.5223          0.6884     0.5586                 0.4975     0.5156      0.2827     0.3096
           #obs                 235      235            235        235                    235        235         235        235
           df                     2        2              2          2                      2          2           2         12
     Utility gain (percent)
           (γ=2,θ=2)           2.77     2.90            2.84       5.77                   3.65       1.48        1.82       2.28
           (γ=5,θ=2)           1.88     2.25            2.18       4.53                   2.76       1.02        1.17       1.47




                                                                        47
Table 7.6     Mean-Variance Spanning Tests and the Utility Gain from MNC Diversification, United Kingdom
              The benchmark set is the domestic assets and the international index(es). The mnc assets comprise the extended set.

                                                                                                           Equal-Wt      All
                           Canada      France    Germany       Italy        Japan     UK          US        Index      Indices

Truncated Full Sample: December 24, 1986 to December 1992
          test statistic    9.5948    7.7668    7.7255    9.5930             7.6287               7.9282     7.4648     8.7452
          p-value           0.6515    0.8031    0.8062    0.6516             0.8134               0.7907     0.8254     0.7245
          #obs                 315       315       315       315                315                  315        315        315
          df                     2          2        2         2                  2                    2          2         12
    Utility gain (percent)
          (γ=2,θ=2)           6.79      6.37      7.06      5.84               7.90                 6.55        8.01       1.39
          (γ=5,θ=2)           3.95      3.66      3.94      3.61               4.50                 3.78        4.41       1.34

Truncated First Subsample: December 24, 1986 - June 88
          test statistic    6.7228   6.3505      7.1358        5.6764        5.3565               5.6909     5.8185     6.7133
          p-value           0.8754   0.8974      0.8485        0.9315        0.9450               0.9309     0.9250     0.8760
          #obs                  80        80         80            80            80                   80         80         80
          df                     2         2          2             2             2                    2          2          2
    Utility gain (percent)
          (γ=2,θ=2)          18.55     21.80      16.60          19.74        17.87                18.62      20.73        0.75
          (γ=5,θ=2)          14.40     16.77      13.88          16.12        13.15                14.32      15.73        0.87

Second Subsample: July 1988 - December 1992
           test statistic   9.1053   9.3901         8.6429    11.0049        9.8559               8.4607     8.6364    10.2333
           p-value          0.6939   0.6693         0.7331     0.5285        0.6286               0.7482     0.7336     0.5955
           #obs                 235      235           235        235           235                  235        235        235
           df                     2        2             2          2             2                    2          2         12
     Utility gain (percent)
           (γ=2,θ=2)          11.06    10.99         11.21       10.30        13.14                11.38      12.30        8.96
           (γ=5,θ=2)           6.37     5.97          6.01        5.84         7.61                 6.21       6.84        5.58




                                                                       48
Table 7.7     Mean-Variance Spanning Tests and the Utility Gain from MNC Diversification, United States
              The benchmark set is the domestic assets and the international index(es). The mnc assets comprise the extended set.

                                                                                                          Equal-Wt       All
                           Canada      France    Germany       Italy        Japan     UK          US       Index       Indices

Truncated Full Sample: December 24, 1986 to December 1992
          test statistic   25.2602 27.8704 27.4132 27.1586                  26.9986   26.8083               26.4764    23.9776
          p-value           0.1179    0.0641    0.0716    0.0761             0.0790    0.0827                0.0894     0.1558
          #obs                 470       470       470       470                470       470                   470        470
          df                     2          2        2         2                  2         2                     2         12
    Utility gain (percent)
          (γ=2,θ=2)          13.86     14.53     15.39     15.32              15.42     15.32                 15.38       12.07
          (γ=5,θ=2)           8.17      8.01      8.53      8.48               8.55      8.43                  8.47        7.22

Truncated First Subsample: December 24, 1986 - June 88
          test statistic   15.0145 16.4453 16.6118            16.0890       16.8067   15.5776               16.3227    16.2905
          p-value           0.6610   0.5615      0.5499        0.5863        0.5364    0.6220                0.5700     0.5723
          #obs                 235       235        235           235           235       235                   235        235
          df                     2         2          2             2             2         2                     2         12
    Utility gain (percent)
          (γ=2,θ=2)          20.21     18.36      21.29          18.85        18.30     19.59                 19.80       15.92
          (γ=5,θ=2)          11.70     10.46      12.36          10.66        10.47     11.11                 11.41        9.53

Second Subsample: July 1988 - December 1992
           test statistic   27.6172 26.6097        27.7044    25.2395       24.4299   23.4240               26.1306    26.6747
           p-value           0.0681  0.0866         0.0667     0.1185        0.1414    0.1748                0.0968     0.0853
           #obs                 235      235           235        235           235       235                   235        235
           df                     2        2             2          2             2         2                     2         12
     Utility gain (percent)
           (γ=2,θ=2)          19.99    24.52         24.38       21.03        23.46     24.38                 22.30       16.92
           (γ=5,θ=2)          12.67    14.28         14.24       12.57        14.18     14.25                 13.42       11.20




                                                                       49
Appendix A


Equity Classification Methodology


        Datastream classifies firms according to country of origin and industry. The primary classification
is by country of origin. American depository receipts, global depository receipts and cross-listed securities
are omitted from Datastream’s country-specific classification of firms.15 We follow Datastream’s
classification hierarchy and use four broad industry categories as defined by Datastream: consumer goods
and services (CGS), energy and utilities (EU), finance and real estate (FIR) and industrials (IND). Firms
that do not have a valid Datastream industry classification are assigned the industry classification other
(OTHER).16 Firms that are classified as OTHER may have unobservable characteristics that distinguish
them from the firms in the four categories. If the OTHER category remains distinct, the portfolio selection
process may be biased. To reduce this potential bias, the OTHER category is incorporated into the four
industry categories. The methodology is explained below.17
        We construct the firm size classification within each industry by using a size-sorting algorithm
based on the annual observations of each firm’s market capitalization denominated in the local currency. If
a firm has no market capitalization during the sample period, it is dropped from the sample. A firm may
have a reported market capitalization of zero. Datastream measures market capitalization in millions of
local currency units. We assume that a firm that has a reported market capitalization of zero either has a
true capitalization equal to zero or has a true capitalization that is positive and a reported capitalization of
zero due to rounding. Including firms with reported market capitalizations equal to zero and true market
capitalizations greater than zero biases the size sorting algorithm such that the marginal firm in a size
category is classified as smaller than it actually is.




15
   Datastream documentation states that the lists of firms by country do not include cross-listed securities. (Find
specific reference.) We performed a secondary check to ensure that cross-listed securities are not omitted from the
sample.
16
   For example, a firm whose trading has been suspended is classified by Datastream as a suspended firm. This
designation overlays the industry classification. As a result, the industry classification cannot be determined from
the information available from Datastream.
17
   Firms whose trading has been suspended comprise the majority of the firms that are included in the OTHER
category. We infer from this status that the firms are poor performers. If the OTHER category contains a
disproportionately high number of poor performers, the four other categories contain a disproportionately low
number of poor performers. We assume that the investor cannot identify poor performers a priori, therefore, the
investor could not construct the OTHER category a priori.



                                                         50
        The firms are classified into small, medium and large categories such that approximately one third
of the total industry market capitalization falls into each size category. If each size category contains
exactly one third of the industry’s market capitalization, the value-weighted portfolio weights for each size
category in each industry are equal to one third. This methodology provides a reference point for a
comparison of the weights derived from mean-variance optimization and the value-weighted portfolio
weights.
        To allocate firms in this way, the total market capitalization for each industry category is
calculated for each set of annual observations. The firms within each industry are sorted by market
capitalization in descending order. Beginning with the largest firm in each industry and proceeding with
progressively smaller firms, the market capitalizations are summed until the accumulated total is greater
than or equal to one third of the industry market capitalization. The market capitalization of the last firm
that is added to the accumulated total is the reference point that partitions the medium-sized firms from the
large-sized firms. Denote the market capitalization of this firm at time t as MtM/L. The process of summing
the market capitalizations continues until the accumulated total is greater than or equal to two thirds of the
industry market capitalization. The market capitalization of the last firm that is added to the accumulated
total is the reference point that partitions the small-sized firms from the medium-sized firms. Denote the
market capitalization of this firm as MtS/M.
        The methodology described above is used to calculate the values of MtS/M and MtM/L conditional on
the market capitalizations of firms that begin trading prior to the first year of the sample or begin trading in
the first year of the sample. As new firms begin trading and old firms cease trading over time, the market
capitalization of each industry changes. Rather than recalculate MtS/M and MtM/L at each point in time
conditional on the market capitalizations of all firms at time t, the values of MtS/M and MtM/L for time
periods after the first year of the sample are scaled to reflect the growth rate in the market capitalization of
the industry. For example, if the consumer goods and services industry’s market capitalization grows by
five percent from the first year to the second year, M2S/M is equal to M1S/M times 1.05. As a result, a firm’s
size is determined only once during the sample and a firm’s size classification cannot change during the
sample period.
        If MtS/M and MtM/L were recalculated each year using the market capitalizations of all firms at time
t, a small successful firm with an increasing market capitalization could be reclassified as a larger firm and
an unsuccessful firm with a diminishing market capitalization could be reclassified as a smaller firm. If the
size classification of a firm is permitted to vary with the firm’s success or failure, the portfolio weights
would be a function of the size classification. The investor would hold relatively more of the large, i.e.



                                                      51
successful, firms and relatively less of the small, i.e. unsuccessful, firms. The portfolio weights would be a
function of survivorship bias. By classifying the size of the firm only once, the effects of survivorship bias
are reduced.
        A firm is designated as a domestic or multinational firm conditional on the listing of multinational
corporations in Worldwide Branch Locations of Multinational Companies (1994). The primary criteria for
inclusion in the listing is the existence of one or more branches, subsidiaries, manufacturing plants or other
holdings located in countries other than the country in which the corporation is headquartered. This
selection criteria for multinational corporations is relatively narrow. A broader definition would include all
firms with a large percentage of corporate sales outside the country in which the corporation is
headquartered. We assume the list of firms with one or more branches, subsidiaries, manufacturing plants
or other holdings located in countries other than the country in which the corporation is headquartered is
highly correlated with the list of firms that fulfill the broader definition of a multinational firm.
        The list includes five hundred multinational corporations. Approximately two hundred are
headquartered in the United States and the majority of the remaining three hundred are headquartered in
Canada, France, Germany, Japan, the United Kingdom and Sweden. This classification methodology
captures the largest and most prominent multinational corporations. Because these firms have a physical
presence in other countries, the firms are directly affected by international economic conditions. Firms that
have international sales and no international physical presence are less directly affected by international
economic conditions.


Sample Selection and Sample Construction Methodology
        Conditional on the classification of the firms, a random sample is drawn for each category. Define
the initial set of the firms for each category as the population and the random sample from each category as
the sample.18 The maximum number of firms in the sample for each category is arbitrary set at thirty firms.
If the number of firms in a category population is less than thirty, all of the firms are included in the sample
portfolio.19 The size of the category sample is reported in the second column of Table 1. For example, the
sample size for medium, domestic, finance-and-real-estate firms in Canada is 7.
        Datastream provides returns data on firms that are currently traded and firms that are not currently
traded but were traded in the past. For firms that are no longer traded, Datastream does not, however,


18
   The database of firms that are available from Datastream is not the true population of firms. For ease of
discussion, consider it the population of Datastream firms.
19
   The names of the firms included in each category subsample are available from the authors upon request.



                                                        52
provide information regarding the disposition of the firm on the last day that it was traded. This
shortcoming implies that a bankrupt firm can be easily be distinguished from a firm that has been acquired
by another firm. As a result, the return series must be edited to reflect the final status of the firm. If the
firm went bankrupt, the investor is assumed to have lost the entire amount of the investment and the last
return observation is set equal to minus one. If the firm merged with another firm or was acquired by
another firm, the investor is assumed to receive the amount of the investment on the day of the last observed
return. The investor is assumed to reinvest the proceeds in the portfolio. The last observed return as stated
by Datastream, which reflects the capital appreciation and any dividend disbursement over the last period,
is not altered.
         The primary source used to determine the final status of individual firms is Standard & Poor’s
Standard Corporate Descriptions (1996). Standard & Poor reports the final disposition of individual
securities. In addition to Standard & Poor, Canada Stockwatch, an on-line securities database, is used to
verify the final status of some Canadian firms. If these sources do not provide the needed information, the
final status of the firm is inferred from the return series and the price series for each individual firm. As a
rule of thumb, the firm is assumed to be bankrupt if the time series of prices for the firm’s equity
approaches zero as the date approaches the final day of trading. The firm is assumed to be acquired by
another firm or merged with another firm if the time series of prices for the firm’s equity is significantly
different from zero as the date approaches the final day of trading. In cases such that the final status of the
firm is ambiguous, the firm is assumed to be bankrupt.20
         Conditional on the random sample of firms by category, a value-weighted portfolio is constructed
for each category sample. The firms are chosen randomly from the list of firms for each category. A firm is
included in the list if its equity traded during any part of the time series of returns. This selection
methodology biases the sample portfolio because firms that trade for a short period of time are over-
represented in the list of firms and firms that trade for a long period of time are under-represented in the list
of firms. To demonstrate this bias, consider an example. Suppose the sample for small, domestic, industrial
firms in Canada is comprised of fifty firms. Forty-five of the firms are traded for six months of the sample
time period and five firms are traded for five years of the sample time period. The sample of thirty firms is
chosen from the list of fifty firms. This selection methodology implies that each firm is equally likely to be
included in the subsample portfolio. If the sample portfolio is constructed on a period-by-period basis
however, each firm does not have an equal probability of being included in the sample portfolio. The firms

20
  A summary of the status for all firms, both currently traded and not traded, is available from the authors upon
request.



                                                       53
that trade for a long period of time have a higher probability of being traded at any point in time and
therefore have a higher probability of inclusion in the period-specific subsample portfolio. To reduce the
bias of the sample selection methodology, the weights of the sample portfolio are a function of the value of
the firm relative to the total value of all the firms in the category and the relative length of the time series of
returns for each firm. The weight for each equity in the sample portfolio is equal to

                                                           
                                    mv it              ni
(A.1)                ωit =                                 λ t ∀ i = 1,...NS
                           
                               ∑         mv it     ∑   n 
                                    NS                 NS
                                   i =1               i =1 i 


where ωit is equal to the portfolio weight on asset i at time t, mvit is equal to the market value of firm i at
time t, ni is equal to the number of observations in the time series of returns for firm i, NS is the number of
firms in the sample and λt is an adjustment factor that ensures that the weights of the portfolio sum to one
for each time period. Combining the time series of returns for the firms in each sample yields one time
series of returns for each category.
           The portfolio for each category is augmented to incorporate the return series of the OTHER
category because the characteristics of the firms in the OTHER category may not be readily identifiable a-
priori. The three size classifications of the OTHER category are individually incorporated into the size
categories of the other four industry classifications. For example, the small OTHER category is
incorporated into the small categories of the other four industry categories. The return series are combined
conditional on the relative market value of each category. The augmented return series is a linear
combination of the industry return series and the return series of the OTHER category,

(A.2)                                          (
                     ritA = rit ωitA + rOt 1 − ωAit         )
where ritA is the augmented return of industry category i at time t, rit is the return of industry i at time t, ωitA
is the augmented weight on industry i at time t, and (1 - ωitA) is the augmented weight on the other category
at time t. 21
           Constructing the augmented weight on industry i is a two step process. The first step is the
calculation of the percent of total market value of each size category for each industry:

                                                                            ∑
                                                                                Ni
                                                                                j=1
                                                                                      mv jt
                      z it =
                               ∑                       ∑                  +∑                   ∑                     ∑
                                   N CGS                   N EU             N FIR                  N IND                 N OTHER
(A.3)
                                   j=1
                                           mv jt +         j=1
                                                                  mv jt     j=1
                                                                                     mv jt +       j=1
                                                                                                           mv jt +       j=1
                                                                                                                                   mv jt
                     ∀ i = CGS, EU, FIR, IND



21
     The size category subscript is omitted in this derivation for notational clarity.



                                                                           54
where zit is the percent of total market value of industry i, mvjt is the market value of firm j at time t, and Nj
is the number of firms in the sample of industry j. For categories where the number of firms in the
population is greater than thirty, the total market value of the category is approximated as the average
market value of a firm in the category sample times the number of firms in the category’s population.
                                     1                      
                 ∑                             ∑
                     Ni                            Ni
(A.4)                    mv jt ≅ N i                  mv jt 
                     j=1                           j=1
                                      Ni                    

N i is the number of firms in the category sample. For example, suppose that the zits for the medium sized

CGS, EU, FIR, IND and OTHER categories are 0.30, 0.10, 0.20, 0.35 and 0.05, respectively. For this
example, the IND category is the largest category as measured by market capitalization and the OTHER
category is the smallest.
        The second step in the construction of the augmented weight is to apportion the return series of the
OTHER category to each of the four industry categories in proportion to their percent market value.
Therefore, the augmented weight for industry i at time t, witA, is equal to
                                  z it
(A.5)            ωitA =
                            z it + z it z Ot

where zOt is the percent of total market value of the OTHER category. Using this apportionment
methodology and the example percentages from step 1, twenty percent of the return series of the OTHER
category, which comprises five percent of the total, is apportioned to the CGS category. The weights for
combining the CGS category and the OTHER category would be 0.9524 and 0.0476, respectively.
Therefore the augmented return for the CGS category would be

(A.6)              A
                  rCGSt = rCGSt (0.9524) + rOt (0.0476) .




                                                                 55
Appendix B

Geographical Listing of Multinational Corporation Headquarters
Source: Worldwide Branch Locations of Multinational Companies

* Data not available from Datastream database.

Canada (11 Firms)                    Germany (32 firms)           Fiat SpA
Abitibi-Price, Inc.                  Allianz Aktiengesellschaft   Ing. C. Olivetti & C. SpA
Alcan Aluminium Ltd.                 BASF Aktiengesellschaft      Montedison SpA
Dominion textile, Inc.               Bayer AG                     Pirelli SpA*
Inco Ltd.*                           Bayerische Motoren Werke
Ivanco, Inc.                             AG                       Japan (68 firms)
John Labatt Ltd.                     Beiersdorf AG                Advantest Corp.
Moore Corp. Ltd.                     Bertelsmann AG*              Ajinomoto Co., Inc.
Northern Telecom Ltd.                Continental AG               Alps Electric Co., Ltd.
Quebecor, Inc.                       Daimler-Benz AG              Anritsu Corp.
The Seagram Company Ltd.             Degussa AG                   Asahi Chemical Industry Co.,
Thomson Corporation                  Deutch Babcock AG*               Ltd.
                                     Deutch Bank                  Bridgestone Corp.
France (22 firms)                    Dywidag-Systems              Brothers Industries Ltd.
L’air Liquide SA                         International GmbH*      C. Itoh & Co., Ltd.*
Alcatel Alsthom                      FAG Kugelfischer Georg       Canon Inc.
BSN Groupe                               Schaefer KGAA            Citizen Watch Company
Bull SA                              Feldmuhle Nobel AG*          Dai Nippon Printing Co., Ltd.
Cap Gemini Sogeti Holding            Franz Haniel & Cie GmbH*     The Daiei, Inc.
    Company                          Freudenberg & Co.*           Daihatsu Motor Co.
Club Mediterranee SA                 Fried. Krupp GmbH*           Dainippon Ink and
Dumez SA                             Fuchs Petrolub AG OEL &          Chemicals, Inc.
Groupe Pernod Ricard                     Chemie                   Dentsu Inc.*
Hachette SA                          Grundig AG*                  Fuji Heavy Industries Ltd.
Lafarge Coupee SA                    Hoechst                      Fuji Photo Film Co., Ltd.
LVMH Moet Hennessy Louis             Kloecknet-Werke AG           Fujitsu Ltd.
    Vuitton                          Mannesmann AG                Furukawa Electric Co.
L’Oral SA*                           Philipp Holzmann AG          Hakuhodo, Inc.*
Pechiney SA                          Preussag AG                  Haseko Corp.
Peugeot SA                           Robert Bosch GmbH*           Hitachi Ltd.
Regie Nationale Des Usines           Schering AG                  Honda Motor Co., Ltd.
    Renault SA*                      Siemens AG                   Ishikawajima-Harima Heavy
Rhone-Poulenc SA                     Siemens Nixdorf                  Industries Co., Ltd.
Saint-Gobain                             Informationssysteme AG   Kajima Corp.
Salamon SA                           SMS AG*                      Kanematsu Corp.
Societe Bic SA                       Veba AG                      Kao Corp.
Societe Nationale Elf                Volkswagen AG                Kawasaki Heavy Industries,
Aquitaine                            Wella AG*                        Ltd.
Source Perrier SA*                                                Kikkoman Corp.
Total Compagnie Francaise            Italy (6 Firms)              Kirin Brewery Co., Ltd.
    des Petroles                     Alfa Romeo SpA*              Kobe Steel Ltd.
                                     Benetton Group SpA           Komatsu Ltd.


                                                 56
Konica Corp.                     BICC Plc                       Towers, Perrin, Forster &
Kubota Ltd.                      Blue Circle Industries Plc         Crosby Inc.*
Kyocera Corp.                    The BOC Group Plc              Unilever Plc
Marubeni Corp.*                  Booker Plc                     United Biscuits (Holdings)
Matsushita Electric Industrial   Bowater Plc                        Plc
    Co., Ltd.                    Bowthorpe Holdings Plc         Vickers Plc
Minolta Camera Co.               British Aerospace Plc
Mitsubishi Electric Corp.        British Petroleum Co. Plc      United States (214 firms)
Mitsubishi Heavy Industries      Bunzl Plc                      Abbott Laboratories
Mitsui & Co., Ltd.               The Burmah Oil Plc             Air Products and Chemicals,
NEC Corp.                        Cadbury Schweppes Plc              Inc.
NGK Insulators                   Coats Viyella Plc              ALCO Standard Corp.
Nippon Mining Co., Ltd.*         Delta Plc                      Allied-Signal Inc.
Nippon Steel Corp.               Dowty Group Plc                Amax Inc.
Nissan Motor Co., Ltd.           Eagle Star Insurance Co.       Amdahl Corp.
Nissho Iwai Corp.                    Ltd.*                      American Cyanamid Co.
NTN Corp.                        ECC Group Plc                  American Express Co.
Oki Electric Industry Co.,       Ferranti International Plc*    American Greetings Corp.
Ltd.                             FKI-Electricals Plc            American Home Products
Omron Tatesi Elecronics Co.      GKN Plc                            Corp.
Pioneer Electronic Corp.         Grand Metropolitan Plc         Amoco Corp.
Ricoh Co., Ltd.                  Halma Plc                      AMP Inc.
Sanyo Electric Co., Ltd.         Hanson Plc                     Amway Corp.
Seiko Epson Corp.                Hawker Siddeley Group Plc      Anixter Bros., Inc.
Sharp Corp.                      Ibstock Johnson Plc            Apple Computer, Inc.
Shimuzu Corp.                    ICL Plc*                       Armstrong World Industries,
Sony Corp.                       IMI Plc                            Inc.
Sumitomo Chemical Co.            Imperial Chemical Industries   Arvin Industries, Inc.
Sumitomo Corp.                       Plc                        Ashland Oil, Inc.
Sumitomo Heavy Industries        Johnson Matthey Plc            Atari Corp.
    Ltd.                         Laporte Plc                    Atlantic Richfield Co.
Suntory Ltd.*                    Lonrho Plc                     Avery International Corp.
Suzuki Motor Corp.               Lucas Aerospace Ltd.           Avis Rent A Car System, Inc.
Takeda Chemical Industries       Pearson Plc                    Avnet, Inc.
TDK Corp.                        Racal Electronics Plc          Avon Products, Inc.
Toshiba Corp.                    The Rank Organisation Plc      Baker Hughes, Inc.
Toyota Corp.                     Reckitt & Colman Plc           Bausch and Lomb, Inc.
Yamaha Corp.                     Redland Plc                    Bechtel Group, Inc.
Yoshida Kogyo KK*                Reed International Plc         Berlitz International, Inc.
                                 RMC Group Plc                  BF Goodrich
United Kingdom (58 firms)        Rolls-Royce Plc                Black & Decker Corp.
ADT Group Plc*                   The RTZ Corp. Plc              The Boeing Co.
Allied Lyons Plc*                Saatchi & Saatchi Plc          Boise Cascade Corp.
Amec Plc                         Scapa group Plc                Borden, Inc.
APV Plc                          Shandwick Plc                  Bozell, Inc.
Associated British Foods         Smithkline Beecham             Briggs & Stratton Corp.
    Plc*                         Tarmac Plc                     Bristol –Meyers Squibb Co.
BBA Group Plc                    Tate and Lyle Plc              Burson-Marsteller
BET Plc                          Thorn EMI PLV                  Campbell Soup Co.


                                              57
Caterpillar, Inc.              The Franklin Mint            Merrill Lynch, Pierce,
CBI Industries, Inc.           General Dynamic Corp.            Fenner, & Smith
CBS, Inc.                      General Electric Co.         Minnesota Mining and
Champion International         General Mills, Inc.              Manufacturing
    Corp.                      General Motors Corp.         Mobil Corp.
Chevron Corp.                  General Signal Corp.         Molex Inc.
Chrysler Corp.                 Georgia-Pacific Corp.        Monsanto
Cigna Worldwide, Inc.          The Gillette Co.             Morton International, Inc.
The Coca Cola Co.              The Goodyear Tire & Rubber   Motorola, Inc.
Colgate-Palmolive Co.              Co.                      Murphy Oil Corp.
Coltec Industries, Inc.        Grey Advertising Inc.        National Semiconductor
Communications Satellite       GTE Corp.                    National Starch and
    Corp.                      Hasbro, Inc.                     Chemical Co.
Compaq Computer Corp.          H.B. Fuller Co.              NCR Corp.
Control Data Corp.             Hercules, Inc.               Neutrogena Corp.
Cooper Industries, Inc.        Hershey Foods Corp.          Newmont Mining Corp.
Corning, Inc.                  Hewlett-Packard Co.          Occidental Petroleum Corp.
CPC International              H.J. Heinz Co.               Olin Corp.
Crown Cork & Seal Co., Inc.    Honeywell, Inc.              Omnicom Group, Inc.
Cummins Engine Co. Ltd.        Hosokawa Micron              Owens-Corning Fiberglass
Dana Corp.                         International Inc.           Corp.
D’Arcy Masuis Benton &         Ingersoll-Rand Co.           Paccar, Inc.
    Bowles, Inc.               International Business       Parker Hannifin Corp.
Data General Corp.                 Machines Inc.            The Penn Central Corp.
Deere and Co.                  International Paper Co.      Pepsico, Inc
Digital Equipment Corp.        ITT Corp.                    The Perkin-Elmer Corp.
Dover Corp.                    James River Corp.            Pfizer, Inc.
Dow Chemical Co.               Johnson Controls, Inc.       Phelps Dodge Corp.
Dow Jones & Co., Inc.          Johnson & Johnson            Phillip Morris Cos., Inc.
Dresser Industries, Inc.       Kaiser Aluminum &            Phillips Petroleum Co.
Du Pont                            Chemical Corp.           Phillips-Van Heusen Corp.
Dun & Bradstreet Corp.         Kellogg Co.                  Pioneer Hi-Bred
The Dynatech Corp              Kimberly-Clark Corp.             International, Inc.
Eastman Kodac Co.              Levi Strauss & Co.           Pitney Bowes, Inc.
Eaton Corp.                    Litton Inc.                  Polaroid Corp.
EG & G, Inc.                   The Lubrizol Corp.           PPG Industries, Inc.
Eli Lilly and Co.              Manville Corp.               Precision Valve Corp.
Encore Computer Corp.          Martin Marietta Corp.        Premark International
Ethyl Corp.                    Mary Kay Cosmetics, Inc.     The Prudential Insurance Co.
Exxon Corp.                    Mattel, Inc.                     of America
Ferro Corp.                    McCann-Erickson              Quaker Oats Co.
Fluor Corp.                        Worldwide                Quaker State Corp.
FMC Corp.                      McDonald’s Corp.             Ralston Purina Co.
Foote, Cone, & Belding         McDonnell Douglas Corp.      Raychem Corp.
    Communications, Inc.       The Mead Corp.               Rayovac Corp.
Ford Motor Co.                 Measurex Corp.               Raytheon Co.
Foster Wheel Corp.             Medtronic, Inc.              The Reader’s Digest Assn.,
Frank B. Hall international,   Merck and Co., Inc.              Inc.
    Inc.                                                    Reynolds Metals Co.


                                           58
RJR Nabisco, Inc.              Teledyne, Inc.                 USX Corp.
Rockwell International Corp.   Tenneco, Inc.                  Varian Associates, Inc.
Rohm and Haas                  Texaco Inc.                    The Wackenhut Corp.
Rosemount Inc.                 Texas Instruments              Wang Laboratories, Inc.
R.R. Donnelley & Sons          Tidewater Marine Service,      Warner-Lambert Co.
Sara Lee Corp.                     Inc.                       Weatherford International,
Scott Paper Co.                Time Warner, Inc.                  Inc.
Searle                         Timken Co.                     Westinghouse Electric Corp.
Sears, Roebuck, and Co.        Trinova Corp.                  Westvaco Corp.
The Sherwin-Williams Co.       TRW, Inc.                      Weyerhaeuser Co.
Sonoco Products Co.            Union Carbide Corp.            Witco Corp.
Standex International          Unisys Corp.                   WM. Wrigley Jr. Co.
The Stanley Works              United Technologies Corp.      Xerox Corp.
Storage Technology Corp.       Unocal Corp.                   Zenith Electronics Corp.
Sunstrand Corp.                UOP
Sunkist Growers, Inc.          The Upjohn Co.
Tektronix, Inc.                USG Corp. International Ltd.




                                            59
