    I. INTRODUCTION

       We know that exchange rates matter. The challenge is pinning down the exact channels
for exchange rate effects and their range of specific implications for the real economy. This paper
examines the effects of exchange rates on employment, wages, and overtime activity over the past
twenty-five years for manufacturing industries of the United States. Two economic trends have
been persistent during this period: an increase in the external orientation of the U.S.
manufacturing sector and large movements in exchange rates. The goal of this paper is to identify
the effects that these exchange rate movements have had on U.S. manufacturing jobs and wages
given the changing external orientation of U.S. industries.
       Our evidence supports a statistically significant response of industry wages to exchange
rate changes, and a very weak statistical relationship between numbers of jobs and employment
and dollar movements. The average wage elasticity to a permanent exchange rate change for all
manufacturing during this period was 0.04, while the average employment elasticity was only
0.01. We also identify two particular industry features that are associated with the relative
importance of exchange rates: the industry competitive structure, and the skill level of its labor
force. Low-markup industries –industries like textiles, lumber and wood products, and primary
metal or fabricated metal products– have a more significant response to exchange rate than high-
markup industries. The wage elasticities of response are larger in industries that are more export-
oriented and are reduced (and can even turn negative) for industries that rely more heavily on
imported productive inputs. Industries with a higher proportion of college-educated workers in
their labor force also have higher wage and lower employment elasticities to exchange rates.
       We also look at the effects of exchange rate movements on overtime activity in these
industries. We find statistically significant effects of exchange rate changes on overtime hours and
overtime wages. The elasticity of overtime wage to exchange rate changes is small and negative
for most industries, averaging -0.02. The overtime hour and wage elasticities are higher in
industries with more skilled workforces and in low-markup industries.
       Our results -- on significant wage response and weak employment response -- differ from
those of earlier studies linking exchange rates to labor markets. Branson and Love (1987, 1988),
using data for the 1970s and early 1980s, found that real exchange rate movements influenced
manufacturing sector employment: dollar appreciations (depreciations) were associated with

                                                 2
significant output and employment losses across mainly durable goods sectors. Revenga (1992),
using a sample of three and four digit manufacturing industries over the 1977 to 1987 period,
found that exchange rates have significant implications for employment in the United States, and
smaller but still significant effects on wages. The estimates came from a sub-sample of
manufacturing industries and focused on the effects of import competition into the United States:
the higher the import share of an industry, the more an import price decline or dollar appreciation
hurt domestic labor markets.1
        Instead, using 2-digit industry data for all of manufacturing for a longer sample period --
the early 1970s through mid -1990s-- we find that industry wages are considerably more
responsive than jobs (and hours worked) to exchange rate movements. We also show how this
wage responsiveness has been growing over time as U.S. industries become more export oriented.
The growth of imported input use by producers provides some offset to the pressures from the
export channel partially offsetting its overall effect. More significant wage effects are apparent in
industries that have lower price-over-cost markups and with relatively less-skilled workforces.
These industries are closer to perfect competition and have production biased toward durable
goods. Patterns of significant employment responsiveness are different: these employment effects
are concentrated in a much smaller group of industries. We also consider labor market adjustment
via another margin, through industry use of and payment for overtime activity. We find a
qualitatively important role of currency movements. Changes in the U.S dollar significantly affect
overtime wages and overtime hours, especially in high markup industries and industries with more
skill-intensive production. Industry unionization rates and capital intensity uncorrelated with




1International evidence on the effects of exchange rates on labor markets is provided in Dekle (1996), who focuses

on Japan, and in Burgess and Knetter (1997), who focus on the G-7 countries (the United States, Germany, the
United Kingdom, Japan, Canada, France, and Italy). Dekle shows that exchange rates significantly influence
employment in Japan, with larger implications observed in industries with higher export shares. Brunello (1990)
provides further insights regarding Japanese labor market adjustments. Burgess and Knetter also focus exclusively
on employment adjustment to exchange rate movements, and emphasis two themes. First, they confirm differences
across countries in employment elasticities with respect to exchange rates and different industry speeds of
employment adjustment. Second, they assert that those industries in which a high degree of pricing to market
occurs exhibit weaker linkages between exchange rate and employment fluctuations.


                                                        3
industry rankings of the elasticity of wage, employment or overtime activity response to the
exchange rate.
           Our conclusions on wages are quantitatively similar to those reported by Revenga (1992)
while our employment estimates differ with both the early Branson and Love study and the more
recent findings by Revenga. Differences in the estimation intervals across the studies do not
explain these differences.2 Two other differences in approach, one methodological and one related
to data, may explain the starkly different findings on employment response across this group of
related papers.
           On the methodology front, our work focuses on the different channels of exchange rate
exposure of an industry while the previous studies focus on one particular channel, import
competition. For example, Revenga’s motivation and sample of industries are driven by the goal
of estimating the effects that import competition in the United States had on U.S. labor markets.
Instead, we stress the importance of decomposing the sources of currency exposure of an industry
into its three major components. An industry exposure to exchange rates can arise from its
reliance on export revenues, imported inputs into production, and, as highlighted in the previous
work, from import competition.3 A complete understanding of the effects of exchange rates on
economic activity requires an econometric analysis that accounts for these three different forms of
exposure and for their evolution overtime.4 Indeed, we find that this decomposition of channels is
important for observing the evolving pattern of industry wage responsiveness to exchange rates.
           The second important difference between the current paper and the previous work relates
to differences in the data used. Although our sample is broader in scope by including all the 2-


2   We estimated our equations for the intervals used in the Branson-Love and in the Revenga studies. Our
empirical results for the 1972 to 1984 interval, used in Branson and Love, were not qualitatively different from
our full sample results. For the 1977 to 1987 interval, used in Revenga, our wage significance results continued
to be similar to what is reported in the paper. Even in this limited sample period, we find that both employment
and hours have weak statistical relationships with exchange rates. Any significance that we detect works in the
opposite direction – suggesting that a dollar depreciation reduces rather than stimulates manufacturing
employment.
3   In practice, since industry import penetration and use of imported inputs are so highly correlated, these separate
transmission channels cannot be identified empirically.




                                                           4
digit manufacturing sectors this comes at the cost of a higher level of industry aggregation.
Revenga (1992) uses data from 3 and 4-digit industries. Our lower estimates for employment
elasticities can possibly be explained by this aggregation difference. If most of the employment
reallocation gets down among 4-digit industries within a single 2-digit industry, then one should
expect very low employment elasticities to exchange rates at the 2-digit level while there is
substantial employment turnover within that industry. Low net employment fluctuations in the 2-
digit industry could be consistent with high rates of job creation and destruction within the
industry.      Davis and Haltiwanger (1997) provide some evidence in this direction in their
documentation of the substantial allocative employment effects of oil price shocks.                          Using
information at the plant level from census data, they show that there is job churning in response
to oil shocks and the amount of this churning differs across the 4-digit versus 2-digit level of
industry aggregation of employment data. At the 2-digit level, within manufacturing sector
adjustment accounts for 67 percent of the total job re-allocation. At the 4-digit level, however,
within sector reallocation is only 45 percent of the total.5 These findings suggest that the more
disaggregated the data, the more likely that net employment will appear to respond to industry
shocks. Which level of aggregation is appropriate should depend on the question being asked. If
one is mainly interested in the amount of employment and jobs, the aggregated numbers are more
appropriate. If one is interested in the quality and composition of the jobs, different approaches
to disaggregation could be applied.
           These issues of aggregation may not mask the significant wage effects of dollar
movements. Even when there is job destruction and hiring within a sector, worker earnings can
still adjust substantially. Kletzer (1998, Table 6) provides insightful data relevant to this point: a
matrix of post-job displacement employment by sector between 1979 and 1994 shows that
displaced workers are most likely to find new positions within their old sector, and this re-
employment is almost always (on average) associated with mean wage declines.




4   For example, see Campa and Goldberg (1995 and forthcoming) on investment and exchange rates, Sheets (1992)
on profits and exchange rates, and Allayanis and Ehrig (1998) on stock prices and exchange rates.
5   Our data are at the 2-digit level of industry aggregation. Revenga’s data is more disaggregated, and more likely
to show some of the job churning activity.

                                                          5
          In the next section we develop a simple model of dynamic labor market equilibrium that
explicitly incorporates the channels for exchange rate effects. Through the demand side of the
labor market, we show that industry features – including trade orientation, costs of adjustment,
and competitive structure -- can influence the level and timing of labor market adjustments to
exchange rates. All else equal, optimal adjustments to labor demand in response to exchange rates
movements are increasing in the industry export orientation and import competition. These
effects are more ambiguously related to an industry’s use of imported inputs because domestic
and imported inputs may be either substitutes or complements in the production function.
          The theory presented in Section II also tracks how other industry features should
systematically affect the level and mix of industry wage versus employment adjustment, if these
features are correlated with labor demand and supply elasticities or the costs of employment
adjustment to shocks. 6 Among these features are the mix of skilled and less-skilled workers and
the industry unionization rates, which may influence the cost of adjusting the labor force. In
addition, industry structure should matter: more “competitive” industries (i.e. those with lower
price-over-cost markups) are expected to have more responsive labor demand than more
oligopolistic industries.7 The remainder of the paper, Sections III and IV, describes the data and
provides the results from the empirical estimation of the effects of exchange rates on industry
wages, employment, and overtime activity in the United States. Section V concludes.



          II. Labor Markets and Exchange Rates

          We present a simple dynamic model of labor market equilibrium, wherein within each year
some combination of employment and wage adjustments equilibrate labor markets in response to
shocks. Exchange rate shocks influence labor demand by affecting the marginal revenue product
of through changes in its domestic and foreign sales and the cost of imported inputs into the
production process. The elasticity of marginal revenue product with respect to exchange rates
depends on industry pass-through elasticities, i.e. the price elasticities with respect to exchange


6   Hammermesh (1993, chapter 7) provides a survey of related studies.




                                                         6
rates in both domestic and foreign markets. Theoretically, these coefficients should be sensitive to
industry trade orientation and to industry competitive structure (for example, see Dornbusch
1987, Marston 1990, and Bodnar, Dumas and Marston 1998).
          Industry structure matters because producer profitability and labor demand will be most
affected by exchange rates in industries where producers have little ability to counter shocks by
exerting price-setting abilities.8 The trade orientation of the industry also matters, since greater
export orientation increases labor demand sensitivity and the positive stimuli from a dollar
depreciation. More intensive imported input use can either increase or reduce labor demand
sensitivity, depending on the assumed structure of production activity and product demand. Other
industry characteristics, including those that alter an industry’s costs of adjusting it’s workforce,
will change the timing of wage versus employment response, and the degree of short-term reliance
on overtime work efforts.



A. Exchange Rates and Labor Demand: Profit maximizing producers sell to both domestic and
foreign markets and are faced with a variety of demand shocks. Producer decisions depend on the
future paths of all variables influencing profitability.
                                                     In our context, the unknowns to the
producer are aggregate demand in domestic and foreign markets, denoted y and y * , and the

exchange rate, e, is defined as domestic currency per unit of foreign exchange. Production uses
three factors: domestic labor L, domestic capital and other domestic inputs Z, and imported
productive inputs, Z*. Respective factor prices are denoted by w, s, and es*. Our focus in the
paper is on one factor input, domestic labor. We model changes in the use of domestic input
subject to a partial adjustment cost. For simplicity, we assume that labor is a homogeneous input




7   This relationship between industry markups and degrees of responsiveness to exchange rates already has been
documented in the context of industry investment and profitability data for the United States and Japan in Campa and
Goldberg, forthcoming; Allayanis and Ehrig (1998), and Bodnar, Dumas, and Marston, 1998.
8   Industry stock prices and investment responses to exchange rates across various international markets are more
sensitive in low price-over-cost markup industries Allayanis and Ehrig (1997) and Bodnar, Dumas, and Marston
(1998) provide preliminary evidence on stock prices. Campa and Goldberg (1995 and forthcoming) provide
evidence on investment responses across countries.

                                                         7
into production and that the levels of capital and foreign inputs can be fully adjusted in the short
run with no additional costs.9
          Within an industry, the representative producer chooses factor inputs and total output in
order to maximize the expected present value of the flow of current and future profits, π ,
(equation 1). The optimization is subject to the constraints posed by its production structure
(equation 2), given its product demands in domestic and foreign markets (equation 3) and the
additional costs involved in changing its level of domestic labor (equation 4). Profits are garnered
from the sales in the home market, q, and the sales in the foreign market, q*. In addition, home
and foreign sales depend on aggregate demand conditions in the respective markets, i.e. on
y and y * .


                                                  p(q t : y t , et )q t               
                                             ∞    + et p * (q *t : y * t , et )q * t 
π ( y t , y *t , et ) =      max           ∑ φt  
                                                                                                        (1)
                        Qt , Lt , Z *t , Z t = 0  − wt Lt − e t s *t Z * t − s t Z t 
                                                                                      
                                                  − c(∆Lt )                           

                                  β   *α 1−α − β
subject to      Q = q + q* , Q = L Z * Z         ,                                                      (2)


                 p(q : y, e ) = a( y, e )q −1 / η and ep * (q* : y*, e ) = a * ( y*, e )q *−1 / η
                                                                                                    *
and                                                                                                           (3)


          c (∆Lt ) = wt     (Lt − Lt −1 )2
                          b
and                                                                                                     (4)
                          2

The time discount factor is defined by φt = Π δ τ . In equations (2) and (3) we have dropped the
                                                          τ

period t time subscripts for convenience. . In equation (2), a Cobb-Douglas production structure
is assumed for simplicity, but our main results also will hold under a more general CES
production structure.
          In equation (3) the parameters η and η* are, respectively, the domestic and foreign
product demand elasticities facing producers in their own industries. The demand curves in



9   The assumption of homogeneous labor precludes us from considering the linkage between exchange rate movements
and the wage gap between skilled and unskilled workers.

                                                              8
domestic and foreign markets include multiplicative demand shifters, a( y, e) and a * ( y*, e) , which

allow for independent roles of local market real income and of exchange rates. Exchange rates
influence demand by potentially leading to shifts in the relative price of home products versus
those of foreign competitors,10 and therefore, affecting the residual demand faced by the domestic
firm .
           In equation (4) the costs of adjusting an industry’s labor input, assumed to be quadratic,
are fixed per worker in wage units, reflecting labor force adjustment costs that rise in proportion
to wages. The parameter b reflects the costs of adjustment of the level of labor and should be
viewed as being industry specific. The use of a quadratic formulation for adjustment costs is
standard in the literature and should not be as an attempt to closely represent reality since it
implies that firing and hiring costs are identical. However, it should be interpreted as a convenient
simplification since it allows a straightforward empirical implementation of the labor demand
equation.
           The solution to the firm’s optimal labor demand problem is a dynamic equation. This
equation is derived from the first-order conditions in each factor, and equates the marginal
revenue product from an additional unit of labor today to the marginal cost of that unit for the
firm. The marginal cost for the firm of an additional unit of labor has three components: 1) the
additional wage that has to be paid; 2) the costs incurred in adjusting the level of input use by that
additional unit; and 3) the present value of the change in additional costs of changing the optimal
labor amount in the future by the firm. The resulting first-order condition has the form:


                                   δf
 p(q t , e t )(1 + η      −1
                               )        = w t + b (w t (L t − L t − 1 ) + δ w t + 1 (L t + 1 − L t   ))   (5)
                                   δL t

       Equation (5) is a second order difference equation in units of labor. As a step toward
                                                                                ~
solving this equation, it is convenient at this point to define a new variable, L , as that level of
input use which would be the optimal amount chosen by the firm in the absence of adjustment
costs, i.e. at b=0. Nickell (1986) shows that, under reasonable assumptions, the stable root of
the resulting fundamental equation implies a partial adjustment path of optimal employment:



10   Our demand structure here is similar to that of Burgess and Knetter (1996).

                                                           9
                                         ∞
L t = µ L t − 1 + (1 − µ )(1 − δ g µ   )∑ (δ g µ ) j L~ t + j                               (6)
                                        j=0


where g denotes expected real wage growth rate (assumed to be a constant), and µ denotes the
stable root of the fundamental equation for employment. µ is increasing in b and decreasing in the
wage sensitivity of marginal revenue product.
       Equation (6) shows that the target level of current employment is simply a convex
combination of last period’s employment and a weighted sum of all future values of L~ . The
weights on future values of L~ decline geometrically. The “speed of adjustment” of labor demand
to the levels that would exist in the absence of costly adjustment is given by 1-µ. This weighting
structure is intuitive: changes in employment will be slower in industries with large adjustment
costs and faster in those industries with more wage sensitive marginal revenue product.
       At this point, we need to elaborate on the solution for L~ at any date t. The solution to the
first-order conditions of the producer problem, after invoking Euler’s theorem, shows that optimal
labor demand by a firm in the absence of adjustment costs is:


                                                                                     
                                                                                     
                              (              )
         p (q t : y t , e t ) 1 + η − 1 (1 − χ t )                                   
     Q                                                                               
~
Lt =
     wt 
                                                 (
         + e t p * (q * t : y * t , e t ) 1 + η * (χ t
                                                    −1
                                                            )   )                          (7)
                                       −1                                        −1   
                          ∂Q t                                           
        
         − e t s * t α  ∂ Z *  − s t (1 − α − β
                                                              ) ∂ Q t           
                                                                                      
                                 t                             ∂Z   t            



       Equation (7) shows that optimal labor demand in the absence of adjustment costs depends
on the structure of and importance to the firm of both domestic and foreign demand, and on the
substitutability between productive factors measured alongside their costs.
       Our goal is to use the optimal labor demand defined by equations (6) and (7) to derive a
workable and intuitive relationship between exchange rates -- a variable assumed exogenous to
the firm -- and labor demand. Recall from our framework in equation (1) that there are three
potential sources of shocks that the firm faces, through aggregate domestic demand, through
foreign demand, and through the exchange rate. Our emphasis here is on the effect of changes in



                                                     10
the exchange rates. Differentiating (7) with respect to exchange rates, we derive the following
elasticity:

          ~
         ∂L
              ~
                =
                          (    −1
                                  )
                                  pe
                                          (        (  −1
                                                          )(
              L 1  p(⋅) 1 + η η + χ ep * (⋅) 1 + η * 1 + η
                                                             p *e
                                                                    )     (       ) )
                                                                  − p(⋅) 1 + η −1 η pe
                                                                                               (8)
         ∂e   e β  − αes * (∂Q ∂Z *)−1                                                 
                                                                                         



where χ represents the share of export sales in revenues, χ i = p *i q *i ( pi qi + p *i q *i ) .

η p , e and η p*e are domestic and foreign price elasticities with respect to exchange rates. These
price elasticities are best understood in the context of theories of exchange-rate pass through. For
monopolistically competitive markets, the domestic price elasticity with respect to exchange rates
is proportional to import penetration of domestic markets, i.e. η p , e ∝ kM .           Moreover, the
foreign price elasticity with respect to exchange rates is proportional to domestic penetration of
those markets (Dornbusch 1989). We use these relationships, assume that law of one price holds
ex ante, and assume that the product of two trade share terms is approximately equal zero
( χM = 0 and χM * = 0 ).11 Under these assumptions there is a very clean expression for the
elasticity of L~ with respect to exchange rates:
          ~   ~
         ∂L
         ∂e
              L
                =
              e β
                  p
                     ((       )       (       )
                    1 + η −1 kM + 1 + η *−1 χ − (∂Q ∂Z *) α
                                                         −1
                                                                )                              (9)


        Equation (9) clearly shows the three channels through which optimal labor demand is
exposed to exchange rate movements, and the key roles played by industry features and the
producer’s external orientation. The three transmission channels are through industry import
penetration (M), export orientation (χ), and imported input use, α. All else equal, from the
derived elasticity of labor demand (under costless adjustment) to exchange rates we observe
specific ways in which industry features magnify or reduce this elasticity: i) When the production
technology is labor intensive (i.e. β is high), labor demand is less responsive to exchange rates; ii)
Greater import penetration of domestic markets raises the sensitivity of labor demand to exchange
rates; iii) Higher export orientation of an industry increases the sensitivity of its labor demand to
exchange rates; and iv) Greater reliance on imported inputs into production (higher α) reduces




                                                   11
labor demand following a stronger domestic currency (since domestic currency depreciation raises
the cost of one of the factors of production).
              Equation (9) also explicitly shows that the role of exchange rates in labor demand is
strongest in industries that impart pricing power to firms. This occurs when k is high and when
demand elasticities are low. Thus, all else equal, labor demand is most sensitive to exchange rates
if foreign firms have pricing power in local markets. Product demand elasticities – in both
domestic and foreign markets – also are important. The higher the price elasticity of demand
facing producers, and the lower the implied price-over-cost markups in the industry, the more
responsive will be labor demand to exchange rates.

              Using equations (7) and (9), and log-linearizing, optimal labor demand in the absence of
adjustment costs can be expressed in reduced form as:


L t = c 0 + c 1 y t + c 2 y t* + (c 3 , 0 + c 3,1 χ + c 3, 2 M + c 3, 3α )e t + c 4 w t + c 5 s t + c 6 s t*
~
                                                                                                               (10)



where all variables other than χ, M, and α are defined in logs.
              We next use equations (6) and (10) to solve for optimal labor demand at any point in time.
Recall that equation (6) shows that the reaction of employment today to an exchange rate shock
depends not only on the current shock, but also on all future expected changes of the exchange
rate through their effects on L~ t+j. The actual structure of labor demand of any specific shock
depends on whether the shock is permanent or transitory. A general form for optimal labor
demand is given by a reduced form expression:


                                    c 0 + c 1 y t + c 2 y t* + (c 3 , 0 + c 3 ,1 χ + c 3 , 2 M + c 3 , 3 α )e t 
L    d
             = µ L t − 1 + (1 − µ )                                                                              (11)
                                    + c w + c s + c s*                                                          
         t
                                         4   t     5 t        6 t                                               


where the actual parameters on the shocks change with the degree of permanence of the shock. A
shock that is transitory will have a much smaller impact than a shock that is viewed as permanent.




11   We also assume that the foreign real input cost equals 1, i.e that s*/p*=1.

                                                             12
 For instance, a purely transitory movement in the exchange rate gives rise to a change in labor
 demand that is (1 − δgµ ) < 1 the size of the effect from a permanent exchange rate movement.12


 B. Exchange Rates and Labor Supply: To complete our description of the labor market and
 move toward an understanding of observable labor market outcomes – i.e. on industry wages and
 employment or hours -- we also must introduce labor supply conditions. Labor supply has been
 the focal point of a vast amount of research with a micro-economic orientation. However, much
 of the emphasis of that literature – on changes in market demographics and household structure –
 is orthogonal to our emphasis on exchange rate movements. For simplicity we treat labor supply
 as an increasing function of wages and decreasing function of income, wherein the size of the
 supply sensitivities depend on worker preferences and characteristics.


  Lst = ao + a1wt + a2 yt                                                                                                       (12)


            Setting labor demand (equation 11) equal to labor supply (equation 12), and solving the
 simultaneous equations for employment and wages yields the system of equations given by (13)
 for any industry i:


                                                          (                                         )
wti =ω 0 + ω 2i yt + ω 3i yt* + ω 4i st + ω 5i st* + ω 6i ,0 + ω 6i ,1 χ i + ω 6i , 2 M i + ω 6i ,3α i ⋅ e(t ) + ω 7i Li (t − 1) (13a)


                                                      (                                        )
Lit = λ0 + λi2 yt + λi3 yt* + λi4 st + λi5 st* + λi6, 0 + λi6,1χ i + λi6, 2 M i + λi6,3α i ⋅ e(t ) + λi7 Li (t − 1)             (13b)




            From this system of equations we have key insights into features of the equilibrium wage
 and employment response to shocks.13 Specifically, (i) Industries with higher labor supply
 elasticity with respect to wages have smaller wage adjustments and larger employment
 adjustments; (ii) Industries with higher labor demand elasticity with respect to wages have smaller


 12   A pure transitory shock is defined as a shock to the exchange rate that is expected to be fully reversed the next
 period, i.e., the best predictor today of tomorrow’s exchange rate was its value yesterday.
 13   In the appendix we provide the solution using the exact parameters of the labor supply and the labor demand
 equations.

                                                                  13
wage and employment responsiveness to shocks; (iii) Industries with less elastic product demands
have more responsive wages and employment; (iv) The wage and employment effects of exchange
rate movements are increasing in industry export orientation and home market import penetration;
and (v) The scale of wage and employment response to exchange rates has an ambiguous
relationship with industry use of imported productive inputs.


III. The Data and Regression Specification.

        The system of equations provided by (13) are the basis for our estimating equations. We
use annual industry data for the U.S. labor market variables and the trade shares for the interval
1972 through 1995. Our equations are estimated in first differences, and include common time
trends and industry dummy variables. We run the regressions using pooled groups of two-digit
manufacturing industries, and separately for the individual manufacturing industries.
        We have conducted our estimation using two alternative exchange rate series. The first
series is a real multilateral exchange rate index, defined as the dollars per foreign currency: an increase
in the index implies a real depreciation of the dollar. The second series is a set of industry-specific real
exchange rates for exports and for imports computed as a weighted average of the bilateral real
exchange rates of the United States with its major trading partners in each industry. The weights used
are the annual shares of U.S. imports and U.S. exports in each industry from the 19 major trading
partners of the United States (see Goldberg and Tracy 1998). In the regressions, both types of real
exchange rate measures yield qualititatively similar results. In our exposition, we present only the
results using the single real multilateral exchange rate measure.14
        Our regressions examine the effect of exchange rates entered alone in the regressions, which
has been the standard in this literature, and also examine the effects of exchange rates interacted with
the industry-specific and time-varying channels of trade. While our theory spelled out three distinct
channels (exports, import competition and imported inputs) ultimately we use only two interacted
channels in the regressions: (i) the export to production share in the industry, and (ii) the share of
imported inputs into production costs (Campa and Goldberg 1997). We limited ourselves to these two
channels because of the high within-industry correlations between import penetration and imported
input use.




                                                    14
           The regressions also include the prices of two other inputs: capital and energy. We use the
long-term interest rate, measured by the yield in long-term U.S. Government bonds, as a measure of
the cost of capital. Real oil prices, measured by the average annual dollar price per barrel of crude
petroleum reported by the International Monetary Fund, are used as our measure of energy prices. The
net effect for labor demand of an increase in either of these two prices depends on the substitutability
versus complementarities of each of these factors with labor. To the extent that technological
substitution between that input and labor is possible, an increase in the input price leads to an increase
in the demand for labor. To the extent that the factors are complements, the sign of this correlation
will be negative.
           Our measures of labor market activity are central to the empirical work. The model of
labor market equilibrium in Section II did not specify the unit of observation for labor. Labor was a
continuous input that could be adjusted by infinitesimal amounts as needed. Empirically, labor activity
during a certain period can be measured by several proxies, such as the average number of employees
or as the total number of hours worked by employees (including overtime effort). As surveyed by
Hammermesh (1993), a number of factors determine whether a producer’s response to stimuli is
through hiring (firing) new workers or through an increase (decrease) in the number of hours that the
existing staff work. These factors include: the nature of the shock (transitory versus permanent)15; the
industry costs of hiring/ firing versus expanding/ contracting work effort; and the types of contracts
signed with workers. The tendency toward the use of overtime employment instead of changes in the
number of employees is expected to be higher when the shocks are temporary, hiring and firing costs
are high, and the labor pool is more skilled or requires more job-specific skills.
           Our analysis looks at the endogeneity of both employment and total hours worked in each
2-digit manufacturing industry, as well as at industry wages and measures of industry overtime
activity. The employment series is the total number of non-farm employees in the industry, as
reported by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The total hours series is the product of the employment
series and the reported average weekly hours in each industry. Our measure of wages per employee is
the average hourly wage in each industry, constructed by dividing the total of wage and salary accruals


14   Additional results are available upon request from the authors.
15   Stimuli perceived to be more permanent are expected to more often be reflected in altered workforce numbers than in
overtime hours.

                                                          15
to all employees in each industry by the number of non-farm employees. Overtime wage is defined as
the difference between total average hourly wages and average hourly wages excluding overtime for
production and non-supervisory workers as defined by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Overtime hours
are the average weekly overtime hours of production workers.
           As detailed in Appendix A, Table 1, there is a fair amount of dispersion of wages and
employment across industries and within industries over time. Wages are less variable within
industries over time than across industries at points in time. The variability of wages across
industries is almost four times higher than the average variability overtime of wages within each
industry. Wage variability across industries is also higher than employment variability. Finally,
industry overtime wages and employment are considerably more volatile than overall wages and
employment.
           Wage and employment variability across industries are also related to observable industry
and worker characteristics. Wage variability across industries is positively correlated with the skill
intensity of its workers, industry unionization rates, and industry capital intensity. High
unionization rates are associated with higher wage and employment variability (both total and
overtime) while industries with higher price-over-cost markups tend to have lower employment
and wage variability.
           Finally, in our analysis we decompose exchange rate movements into their permanent
versus transitory components to capture our expectation that regular labor demand should be most
responsive to permanent movements in exchange rates. We use the decomposition first suggested by
Beveridge and Nelson (1981) and later employed to exchange rate data by Huizinga (1987),
Campbell and Clarida (1987), Cumby and Huizinga (1990), and Clarida and Gali (1994), among
others. The procedure, described in the appendix, decomposes the real exchange rate series into a
stationary component (the temporary component) and a nonstationary component (its permanent
component). An analysis of the resulting variance decomposition shows that the temporary
component of exchange rate changes accounts for only a small proportion of the variance of the
real exchange rate series. The variance of the transitory component of the real exchange rate
accounts for less than 40 percent of the total variability of the real exchange rates.16




16   This result is consistent with the finding in this literature that real exchange rate shocks tend to be permanent.

                                                            16
     IV. EMPIRICAL RESULTS

        In this section we present the results of several types of regressions. The first sets of
regressions consider the role of the exchange rates and other variables in moving industry labor
market variables across pooled groups of industries. In addition to pooling across the full sample
of manufacturing industries, we compare industry responses in High versus Low Markup industry
groups. Specifically, this sample of industries is split according to the median level of average
price-over-cost markup across the group of manufacturing industries.17
        The second set of regressions are for individual industries. While industry-specific
regressions are ultimately what one would want, they each have too few observations to fully
stand on their own merits. For each industry we will show the effects of exchange rates on it’s
employment, hours, wages, and overtime activity.


Pooled Industry Regressions.
        The estimated results from equations (13a) and (13b) are reported in Tables 1 and 2.
Table 1 reports the estimated coefficients from using total industry wages, total hours employed,
and total industry employment. For each dependent variable we report the results from pooling
the full sample of manufacturing industries and from splitting the sample between high and low
markup industry markups.
        The specifications also include as regressors a set of industry dummies, the interest rate,18
the price of oil, the annual value of GDP, and the lagged values of our measure of employment for
each industry. All variables other than lagged employment are expressed in log differences
(except for the interest rate which is just in percentage differences). We allow for industry specific
speeds of adjustment to shocks by letting the coefficient on lagged industry employment be
industry specific (not reported).
        Table 2 reports the estimated coefficients from analogous regressions using as the
dependent variable the measures of industry overtime wage and overtime employment. These


17  The “Low Markup” group of industries includes: primary metal products, fabricated metal products,
transportation equipment, food and kindred products, textile mill products, apparel and mill products, lumber and
wood products, furniture and fixtures, paper and allied products, petroleum and coal products, and leather and
leather products.
18 We also ran a full system of regressions using a 2SLS procedure wherein interest rates were instrumented.
This instrumenting did not qualitatively change our exchange rate results.

                                                       17
regressions are similar in format to those of Table 1 with two notable exceptions. First, we
assume that since changes in the amount of overtime activity is a short-run, temporary practice, it
is not subject to the same adjustment costs as changes in permanent employment. Therefore, we
estimate a static model instead of a partial-adjustment model in the overtime regressions. This
implies that changing the size of the labor force through (limited) use of overtime has no cost
other than the corresponding wage. We then drop from the estimation the lagged level of
industry employment as a regressor. Second, since the model is static the amount of overtime
activity is independent of whether a given exchange rate shock is permanent or temporary. We
use actual (not just permanent) movements in exchange rates as the right-hand-side regressor.
       From Table 1 observe that permanent exchange rates have significant explanatory power
with respect to industry wages in low-markup industries. A dollar depreciation increases the
average wages in industries that are more heavily involved in export activity. As industry export
orientation rises, so does the role of the dollar in slowing industry wage growth. Industry reliance
on imported production inputs can reverse the stimuli to wages associated with dollar
depreciations. All else equal, as an industry increases its reliance on imported inputs, dollar
appreciations have a smaller role in wage growth restraint. Indeed, in industries with imported
input shares exceeding their export shares, appreciations could potentially accelerate wage
growth. The same sign pattern of effects of exchange rates on wages appear for the full sample of
industries and for the sub-sample including high-markup industries. However, for neither of them
can we reject the hypothesis that the estimated exchange rate effects are jointly insignificant.
       The effects of a permanent exchange rate change on industry employment measures are
much weaker. All of the individual exchange rate coefficients for total hours are statistically
insignificant, although the F-test rejects the hypothesis of these coefficients being equal to zero for
high-markup industries. In the specifications explaining the total number of employees, the
coefficients on the export terms are statistically significant for the full and high markup samples,
as well as the coefficient with imported inputs. However, this significance is most likely resulting
from the colinearity among these exchange rate terms since for all samples the F-tests are unable
to reject the null hypothesis of these coefficients being jointly different from zero. Given these
results, the effects of exchange rate changes on these measures of employment activity in
manufacturing industries is likely to be very small.



                                                  18
       The rest of the regressors show consistently significant results for all the different
specifications. Increases in the prices of other inputs are consistently negatively correlated with
industry wages and positively correlated with industry employment. Industry employment, as
expected, is high when the economy is in a boom, i.e., when the level of GDP is high. It is
however, surprising that wages appear to decrease in periods of high economic activity.
       Overtime wages and overtime employment both are more significantly affected by
exchange rate movements than total wages and employment (Table 2). The F-tests easily reject
the null hypothesis of no exchange rate effect in all cases, with the exception of overtime
employment in high markup industries (which is only marginally rejected). Dollar depreciations
significantly increase overtime wages in high-markup industries with large export orientation, and
decrease overtime wages in those industries with a larger imported-input orientation. We observe
an opposite sign pattern for low markup industries. The effects of exchange rates on overtime
employment are more significant in low markup industries than in high-markup industries.




                                                19
           Table 1.Permanent Exchange Rate Changes and U.S. Employment and Wages
                       Xit∆ERt Mit∆ERt ∆OILt         ∆RATEt ∆GDPt         N. obs.                          adj.R2     F-test
Change in Wages
                                           -0.021* -0.039* -0.155** 439                                    .11
All industries                             (0.006)   (0.014)   (0.014)
                       1.094*    -0.850    -0.020* -0.040* -0.135         439                              .13        2.32
                       (0.445)   (0.605)   (0.006)   (0.014)   (0.083)
High Price-over-                           -.022*    -.042** -0.063       197                              .13
Cost Markup                                (.010)    (0.023)   (0.133)
Industries             1.034     -1.032    -0.024* -0.039      -0.096     197                              .15        1.14
                       (0.785)   (1.703)   (0.010)   (0.023)   (0.133)
Low Price-over-                            -0.018* -0.038* -0.205*        242                              .05
Cost Markup                                (0.007)   (0.017)   (0.104)
Industries             1.896*    -1.296** -0.020* -0.037* -0.226*         242                              .06        3.43*
                       (0.963)   (0.802)   (0.007)   (0.017)   (0.106)
Change in Total Hours
                                           0.021*    0.027** 1.565*       439                              .53
All industries                             (0.006)   (0.014)   (0.086)
                       -0.664    0.950     0.021*    0.027** 1.571*       439                              .53        1.10
                       0.478     0.653     (0.006)   (0.014)   (0.087)
High Price-over-                           0.023*    0.048*    1.441*     197                              .55
Cost Markup                                (0.008)   (0.019)   (0.112)
Industries             -0.639    0.970     0.024*    0.048*    1.456*     197                              .55        3.56*
                       (0.700)   (1.527)   (0.008)   (0.019)   (0.114)
Low Price-over-                            0.019*    0.009     1.680*     242                              .53
Cost Markup                                (0.008)   (0.021)   (0.127)
Industries             0.132     0.346     0.019*    0.010     1.665*     242                              .52        0.67
                       (1.195)   (0.995)   (0.008)   (0.021)   (0.129)
Change in Number of Jobs
                                           0.026*    0.026*    1.226*     439                              .53
All industries                             (0.005)   (0.012)   (0.074)
                       -0.758** 1.136** 0.027*       0.026*    1.23*      439                              .54        2.00
                       (0.425)   (0.582)   (0.005)   (0.012)   (0.074)
High Price-over-                           0.026*    0.037*    1.085*     197                              .51
Cost Markup                                (0.007)   (0.018)   (0.104)
Industries             -1.211** 2.051      0.027*    0.035*    1.110*     197                              .52        1.80
                       (0.656)   (1.432)   (0.007)   (0.018)   (0.105)
Low Price-over-                            0.077*    0.016     1.364*     242                              .54
Cost Markup                                (0.006)   (0.017)   (0.103)
Industries             0.748     0.037     0.027*    0.017     1.338*     242                              .54        0.81
                       (1.038)   (0.859)   (0.006)   (0.017)   (0.104)
•   * significant at 5 percent. ** significant at 10 percent. F-test is of the hypothesis that coefficients on exchange rate
    terms are jointly non-zero. Each regression also includes as explanatory variables a time dummy, industry dummies,
    and a two-period lag of employment (industry-specific)
Table 2. Actual Exchange Rate Changes and U.S. Overtime Wages and Hours

                     Xit∆ERt      Mit∆ERt       ∆OILt        ∆RATEt         ∆GDPt            N.     adj.R2   F-test
                                                                                             Obs.

Change in Overtime Wages
                                           -0.089*           -0.084*         3.342*          440    .38
All Industries                             (0.018)           (0.045)        (0.251)
                     0.803        -1.595   -0.073*           -0.074         3.419*           440    .39      3.95*
                     (1.129)      (1.641)  (0.019)           (0.047)        (0.258)
High Price-over-                           -.062*            0.023          3.651*           198    .34
Cost Markup                                (0.031)           (0.076)        (0.416)
Industries       3.744**          -7.445** -0.075*           0.034          3.498*           198    .35      4.10*
                 (1.943)          (4.506)  (0.032)           (0.077)        (0.427)
Low Price-over-                            -0.080*           -0.147*        3.218*           242    .44
Cost Markup                                (0.023)           (0.055)        (0.301)
Industries       -5.955*          3.138    -0.067*           -0.168*        3.393*           242    .46      6.46*
                 (2.430)          (2.086)  (0.023)           (0.055)        (0.307)

Change in Overtime Employment
                                                -0.086*      -0.065         3.326*           440    .31
All Industries                                  (0.020)      (0.051)        (0.281)
                     0.581        -0.892        -0.064*      -0.047         3.419*           440    .32      5.25*
                     1.256        1.826         (0.021)      (0.052)        (0.288)
Low Price-over-                                 -0.056**     0.054          3.416*           198    .26
Cost Markup                                     (0.034)      (0.084)        (0.465)
Industries      3.403             -5.714        -0.068**     0.071          3.248*           198    .32      2.92
                (2.194)           (5.093)       (0.035)      (0.081)        (0.478)
Low Price-over-                                 -0.072*      -0.130*        3.382*           242    .41
Cost Markup                                     (0.026)      (0.061)        (0.332)
Industries      -6.812*           3.953**       -0.056*      -0.153*        3.575*           242    .42      6.57*
                (2.655)           (2.274)       (0.026)      (0.062)        (0.339)
•   * significant at 5 percent level. ** significant at 10 percent level.
•   F-test is of the hypothesis that coefficients on exchange rate terms are jointly non-zero.
•   Each regression also includes a time trend, and industry dummies as explanatory variables.




                                                       21
Industry-Specific Estimates.
       The results reported above impose that the effects of all the explanatory variables be the
same for all industries (with the exception of the constant term and lagged employment). It is
reasonable to think that some of the underlying parameters in the model outlined in section two,
such as the industry demand and cost elasticities, to be industry specific. We have attempted to
relax this restriction somewhat by splitting the sample between high and low-markup industries
and, as seen in Table 1 and 2, and the results do differ. In this section we provide further insights
in the differences in the exchange rate effects by industry.
       There are two ways that we attempt to shed light on the industry-specific behavior of
adjustment of employment and wages to exchange rate changes. First, we use the estimated
exchange rate coefficients in Tables 1 and 2 for the low and high-markup samples and the average
export share and imported input share of each industry during the sample period to calculate the
industry-specific elasticities of response to an exchange rate shock. These elasticities are reported
in Table 3. Second, we estimated our original wage and employment specifications separately for
each industry using its individual data. The estimated coefficients from these regressions are
reported in Appendix Tables 2 and 3.
       Table 3 shows that the computed labor market response elasticities to an exchange rate
shock vary considerably across industries. An exchange rate depreciation results in an increase in
both wages (for 16 out of 20 industries) and employment (15 out of 20). in most industries. On
average, a 10 percent permanent dollar depreciation will result in an increase in manufacturing
wages of 0.4 percent and will increase total employment (number of jobs) by about 0.1 percent.
The effects of an exchange rate depreciation on overtime activity tend to be negative for most
industries and its variability appears larger among different industries. However, its overall effect
in the overall manufacturing sector seems also small. The average effect on overtime employment
in manufacturing from a 10 percent dollar depreciation is around 0.46 percent, while it appears to
decrease overtime wages by about 0.2 percent.
       The average elasticity of response have changed considerably over time. Average
employment elasticities have consistently increased during the sample period, and have changed
from initial negative values during the 1970s to increasingly larger positive values. Average wage
elasticities have also been in general increasing, except for a short period in the middle of the



                                                  22
1980s. Average overtime wage and employment elasticities have remained consistently negative
through out the sample period, with a slight absolute value increase.
       The relative size of exchange rate effects on industry activity appears to be highly
correlated with industry-specific characteristics other than its external orientation. In table 4 we
report the results of correlating the estimated elasticities reported in Table 3 with four different
industry characteristics: average industry markup during the sample period, unionization rates,
percent of workers without a college degree, and industry capital-labor ratios.
       A clear pattern of correlation exists between our estimated exchange rate wage and
employment elasticities and industry markups and the level of workers' education. High markup
industries have significantly higher estimated elasticities of total and overtime wage to exchange
rates and significantly lower employment and overtime activity exchange rate elasticities.
Industries with lower shares of non-college-degree workers also have higher elasticities of total
wages and overtime wages to exchange rates. However, the elasticity of total employment in
those industries is also significantly higher.    We do not find a clear relationship between
employment and wage responses to exchange rates in an industry and the industry's capital-labor
ratios or unionization rates. This strong correlation between these specific industry characteristics
and exchange rate elasticities suggest that issues such as the degree of education of the labor
force, type of education and competitive pressures in the industry might result in quite different
mechanisms for the adjustment of labor markets.
       We further explore cross-industry differences in their adjustment to exchange rate
movements by re-estimating equation (13) separately for each industry. We computed for each of
the 20 two-digit SIC manufacturing industries similar specifications to those reported in Tables 1
and 2. The limited number of observations and degrees of freedom in each of these regressions
lead them to have very little power. As a consequence, the parameter estimates are extremely
noisy and should be viewed with a great deal of skepticism. Although we present the parameter
estimates on exchange rate terms from these industry-specific regressions (Appendix Tables 2 and
3), we do not have much faith in them.        In the vast majority of cases, the hypothesis of an
insignificant exchange rate effect could not be rejected for the exchange rate terms for permanent
exchange rate changes on regular wages and employment. In regressions on overtime
responsiveness to actual changes in exchange rates, the final rows of these tables show that the
coefficients on the non-interacted and interacted exchange rate terms are seldom significant in

                                                 23
explaining either basic wages and employment or overtime activity. Only some of these industry-
specific measures are reassuring. In particular, there is a strong correlation between the estimated
response elasticities for industry wages, overtime wages, and overtime employment reported in
Table 4 and those implied from the industry specific regressions. However, the two elasticities
approaches give nearly uncorrelated results for the two employment measures.

    IV. SUMMARY AND CONCLUDING REMARKS

       In this paper we have examined the effects of exchange rate movements on employment
and wages for manufacturing industries in the United States. Exchange rate movements affect the
marginal revenue product of labor, and as a result, industry labor demand to the extent that these
exchange rate movements affect the marginal profitability of firms in an industry. The paper
argues that these movements in the marginal revenue product of labor will depend on the form of
external exposure of each particular industry. The effects of an exchange rate movement will be
increasing in the export orientation of the industry, the amount of import competition, and the
reliance on imported inputs into production of the industry. Other industry characteristics such as
an industry’s competitive structure, the composition of its labor force, and the characteristics of
the production process will also determine the expected size of labor adjustment to an exchange
rate shock.


       We empirically estimated the effects of exchange rate changes on four different measures
of labor market activity: wages and employment, and overtime employment and wages. The
results indicate that labor market adjustments to exchange rate movements tend to be small but
statistically significant. We find an average wage elasticity to exchange rates of 0.04 over 1972 to
1995, which is in line with other estimates from import competition studies (Revenga 1992,
Slaughter and Swagel 1998). We also find that the importance of exchange rates for wages has
been growing over time. This reflects the more rapid growth of export markets compared with
the growth of imported input use in production. Our estimates of employment elasticities are
significantly lower (0.01 on average). This low employment elasticities are consistent with larger
elasticities at a more disaggregated industry level and a large amount of employment reallocation
within a 2-digit industry (Davis and Haltiwanger 1997).


                                                24
Table 3: Implied Elasticities of Response of Changes in Industry Labor Market Variables
               Computed using average export and imported input shares, 1972-1995
                                       wages     Total     Total     Overtime     Overtime
Industry                                         hours      jobs      wages         hours
Food & Kindred Products                0.019    0.003      0.033      -0.019       -0.005
Tobacco Products                         0.105        -0.056   -0.096     0.060            0.048
Textile Mill Products                    0.013        0.013    0.039      -0.037       -0.014
Apparel & Other Textile Products         0.020        -0.004   0.027      -0.005           0.002
Lumber & Wood Products                   0.049        -0.016   0.052      0.006            0.012
Furniture & Fixtures                    -0.011        0.026    0.021      -0.052       -0.026
Paper & Allied Products                  0.022        0.008    0.045      -0.031       -0.010
Printing & Publishing                   -0.006        0.016    0.039      -0.033       -0.016
Chemical & Allied Products               0.097        -0.041   -0.061     0.031            0.033
Petroleum & Coal Products               -0.022        0.040    0.023      -0.076       -0.039
Rubber & Misc. Plastic Products          0.026        0.000    0.012      -0.017       -0.002
Leather & Leather Products              -0.022        0.068    0.064      -0.139       -0.067
Stone, Clay, and Glass Products          0.018        0.003    0.016      -0.018       -0.005
Primary Metal Industries                 0.003        0.030    0.049      -0.071       -0.031
Fabricated Metal Products                0.008        0.024    0.046      -0.058       -0.025
Industrial Machinery & Equipment         0.180        -0.079   -0.123     0.065            0.065
Electronic & Other Electric Equip.       0.096        -0.027   -0.026     0.000            0.019
Transportation Equipment                 0.078        -0.003   0.115      -0.041       -0.003
Instruments & Related Products           0.140        -0.065   -0.103     0.057            0.054
Misc. Manufacturing                      0.057        -0.004   0.016      -0.027       -0.001
Average Industry Elasticity 1972-95      0.044        0.005    0.009      -0.021       -0.046
Average Industry Elasticity: 1975        0.055        -0.002   -0.001     -0.013       -0.039
                               1980      0.070        -0.004   -0.003     -0.020       -0.048
                               1985      0.019        0.012    0.016      -0.014       -0.011
                               1990      0.060        0.008    0.017      -0.042       -0.080
                               1995      0.071        0.009    0.020      -0.046       -0.101
Note: Reported elasticities are constructed using parameters reported in Tables 1 and 2.




                                                 25
   Table 4    Regression Coefficients of Estimated Industry Elasticities against Industry Features



                                Price-Over-      % Non-College        Unionization        Capital
                                Cost Markup      Degree Workers          Rates           Intensity
     Elasticities of response
     of changes in:

     Wages                         0.332*             -0.003*             -0.001          0.009
                                   (2.534)            (-2.720)           (-0.875)        (0.411)


     Overtime wages                0.360*             -0.001*             -0.001          0.010
                                   (3.373)            (-2.154)           (-1.228)        (0.797)


     Number of jobs                -0.465*            0.003*              0.002           -0.035
                                   (-3.683)           (2.427)            (1.544)         (0.018)


     Total hours                   -0.253*            0.001*              0.001           -0.011
                                   (-3.182)           (2.244)            (1.126)         (-0.757)


     Overtime employment           0.228*             -0.002**            -0.002          0.017
                                   (3.243)            (-1.780)           (-0.290)        (0.018)



   Notes: industry responses use industry average external orientation ratios over 1972-1995.
   * indicates significance at 5 percent level. Regression t-statistic in parentheses.



       Industry-specific elasticities of response to exchange rate movements are significantly
correlated with the skill composition of workers in an industry and the competitive structure of
the industry. Industries with a higher proportion of college-educated workers observe higher
wage elasticities and lower employment elasticities of response to exchange rates, despite the fact
that the skill-intensive industries tend to be more export oriented. The reason may be that skill
intensive industries have relatively higher costs of hiring or firing workers. We also find that high
price-over-cost markup industries and more skill-intensive industries, also have relatively larger



                                                 26
overtime wage and employment responses to exchange rates. On the margin, more skill intensive
industries use overtime activity rather than hiring and firing workers, or changing basic
compensation. We find other indicators of industry characteristics -- unionization rates, and
capital intensities -- to be uncorrelated with the size of industry response to exchange rates.




                                                 27
REFERENCES
Bernard, A. and B. Jensen. 1995. Exporters, Jobs, and Wages in U.S. Manufacturing: 1976-1987”
     Brookings Papers on Economic Activity on Microeconomics pp.67- 117.
Beveridge, S. and Nelson, C. 1981. "A New Approach to the Decomposition of Economic Time
     Series Into Permanent and Transitory Components," Journal of Monetary Economics, 33,
     No.1, pp. 5-38.
Branson, W., and J. Love. 1988. “United States Manufacturing and the Real Exchange Rate.” In
     R. Marston, ed., Misalignment of Exchange Rates: Effects on Trade and Industry,
     University of Chicago Press.
Branson, W., and R. Marston. 1989. “Price and Output Adjustment in Japanese Manufacturing.”
     National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper no. 2878.
Brunello, G. 1990. “Real Exchange Rate Variability and Japanese Industrial Employment,”
     Journal of the Japanese and International Economies.
Burgess, S. and M. Knetter 1996. An International Comparison of Employment Adjustment to
     Exchange Rate Fluctuations. NBER working paper 5861 (December).
Campa, J., and L. Goldberg. 1995. “Investment, Exchange Rates and External Exposure.”
     Journal of International Economics 38 (May): 297-320.
Campa, J., and L. Goldberg. 1996a. “Investment, Pass-Through and Exchange Rates: A Cross-
     Country Comparison.” forthcoming International Economic Review.
Campa, J., and L. Goldberg. 1997. “The Evolving External Orientation of Manufacturing:
     Evidence from Four Countries.” Economic Policy Review (July 1997, Federal Reserve
     Bank of New York). See also NBER working paper 5919 (February).
Campbell, J. and Clarida, R. 1987. "The Dollar and Real Interest Rates: An Empirical
       Investigation," Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 27, pp. 103-140.
Clarida, R. and Gali, J. 1994. "Sources of real exchange rate fluctuations: How important are
       nominal shocks?," Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 41, pp. 1-56.
Davis, S. and J. Haltiwanger. 1997. “Sectoral Job Creation and Destruction Responses to Oil
       Price Changes and Other Shocks.” Manuscript, University of Chicago.
Domowitz, I., G. Hubbard, and B. Petersen. 1986. “Business Cycles and the Relationship
     between Concentration and Price-Cost Margins.” Rand Journal of Economics 17 (Spring):
     1-17.

                                             28
Dornbusch, R. 1987. “Exchange Rates and Prices.” American Economic Review 77 (March): 93-
     106.
Freeman, R. and L. Katz. 1991. “Industrial Wage and Employment Determination in an Open
     Economy”. in J. Abowd and R. Freeman eds. Immigration, Trade, and the Labor Market
     (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).
Goldberg, L. 1993. “Exchange Rates and Investment in United States Industry.” Review of
     Economics and Statistics LXXV, no. 4 (November): 575-88.
Hall, R. 1988. “The Relation Between Price and Marginal Cost in U.S. Industry.” Journal of
     Political Economy 96 (October): 921-47.
Huizinga, J. 1987. "An Empirical Investigation of the Long Run Behavior of Real Exchange
     Rates," Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 27, pp. 149-215.
Kletzer, L. 1998. “Trade and Job Loss in U.S. Manufacturing”. Manuscript. U.C. Santa Cruz..
Knetter, M., 1989. “Price Discrimination by U.S. and German Exporters.” American Economic
     Review 79 (March): 198-210.
Marston, R. 1990. “Pricing to Market in Japanese Manufacturing.” Journal of International
     Economics 29 (November): 217-36.
Nickell, S. 1986. Dynamic Models of Labour Demand. in Handbook of Labor Economics
     volume I edited by O. Ashenfelter and R. Layard pp.473-522.
Revenga, A. 1992. “Exporting Jobs? The Impact of Import Competition on Employment and
     Wages in the U.S. Manufacturing,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107 (1): pp.255-284.
Slaughter, M. and P. Swagel, 1998. “The Effect of Import Competition on Wages and
     Employment: Evidence from the Advanced Economies,” mimeo, Dartmouth College.




                                               29
Data Appendix
          All wages were deflated from nominal values to real values using the consumer price index
from the IMF International Financial Statistics, line 4.    The measures of export share, import to
domestic consumption share, and imported input share are taken from Campa and Goldberg (1997).
The exchange rate is the real effective exchange rate index, defined as dollars per unit of foreign
currency, from the IMF International Financial Statistics, line reu. Prior to 1975 the real exchange
rate index was computed by deflating the bilateral nominal exchange rates with the countries wholesale
price index and computing the index using the IMF weights. The interest rate is the long-term interest
rate from the IMF International Financial Statistics, line 61. Oil Price is the real domestic currency
price of average price of crude oil IMF International Financial Statistics. Real Gross Domestic
Product in 1990 prices is from IMF International Financial Statistics, line 99b.


          Computation of Permanent Exchange Rates: As derived in the previous section investment
responds to permanent changes in exchange rates. Therefore, we need to decompose the real
exchange rates into their permanent and transitory components. We computed the permanent
exchange rate series using the decomposition first suggested by Beveridge and Nelson (1981) and
later employed to exchange rate data by Huizinga (1987), Campbell and Clarida (1987), Cumby
and Huizinga (1990), and Clarida and Gali (1994), among others.
          The Beveridge-Nelson procedure consists of decomposing an I(1) time series into its
transitory and permanent components. For the real exchange rate at time t, et, this is expressed as

et = etBN + e$tBN , where the permanent component is denoted by “^”. The transitory departure of

the real exchange rate from its expected long-run equilibrium, etBN , is given by:

              ∞                                                                             (a1)
etBN = - E t  ∑ ∆ et+ j | ∆ et , ∆ et-1 ,...
              j=1                           

with the permanent component defined by:
                   ∞                                                                        (a2)
e$ tBN = et + E t  ∑ ∆ e t+ j | ∆ et , ∆ et-1 ,...
                   j=1                            

Beveridge and Nelson (1981) proved that the first of these components is a stationary process,
while the second is a random walk.



                                                       30
         We follow Beveridge and Nelson (1981) and Huizinga (1987) and model the exchange
rate decomposition using lags of the real exchange rate.19 In particular, we assume that the first
differences of the quarterly (log) real exchange rate follow an AR(4) process, so that:
                 ∞                                           
     ( )
Et etBN = - E t  ∑ ∆ et+ j | ∆ et , ∆ et-1, ∆ et − 2 , ∆ et-3
                 j=1                                         
                                                                                                          (a3)


         The actual variance decomposition results suggest that the temporary component of
exchange rate changes accounts for only a small proportion of the variance of the real exchange
rate series.20 The variance of the transitory component of the real exchange rate accounts for
about 40 percent of the total variability of the real exchange rates.




19    We also tried a multivariate system in which we also included three lags of the country’s quarterly inflation
      rate and GDP growth. The results of the decomposition were very similar, with an average correlation
      between the permanent components about 0.9. Given that these exchange rates are trade-weighted
      multilateral indices, we decided to report and utilize only the univariate decompositions.
20    Similar results are reported in Clarida and Galí (1994).

                                                              31
  Appendix Table A1: Relative Variability of Annual Wage, Employment and Overtime Series


                                             Average Coefficients of Variation
                           (minimum coefficient variation, maximum coefficient variation)
                             Across Industries                         Within Industries
Wages                                0.242                                    0.066
                               (0.193, 0.289)                           (0.022, 0.274)
Number of jobs                       0.044                                    0.053
                               (0.022, 0.070)                           (0.023, 0.091)
Total hours                          0.051                                    0.071
                               (0.025,0.081)                            (0.034, 0.132)
overtime wages                       0.407                                    0.158
                                  (0.330,0469)                          (0.054, 0.491)
overtime employment                  0.309                                    0.178
                               (0.268,0.362)                            (0.078, 0.388)


                                   Ratio of within industry Coefficients of Variability
                                  for Industries sorted relative to median characteristic
                       High / Low            High/Low          High / Low             High / Low
                       Price-Over-       % Non-College         Unionization       Capital Intensity
                       Cost Markup       Degree Workers           Rates
Wages                     0.950                1.041              1.045                 1.095
number of jobs            0.929                0.989              0.924                 0.796
total hours               0.901                0.910              1.156                   0.9
overtime wages            1.068                0.746              1.160                 1.240
overtime employment       0.926                0.895              1.109                 1.147




                                                32
Table A2         Permanent Exchange Rate Movements and Industry-Specific Wage and Employment Response
       This table reports the estimated coefficients and t-statistics (in parentheses) of industry-specific regressions. These coefficients come from
       two different specifications of equation (13): including only the exchange rate, and including the exchange rate interacted with the export
       share, Xit, and with the imported input share, "it, of the industry. The increase in adjusted R2 relative to an specification without any exchange
       rate term is also reported.

Industry                     Wage Response                                 Employment Response

        ∆ERt      ∆R2        Xit∆ERt "it∆ERt          ∆R2             ∆ERt       ∆R2     Xit∆ERt       "I,t∆ERt        ∆R2
        0.07**                1.733      0.008                        0.03                6.708        -7.090
20      (0.04)     0.14      (6.373)     (7.369)      0.11            (0.03)     0.00    (5.000)       (5.989)         0.06
        -0.04                -16.285* 83.275*                         0.05                9.434*       -47.291**
21      (0.11) -0.07         (6.867)     (36.466) 0.16                (0.08)     -0.02   (4.981)       (26.509)        0.06
        -0.04                -3.268      2.036                        0.22*              -13.207**     16.636*
22      (0.05) -0.03         (3.945)     (3.524)      -0.06           (0.11)     0.10    (7.186)       (6.427)         0.21
         0.02                 4.580      -4.256                       0.00               -2.791        4.131
23      (0.05) -0.04         (6.057)     (7.060)      -0.04           (0.10)     -0.04   (12.598)      (14.817)        -0.07
         0.18*               4.576       -3.099                       -0.06              -10.956        19.039
24      (0.06)     0.35      (3.976)     (7.583)      0.35            (0.12)     -0.01   (8.410)       (16.036)        -0.01
         0.05                -1.017      1.482                        -0.04              -17.652        5.529
25      (0.04)     0.04      (7.164)     (2.651)      -0.02           (0.08)     -0.01   (12.462)      (4.589)         0.00
        -0.01                -0.836       0.783                       -0.01              -5.697        5.644
26      (0.04) -0.02         (4.458)     (4.489)      -0.05           (0.05)     -0.03   (6.220)       (6.306)         -0.04
         0.02                -18.700** 9.615                          0.02               -35.647*      16.870*
27      (0.04) -0.01         (10.617) (5.065)         0.09            (0.01)     -0.01   (14.317)      (6.824)         0.04
        -0.05                -1.259        2.317                      -0.01              -4.091        10.906
28      (0.07) -0.02         (3.952)     (10.622) -0.07               (0.07)     -0.03   (4.667)       (12.683)        -0.02
        -0.26*               -13.388       2.016                      -0.10              -2.928        -0.053
29      (0.10)     0.30      (25.574) (11.748) 0.30                   (0.10)      0.00   (28.432)      (13.070)        -0.04
         0.07                -10.841* 14.531**                        -0.07              -12.036        12.701
30      (0.04)     0.13      (4.410)     (5.209)      0.23            (0.09)     -0.00   (9.821)       (11.762)        0.00
* Significant at 5 percent. ** significant at 10 percent.
Table A2 (cont’d) Permanent Exchange Rate Movements and Industry-Specific Wage and Employment Response

Industry                     Wage Response                                     Employment Response
       ∆ERt       ∆R 2
                             Xit∆ERt "it∆ERt          ∆R    2
                                                                ∆ERt ∆R  2
                                                                               Xit∆ERt  "I,t∆ERt     ∆R2

        -0.01                -0.607      0.351                  -0.17          -8.628    2.727
31      (0.04)    -0.04      (3.341)     (1.457)      -0.07     (0.11) 0.10    (9.049)   (3.899)     0.04
        -0.02                12.568*     -14.724*               0.03           2.489     -1.955
32      (0.05)    -0.04      (3.956)     (4.255)      0.20      (0.06) -0.00   (6.442)   (6.960)     -0.01
        -0.08                 2.171      -2.089                 0.21**         10.425    -3.176
33      (0.08)    0.00       (4.950)     (2.498)      -0.02     (0.12) 0.02    (7.302)   (3.572)     0.03
        -0.02                 5.680      -3.949                 -0.06          7.198**   -5.489*
34      (0.18)    -0.06      (13.702)    (9.222)      -0.11     (0.05) 0.01    (3.988)   (2.594)     0.03
         0.21*               -2.235       8.791                 -0.03          3.529**   -9.791**
35      (0.18)    0.26       (2.904)     (7.675)      0.23      (0.07) -0.01   (1.991)   (5.262)     0.02
        -0.38*               12.713*      -27.735*              -0.18*         -8.233    11.618
36      (0.10)    0.40       (5.465)     (9.478)      0.54      (0.09) 0.08    (5.272)   (9.234)     0.11
        0.24                  3.224      -2.067                 -0.03          -0.464     0.309
37      (0.16)    0.04       (4.878)     (6.388)      0.01      (0.05) -0.00   (1.861)   (2.448)     -0.01

        0.69*                -25.653* 92.874*                   -0.02          -1.749    4.869
38      (0.18)    0.60       (4.360)  (13.265)        0.46      (0.09) -0.02   (4.628)   (14.300)    -0.06
        -0.01                -1.790    1.989                    0.09            0.364    0.652
39      (0.05)    -0.04      (1.782)  (2.148)         -0.03     (0.07) 0.01    (2.874)   (3.475)     -0.02

# Significant coefficients
        6/20                 6/20        5/20                   3/20           5/20      4/20
(#+/#-)
        9/11                 8/12        13/7                   8/12           7/13      13/7
* significant at 5 percent. ** significant at 10 percent.




                                                                   1
Table A3 Actual exchange rate effects on industry overtime employment and overtime wages
       This table reports the estimated coefficients and t-statistics (in parentheses) of industry-specific regressions. These coefficients come from
       two different specifications of equation (13), without the lagged employment variable: including only the exchange rate, and including the
       exchange rate interacted with the export share, Xit, and with the imported input share, "it, of the industry. The increase in adjusted R2 relative
       to an specification without any exchange rate term is also reported.

Industry         Overtime Wage Response                          Overtime Employment Response
       ∆ERt      ∆R2      Xit∆ERt "it∆ERt              ∆R2           ∆ERt ∆R2      Xit∆ERt    "I,t∆ERt                 ∆R2

         0.01                -2.162      2.937        0.03            0.01               -11.558       14.211          0.56
20      (0.07) -0.03         (10.456) (12.640) -0.07                  (0.08)    -0.03    (10.770)      (13.017)        -0.03
         1.87*               -33.800 285.57           3.64            1.92*              -30.944       272.91          3.96*
21      (0.67)     0.21      (39.096) (213.12) 0.20                   (0.65)    0.24     (38.310)      (208.34)        0.21
         0.11                11.887      -7.426       0.33            0.20               13.184        -6.618          0.41
22      (0.23) -0.02         (16.934) (14.528) -0.02                  (0.28)    -0.02    (21.062)      (18.105)        -0.03
         0.04                0.478       2.030        0.06             0.02              -12.739       16.778          0.19
23      (0.15) -0.01         (16.986) (20.364) -0.03                  (0.19)    -0.02    (21.859)      (26.272)        -0.04
        -0.17                4.224       -13.316      0.23            -0.21              -0.781        -4.650          0.37
24      (0.22)     0.01      (14.084) (27.095) -0.01                  (0.20)    0.03     (14.559)      (27.555)        0.00
        -0.28                -29.850      5.170       0.65            -0.40              -37.488       5.705           1.06
25      (0.29)     0.02      (42.050) (16.805) 0.01                   (0.31)    0.04     (45.372)      (17.956)        0.03
        -0.08                -11.878 11.641           0.15            -0.07              -21.259       21.570          0.25
26      (0.18) -0.03         (19.569) (20.492) -0.07                  (0.19)    -0.04    (21.050)      (22.032)        -0.05
        -0.06                -76.710 36.294           0.93            -0.06              -76.260       35.611          0.90
27      (0.16)     -0.01     (51.703) (25.187) -0.02                  (0.15)    -0.01    (51.403)      (24.979)        -0.02
         0.04                -10.404 30.803           0.82            0.11                -9.536       29.7597         0.92
28      (0.13)     -0.02     (7.667)     (21.897) -0.03               (0.14)    -0.00    (8.297)       (23.601)        -0.01
        -0.00                 28.594 -11.843          0.20            0.10               30.324        -10.607         0.37
29      (0.22)     -0.05     (44.551) (19.667) -0.09                  (0.25)    -0.04    (50.799)      (22.449)        -0.06
* significant at 5 percent. ** significant at 10 percent.




                                                                          2
Table A3 (continued) Actual exchange rate effects on industry overtime employment and overtime wages

Industry           Overtime Wage Response                     Overtime Employment Response
        ∆ERt       ∆R2       Xit∆ERt "it∆ERt          ∆R2        ∆ERt    ∆R2    Xit∆ERt      "I,t∆ERt   ∆R2
        -0.36                -37.610 37.733           1.66       -0.35          -37.502      37.334     1.39
30      (0.24)     0.06      (23.737) (29.204) 0.04              (0.26)  0.04 (26.194)       (32.133)   0.04
         0.37                -16.977 10.309           1.90        0.40          -26.094      14.585     2.25
31      (0.23)     0.08      (17.780) (7.921)         0.11       (0.26)  0.09 (19.761)       (8.797)    0.16
        -0.23                -22.865 19.646           1.63       -0.27*         -21.073      15.861     1.86
32      (0.15)     0.01      (15.233) (17.223) 0.02              (0.14)  0.03 (14.833)       (16.753)   0.03
        -0.07                -10.778 5.165            0.14       -0.09          -19.190      9.643      0.39
33      (0.25) -0.01         (16.991) (9.369)         -0.04      (0.29) -0.01 (19.258)       (10.659)   -0.03
        -0.31                -8.353      1.986        0.65       -0.31           -9.403      2.473      0.63
34      (0.25)     0.02      (16.390) (11.881) 0.00              (0.26)  0.02 (17.446)       (12.580)   0.00
        -0.03                -0.597      1.233        0.02       -0.02           -1.552      4.208      0.05
35      (0.22)     0.05      (4.309)     (12.974) -0.03          (0.25) -0.02    (4.946)     (14.912)   -0.03
        -0.35                -12.59      17.606       0.73       -0.17          -4.739       6.064      0.14
36      (0.30)     0.01      (13.991) (24.704) -0.01             (0.31) -0.02 (13.813)       (24.422)   -0.05
        -0.95*               -7.078      0.539        3.18       -1.00*          -8.599      2.098      3.28
37      (0.34)     0.14      (10.531) (14.458) 0.11              (0.35)  0.14 (11.083)       (15.191)   0.12
        -0.07                -1.609      4.010        0.03       0.09           -25.061      82.898     0.73
38      (0.25) -0.03         (9.522)     (30.386) -0.05          (0.61) -0.06 (20.485)       (66.451)   -0.03
        -0.08                -0.583      -0.256       0.13       -0.03          2.633        -3.488     0.13
39      (0.13) -0.00         (5.778)     (6.976)      -0.03      (0.13) -0.02 (5.367)        (6.443)    -0.02
# Significant coefficients
        2/20                 0/20        0/20                    3/20            0/20        2/20
(#+/#-)
        6/14                 16/4        16/4                    8/12            3/17        16/4
* significant at 5 percent. ** significant at 10 percent.




                                                                     3
