I. Introduction

        Declining industries, worker layoffs, and factory closings are unavoidable consequences of

a continuously evolving market economy. How efficiently does the market reallocate factors of

production to productive uses in other sectors? Much is known about the outcomes for labor.

Studies, such as those by Topel (1990), Ruhm (1991), Jacobson, LaLonde and Sullivan (1993),

and Schoeni et al (1996), estimate the effects of reallocation on individual workers. They find

that displaced workers often experience prolonged periods of unemployment, as well as

significant losses in permanent income even after they become re-employed.             These results

suggest that labor market frictions, such as inefficient separations, search costs or industry-

specific human capital, may be impediments to the efficient reallocation of labor.

        Relatively little is known, however, about the post-displacement outcomes for the other

major factor of production - physical capital. Much capital is highly specialized, both in its

embodied technology and factor substitution possibilities and in the types of products it can

produce. While a substantial amount of theoretical and empirical work on investment behavior

has analyzed the effects of costly reversibility on the decision to invest, little direct evidence has

been offered on the efficiency with which capital is reallocated across firms and sectors.

        We seek to fill this gap in the literature by providing a theory and estimates of the costs of

reallocation of capital across firms and sectors.         Our theory of used capital sales features

specificity of capital and thinness of resale markets. We show how variations in specificity and

costs of search affect the reallocation of capital.




                                                      1
       Quantifying the costs of capital mobility is more difficult because of data availability.

While several data sets, such as the Panel Study of Income Dynamics and the Displaced Workers

Survey, allow one to track workers over time as they move between industries, we know of no

data set that tracks physical capital as it moves between industries. Studies of depreciation, such

as those by Hulten and Wykoff (1981) and Hulten, Robertson and Wykoff (1989), use transaction

prices from used assets to determine rates of economic depreciation. These data, however, do not

contain information on the original purchase price, nor do they link the buyers and sellers of the

assets. Bresnahan and Ramey (1993) study capital utilization and reallocation of capital across

size classes in the automobile industry during the 1970s and 1980s. Much of that reallocation,

though, was within firms.

       Thus, to answer these questions it was necessary to construct a new data set. We

collected confidential information from auctions of equipment from three large Southern

California aerospace plants that discontinued operations. We then used information on sales

prices and the characteristics of buyers to determine the extent of capital mobility for this

particular industry. We will argue below that the aerospace industry is particularly interesting

because it has undergone significant downsizing.

       Our findings suggest that capital is very specialized by sector and that reallocating capital

across sectors entails real costs. For example, we find that capital crossing industries sold for a

greater discount than capital that remained in the aerospace industry. Furthermore, the process of

winding down operations before selling the capital resulted in significant periods of under-

utilization before the capital was finally sold. Thus, there also appears to be a time cost to

restructuring. On the other hand, the assumption of zero fungibility of capital is also far from




                                                2
true. We find that capital is sold to firms in a wide range of sectors as well as in far-flung

geographical locations.

        Recognizing sectoral specificity of capital has the potential to shed light on numerous

theoretical and empirical issues. The trade theory literature has a long history of analyzing the

effects of changes in the terms of trade under the assumption of imperfect capital mobility.1

Similarly, in the explosion of work on growth theory in the 1960s, a number of papers addressed

vintage capital, variation in the elasticity of substitution, and the macroeconomics of multiple

sectors (e.g. Stiglitz and Uzawa (1969)).                 Most dynamic stochastic general equilibrium

macroeconomic models, on the other hand, assume that capital is perfectly malleable and can be

costlessly shifted across firms and sectors.2 Only recently have macroeconomic models begun to

incorporate some specificity of capital, such as irreversibility or vintage effects.3              These models

show that incorporation of heterogeneous capital can significantly change the economic

predictions of standard models.

        Allowing for capital specificity may also shed light on worker reallocation. Nadiri and

Rosen (1969) demonstrated the importance of spillover effects of adjustment costs of one factor

of production onto the behavior of another. If job creation and destruction are intimately linked

with capital creation and destruction, then consideration of the specificity of capital may increase

our understanding of the results of Davis and Haltiwanger (1990, 1992). Moreover, slow capital

mobility may change the predicted effects of sectoral shocks. The lack of positive comovement


1
  See, for example, Mussa (1974, 1978), Dixit (1989), Neary (1995), and Rauch (1997).
2
  In fact, most real business cycle models also allow capital to be costlessly transformed into consumption goods
and back again. A notable exception is the work of Christiano and Fisher (1995), which analyzes a two-sector
model with a consumption good sector and an investment good sector.
3
  See, for example, Dixit and Pindyck (1994), Abel and Eberly (1994, 1996), Greenwood, Hercowitz and Krusell
(1994), Gilchrist and Williams (1998), Coleman (1996), Faig (1997), Ejarque (1997), Cooley, Greenwood and




                                                         3
between unemployment and vacancies has been taken as evidence against the hypothesis that

sectoral shifts are an important contributor to aggregate fluctuations (e.g. Abraham and Katz

(1986), Blanchard and Diamond (1989)). If, however, capital is required to create a vacancy,

then a sectoral shift may not manifest itself as an increase in vacancies in the short-run.4

         Our work is related to a growing empirical literature that demonstrates the importance of

considering the costs of disinvestment. Caballero and Engel (1994) (using industry-level data),

Abel and Eberly (1996) (using firm-level data), Caballero, Engel and Haltiwanger (1995) (using

establishment-level data), and Goolsbee and Gross (1997) (using aircraft model data) all provide

evidence that the behavior of investment is consistent with the presence of important non-

convexities in the adjustment cost function.           Pulvino’s (1996a,b) analysis of the effect of credit

constraints and bankruptcy court protection on asset sales provides further insights into the costs

of disinvestment. Using data on the sales of aircraft by commercial airlines, he finds that capital-

constrained airlines sell their aircraft at relatively lower prices than airlines that are not

constrained.       Our empirical work provides further evidence for costs of disinvestment. In

addition, our theoretical model offers a plausible interpretation of our empirical findings, as well

as of other findings in the literature.



II. Theoretical Framework

A. Overview




Yorukoglu (1997), and Ramey and Shapiro (1997). LeRoy(1983) argues that Keynes investment theory was
actually the first analysis of temporary general equilibrium under a two-sector technology with nonshiftable capital.
4
  Caballero and Hammour (1996) obtain an inverse Beveridge curve from their assumption of incomplete
contracting. Their model also has capital that is specific to the relationship, but this element alone does not
produce an inverse Beveridge curve.


                                                         4
         We consider the following story to be a plausible depiction of the market for used capital.

Most capital is specialized by industry, so that used capital typically has greater value inside the

industry than outside the industry. Even within an industry, though, capital from one firm may

not be a perfect match for another firm. Thin markets and costly search complicate the process of

finding buyers whose needs best match the capital’s characteristics. The cost of search includes

not only monetary costs, but also the time it takes to find good matches within the industry. As a

result, firms will not search exhaustively for the best match for all their pieces of capital. Firms

with high discount factors may resort to “fire-sales,” resulting in significantly inferior matches and

the reallocation of capital to low valued uses.

         This story, which will be formalized below, contains several key assumptions. We begin

by motivating the first assumption of sectoral specificity of capital. We view each piece of capital

as comprising a certain set of physical characteristics. When new capital is built for sale to a

specific sector, it will have the best match of features for that sector. Despite the specificity of

these characteristics, capital can be reallocated across sectors. The key is that only some of the

characteristics of a particular piece of capital will have value in another sector.5

         We illustrate this idea with an example of a wind tunnel. A low-speed wind tunnel capable

of producing winds from 10 to 270 miles per hour was sold to a company outside of the

aerospace industry (San Diego Union-Tribune Oct. 23, 1994). This company rents the wind

tunnel for $900 an hour to businesses such as bicycle helmet designers and architects who wish to

gauge air flows between buildings. Most of the users require only low wind speeds and do not



5
  Firms might design or purchase equipment with ex post flexibility in mind. (In a visit to an automobile assembly
plant, we were told that the firm paid an extra 10 or 15 percent to purchase machine tools that could be easily
reconfigured.) Even if this flexibility is built in ex ante, the capital will lose some value if the flexibility needs to
be employed ex post, except in the unlikely event that the design made the capital perfectly flexible.


                                                            5
value the fact that the tunnel can produce 270 mile per hour wind speeds.               Thus, a key

characteristic of this wind tunnel – high air speeds – has no value outside of aerospace.

        We also believe that thin markets for used capital are an important impediment to the

efficient reallocation of capital.   Our discussions with professional liquidators and auctioneers

suggested several transaction costs in the reallocation of capital. Finding buyers whose needs

match the characteristics of the equipment closely is a costly and time-consuming process. The

sale of the equipment must be advertised and the process of inspection, negotiation and capital

budgeting can be lengthy. On the other hand, the firm can hold a public auction, which takes

place over a couple of days, but which may result in inferior matches between capital

characteristics and buyers’ needs.

        Several other models in the literature incorporate some of these features. For example,

the specialization of capital by industry is a key assumption used in the literature on debt capacity

and liquidation of assets (e.g. Williamson(1988), Shleifer and Vishny (1992)).        In Shleifer and

Vishny’s model, capital may be sold to a lower value use outside the industry because firms inside

the industry may be credit-constrained. In our model, capital may be allocated to low-valued uses

even with no financial market imperfections because of costs of search.

        Our assumption about costly search and matching is related to the large literature on

search and matching (e.g. Stigler (1961), McCall (1970), Diamond (1982), Pissarides (1985),

Mortenson (1986)). The structure of our model, however, contains a feature not found in other

search models (to our knowledge.) In our model, the firm sells multiple units, whose value

depends on the total selection available. This feature leads the firm to face a tradeoff between

selling early at a low price and preserving the selection available to high-valuation buyers.




                                                  6
           For those readers who wish to skip the theoretical details of the model, we briefly

summarize the theoretical results to which we allude later in the empirical section. We show that

under certain conditions, a firm structures its capital sales to consist of two parts. The first part,

which is called the “private liquidation sale,” is a period of search for industry insiders. These

sales result in high value matches and a higher sales price for the capital. The second part is a

“public auction,” which involves a large auction in which the remaining capital is sold all at once

to industry outsiders. The amount of capital sold to insiders is positively related to the firm’s

discount factor: more patient firms spend more time searching for high quality matches among

industry insiders.



B. Model6

           The model analyzes the decision problem of a firm that is selling used capital.7 Consider a

firm from sector A (aerospace) that wishes to sell a total of N units of capital so as to maximize

the expected present discounted value of revenue from the sale.                       The units of capital are

heterogeneous in that each unit will have a different value for different buyers, but the seller does

not know which particular unit the buyer will prefer. For each unit of capital, the firm can decide

whether to sell to another firm in sector A or to a firm outside of sector A, called sector O

(outsiders).

           We assume that selling capital to sector A has the following structure:


6
    We are indebted to Garey Ramey for very helpful suggestions for the formulation of the model.
7
  We abstract from the original decision on how much capital to sell in order to concentrate on how the capital is
sold. The expected outcomes from this second stage would certainly have a significant effect on the original
decision to install capital. It would be straightforward to embed this second stage decision problem in a broader
model, such as the ones discussed by Dixit and Pindyck (1994).



                                                          7
       (i) To take a draw from sector A, the firm must pay a fixed cost C. The firm can only
       make one draw from sector A per period.

       (ii) If the firm takes a draw from sector A, there is a probability θ, 0<θ ≤ 1, of matching
       with a firm.

       (iii) If a match is made, the firm sells one unit of capital and receives RA(n). n indexes the
       remaining number of units of capital the firm has for sale at that point in time.

       (iv) RA(n) is an increasing function of n, owing to the likelihood of making a better match
       when there is a greater selection of capital.



These assumptions are intended to capture the thinness of the market and the costs of matching

with other aerospace firms.

       In contrast, we assume that selling capital to sector O has the following structure:



        (i) There is no cost of selling to firms in sector O and the firm may make any number of
       sales during the period.

       (ii) If a sale is made to a firm in sector O, the selling firm receives RO per unit of capital.
       RO is independent of n.


Despite the higher costs of selling within the sector, the firm may choose to sell to other firms

within the sector if the expected returns are large enough. Once the match is achieved, we make

the common simplifying assumption that the selling price is equal to the valuation of the buyer.

The valuations of the buyers, RA for insiders and RO for outsiders, are given as follows:




(1)    RA = φΑ ⋅ SA(n),       S A ′ ( n) > 0

(2)    RO = φΟ ⋅ SO,



                                                 8
(3)     SA(n) > SO for all n.



The φ ’s are marginal revenue product shifters for each of the industries. For example, a decline

in the demand for aerospace goods would be represented as a decline in φΑ. The S functions

denote the goodness of the match of the capital’s characteristics, and are intended to capture the

specificity of capital discussed above.8 Even within the same industry, capital from one firm may

not be a perfect match for another firm. We assume that the value of a match with another

industry insider rises with the selection currently available for sale, n.        As shown above in

equation (3), we also assume that it is always the case that the characteristics of the capital will be

better suited to industry insiders than industry outsiders. If, however, φΑ falls far enough relative

to φΟ then RA can fall below RO.

        We begin the analysis by deriving value functions using backward induction from the last

unit sold. When the firm has only one unit left for sale, it can decide to draw from the insider pool

or to sell to outsiders. The value function evaluated at the last unit left to sell (n=1) is given by:



(4) V(1) = Max {θ RA(1) – C + (1- θ) β V(1), RO}


The first argument in the brackets is the expected value of taking a draw from inside the industry.

The firm receives RA(1) with probability θ, and must pay a cost to search of C. There is a

probability 1 - θ of not making a match, and receiving the discounted value of having one unit left

for sale the following period. If RO is greater than the first argument in the expression, the firm

will decide to sell to outsiders. Let that value be given by:




                                                   9
(5)      VO (1) = RO



If the first expression in brackets in equation (4) is greater than RO, the firm will choose to take a

draw from inside its sector. Solving for VA(1) in this case, we obtain:



                θ R A (1) − C
(6) V A (1) =
                1 − β + βθ



If RA(1) is sufficiently small that VA(1) < VO(1), the firm decides to sell its last unit to outsiders.

Iterating backward from the last unit, we obtain the value of each choice when a firm is left with n

units to sell, and finds it optimal to sell the last n-1 units to outsiders. These values are given by:



(7)      VO (n) = nRO

                      θ R A (n) − C + θβ (n − 1) RO
(8)      V A ( n) =
                               1 − β + βθ



VO(n), the value of selling all n units to sector O now, is linear and increasing in n. The slope is

                                                              θ R ′A (n) + θ β Ro
RO. VA(n) is also increasing in n, with a slope of                                  .
                                                                 1 − β + βθ

         The following proposition establishes conditions under which the firm will sell some

equipment to each group of buyers:


8
  For tractability, we assume that SA(n) is a continuous function of n, even though the n’s are discrete. We take
into account the discreteness of n in the propositions and proofs.


                                                         10
Proposition 1: (Conditions for selling to both aerospace and outsiders)

If:

                                          θ R A (1) − C
(i) V A (1) < VO (1), or equivalently ,                 < RO
                                          1 − β + βθ

(ii) V A (n) > VO (n), or equivalently , θR A (n) − C > [(1 − β )n + θβ ]RO for 1 < n < N . ,



then there exists some n*, 1 < n* < N, such that V A (n * −1) < VO (n * −1) and V A (n*) ≥ VO (n*) ,

and the optimal policy is to sell at least one unit to sector A before selling all remaining units to

outsiders.



Proof: See the technical appendix.



Proposition 1 establishes conditions under which there will be two stages to the selling process.

Consider Figure 1, which shows graphs of VO(n) and VA(n) against n. Note that time moves

backwards as n increases, since higher n means that the firm has more units left to sell. The two

conditions together guarantee that VO(n) and VA(n) cross, and that there is at least one crossing

where VA(n) crosses VO(n) from below. If the conditions hold, the first stage of the selling

process involves some search for sector A buyers, which we call the “private liquidation sale.”

The second stage involves selling all remaining units at once to sector O. We call this stage the

“public auction.” If it is the case that VA(n) is less than VO(n) for all n<N, then the firm will skip

the first stage and only hold the public auction.




                                                       11
         In general, the first stage need not involve only sales to sector A buyers. During the first

stage, the firm is faced with the following tradeoff: Selling some units to outsiders now has the

advantage of speeding up the time when the firm can realize revenues from the public auction, but

has the disadvantage of decreasing the selection available to sector A buyers, hence reducing the

expected revenue from those sales. When will the firm not sell units to outsiders during the

second stage? The following lemma specifies a sufficient condition to ensure that the gains to

speeding up the process by selling to outsiders early are outweighed by the lost revenue from

selling to insiders.



Lemma. If, in addition to the conditions in Proposition 1, the following condition holds:



                        1− β
(iii) θ R A′ (n) ≥              [θ R A (n − 1) − C − (1 − β )( n − 1) RO ] for n* < n < N
                     1 − β + θβ



then the sale will take place in two stages, with a first stage involving only search for sector A

buyers and the second stage involving the sale of all remaining units at once to sector O.



Proof: See the technical appendix



         While this corollary is not necessary for explaining many of the empirical results, it is

useful for clarifying the effects of certain parameters on the nature of the sales process, as shown

in the following proposition.




                                                        12
Proposition 2 (The effects of parameters on the structures of sales). Assume that conditions (i)-

(iii) as well as the following condition hold:



(iv) θ R A′ (n) > (1 − β ) RO for all n such that 1 < n < N .



Then, the firm will sell more units to sector A,

        (a) the higher is β

        (b) the higher is θ

        (c) the lower is RO

        (d) the higher is φA



Proof: See the technical appendix.



        Proposition 2 shows that as a firm becomes more patient, it will search longer for sector A

buyers and delay the public auction.        This result can explain how a firm’s discount factor

determines how much capital it sells to industry insiders. The proposition also shows that the firm

will search longer for sector A buyers if the efficiency of searching for sector A buyers is higher

(higher θ) or if the marginal revenue product of capital in sector A is higher.9

        The following corollary states how prices of capital will differ across types of buyers, and

how the sales revenue will vary with the discount factor.




                                                   13
Corollary: Under the conditions of Proposition 2, the average (undiscounted) price paid by

sector A buyers is greater than the average (undiscounted) price paid by sector O buyers.

Furthermore, a firm with a higher β will realize higher undiscounted proceeds from the sale of its

equipment.



         The implications of the model will be useful for interpreting the results we present later.

The model also sheds light on several other results in the literature. For example, Shleifer and

Vishny (1992) present several interesting anecdotes about how rapid sales of assets lead to price

discounts.     Pulvino (1997) shows that capital-constrained airlines not only sold their aircraft at

lower prices, but were more likely to sell them to industry outsiders. Our model of thin resale

markets for heterogeneous capital provides a straightforward explanation for these results.

Searching for good match is a time-consuming process. If the firm does not spend the time, the

capital ends up in lower valued matches and the firm receives less for its assets.



III. Data Description

         Our data consist of information on capital sales from Southern California plants belonging

to three large aerospace companies. The aerospace industry has undergone enormous downsizing

and restructuring in the last decade. This industry is ideal for our study because the exogeneity of

the end of the Cold War eliminates concerns about the endogeneity of demand for the output of

the factories we study and the selectivity of which equipment and which factories get liquidated.




9
 If we do not assume condition (iii) from the Lemma, then the results from Proposition 2 change slightly. Instead
of specifying the effect of the parameters on the number of units sold to sector A, the weaker proposition would
specify the effect of the parameters on the point at which the firm decides to hold the final public auction, n* - 1.


                                                         14
           Variations in defense spending represent major shifts in total demand for aerospace goods.

In 1987, shipments to the Department of Defense accounted for 60 percent of total shipments of

aircraft (SIC 372) and missles and space vehicles (SIC 376).10 Furthermore, defense department

demand is highly variable. Figure 2 shows real defense purchases of aerospace equipment over

time. From 1977 to 1988, real purchases rose 225 percent. From 1988 to 1995, real purchases

reversed themselves, declining back to their 1977 levels.

           A Rand report by Schoeni, Dardia, McCarthy and Vernez (1996) studies the experiences

of aerospace workers over this time period, and thus is complementary to our study of capital

flows. Using state unemployment insurance records, the authors gathered data on every worker

who was employed in the aerospace industry in California in the first quarter of 1989.         They

found that the one-third of the workers who remained with the same firm experienced an 8

percent increase in real wages through the third quarter 1994. The other two-thirds experienced

some losses on average, though not out of line with the control group of displaced workers from

other durable goods industries. Nevertheless, even those workers who were employed each

quarter in California after separation from their firm experienced average wage losses of 4 - 5

percent relative to their pre-separation earnings. Furthermore, one-quarter of this group suffered

real wage losses of 15 percent or more. Thus, these numbers are consistent with the literature

showing that displaced workers generally experience persistent income losses.

           We study three of the many plants that closed in the 1990s. All three plants were

important manufacturers of military and/or commercial airplanes, as well as missiles. Two of the

plants were over 40 years old, and the third was about 20 years old. At the time we obtained the

data, the third plant was in the process of slowly paring down operations, but had not completely


10
     Shipments to all Federal government agencies represented 66 percent of shipments.


                                                         15
closed.     In all cases, after several years of declining production and employment, the firms

decided to discontinue operations. The decisions on all of these plants, however, came several

years after the majority of plant closures, so none of these plants was a marginal plant.

          Two of the firms held their sales through the same liquidation and auction company. Plant

1 sold equipment through private negotiation (“private liquidation sale”) over the space of four

months, and then sold the remaining equipment at a public auction that took approximately one

week. Plant 2 held no liquidation sale, but held a series of public auctions over the year and a half

that it was winding down operations. Plant 3 held a public auction through another company. We

have obtained only data from its first auction. All of the public auctions were conducted as

English auctions. We were told that most of the larger items had multiple bidders. The total

proceeds from the sales were $18.7 million and over 1,000 buyers purchased equipment. Three

times that many buyers attended the auctions. Hence, the markets at the auctions are fairly thick.

          A significant part of the equipment sold was machine tools, such as milling machines, jig

mills and lathes. These are the standard metal cutting and metal forming equipment used in

manufacturing aircraft parts. But there was also a great variety of other goods sold, such as

forklifts, cranes, generators, vibratory finishers, drill bits, and even cafeteria chairs. Thus, our

data covers a fairly wide span of equipment.

          It is interesting to note that the manufacturers did not sell any buildings.11 Not selling

buildings is not unusual for plant closings involving plants that are more than 25 years old. Many

have found that the cost of bringing the plants up to current environmental standards (e.g.

removing asbestos) are greater than the potential sales price, so they simply raze the buildings.12


11
  We do not yet know the outcome for the buildings of Plant 3.
12
  The front page of the June 26, 1996 Wall Street Journal contains an interesting article describing the problems
faced by GM in the closing of its 100 year old Tarrytown automobile assembly plant.


                                                       16
        For every item sold in the liquidation sale and public auction (over 20,000 lots), we

obtained information on the complete equipment description, the sales price, and the buyer.

Using business directories, as well as direct phone calls to buyers, we assigned buyers to a four

digit SIC industry. Buyers whose industries we could not identify accounted for less than 4

percent of total sales.    The industry information allowed us to track the dispersion of the

equipment to various industries. For Plant 1, the selling company provided us with information

on the original purchase year and price as well as the year and cost of any refabrications or

rebuilds for almost all of the pieces of equipment that sold for $10,000 or more each. We were

able to obtain information for 127 pieces of equipment that accounted for $6.7 million of sales.

With this information, we can estimate implied depreciation rates for the equipment sold.

        The data set we have collected has features that overcome the “lemons problem” criticism

that has been made of some of the other studies of used equipment. First, the tremendous amount

of downsizing that occurred meant that the plants that closed were not marginal plants. Second,

the fact that the plants sold everything they owned means that there is no selection bias in the

equipment that was sold.

        We will conduct three types of analyses of the data that shed light on capital mobility.

First, we will compute the distribution of sales of equipment across industries. The extent to

which the sales are more concentrated in aerospace or manufacturing relative to the aggregate

gives an indication of the specialization of equipment. We will also distinguish the distribution of

sales according to whether the good was sold through private negotiation or public auction.

Second, we will use the subset of sales for which we have original purchase prices to estimate a

model of economic depreciation. We will estimate depreciation rates and compare them to others

in the literature. Finally, we will discuss the time lags that were involved in the sale of capital.


                                                   17
IV. Empirical Results

A. Sectoral Flows of Capital

       Before we present our results on the sectoral flows of capital from the two plants, it is

useful to give an indication of the aggregate demands for equipment for comparison purposes.

The Annual Capital Expenditures Survey reports that in 1993 the aerospace industry represented

just 0.78 percent of total private expenditures on producers’ durable equipment, and just 2.5

percent of manufacturing expenditures.        Although the aerospace industry is more heavily

concentrated in California, it is unlikely that its fraction of investment was much higher, given the

downsizing that was occurring. The manufacturing sector as a whole accounted for 32 percent of

all investment in producers’ durable equipment in 1993.

       Against this backdrop, we calculate the flow across sectors of equipment from our data.

To our knowledge, this is the first study to track capital equipment as it flows out of a shrinking

industry. Using every item sold, we calculated the fraction of goods that went to each industry,

both by the value of sales and the number of buyers.

       Tables 1, 2 and 3 present the distribution of sales of equipment by buyer industry. Table 1

shows the results for all types of sales combined; Table 2 shows the results for the private

liquidation sales; and Table 3 shows the results for the public auctions.

       Consider first Table 1. The most important fact that emerges from the table is that almost

one-quarter of the value of sales was to other aerospace manufacturers. Thus, one-quarter of the

equipment remained in the same 3-digit industry. If there were perfect fungibility of capital across

sectors, we would expect the equipment to have been sold in proportions similar to aggregate

equipment investment. The fact that the sales were over 30 times more concentrated in aerospace


                                                 18
relative to the aggregate is an indicator of substantial impediments to the cross-sectoral flow of

capital.

           Table 1 also shows several other sectors that were major buyers. Machinery dealers

bought 23 percent of the equipment. Hence, we are not able to track this equipment to its final

destination. It is likely that some of this equipment was resold to aerospace manufacturers. The

other important set of buyers was firms in the fabricated metals and machinery industries, who

together bought 28 percent of the equipment. Many of these industries use the types of machine

tools used by aircraft manufacturers. Manufacturing as a whole accounted for 58 percent of sales.

In comparison to the aggregate, sales to manufacturing were almost twice as concentrated.

           We also note the geographic dispersion of sales at the bottom of the table. Over one-third

of the equipment was sold to buyers outside of California, and 4 percent was sold to buyers from

outside the United States. This calculation of the percent sold to foreigners is probably an

underestimate. Many sales to foreign countries go through U.S. dealers or through individuals

who serve as agents.13

           There are two ways to view these numbers. In one sense, they show that capital is not

absolutely stationary, since more than one-third of it left California. In another sense, though, the

fact that California accounted for a much larger share of sales than it does in the aggregate

investment data shows that there are costs to geographic mobility. Some of the equipment, such

as the double gantry profilers, weighs several tons.

           Tables 2 and 3 shows that there is a significant difference in the buyers through private

liquidation and public auction. Table 2 shows that 66.8 percent of the sales value from the


13
   According to some auctioneers, a significant part of the equipment sold at aerospace auctions was sold to foreign
manufacturers in China and India. China obtained some weapons manufacturing equipment illegally through
individuals who attended defense industry auctions (Wall Street Journal, October 21, 1996, A1).


                                                        19
liquidation sale went to other aerospace firms, whereas Table 3 shows that only 10 percent of the

public auction sales went to aerospace firms.

       The theory presented in the last section is helpful for interpreting these results.         If

aerospace firms have higher valuations for the equipment, but are harder to locate due to thin

market effects, the selling firms must spend time and effort seeking out other aerospace firms.

Thus, we would expect most of the private liquidation sales to be to other aerospace firms. When

the expected return from this process becomes low enough, the firm sells all remaining units at a

public auction. Most of the sales at public auction are to industry outsiders. Firms who cannot

afford to wait during the search process sell all of their equipment at public auction.

       The theory can also explain why some plants had private liquidation sales and others did

not. Plant 1 had a private liquidation sale before its public auction, whereas Plant 2 did not. Plant

3 had an initial public auction (which constitutes our data from the plant), but planned to have a

liquidation sale later as production decreased. At the time of its closing, Plant 1 was owned by a

firm that was cash rich. In contrast, at the time of its closing, Plant 2 was owned by a firm that

was heavily indebted and had low bond ratings. Plant 3 also was more heavily indebted than Plant

1. Based on these factors, one would expect the discount factor β of the owner of Plant 1 to be

much higher than the discount factors of the owners of Plant 2 and 3. In the model, a low enough

β will result in no time spent searching for other buyers inside the industry. This appears to be

exactly what happened in Plant 2. Only 4.6 percent of Plant 2’s sales went to aerospace buyers.

In contrast, 32 percent of the sales from Plant 1 went to aerospace buyers. We cannot attribute

the difference in sales to the difference in the composition of equipment since both appeared to

have similar types of machine tools.




                                                 20
B. Econometric Estimates of Economic Depreciation

Overview

        In this section we use the subset of data from Plant 1 containing original purchase prices

to obtain estimates of the loss of value suffered by capital that must be sold as part of the

consolidation and downsizing of an industry. We begin by summarizing the data and discuss

depreciation estimates from other studies. We then estimate two types of models: a fairly standard

exponential depreciation model and a more flexible functional form model. Both models give

similar results.

        As discussed in the last section, the subset of data consists of 127 items with a total sales

value of $6.7 million. To put the data on a current-cost basis, we reflate the original acquisition

cost plus the cost of subsequent investment for rebuilds using implicit deflators for investment

goods.14 We used the deflator for metal working machinery investment for the machine tools and

similar equipment, the instruments investment deflator for the instruments, the deflator for

computer investment for computers, the price deflator for turbines for a generator, the deflator for

construction tractors for gas-driven forklifts, and the deflator for industrial equipment investment

for the remaining items.

        Figure 3 shows a plot of the ratio of the sales price to the reflated original acquisition cost

against age. This ratio is Brainard-Tobin’s q -- the ratio of the market value of capital to the

replacement cost.15 The size of the circle is proportional to the original cost.


14
   These data are from the BEA’s capital stock data. We calculate the implicit deflator as the ratio of historical
cost to the chain-weighted quantity index.
15
   Figure 3 does not take into account depreciation. Also, in the figure we make no corrections for the pieces of
machinery that had later investment flows. Both depreciation and subsequent investment are taken into account in
the econometric analysis presented below.


                                                       21
       Several features stand out in the data. First, it is clear that there were several large items

with ages up to 15 years that suffered huge declines in value. Second, some of the equipment that

was near fifty years old sold for a large fraction of its original purchase price, even after reflation.

We double-checked these data to make sure they were not errors. We were told that there were

certain types of machinery manufactured fifty years ago that were used only by aircraft

manufacturers at the time.      Later, however, other manufacturers started using this type of

machinery, and since these exact types are no longer manufactured, many non-aircraft

manufacturers are willing to pay a high premium to acquire it. There is also some selectivity in

these data since our sample excludes retired equipment.

       Before we estimate rates of depreciation, it is useful to review estimates obtained by

others on economic depreciation rates. Hulten and Wykoff (1981) and Hulten, Robertson and

Wykoff (1989) applied Hall’s (1971) hedonic model of asset prices to data on used capital sales to

estimate economic depreciation rates. For example, Hulten, Robertson, and Wykoff (1989) used

data from the Machine Dealers National Association from 1954 to 1983 to estimate economic

depreciation rates for machine tools. Their data has many more observations (almost 3,000) than

ours, but unfortunately has no information on the original cost or the industry of the buyer and

sellers. They estimate depreciation rates by using dummy variables for characteristics of

equipment.     Several of their findings are of interest. First, geometric depreciation is a good

approximation to the estimates they obtain using more flexible functional forms. Second, in a

summary of their work, Hulten and Wykoff (1996) report estimated depreciation rates for a

variety of equipment.     They report an annual depreciation rate of 12 percent for industrial

machinery, and rates varying from 12 to 18 percent for other equipment (excluding automobiles

and computers which have depreciation rates up to 30 percent).


                                                  22
        These estimated depreciation rates are not exactly what we need for comparison. In

estimating the depreciation rates, the authors correct for sample selection problems induced by the

fact that some equipment is retired rather than sold. Because we are only studying equipment that

is sold, we need estimates that do not correct for sample selection. Oliner’s (1996) study

provides such estimates. Oliner surveyed machinery dealers in the mid-1980’s and estimated a

depreciation rate of 3.5 percent for the group of machine tools still in operation. Survey

respondents indicated an average life of these machine tools of 30 years. When he corrected for

sample selection, he found depreciation estimates of 9.5 percent. Thus, the relevant estimate for

our comparison may be as low as 3.5 percent.



Geometric Depreciation Model

        We begin by estimating a model of geometric depreciation. For 127 pieces of equipment

representing over a third of the value of all sales, we estimated the following model that relates

the sales price to the flow of investment and the age:




(10)
                        LM                       3                             OP
        S i = Co + α (1 − δ ) age (i ) I i + ∑ (1 − δ r ) age (i , j ) R(i , j ) + ε i ,   where
                         N                      j =1                            Q
Si = price at which machine i sold

C0 = constant term

α = positive parameter

δ = annual geometric depreciation rate on original cost

age(i) = age of machine i

Ii = initial purchase cost (including installation), reflated to current prices


                                                              23
δr = annual geometric depreciation rate on rebuild expenditures.

age(i,j) = years since jth rebuild of machine i

R(i,j) = expenditures for jth rebuild of machine i, relative to current equipment price.

εi = error term



        The first term in brackets in the equation is the standard formula for geometric

depreciation on a capital investment. The second term is included to account for the rebuilds,

which constitute additional flows of investment expenditures on the same piece of equipment. 19

of the machines experienced one to three rebuilds or refabrications over the course of their use, so

we include those investment flows as well. We assume that the error term ε arises from different

preferences for machinery features, different outcomes in the search process, as well as

idiosyncratic differences in the rate of physical depreciation, all of which are assumed to be

independent of the original price.

        Both δ and α are parameters measuring economic depreciation.                 Most models of

economic depreciation in the literature implicitly assume that α is unity, so that all loss of value is

related to age. That is, most models for measuring geometric depreciation presume that Brainard-

Tobin’s q equals one. We will show that it is important to consider losses in value that are

unrelated to age, so that α is less than unity.

        Because of the linearity induced by the additional terms that allow for rebuilds, we do not

estimate equation (10) in logarithms. Thus, we estimate the equation by nonlinear least squares,

and use heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors.

        We begin by estimating a simple model in which the rate of depreciation on rebuilds is

constrained to equal the rate of depreciation on initial investments and the values of α and δ are


                                                  24
common across types of equipment. The results of this specification are presented in the first

column of Table 4.

           The estimated value of δ is 7.6 percent, which is within the range of estimates in the

literature. The value of α, however, is very low, at 0.1, and is significantly different from the

commonly assumed value of unity. Thus, the estimates imply that there is a significant decline in

value that is independent of age. The positive constant term further implies that the returns are

proportionally greater on the less expensive items. Thus, the estimate of α gives the marginal q,

not the average q. The first column shows a calculation of the q for the median valued good, after

taking into account the estimated seven percent depreciation per year. The parameter estimates

imply that Brainard-Tobin’s q is only 0.18 on the median-valued good.16 Thus, the loss was 82

percent.

           To see whether the high estimated losses were uniform across the types of capital goods,

we estimated a model in which the losses were allowed to differ across types of capital. We

classified the equipment into three groups: (1) machine tools; (2) structural equipment; and (3)

miscellaneous equipment. Machine tools include equipment such as profilers and jig mills, and

represent 104 of the 127 items sold. Structural equipment consists of two very large, complex

and expensive items that required costly disassembly and re-assembly in order to be sold. The

miscellaneous equipment consisted mainly of instruments and a few items such as forklifts and

computers. We allowed the constant term, the geometric depreciation rate and the α to differ for

machine tools versus miscellaneous equipment. Because there were only two structural items, we

could not separately estimate several parameters for them. Thus, for these two items we preset


16
                                                C0 + αI m
     Brainard-Tobin’s q was calculated as q =             , where Im is the median reflated original acquisition cost.
                                                   Im


                                                          25
the geometric depreciation factor to 12 percent and estimated a separate α. Finally, we also

allowed the depreciation rate on rebuilds to differ from the depreciation rate on initial

investments.

       The second column of Table 4 shows the results of estimating the heterogeneous capital

model. The results indicate some heterogeneity across categories. According to the estimates,

the annual depreciation rate for machine tools is 12 percent and for miscellaneous equipment is 6

percent. On the other hand, the α is estimated to be higher for machine tools than miscellaneous

equipment, 40 percent versus 27 percent. Note also that the depreciation rate on investment for

rebuilds is substantially higher than the estimated depreciation rates for initial investments.

       The most significant difference is between machine tools and miscellaneous equipment on

the one hand and the two pieces of structural equipment on the other. As the table shows, the

estimated α for the structures is only 5 percent. Because the original cost of these structures was

so great, their discounts affect the estimated discounts for all of the equipment in the

homogeneous capital model.

       In fact, once we allow for a different coefficient on structures, there is not significant

evidence of differences in discounts by type of equipment. The final column shows the estimates

from a restricted model in which the constant term, the δ, and the α are constrained to be the

same for machine tools and miscellaneous equipment, but the α for the two structures is still

allowed to be different. One cannot reject this model in favor the more general model at any

reasonable significant level. Thus, all of the nonstructural pieces of equipment included in the

sample appear to have similar discounts and rates of depreciation.

       There are several ways to calculate the losses on capital from these parameter estimates.

The estimate of α for non-structural equipment implies that even after taking into account annual


                                                  26
rates of depreciation, the firm would receive only 38 cents on the marginal dollar spent on

purchasing the capital, implying a loss of 62 percent on the margin. Because of the positive

constant term, though, the average returns were higher. The loss on the median-valued piece of

nonstructural equipment was 53 percent. The loss was 95 percent on the structures.

       We can also compare the total revenues from the sale to the total value of the goods,

depreciated by the estimated annual discount rates. This measure is an average “q.” We calculate

q as follows:



                                                     127

                                                     ∑S       i
        Average q =   127
                                                     i =1
                                                        3

                      ∑ [(1 − δ )
                      i =1
                                    age ( i )
                                                I i + ∑ (1 − δ r ) age (i , j ) R(i , j )
                                                       j =1




The numerator is the sum of the sales prices, and the denominator is the replacement cost. We

use the estimated values of δ and δr from the preferred model in Table 4. For the entire sample,

the average value of q is 0.37, implying a discount relative to replacement cost of 63 percent. If

we omit the two structures, the average value of q is 0.57, implying a discount relative to

replacement cost of 43 percent.

       We draw two conclusions from these results. First, all types of equipment sold for

significant discounts relative to new equipment, and most of these discounts were from factors

that were independent of age. Second, the structural pieces sold for much greater discounts than

other types of equipment.




                                                                  27
Discounts by Type of Buyer and Mode of Sale

       We now study whether the discounts vary systematically with the industry that bought the

equipment and with the way in which it was sold. Recall that our theoretical model predicted that

the items that sold to other aerospace firms should sell at a higher price than the items that sold

outside the industry. The characteristics of the capital should be a better match for other firms in

the industry. Furthermore, in the context of our model, the sales to other aerospace firms should

have occurred during the private liquidation sale. As shown earlier in Tables 2 and 3, though,

there were some sales to outsiders during the private liquidation sale and some sales to aerospace

during the public auction. Table 5 shows the distribution of buyer type by mode of sale and vice

versa for the sample of 127 items used in our depreciation estimates. The calculations show that

91.5 percent of the value of aerospace purchases in this sample was through the private

liquidation sale. The calculations also show that 75 percent of the revenue from the liquidation

sale was from sales to other aerospace firms. Thus, the actual data does not have the complete

separation that occurs in our model.

       To determine whether the identity of the buyer or the mode of sale affects the selling

price, we re-estimate the model allowing the α’s to differ according to the identity of the buyer’s

industry and the mode of sale. We exclude the two pieces of structural equipment, which were

sold to dealers during the private liquidation sale, because they are so different from the other

equipment, and they would skew the results.

       Table 6 shows several sets of results. The first column shows an estimate of the previous

specification without the structural equipment, to serve as a baseline. The estimated annual

depreciation rate is 12 percent on the original investment and the estimated value of α is 38

percent. The second column shows the results from allowing the discount to vary by the identity


                                                28
of the buyer. The estimate of α for equipment that sold to other aerospace manufacturers is 45

percent, whereas the estimated α for equipment that sold to outsiders is only 25 percent. Both

estimates imply substantial losses in value and the difference between the two is statistically

significant at the one percent significance level. At the median equipment value, the estimates

imply that resale of a new piece of equipment to another aerospace firm would result in an

average return of 56 cents on the dollar, whereas resale to an outsider would yield 36 cents on the

dollar.

          The third column presents estimates when the α’s are allowed to vary according to

whether the item was sold during the private liquidation sale or the public auction. The estimated

α for the items sold during the private liquidation sale is 42 percent, which is more than twice the

estimated α of 18 percent for the items sold at the public auction. Along with the estimated

constant term, the results imply that the loss on the median good sold at the private liquidation

sale was 46 percent, whereas the loss on the median good sold at the public auction was 69

percent.    The value of the log likelihood function is only slightly greater than the value for the

previous specification.

          The last column of Table 6 presents results from a model in which the α can differ across

both buyer category and sales mode category. The highest estimated return is for equipment that

is sold to other aerospace firms at the private liquidation sale, with an estimated value of α of 45

percent. The next highest is sales to outsiders at the private liquidation sale, followed by sales to

outsiders at the public auction. Interestingly, the estimate of α for sales to aerospace during the

public auction is near zero. This result might be due to the small sample of items in this category

or to the fact that these items had very little use outside of aerospace, so that the winning bids

were very low.


                                                 29
       Neither the buyer model nor the sales mode model can be rejected at the five percent level

against the model that includes both distinctions. Both models can, however, be rejected at the

ten percent level. All of the results, however, are broadly consistent with the theoretical model

that highlights the importance of the type of buyer and the mode of sale for determining the return

on the assets.    Both the average and marginal returns on sales to industry outsiders are

significantly lower than the return on sales to industry insiders.



Flexible Functional Form Estimates

       Finally, to test further the robustness of the results, we estimated models with a more

flexible functional form. In particular, we regress the log of the ratio of the sales price to the

reflated original cost (i.e. the log of q) on the following set of variables: a quadratic in age,

dummies for aerospace buyers or private liquidation sale interacted with the quadratic in age, a

dummy variable indicating whether the equipment was rebuilt, and the log of the original real cost.

We estimate two separate models rather than the combined by buyer – by mode model because it

is easier to interpret the separate models. We omit the two structures from the sample, and we

weight the regression by the reflated original cost of the equipment. The quadratic in age is

included to allow for time-varying depreciation rates, which we also allow to vary according to

either the buyer’s identity or the mode of sale. We include the log of the original real cost to

allow for the possibility that the discount varies with the original price of the equipment.

       The estimated parameters from this type of model are shown in Table 7. Several results

are noteworthy. First, the significant negative coefficient on the log of the reflated original cost

indicates that the higher cost items suffer a greater decline in value. This result is consistent with

the positive constant term in the geometric depreciation model.           Second, paradoxically the


                                                  30
coefficient on the dummy variable for equipment that was rebuilt is negative, indicating that those

items experienced a greater decline in value. Both the set of coefficients on aerospace and the

liquidation sale dummy interactions are jointly significant.

       Because it is difficult to see the age pattern from the coefficients, we calculate the implied

rates of depreciation and plot the fitted values of q. Table 8 shows the implied depreciation rates

by age for each case. Figures 4 and 5 show the fitted values of the two regressions. In each case,

we calculated the fitted values for a piece of equipment with the median reflated original cost and

which was not rebuilt. The figures show the implied fitted ratio of sales price to cost, rather than

the log. Each age for which we have at least one observation is represented by a point. In Figure

4 the “A’s” indicate items bought by aerospace firms and the “O’s” indicate items bought by

outsiders. Figure 5 shows the similar fitted values from the sales mode model. Here the “X’s”

denote items sold at public auction and the “L’s” denote items sold at the private liquidation sale.

       Consider first the patterns shown in Figure 4. The estimates indicate that relatively recent

equipment sold to aerospace had significantly higher values of q than the recent equipment sold to

outsiders. The values of q for aerospace, however, decline very steeply, and cross below the q for

goods sold to outsiders at about 11 years of age. While the q’s for the goods sold to outsiders

start very low, they decline very gradually with age. As Table 8 shows, the estimated annual rates

of depreciation for equipment that sells to aerospace is greater than 15 percent for the first ten

years, where as the rates are less than half that for equipment sold to outsiders. Thus, these

estimates show that the pattern of discounts is much richer than that suggested by the geometric

depreciation model. The basic conclusions from the earlier model, however, remain unchanged:

the selling company made significantly higher returns on the items sold to other aerospace firms.




                                                 31
       Figure 5 shows the patterns for the mode of sale model. As in the geometric depreciation

model, the results indicate that goods sold through the private liquidation sale sold for higher

prices relative to their replacement costs. The annual rate of depreciation of these goods appears

to be similar to the goods that sold at public auction, as shown in Table 8.

       All of the estimated models point to the same pattern. The selling firm received higher

prices on goods it sold to aerospace firms rather than outsiders. Similarly, with the exception of

the two pieces of structural equipment, the selling firms received significantly higher prices on the

goods sold through private liquidation rather than through the public auction.



C. Time Costs of Capital Mobility

       Finally, we present evidence on the length of time the capital was out of production or

underutilized before it was sold. To maintain the confidentiality of the manufacturer, we denote

the time of the auction by year 0.

       In Plant 1, about which we know the most, employment and production declined by some

75 percent between years -5 and -1. In year -1 (approximately 13 months before the beginning of

the equipment sales), the manufacturer decided to discontinue operations. Between year -1 and

the auction, production gradually slowed, and reached zero at the time of the auction. The last

delivery occurred two months after the auction.       The announcement to shut down Plant 2 was

made a little over a year before the first auction. Production had dropped considerable in the

years leading up the announcement, and continued to decline until the last equipment was sold.

       Thus, in one sense the sale of capital was swift, for it coincided with the point when

production fell to zero. Capital utilization rates, however, were low both in the few years leading




                                                 32
up to the decision to discontinue operations and during the year of winding down. Thus, there

was a prolonged period of declining utilization before the capital was eventually sold.

        One aspect that struck us was that in some respects the dismantling of the enterprise

resulted in the more efficient use of the capital, by allowing it to be sold. In contrast, there was

another time at which production was low, but no capital was sold. For almost an entire decade

in its existence, one of the facilities operated at very low levels of production with fewer than 500

employees. During this time, most of the equipment and structures were unutilized.               The

combination of our economic depreciation estimates with current option value theories of

investment suggest that this was optimal behavior on the part of the firm. Nevertheless, this

behavior represented substantial under-utilization of resources.

        The final issue on timing is the lag between the purchase of the capital by the buyers and

the use of that capital in production. We do not have information on this issue, but we can offer

some speculation. It is likely that many pieces of equipment were used in production within a few

months of purchase, since they did not require much setup. The outcome of the equipment that

was sold to dealers is more uncertain. It would interesting to find out how many dealers were

able to resell the equipment quickly, and how many dealers held the equipment in inventory for

speculation purposes.

        We draw two conclusions on timing from this analysis. First, any prolonged decrease in

production probably results in significant periods of under-utilization of capital. Second, because

of the large discounts experienced on the sale of capital, the option value of a piece of installed

capital is very high. Thus, firms may rationally choose to hold on to capital for long periods of

time in case production might rise in the future. It is only at times when firms decide to cease

operations that they sell significant portions of their capital.


                                                   33
V.     Interpretation of Empirical Results

       We now discuss the implications of our empirical results for the costs of reversing

investment decisions and the costs of capital reallocation. We will begin by discussing several

issues, including wedges between sellers’ receipts and buyers’ values and the applicability of this

aerospace study to other situations.

       The first point to note is that the price received by the seller is less than the value of the

equipment to the buyer. There are several reasons for this wedge. First, standard auction theory

suggests that the price paid at auction is equal to the second highest valuation. The distance

between the first and second highest valuation depends on the distribution of valuations of the

buyers. Since we were told that there were usually a good number of bidders on many items, we

are led to believe that this wedge is not too large. A second wedge between the price received by

the sellers and the value to the buyers is the fraction that is paid to the auction company. The

prices we recorded are prices received by the sellers, not the price paid by the buyers. Typically

buyers must pay an additional buyers premium of approximately ten percent. Thus, the buyers’

values are at least ten percent greater than the prices received by sellers.

       Our results suggest that sellers receive low prices on their sales of capital. There are

various alternative explanations, such as lemons markets or the quality of the capital, that could

explain these results. We believe that these explanations are less plausible than the one we offer in

our theoretical model. First, as mentioned earlier, the equipment sold is not subject to the usual

lemons problems because the plants we study were among the last closed, and all of the

equipment was sold. Furthermore, our sample selection device for estimating depreciation rates

for equipment that sold for $10,000 or more should bias our estimates upward.          Second, it is


                                                  34
unlikely that the large discounts were due to poor quality equipment. Industry sources report that

the equipment in the aerospace industry is typically well-maintained (Robert Levy (1996)).

Finally, it is unlikely that the high discounts are due to technological obsolescence. There has not

been much technological advance in the type of machine tools used in aerospace manufacturing.

The only advance is the use of computer numerical control, which can be added to existing

machines (Robert Levy (1996)). In fact, many of the rebuilds in our sample consist of the

addition of computer numerical control.        Thus, we do not believe that lemons problems,

equipment quality or technological obsolescence can explain much of the results we found.

       It is also important to discuss the applicability of these results to other cases of capital

sales. Our study is of an industry in the midst of a dramatic downsizing. One would expect the

capital losses to be greatest in such a case. Thus, we would not expect a firm that sold capital due

to idiosyncratic reasons to experience such large capital losses. On the other hand, the type of

equipment used in the aerospace industry can more readily be used by other sectors than many

other types of equipment. One of the auction experts told us that in rating the ability to sell

capital to other sectors, where 0 implies no resale ability and 10 indicates great resale ability, the

aerospace industry ranks a 10 compared to the steel industry at a 2. Thus, one might expect other

industries to suffer much larger losses during a downturn.

       With these factors in mind, we now offer what we believe to be reasonable implications

from our results.



1. Investment is very costly to reverse, especially during a sectoral downturn




                                                 35
Our results provide direct evidence on the losses incurred when a firm must sell its capital during

a large sectoral downturn. For the subset of goods for which we had information, the estimates

from the geometric depreciation model imply losses of 63 percent relative to the replacement

value. Even without the two structural items, the losses were 43 percent. This degree of

irreversibility can have a major effect on investment behavior, as shown by the theoretical results

of Dixit and Pindyck (1994) and Abel and Eberly (1994).



2. Capital displays significant sectoral specificity

       According to the auction experts, we are studying one of the sectors with the least specific

types of capital. Yet our calculations of the distribution of capital across sectors showed that

aerospace was more heavily represented among the buyers than one would expect if the capital

were perfectly fungible. Furthermore, we estimate significant additional discounts in price on

capital that sold outside the sector. The loss on the median good was 64 percent if sold outside of

aerospace compared to 44 percent if sold to aerospace.

       These results suggest an enormous degree of sectoral specificity. Consider these estimates

in the context of the model we presented in which the values to each type of buyer were related to

the marginal revenue product (φ) times the quality of the match (S) (equations (1) – (3)). During

the time of our study, the marginal revenue product of capital in aerospace relative to other

sectors plummeted. Yet, the value of much of the equipment to aerospace was still significantly

higher than to outsiders. This fact implies a huge gap in the quality of the match of the capital

characteristics to insiders versus outsiders. Owing to the low state of demand for aerospace, our

estimates are a lower bound on the value of specificity.




                                                36
3.   Sectoral specificity of capital and thinness of resale markets combine to reduce the

economic value of reallocated capital.



As discussed above, the value of the capital to the buyers exceeds the price received by sellers by

at least 10 to 15 percent, so the losses in economic value are not as great as the losses to the

selling firm. Some of the difference between the selling and buying price must be paid to

auctioneers and dealers, so part of the wedge should be seen as a cost of capital mobility. But

there is evidence of an economic cost even beyond that amount. Even if the buyers’ values were

20 to 50 percent above the purchase price, the results would still indicate a fall in economic value

for the used capital.

        According to our theory, the combination of sectoral specificity and thinness of markets

impedes the efficiency of matching capital to new owners. Thus, reallocated capital is often

placed in a lower value use. If one could costlessly break down a wind tunnel into its constituent

elements and costlessly reformulate it into another piece of equipment, it would have much higher

economic value than the immutable wind tunnel that sold outside the aerospace sector.

        The loss in value appears to be much higher than that found for workers in the aerospace

industry by Schoeni et. al. (1996)). It is difficult, however, to make a direct comparison to the

estimates presented in their study, because they were unable to track individuals who left

California. Thus, the estimates they present are for only subsamples. It is unlikely, though, that

the unobserved group had such large losses that they would raise the average loss to labor to

anything near the estimates we found for capital.




                                                37
IV. Conclusions

       In this paper, we have argued that the cost of reallocating capital in response to sectoral

shifts has been overlooked.       We presented a theoretical model that showed how sectoral

specificity of capital and thinness of resale markets could result in low value matches between

reallocated capital and buyers. Our empirical results indicate significant costs of capital mobility.

There are three separate manifestations of these impediments. First, the equipment sales were

concentrated in the aerospace industry to a much greater extent than if equipment was not

specialized by industry. Second, equipment that shifted sectors suffered a higher loss of economic

value than equipment that stayed in the same industry. Finally, the winding down of operations

involved significant periods of time of very low capital utilization.

       These results suggest that capital specialization deserves much more study. It is likely that

studying capital flows jointly with worker flows will greatly increase our understanding of these

and other phenomena.




                                                  38
                                        Technical Appendix



Proof of Proposition 1:

        We first demonstrate why conditions (i) and (ii) are sufficient to guarantee the existence of

an n* between 1 and N. Consider Figure 1, which shows graphs of VO(n) and VA(n) against n.

Note that time move backwards as n increases, since higher n means that the firm has more units

left to sell. Condition (i) guarantees that VA(n) is below VO(n) when n=1. This case will be true

as long as the expected value of drawing from aerospace is sufficiently low when only one unit is

left. Condition (ii) guarantees that VA(n) is above VO(n) for some n < N. This second condition

will hold if θ R A′ (n) is sufficiently large. These two conditions together imply that the curves must

cross, and there is at least one crossing where VA(n) crosses VO(n) from below. It is clear that

once the firm has n ≤ n*-1 units left, it is optimal to sell all remaining units to sector O.

Furthermore, at n* it is optimal to sell one unit to sector A before selling all remaining units to

sector O.

        It remains to be shown that for n > n*, it is not optimal to sell all remaining units to sector

O. Consider the value of liquidating an amount k when n units are left to sell. k > n - n* would

imply that n – k < n*, meaning the firm would not sell any units to sector A. Thus, we need to

show that the value of this strategy is less than the value of selling k < n - n* units to sector O.

The value of selling k > n - n* units to sector O is given by           WO (n, k ) = k RO + W (n − k ) .

However, since n – k < n*, we know that W (n − k ) = (n − k ) RO , since once the firm has less than

n* units left, we know it wants to sell them all to sector O. So the value of selling k > n – n*

units to sector O at n > n* is simply the value of selling all remaining units to sector O,

WO (n, k ) = nRO , for k > n − n * .   But we know that           nRO < (n − n*) RO + W (n*)      since


                                                  39
W (n*) = V A (n*) > n * RO = VO (n*) . Therefore, the optimal policy is to sell at least one unit to

sector A.




Proof of Lemma:

Consider the firm’s decision when n> n* units are left to sell. The value of searching for a buyer

from sector A is:




                 θ R A (n) + θβW (n − 1) − C
(A-1) WA (n) =
                          1 − β + θβ



whereas the value of selling the first k units to outsiders is given by:




(A-2) WO (n, k ) = k RO + W (n − k )




(W(n-k) is the value of the optimal decision when n-k units are left.) In order for the firm to

choose to search in sector A, we require that WA(n) > WO(n,k). Substitution of equations (A-1)

and (A-2) into this condition show that it will hold if the following condition holds:



(A-3) θ R A (n) − C > (1 − β + θβ ) RO + (1 − β )W (n − 1)



                                                   40
How do we guarantee that (A-3) holds? We know that a similar condition holds at n* (by the

definition of n*). Thus, as long as the left hand side (A-3) is increasing faster in n for n*<n<N

than the right hand side, the firm will not sell units to sector O while it is still searching for sector

A buyers. Taking derivatives of each side, and noting that




                θ R A (n − 1) − C − (1 − β )W (n − 1) θ R A (n − 1) − C − (1 − β )( n − 1) RO
W ′ (n − 1) =                                        ≤
                             1 − β + θβ                             1 − β + θβ




it is clear that condition (iii) of Corollary 1 is sufficient to establish that WA(n) > WO(n,k).




Proof of Proposition 2:



At the point where VO(n) and VA(n) cross, θ R A (n) − C = [(1 − β )n * +θ β ] RO , where n* is the

last unit sold to aerospace before the public auction takes place. We implicitly differentiate this

equation with respect to n* and the parameters. The effects of the parameters on n*, and thus on

the number of units sold to aerospace, are easily established with condition (iv), plus the fact that

n* > θ and RA(n*) > β RO.




                                                       41
                                         Bibliography


Abel, Andrew and Janice Eberly (1994), “A Unified Model of Investment Under Uncertainty,”
American Economic Review, 84, 1369-1384.

----------------- (1996), “Investment and q with Fixed Costs: An Empirical Analysis,” manuscript.

Abraham, Katherine and Lawrence Katz (1986), “Cyclical Unemployment: Sectoral Shifts or
Aggregate Disturbances?” Journal of Political Economy 94, 507-522.

Black, Fischer (1987), Business Cycles and Equilibrium, Cambridge, Mass.: Basil Blackwell.

Blanchard, Olivier and Peter Diamond (1989), “The Beveridge Curve,” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, 1: 1-60..

Blanchard, Olivier and Peter Diamond (1990), “The Cyclical Behavior of the Gross Flows of U.S.
Workers,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity No. 2, 85-155.

Bresnahan, Timothy and Valerie Ramey (1993), “Segment Shifts and Capacity Utilization in the
U.S. Automobile Industry,” American Economic Review, 83, 213-18.

Caballero, Ricardo and Eduardo Engel (1994), “Explaining Investment Dynamics in U.S.
Manufacturing: A Generalized (S,s) Approach,” September 1994.

Caballero, Ricardo, Eduardo Engel, and John Haltiwanger (1995), “Plant-Level Adjustment and
Aggregate Investment Dynamics,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1995:2, 1-54.

Caballero, Ricardo and Mohamad Hammour (1996), “On the Ills of Adjustment,”” Journal of
Development Economics, forthcoming.

Christiano, Lawrence J. and Jonas Fisher (1995), “Tobin’s q and Asset Returns: Implications for
Business Cycle Analysis,” NBER working paper 5292.

Cole, Harold and Richard Rogerson (1996), “Can the Mortensen-Pissarides Matching Model
Match the Business Cycle Facts?” March 1996 manuscript.

Coleman, Wilbur John II (1996), “The Behavior of Interest Rates in a General Equilibrium Multi-
Sector Model with Irreversible Investment,” Duke University Fuqua School of Business
manuscript.

Cooley, Thomas F., Jeremy Greenwood and Mehmet Yorukoglu (1997), “The Replacement
Problem,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 40 (December): 457-500.




                                               42
Davis, Steven and John Haltiwanger (1992), “Gross Job Creation, Gross Job Destruction, and
Employment Reallocation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107:3, 819-63.

Davis, Steven, John Haltiwanger, and Scott Schuh (1996), Job Creation and Destruction,
Cambridge, Mass.: M.I.T. Press.

Diamond, Peter (1981), “Mobility Costs, Frictional Unemployment, and Efficiency,” Journal of
Political Economy 89(4): 798-812.

Dixit, Avinash (1989), “Intersectoral Capital Reallocation under Price Uncertainty,” Journal of
International Economics, 26:3, 309-325.

--------------- and Robert Pindyck (1994), Investment Under Uncertainty, Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.

Ejarque, Joao (1997), “Investment Irreversibility and Precautionary Savings in General
Equilibrium,” UCSD anuscript.

Faig, Miquel (1997), “Investment Irreversibility in General Equilibrium: Capital Accumulation,
Interest Rates, and the Risk Premium,” University of Toronto manuscript.

Gilchrist, Simon and John Williams (1998), “Putty-Clay and Investment: A Business cycle
Analsyis,” manuscript.

Goolsbee, Austan and David B. Gross (1997), “Estimating Adjustment Costs with Data on
Heterogeneous Capital Goods,” University of Chicago Graduate School of Business manuscript.

Greenwood, Jeremy, Zvi Hercowitz, and Per Krusell (1994), “Macroeconomic Implications of
Investment-Specific Technological Change,” manuscript.

Hall, Robert E. (1971), “ The Measurement of Quality Changes from Vintage Price Data,” in
Price Indices and Quality Change, edited by Zvi Griliches, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press, pp.240-71.

Hamilton, James (1988), “A Neoclassical Model of Unemployment and the Business Cycle,”
Journal of Political Economy, June, 593-617.

Hulten, Charles and Frank Wykoff (1981), “The Estimation of Economic Depreciation Using
Vintage Asset Prices,” Journal of Econometrics, April, 367-96.

--------------------- (1996), “Issues in the Measurement of Economic Depreciation,” Economic
Inquiry, 34:1, 10-23.




                                               43
Hulten, Charles, James Robertson, and Frank Wykoff, “Energy, Obsolescence and the
Productivity Slowdown,” in Technology and Capital Formation, ed. Dale Jorgenson and Ralph
Landau, Cambridge, Mass.: M.I.T. Press, 1988, 225-58.

Jacobson, Louis, Robert LaLonde and Daniel Sullivan, “Earnings Losses of Displaced Workers,”
Aermican Economic Review, 83: 685-709.

LeRoy, Stephen F. (1983), “Keynes’s Theory of Investment,” History of Political Economy 15:
397-421

Levy, Robert (1996), quoted in “Chinese Find Bargains in Defense Equipment as Firms Unload
Assets,” Wall Street Journal, October 21, 1996, A1, A10.

Lilien, David (1982), “Sectoral Shifts and Cyclical Unemployment,” Journal of Political
Economy, 90: 5, 777-93.

Mayer, Thomas (1960), “Plant and Equipment Lead Times,” Journal of Business, 33, 127-132.

McCall, John J. (1970), “Economics of Information and Job Search,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 84(1): 113-126.

Mortensen, Dale (1982), “The Matching Process as a Noncooperative Bargaining Game,” in The
Economics of Information and Uncertainty, ed. John J. Mccall, pp.233-258. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press for the NBER.

Mortensen, Dale and Christopher Pissarides (1994), “Job Creation and Job Destruction in the
Theory of Unemployment,” Review of Economic Studies, 61:3, 397-415.

Mussa, Michael (1974), “Tariffs and the Distribution of Income: The Importance of Factor
Specificity, Substitutability, and Intensity in the Short and Long Run,” Journal of Political
Economy, 82:6, 1191-1204.

------------ (1978), “Dynamic Adjustment in the Heckscher-Ohlin-Samuelson Model,” Journal of
Political Economy, 86:5, 775-792.

Nadiri, M.I. and Sherwin Rosen (1969), “Interrelated Factor Demand Functions,” American
Economic Review, 59: 457-71.

Neary, J. Peter, “Factor Mobility and International Trade,” Canadian Journal of Economics 28
(November 1995): S4-S23.

Oliner, Stephen (1996), “New Evidence on the Retirement and Depreciation of Machine Tools,”
Economic Inquiry, 34:1, 57-77.




                                                 44
Pissarides, Christopher A. (1983), “Efficiency Aspects of the Financing of Unemployment
Insurance and Other Government Expenditures,” Review of Economic Studies, 50(1): 57-69.

Pulvino, Todd C. (1996a), “Do Asset Fire-Sales Exist? An Empirical Investigation of
Commercial Aircraft Transactions,” Northwestern University Kellogg Graduate School of
Management, Finance Department Manuscript.

_____________ (1996b), “Effects of Bankruptcy Court Protection on Asset Sales,”
Northwestern University Kellogg Graduate School of Management, Finance Department
Manuscript

Ramey, Valerie A. and Matthew D. Shapiro (1997) “Costly Capital Reallocation and the Effects
of Government Spending,” forthcoming Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy.

Rauch, James (1997), “Balanced and Unbalanced Growth,” Journal of Development Economics,
53 (June), 41-66.

Ruhm, Christopher (1991), “Are Workers Permanently Scarred by Job Displacements?” American
Economic Review, March 1991, 81, 319-23.

Schoeni, Robert, Michael Dardia, Kevin McCarthy and Georges Vernez (1996), “Life after
Cutbacks: Tracking California’s Aerospace Workers,” Rand Corporation Report, National
Defense Research Institute.

Shleifer, Andrei and Robert Vishny (1992), “Liquidation Values and Debt Capacity: A Market
Equilibrium Approach,” The Journal of Finance, 47:4, 1343-1366.

Stigler, George (1961), “The Economics of Information,” Journal of Political Economy 69 (3):
213-225.

Stiglitz, Joseph and Hirofumi Uzawa (1969), Readings in the Modern Theory of Economic
Growth, Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.

Topel, Robert H. (1990), “Specific Capital and Unemployment: Measuring the Costs and
Consequences of Worker Displacement,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public
Policy, Autumn 1990, 33, 181-214.

Williamson, Oliver E. (1988), “Corporate Finance and Corporate Governance,” Journal of
Finance 43, 567-592.




                                              45
                                            Table 1
                     Distribution of Sales by Industry: All Sales Included


Industry                       Percent of Sales Value          Percent of Buyers

Aerospace (SIC 372, 376)       24.2                            5.2

Other Transportation           1.6                             1.7
Equipment
Fabricated Metals and          27.8                            25.9
Machinery
Other Manufacturing            4.0                             6.1

Machinery Dealers              22.8                            14.3

Construction                   2.5                             3.4

Transportation and Public      1.1                             1.3
Utilities
Retail Trade                   2.8                             2.9

Services                       5.0                             7.9

Individuals                    3.9                             12.3

Other                          0.6                             0.3

Unknown                        3.7                             18.6


Totals                         Sales Value                     Number of Buyers
                               $18,723,607                     1207




Geographic Distribution

California                     63.8                            89.2
Rest of U.S.                   32.3                            9.9
Foreign                        4.0                             0.8


Note: Data from Plants 1, 2, and 3 are included in these tables.


                                                46
                                            Table 2
                 Distribution of Sales by Industry: Private Liquidation Sales


Industry                       Percent of Sales Value      Percent of Buyers

Aerospace (SIC 372, 376)       66.8                        36.4

Other Transportation           0                           0
Equipment
Fabricated Metals and          10.1                        22.7
Machinery
Other Manufacturing            0.7                         4.5

Machinery Dealers              22.4                        36.4

Construction                   0                           0

Transportation and Public      0                           0
Utilities
Retail Trade                   0                           0

Services                       0                           0

Individuals                    0                           0

Other                          0                           0

Unknown                        0                           0


Totals                         Sales Value                 Number of Buyers
                               $4,688,528                  22




Geographic Distribution

California                     36.4                        36.4
Rest of U.S.                   54.6                        59.0
Foreign                        9.0                         4.6


Note: Data from Plant 1 are included in this table.


                                                 47
                                              Table 3
                        Distribution of Sales by Industry: Public Auctions


Industry                        Percent of Sales Value         Percent of Buyers

Aerospace (SIC 372, 376)        10.0                           4.6

Other Transportation            2.2                            1.7
Equipment
Fabricated Metals and           33.7                           26.0
Machinery
Other Manufacturing             5.1                            6.2

Machinery Dealers               22.9                           13.9

Construction                    3.4                            3.5

Transportation and Public       1.5                            1.4
Utilities
Retail Trade                    3.8                            3.0

Services                        6.7                            8.0

Individuals                     5.2                            12.6

Other                           0.8                            0.3

Unknown                         4.9                            18.9


Totals                          Sales Value                    Number of Buyers
                                $14,035,080                    1185




Geographic Distribution

California                      72.9                           90.2
Rest of U.S.                    24.8                           9.0
Foreign                         2.3                            0.8


Note: Data from Plants 1, 2, and 3 are included in these tables.


                                                48
                                              Table 4
                     Depreciation Estimates: Geometric Depreciation Model
                    (Heteroscedastic-consistent standard errors in parenthesis)

Parameter                       Homogeneous                Heterogeneous             Preferred Model
                                  Capital                     Capital
C0 (constant term)                14,584.4
                                  (7474.8)
C0 for machine tools                                          18,360.2
                                                              (3699.5)                    17,272.3
C0 for miscellaneous                                           9509.5                     (3192.7)
equipment                                                     (4701.5)
δ (annual depreciation)              0.076
                                    (0.051)
δ on machine tools                                              0.122
                                                               (0.013)                      0.120
δ on miscellaneous                                              0.059                      (0.011)
equipment                                                      (0.031)
δ r (deprec. on rebuilds)                                       0.604                       0.564
                                                               (0.166)                     (0.155)
α (ratio of sales price              0.100
to replacement cost)                (0.073)
α on machine tools                                              0.391
                                                               (0.077)                      0.379
α on miscellaneous                                              0.267                      (0.062)
equipment                                                      (0.041)
α on structures                                                 0.051                       0.049
(assuming 12 % geom.                                           (0.037)                     (0.037)
depreciation)
Brainard-Tobin’s q                   0.179                                            0.473 (excluding
(median good)*                                                                           structures)
Number of                             127                        127                         127
Observations
Log Likelihood                     -1629.91                   -1532.16                    -1532.60
Function
 R2                                  0.303                      0.822                       0.825


The p-value of the likelihood ratio test of the preferred model against the heterogeneous capital
model is 0.83.

                                              C0 + αI m
*Brainard-Tobin’s q was calculated as q =               , where Im is the median reflated original
                                                 Im
acquisition cost.


                                                  49
                                         Table 5
        Distribution of Buyer Type and Mode of Sales in Depreciation Subsample
                        (percentages based on value of purchases)


A. Percent Distribution of Buyer Type by Mode of Sale

                    Private Liquidation Sale       Public Auction                Total
Aerospace                     91.5                       8.5                      100

Other                        25.0                       75.0                     100




B. Percent Distribution of Mode of Sale by Buyer Type

                          Aerospace                     Other                    Total
Private                     74.9                         25.1                     100
Liquidation Sale
Public Auction                8.5                       91.5                     100




                                          50
                                           Table 6
                     Depreciation Estimates by Type of Buyer and Sale
                 (Heteroscedastic-consistent standard errors in parenthesis)

Parameter                    Baseline      By Type of     By Type of      By Buyer
                                              Buyer           Sale        and Sale
                                (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)
C0 (constant term)           16,724.5       21,305.8       22,721.4       24,523.4
                             (3170.8)       (3099.8)       (3173.3)       (3235.9)
δ (annual depreciation         0.120          0.132          0.128          0.133
rate)                         (0.011)        (0.009)        (0.009)         (.008)
δr                             0.549          0.464          0.426          0.458
(depreciation on              (0.150)        (0.082)        (0.059)        (0.060)
rebuilds)
α                             0.380
                             (0.062)
α if sold to aerospace                        0.448          0.419
(col.2),                                     (0.050)        (0.050)
private liquidation
(col.3)
α if sold to outsiders                        0.248          0.182
(col.2),                                     (0.047)        (0.065)
public auction (col.3)
α if sold to aerospace                                                      0.451
in private liquidation                                                     (0.048)
α if sold to aerospace                                                      -0.001
at public auction                                                          (0.095)
α if sold to outsiders at                                                   0.289
private liquidation                                                        (0.025)
α if sold to outsiders at                                                   0.178
public auction                                                             (0.064)
Brainard-Tobin’s q,                           0.564          0.543
(median good)
Aerospace (col. 2),
Liquidation (col.3)
Brainard-Tobin’s q,                           0.364          0.306
Outsiders (col. 2),
Auction (col. 3)
Number of                      125            125            125               125
observations
Log Likelihood               -1485.37       -1480.97       -1480.76       -1478.40
Function
P-value of LRT against                        0.076          0.094
model in column 4


                                             51
                                           Table 7
                            Flexible Functional Form Estimates
                   Dependent variable: log(sales price/reflated original cost)
                       (regressions weighted by reflated original cost)

             By type of buyer                              By mode of sale
Regressor                  Estimate          Regressor                  Estimate

Constant                       -0.173        Constant                       2.948
                              (0.781)                                      (0.783)
Log(real original              -0.097        Log(real original              -0.338
cost)                         (0.063)        cost)                         (0.063)
Dummy for rebuilds             -0.783        Dummy for rebuilds             -0.502
                              (0.183)                                      (0.202)
Age                            -0.080        Age                            -0.105
                              (0.025)                                      (0.031)
Age2                           0.001         Age2                           0.002
                             (0.0005)                                     (0.0006)
Aerospace dummy                1.526         Private liquidation            0.694
                              (0.432)        dummy                         (0.443)
Aerospace*Age                  -0.186        Liquidation*Age                0.018
                              (0.048)                                      (0.039)
Aerospace*Age2                 0.004         Liquidation*Age2             -0.0009
                              (0.001)                                     (0.0007)
Number of                       125          Number of                       125
observations                                 observations
 R2                           0.575           R2                           0.554
P-value on joint              0.0007         P-value on joint              0.009
significance of                              significance of
aerospace terms                              liquidation terms




                                               52
                                Table 8
                  Implied Depreciation Rates by Age
                   (Flexible functional form model)


                  By Buyer                       By Mode of Sale

Age   Aerospace         Outsiders        Private         Public Auction
                                         Liquidation

1     0.225             0.074            0.081           0.096
5     0.192             0.063            0.073           0.082
10    0.148             0.050            0.063           0.063
15    0.102             0.037            0.052           0.045
20    0.053             0.023            0.041           0.026




                                    53
