                            I. Global Factor Service Trade
       Theory strives to be simple, rich, and robust. When it succeeds, it attains extraordinary

influence. No doubt this explains the ubiquity of Heckscher-Ohlin theory in the field of

international trade, particularly in the Factor Price Equalization (FPE) version of Samuelson

(1947).1 Countless theoretical and empirical studies have built on this foundation.2

       The FPE theory’s most impressive feature is its extraordinary ambition. It proposes to

describe, with but a few parameters, and in a unified constellation, the endowments, technologies,

production, absorption, and trade of all countries in the world. This juxtaposition of extraordinary

ambition and parsimonious specification has made the theory irresistible to empirical researchers.3

       1
          Since Samuelson’s work, theorists in the FPE tradition have continued to make
important advances. They have explored the robustness of the original insight and re-interpreted
the model in a manner suitable for empirical implementation. Samuelson (1953) extends the
theory to multiple factors and goods. Jaroslav Vanek (1968) re-interprets the model as one of
trade in factor services. Avinash K. Dixit and Victor A. Norman (1980) formalize an allegory
from Samuelson (1949) to provide the deep economic intuition of the FPE model. Elhanan
Helpman (1981) and Helpman and Paul R. Krugman (1985) demonstrate that the essential
prediction for trade in factor services is robust to a variety of specifications with scale economies
and imperfect competition.
       2
          Just in the last few years it has been the preferred framework for a vigorous discussion of
the impact of international trade on wages and employment [Krugman (1996), Leamer (1995),
Lawrence and Slaughter (1993), Davis (1998)]. Similarly, O’Rourke and Williamson (1994) have
used it to study the consequences of Anglo-American commodity price convergence for factor
price convergence.
       3
          This ambition stands in stark relief when compared to that of the two other approaches
that have dominated research in empirical trade. Leamer (1984) explored the empirical validity of
the H-O model with FPE in the so-called “square” case. This has contributed importantly to our
understanding of trade. However Leamer cautions that, in contrast to HOV empirics, these do not
provide a “complete” test of the model, since it does not employ any data on technology. The
importance of this caution is underscored by the recent work of Bernstein and Weinstein (1997),
which confirms that the estimated parameters of the square model fail to have the structural
interpretation theory imposes. The other principal approach to empirical trade is the gravity
equation. While there are multiple general equilibrium theories that yield a gravity equation,

                                                  2
        In recent years, empirical research has focused on a relatively robust version of the theory,

embodied in the Heckscher-Ohlin-Vanek (HOV) theorem. The HOV theorem yields a simple

prediction: The net export of factor services will be the difference between a country’s

endowment and the endowment typical in the world for a country of that size. The prediction is

elegant, intuitive, and spectacularly at odds with the data.

        Wassily A. Leontief’s (1953) “paradox” is widely regarded as the first blow against the

empirical veracity of the factor proportions theory. Confirmation of the paradox in later work led

Keith E. Maskus (1985) to dub it the “Leontief commonplace.” In one of the most widely-cited

and seemingly-damning studies, Harry P. Bowen et al. (1987) report that the factor services a

country will on net export are no better predicted by measured factor abundance than by a coin

flip.

        In a series of important contributions, Daniel Trefler (1993, 1995) explores a variety of

departures from the standard FPE model. While Trefler’s results appeared promising, Xavier

Gabaix (1997) shows that they fail to bring the theory and data into reasonable congruence.

Donald R. Davis, David E. Weinstein, et al. (1997) do report positive results for the HOV model.

However they accomplish this by restricting the sample for which FPE is assumed to hold to

regions of Japan and by remaining agnostic about the degree to which the FPE framework can be

extended across nations. In sum, a half-century of empirical work has failed to find simple

amendments that allow the theory to provide a unified description of the international data.




empirical implementation typically makes no use whatsoever of the underlying production theory.
Instead it predicts the bilateral trade levels (aggregate or by industry) for given levels of output
across countries.

                                                  3
       Nevertheless, the effort has been instructive. A lasting contribution of Trefler (1995) is his

identification of systematic discrepancies between the theory and the international data. Chief

among these is the so-called “mystery of the missing trade.” In simple terms, the mystery is that

measured factor service trade is an order of magnitude smaller than predicted factor service trade

based on national endowments. To date, the mystery remains one of the great challenges in

understanding the international data (cf. Gabaix 1997).

       The salient feature of the recent research is to ask if parsimonious amendments allow the

model to match the data. The research focuses on two classes of amendments: technology and

absorption. The technological assumptions considered include cross-country differences, either

Hicks-neutral or factor-augmenting, and industry-level economies of scale [Trefler 1993, 1995;

Gabaix 1997; Antweiler and Trefler 1997]. The assumptions about absorption introduce non-

homotheticities, most prominently a home-bias in demand [BLS, Trefler 1995].

       The search for parsimonious amendments that allow the model to work is precisely the

right research strategy. However, the existing literature has one major drawback. The

hypothesized amendments concern technology and absorption. Yet the empirical tests draw on

only a single direct observation on technology (typically that of the United States) and no

observations whatsoever concerning absorption. Hence even if these hypotheses improve the

model’s performance by selected statistical measures, it remains uncertain if the estimated

parameters have a structural interpretation in terms of the economic fundamentals.4

       In the present study, we likewise search for parsimonious amendments that allow the

HOV model to work. However, in contrast to all prior work, we have sufficient data on


       4
           Cf. Helpman (1998).

                                                 4
technology and absorption to estimate the structural parameters directly. Having estimated these

directly from the data of interest, we then impose the resulting restrictions in our tests of the HOV

model. By starting with the basic model and relaxing one assumption at a time, we see precisely

how improvements in our structural model translate into improvements in the fit of the HOV

predictions.

       The results are striking. The step by step introduction of our key hypotheses yields

corresponding improvement in measures of model fit. Countries export their abundant factors and

in approximately the right magnitude. The results are remarkably consistent across variations in

weighting schemes and sample. In sum, the Heckscher-Ohlin-Vanek theory, suitably amended,

receives powerful support in our study.




                                          II. Theory

       The Heckscher-Ohlin-Vanek model of net factor trade is exquisite. Unfortunately, in its

standard form, it does not describe the world that actually exists. Various hypotheses have been

advanced to account for the divergence of theory and data, such as technical differences and

divergences in demand structure. These have so far proved wholly insufficient to bridge the gap

between theory and data. Nonetheless, they are likely to be part of a complete account. We

advance several new hypotheses with the hope of providing a first successful match.

       A successful account should provide a parsimonious and plausible set of departures from

the standard model. In order to understand the role played by each of the assumptions, it is

important, both in the theory and empirics, to begin with the standard model, relaxing the



                                                 5
assumptions one at a time. The theoretical departures are developed in this section and

implemented empirically in the following section.



                                     A. The Standard HOV Model

       We begin by developing the standard HOV model from first principles. Assume that all

countries have identical, constant returns to scale production functions. Markets for goods and

factors are perfectly competitive. There are no barriers to trade and transport costs are zero. The

number of tradable goods is at least as large as the number of primary factors. We assume that the

distribution of these factors across countries is consistent with the world replicating the integrated

equilibrium (cf. Helpman and Krugman 1985). Then factor prices will be equalized, so all

producers will choose the same techniques of production. Let the matrix of total factor inputs for

country c be given by Bc. The foregoing implies that for all countries c:

                         )
               B c'Bc        œ c, c )

These assumptions enable us to use a single country’s technology matrix (in prior studies,

typically that of the US) in order to carry out all factor content calculations. We now can relate

endowments and production:

                                 )
              B cYc'Vc'Bc Yc

The first equality is effectively a factor market clearing condition, while the second embodies the

assumption of FPE.




                                                  6
       The standard demand assumption is based on identical and homothetic preferences across

countries. With free and costless trade equalizing goods prices and FPE equalizing non-traded

goods prices, the demand in a country will be proportional to world net output:


                   Dc'scYW

Pre-multiplying this by the matrix of total factor inputs converts this to the factor contents:

             )             )
          B c D c's cB c Y W's cV W

The first equality follows simply from the assumption of identical homothetic preferences and

common goods prices. The second relies on the fact that FPE insures that all countries use the

common technology matrix Bc'.

       Collecting terms, we can state the two key tests of the standard HOV model:
                                        )
Production Specification (P1) B c Y c ' V c for a specified common technology matrix BcN.
                                    )         )
Trade Specification (T1)         B c T c ' B c (Y c & D c) ' V c & s c V W   œc



                    B. A Common Technology Matrix Measured With Error

       The foregoing assumes that both the true and measured technology matrices are identical

across countries. A glance at the measured technology matrices reveals this is not the case. Before

we pursue more elaborate hypotheses on the nature of actual technological differences, it is worth

investigating the case in which the technology matrices are measured with error. Assume, then,

that the measured technology matrix for country c is given as:


                    B c ' B ,c



                                                   7
where ,c is a matrix of errors.

       Then, depending on the structure of the errors, our best estimate of the true technology

matrix B will be some weighted average technology matrix that we term B̄ . This gives rise to our

second set of tests:

Production Specification (P2)              B̄ Y c ' V c

Trade Specification (T2)          B̄ T c ' V c & s c V W   œc



                               C. Hicks-Neutral Technical Differences

       A wide body of literature, both in productivity and in trade, suggests that there are

systematic cross-country differences in productivity, even among the richest countries [e.g.

Jorgenson and Kuroda (1990)]. This is very likely an important reason why Trefler (1995) found

that the data suggests poor countries are “abundant” in all factors and vice versa for the rich

countries. Bowen, et al. (1987) and Trefler (1995) have focused attention on Hicks-Neutral

technical differences as a parsimonious way to capture these effects. Under this hypothesis, the

technologies of countries differ only by a Hicks-neutral shift term. This can be characterized via

country-specific technology shifts 8c:


                B c 8 ' 8c B      œc

In order to implement an amended HOV equation, it is convenient to think of the productivity

differences as reflecting efficiency differences of the factors themselves (rather than technology

per se). For example, if we take the US as a base and US factors are twice as productive as Italian

factors, then 8Italy E = 2. In general, we can express a country’s endowments in efficiency terms:



                                                      8
                            Vc
                    VcE '        œc
                            8c
The standard HOV equation then holds when the endowments of each country are expressed in

efficiency units:

Production Specification (P3)            B Y c ' VcE

Trade Specification (T3)         B T c ' V cE & s c V WE   œc

All succeeding models and the associated empirical specifications will be in efficiency units,

although we will henceforth suppress the superscript E for simplicity.



                                        D. Continuum Model

        So far we have allowed differences in input coefficients across countries only as a Hicks-

neutral shift. For cases of adjusted FPE, this implies that capital to labor ratios are fixed by

industry across countries. However, there is good reason to believe this is not the case. The

simple Rybczynski relation suggests that countries with a relatively large stock of capital should

have an output mix shifted toward relatively capital intensive goods, but with FPE they should not

use different input coefficients within any individual sector. Baumol, Dollar and Wolff (1988)

estimated cross-country differences in capital to labor usage and found this was correlated with

country capital abundance. They interpreted this as evidence against the FPE model, although

they recognized that aggregation might be a problem. We develop this insight in a model that

accounts for the positive relation between country and industry capital to labor usage, yet

preserves (approximate) FPE and the simple HOV prediction. This is valuable in that it will

provide a first set of theoretical insights that help us to understand why the mystery of the missing


                                                    9
trade might arise in previous data exercises, even if the HOV prediction is being met. In the

following section we will go on to consider the question of how to pursue the problem if indeed

FPE has broken down.

       In order to make our discussion compact, we will provide only a sketch of the model that

provides the essential insights. Consider as a starting point the Dornbusch-Fischer-Samuelson

(1980) continuum Heckscher-Ohlin model. Goods are arrayed on the unit interval with continuous

and strictly increasing capital to labor ratios by sector. We consider first the integrated equilibrium

(cf. Helpman and Krugman 1985). The FPE set is depicted in Figure 1 as a “Deardorff lens,”

reflecting the factor intensities and usages for the corresponding sectors.5 Assume that the point

dividing the world endowments between the two countries lies within the FPE set. The factor

content of production for each country is its endowment Vc. With identical homothetic

preferences, common goods prices, and production with the integrated equilibrium techniques, the

factor content of absorption is sc VW. Together these yield the standard HOV prediction for the net

factor content of trade: Vc ! sc VW. However we also know that with more goods than factors, the

pattern of goods production, so also the pattern of goods trade, is not determinate.6

       In order to make the trade and production patterns determinate, we resort to an artifice

originally introduced by Samuelson (1954) and considered within the continuum framework by

Xu (1993). Imagine that all goods have iceberg transport costs, so that if J > 1 units are shipped,



       5
           See Deardorff (1994).
       6
        The relative number of goods versus factors may appear to be an esoteric, nearly
imponderable concept. Not so. Bernstein and Weinstein (1997) show that a framework in which
the number of goods exceeds the number of factors is a very useful way to think about the
determinacy of production patterns in regional versus international data.

                                                  10
only one unit arrives. We will think of these trade costs as being strictly positive but arbitrarily

small. Goods prices will be arbitrarily close to those of the integrated equilibrium, as will

absorption and so the net factor content of trade. However, as Samuelson suggested, trade will be

arranged so as to minimize trade costs. Since all goods are assumed to have the same proportional

costs, this is equivalent to minimizing the volume of trade subject to achieving (approximately)

the HOV-required net factor content. This problem has a very simple solution: insofar as possible,

the capital abundant country will concentrate its exports among the very most capital intensive

goods (call them the X-goods), the labor abundant country will concentrate its exports among the

most labor-intensive goods (call them the Y-goods). Goods of intermediate factor intensity (N-

goods) will not be traded. Thus the real equilibrium features a pattern of perfect specialization in

the goods that are (in equilibrium) traded. The capital abundant home country produces only X

(its export) and N, while the labor abundant country produces only Y (its export) and N.

        Of course, one will find such extreme production specialization nowhere in real data. So

we must discuss how the empirical industries in our data sets match up with the real equilibrium

described above. It is well-known that the industrial classification system was not designed with

the concerns of Heckscher-Ohlin researchers in mind. Hence actual industrial classification, in

contrast to our theoretical industries, includes goods of very heterogeneous capital to labor ratios.

Consider two industries, 1 and 2. Assume that on average industry 1 has a tendency to include the

more capital intensive goods, but that it actually includes goods from Y, N, and X. Similarly,

assume industry 2 tends to include more goods in the labor intensive sectors, but also includes

goods from Y, N, and X. For simplicity, assume the densities for sectors 1 and 2 are uniform over




                                                  11
each of the intervals Y, N, and X (taken separately). A schematic representation appears in Figure

2.

        Think now about how previous tests have been implemented. Call the capital abundant

country the US. Prior tests have used the US technology matrix to measure the factor content of

trade. Consider how the input coefficients are constructed for the empirical US industry 1. Let BX

be the column of average input coefficients for goods in the X sector and BN be the column of

average input coefficients for goods in the the N sector. Then the measured input coefficients for

sector 1 will be:

                              B1 = R1 BX + (1 ! R1)BN + 0 BY

The weight R1 is determined by the X-sector’s weight in US output in sector 1 and we include the

zero-weighted term BY to emphasize that it does not figure at all into calculation of the US

technical coefficients. Note that the coefficients so estimated are a weighted average of the goods

that the US actually exports (X) and goods with much more labor-intensive coefficients (N). That

is, the estimated technology matrix will tend to understate the capital content and overstate the

labor content of US exports. The consequence is to bias our measures of net factor trade toward

zero. A parallel calculation for industry 2 would reveal the same downward bias in the US net

factor content.

        Now consider what happens if we apply the coefficients B1 taken from the US to exports

by the labor abundant country. Again, B1 is a weighted average of US input coefficients in N and

X. But the labor abundant country exports only Y goods — which are more labor intensive than

either X or N. That is, use of the measured US technology matrix will strongly overstate the

capital content of the labor abundant country’s exports, while underestimating the labor content.


                                                 12
Use of the US technology matrix biases measures of the factor content of trade in both countries

toward zero.

       While the theoretical model is special in some respects, it does highlight two insights that

we believe are more general than this example. The first is a pointed reminder that goods

produced in different countries that are classified in the same industrial categories need not be the

same goods at all. When we ignore this fact, we may well miss an important component of net

factor trade. Second, insofar as trade in factor services is one motive for trade, when there are

many goods that could embody this factor service trade, there will be an incentive to focus

exports among those goods most intensively using the abundant factors. Hence average input

coefficients for any country are likely to understate the true factor content of trade.7

       How would one know whether these theoretical problems are a real feature of the data?

One consequence would be that industry factor usage will vary systematically with country capital

abundance. We will explore this more fully below when we estimate the extent to which this

affects factor ratios by industry across countries. The consequence here is twofold. First, we have

to recognize that the technology matrices will differ systematically by country capital abundance,

and so construct technology matrices that reflect this. Second, we will likewise need to recognize

that the factor content of absorption must be measured bilaterally with the producing country’s

technology matrix. With these two points in mind, it is relatively simple to derive the key

expressions:



       7
          In the test that follows, we will focus on the resulting specialization. With the present
data we are not able to examine directly the difference between average and marginal capital
intensity of the relevant sectors. We do hope to look at this further based on microeconomic data
on inputs and trade behavior at the firm level.

                                                  13
Production Specification (P4)                 B cDFS Y c ' V c


                                       B cDFS Y c & B cDFS D cc % j B c DFS M cc ' V c & s c V W
                                                                         )      )
Trade Specification (T4)
                                                                 c…c )
where the superscript in B cDFS reflects the fact that in the continuum of goods, Dornbusch-

Fischer-Samuelson model, the unit input requirements in the tradable goods sectors will vary in

accordance with the country’s capital to labor ratio.



                           E. Case Without Factor Price Equalization

       Helpman (1998) proposes an account of the missing trade in the same spirit as the

continuum model but which focuses on more substantial departures from FPE and the existence of

specialization “cones” of production in tradables. One consequence of this is that the common set

of non-traded goods will be produced using different techniques. In turn, this will affect our HOV

factor content predictions. We now consider the implications.8

       To arrive at a definite result, we need to apply a little more structure on demand than is

standard. Consider a world with any number of countries, two factors (capital and labor) and in

which the extent of differences in endowments is sufficient that at least some countries do not

share factor price equalization. We do not restrict the number of non-traded goods, although we

assume that the number of traded goods is sufficiently large that we can safely ignore boundary

goods produced by countries in adjoining production cones with different production techniques.

Define a country c’s technology matrix at equilibrium factor prices as Bc = [BcN BcT], where the


       8
         Wood (1994) likewise emphasizes that input coefficients differ within the same industry
for goods produced in a developing country as opposed to a developed country. His work
addresses the consequence of this for studies of wage changes linked to the factor content of
imports rather than using it to think about tests of HOV.

                                                 14
                                                                                              Y cN
division is between non-tradables and tradables. Let output be similarly divided, so Y c '       .
                                                                                           Y cT
Then the factor content of production, by factor market clearing, is Bc Yc = Vc. If we separate out

non-tradables and rearrange, we get BcT YcT = Vc ! BcN YcN. Let us term the expression on the

right Vc ! BcN YcN / VcT, so that BcT YcT = VcT. With no FPE, the price of non-traded goods in

terms of tradables will typically differ across countries. Assume that preferences in all countries

between tradables and non-tradables are similar and Cobb-Douglas, so feature fixed expenditure

shares. Let sc be country c’s share of world income (in units of tradables). Then it follows that sc

is also c’s share of world spending on tradables.

       Assume that preferences across countries for tradables are identical and homothetic. The

absorption by country c of tradable goods produced in cN is then DccNT = sc YcNT. The factor content

of this absorption, using the factors actually engaged in production of the good, is BcNT DccN = sc

BcNT YcNT = sc VcNT. Define VWT / 3c VcT and note that for c … cN, DccNT / MccN (imports). Then it

follows that:

BcT YcT ! [BcT DccT + 3cN…c BcNT MccN] = VcT G sc VWT.

That is, under the conditions stated above, we get something very like the simple HOV equation

so long as we restrict ourselves to world endowments devoted to tradable production and weight

absorption according to the actual coefficients employed in production.

       We now need to contemplate the implications of this model for what we will observe in

the data. We know that input coefficients both in tradables and in non-tradables will differ across

countries. The failure of FPE plays a role in both cases, but they have important differences. The

input coefficients differ in tradables because the failure of FPE has led the countries to specialize




                                                    15
in different goods. They differ in non-tradables because the same goods are produced with

different factor proportions. Let us expand the equation above:

BcT YcT ! [BcT DccT + 3cN…c BcNT MccN] = VcT G sc VWT = [Vc ! BcN YcN] ! sc [3cN {VcN ! BcNN YcNN}]

The RHS of this equation can be re-arranged to be:

= [Vc ! sc VW ] ! [BcN YcN ! sc 3cN BcNN YcNN]

If we denote by VcN the resources devoted in country c to production of non-tradable goods (and

correspondingly for the world), then our production and trade tests can be written as:

Production Specification (P5)          BcK Yc = Vc

Trade Specification (T5):

                       BcT YcT ! [BcT DccT + 3cN…c BcNT MccN] = [Vc ! sc VW ] ! [VcN ! sc VWN]

where the superscript in BcK reflects the fact that in the no-FPE model, all input coefficients in a

country’s technology matrix will vary according to the country’s capital to labor ratio.

       The first term on the RHS in T5 is the standard HOV prediction, while the second is an

adjustment that accounts for departures in factor usage in non-tradable goods from the world

average. Note, for example that a capital abundant country will have high wages, inducing

substitution in non-tradables toward capital. The second term in brackets will typically be positive

then for the case of capital, meaning that the simple HOV prediction overstates how much trade

there really ought to be in capital services. In the same case, the actual labor usage in non-

tradables is less than the world average, and so the simple HOV equation will tend to overstate

the expected level of labor service imports. In both cases, the new prediction for factor service

trade will be less than that of the simple HOV model.




                                                  16
                                      F. Demand, HOV, and Gravity

        Among the more outlandish simplifications in the HOV model is the assumption that

international trade is wholly costless. This is false on its face and overwhelmingly refuted by the

data [McCallum (1995), Engel and Rogers (1995)]. There is a highly successful model of trade

volumes known as the “gravity” model that does take trade costs into account, typically proxied

by distance [Anderson (1979), Bergstrand (1985), Frankel, et al. (1996)]. However, the gravity

model has not appeared previously in empirical tests of the HOV factor content predictions. The

reason is that the bilateral trade relations posited in the gravity model are not typically well

defined in a many-country HOV model [see Deardorff (1998) and Trefler (1998)]. However, they

are well defined in the production model we have developed precisely because all countries

feature perfect specialization in tradables.9 In this case, the demand for imports bilaterally has to

be amended to account for bilateral distance. Let dccN be the distance between countries c and cN.

Then a simple way to introduce trade costs is to posit that import demand in country c for

products from cN takes the form of a standard gravity equation:
                               c c)                  Tc    c)                       c c)
                          ln Mi       ' "0i %"1i ln s i Xi      % *i lndc c ) % ln .i

where siTc is total domestic absorption (of final and intermediate goods) as a share of world gross

output, XicN is gross output in sector i in country cN, the "’s and the * are parameters to be

estimated, and . is a log normal error term. We can then estimate the log form of this equation to

obtain parameter estimates. These can then be used to generate predicted imports, M̂cc .



        9
         Rather than provide the full derivation here, readers interested in learning more about
how the gravity can be integrated into our framework should see Anderson (1979). Anderson
provides a cogent and clear analysis of how a gravity equation with a negative coefficient on
distance can be derived in a world with perfect specialization and Cobb-Douglas utility.

                                                      17
Reversing the sign of this matrix then gives us predicted bilateral exports. While the gravity

model is quite successful at predicting bilateral import flows, own demand seems to be determined

by a quite different process (see McCallum (1995)). Rather than trying to model this process

directly, we decided to solve the problem with a two-step procedure. First we assumed that total

demand in each sector is equal to a country’s share of world demand for final goods times world

demand in that sector. We then set demand for domestically produced goods as equal to the

difference between its total demand and predicted imports from the gravity equation.

       Measured net factor trade will be exactly the same as in T5 above. However, in this case

the predicted factor content of absorption of tradables is no longer sc VWT. Instead the predictions

for bilateral absorption must be those generated by the gravity specification, weighted by the

factor usage matrices appropriate to each partner. Let carets indicate fitted values. This gives rise

to:

Trade Specification (T6)


B cK Y cK & B cK D cc % j B c K M cc ' V c & B cK D̂ % j B c K M̂ cc
                                )     )                cc           )      )


                       c)… c                                c)… c




                               III. Data Sources and Issues

                                          A. Data Sources

       An important contribution of our study is the development of a rich new data set for

testing trade theories. This has been a major project on its own. We believe that the data set we

develop is superior to that available in prior studies in numerous dimensions. The mechanics of



                                                 18
construction of the data set are detailed in a Data Appendix. Here we provide a brief description

of the data and a discussion of the practical and conceptual advances.

       The basis for our data set is the OECD’s Input-Output Datase [OECD (1995)]. This

database provides input-output tables, gross output, net output, intermediate input usage,

domestic absorption and trade data for ten OECD countries.10 Significantly, all of this data is

designed to be compatible across countries. We constructed the country endowment data and the

matrices of direct factor input requirements using the OECD’s Inter-Sectoral Database and the

OECD’s STAN Database. Hence for all countries, we have data on technology, net output,

endowments, absorption, and trade. By construction, these satisfy:

1)     Bc Yc = Vc.

2)     Yc - Dc = Tc

       We also have data for 20 other countries that we refer to as the “Rest of the World” or

ROW.11 Data on capital is derived from the Summers and Heston Database while that for labor is

from the International Labor Organization. For countries that do not report labor force data for

1985 we took a labor force number corresponding to the closest year and assumed that the labor

force grew at the same rate as the population. Gross output data is taken from the UN’s Industrial

Statistics Yearbook, as modified by DWBS. Net output is calculated by multiplying gross output

by the GDP weighted average input-output matrix for the OECD and subtracting this from the


       10
       Australia, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Netherlands, United
Kingdom, and the United States. These are the ten available in the IO database.
       11
           Argentina, Austria, Belgium, Finland, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Korea, Mexico,
New Zealand, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Singapore, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Thailand,
and Turkey. These are the countries for which either gross output or value added is available for
all sectors.

                                                 19
gross output vector. Bilateral trade flows for manufacturing between each of our ten OECD

countries as well as between each country and the ROW was drawn from Feenstra, Lipsey, and

Bowen (1997) and scaled so that bilateral industry import totals match country totals from the IO

tables. Bilateral imports for non-manufacturing sectors are set equal to the share of

manufacturing imports from that country times total non-manufacturing imports in that sector.12

ROW absorption was then set to satisfy condition 2.13

       In sum, this data set provides us with 10 sets of compatible technology matrices, output

vectors, trade vectors, absorption vectors, and endowment vectors. In addition we have a data

set for the ROW that is comparable in quality to that used in earlier studies.



                                           B. Data Issues

       We would emphasize several characteristics of the data to underscore its advantage over

prior data sets. The first draws on the nature of the tests considered. The prior work is uniform in

rejecting the simplest HOV model. Hence the most interesting work has gone on to consider



       12
        This is not ideal, but given that the median ratio of imports to gross output in non-
manufacturing for our sample of countries is 1 percent, this is not likely to introduce large errors.
       13
           It is reasonable to ask why we aggregated the ROW into one entity rather than working
with each country separately. A major strength of this paper is that our data are compatible and
of extremely high quality. Unfortunately, the output and endowment data for the ROW countries
are extremely noisy (See Summers and Heston for a discussion of problems with the endowment
data). It is quite difficult to match UN data with OECD IO data because of aggregation issues,
varying country industry definitions, and various necessary imputations (see DWBS for details on
what calculations were necessary). As a result, the output and absorption numbers of any
individual country in the ROW is measured with far more error than OECD data. To the extent
that these errors are unbiased, we mitigate these measurement errors when we aggregate the
ROW. Ultimately we decided that we did not want to pollute a high quality data set with a large
number of poorly measured observations.

                                                 20
alternative hypotheses. Importantly, the most prominent of these theories concern alterations in

assumptions about technological similarity across countries (e.g. Hicks-neutral technical

differences) and the structure of absorption (e.g. a home bias in demand). Yet typically these

studies have only a single observation on technology (that of the US) and no observations

whatsoever about the structure of absorption. The technological and absorption parameters are

chosen to best fit the statistical model, but these yield little confidence that they truly do reflect

the economic parameters of interest.14 Our construction of the technology matrices allows us to

test the theories of technological difference directly on the relevant data and similarly for our

hypotheses about absorption. This ability to directly test the cross-country theories of interest

greatly enhances our confidence that the estimated technology and absorption parameters indeed

do correspond to the economic variables of interest.

        A second issue is the consistency with which the data is handled. In part this corresponds

to the fact that we are able to rely to a great extent on data sources constructed by the OECD

with the explicit aim to be as consistent as practicable across sources. In addition, the OECD has

made great efforts to insure that the mapping between output data and trade categories is sound.

Finally, the consistency extends also to conditions we impose on the data which should hold as

simple identities, but which have failed to hold in previous studies because of the inconsistencies

in disparate data sets. These restrictions include that each country actually uses its own raw

technology matrix, reflected in BcYc / Vc.15



        14
             Helpman (1998).
        15
        See the discussion in BLS of related difficulties. The only exception to this is the ROW
where we were forced to use an estimated B. See section IV for details.

                                                   21
        We would also like to note, though, that the desire to bring new data sources to bear on

the problem has carried a cost. Specifically, the factors available to us for this study are limited to

capital and aggregate labor. We would very much have liked to be able to distinguish skilled and

unskilled workers, but unfortunately the number of skilled and unskilled workers by industry is

not available for most countries.

        We would like to note how the reader should think about this factor “aggregate labor,”

and why we do not believe this presents too great a problem for our study. There are at least a

couple of interpretations that can be given. A first fact about our labor variable is that under most

specifications the OECD countries are judged scarce in labor while the ROW is abundant in it.

This suggests that one appropriate interpretation is that our variable labor is a very rough proxy

for unskilled or semi-skilled labor. Note, though, that in most of our later implementations, labor

is converted to efficiency units. If this is an appropriate way to merge skilled and unskilled, then

the fact that these OECD countries are scarce in it suggests that this is true, even when we

convert all labor to common efficiency units. We have little doubt that if it were possible to

distinguish highly-skilled labor separately for our study that the US and some of the other OECD

countries would be judged abundant in that factor.

        These reservations notwithstanding, we believe that there are good reasons to believe that

choice of factors does not confer an advantage to us over prior studies. Many of the factors we

omit are land or mineral factors, which were the best performers for BLS and Trefler (1995).

Hence their omission should only work against us. As we will see below, the factors that we do

include exhibit precisely the pathologies (e.g. “mystery of the missing trade”) that have




                                                  22
characterized the data in prior studies. Both points argue that selection of factors should not

prejudice the results of our study.

        In sum, we have constructed a rich new data set with compatible data for 10 OECD

countries across a wide range of relevant variables. Importantly, we introduce to this literature

direct testing on technology and absorption data of the central economic hypotheses in contest.

Finally, although in some respects the available data fell short of our ideal, we do not believe that

this introduces any bias toward favorable results.




             IV. Statistical Tests on Technology and Absorption

        The principal hypotheses that distinguish alternative implementations of HOV concern

technology and absorption. In prior work, researchers have selected technological and absorption

parameters designed to allow the model of net factor trade to work as well as possible. Little data

on technology (only that of the US) and no data on absorption were employed.

        By contrast, our principal statistical tests will work directly with the data on technology

and absorption. We consider a variety of models of technology and absorption suggested by

theory and select a preferred model for each. In this respect, the formal statistical tests in this

paper will be complete once we have selected the preferred models. Nonetheless, both because

the principal concern of trade economists here is in measures of net factor trade, and also for

direct comparability with prior studies, in Section V we will go on to implement each of the

models of technology and absorption. In doing so, we will gain a rich view of the role played by

each change in improving the working of the HOV model. For reference, we will indicate the

production specification associated with the distinct models of technology.

                                                   23
                                     A. Estimating Technology

       Our first model of technology (P1) is the standard starting point in all investigations of

HOV: it postulates that all countries use identical production techniques in all sectors. This can

be tested directly using our data. For any countries c and cN, it should be the case that Bc = Bc' .

We reject this restriction by inspection.

       One possible reason for cross-country differences in measured production techniques is

simple measurement error (P2). The Italian aircraft industry is four times as capital intensive as

the US industry. While this may indicate different production techniques, the fact that net output

in US aircraft is approximately 200 times larger than in Italy raises the question of whether the

same set of activities are being captured in the Italian data. This raises a more general point that is

readily visible in the data. Namely extreme outliers in measured Bc tend to be inversely related to

sector size. In tests of trade and production theory this is likely to produce problems when

applying one country’s technology matrix to another country. If sectors that are large in the US

tend to be small abroad, then evaluating the factor content of foreign production using the US

matrix is likely to magnify measurement error. Large foreign sectors are going to be precisely the

ones that are measured with greatest error in the US.

       A simple solution to this problem is to postulate that all countries use identical

technologies but each measured Bc is drawn from a random distribution centered on a common B.

If we postulate that

                                               Bc = B,c

where we assume that ,c is distributed log normally. This can relationship can be estimated by

running the following regression:


                                                  24
                                                 c          c
                                            ln Bfi ' $fi % ,fi


here $fi are parameters to be estimated corresponding to the log of common factor input

requirement for factor f in sector i. We can contemplate two sources of heteroskedasticity. The

first arises because larger sectors tend to be measured more accurately than smaller sectors. The

second arises because percentage errors are likely to be larger in sectors that use less of a factor

than sectors that use more of a factor. In order to correct for this heteroskedasticity, in all

regressions we weighted all observations by the square root of the log of value added multiplied

by B fi / B f where B fi corresponds to the average factor intensity in sector i and B f corresponds


to the average factor intensity across all sectors.16

        As we noted earlier, there is good reason to believe that there are efficiency differences,

even among the rich countries. A convenient specification is to allow for Hicks-Neutral technical

differences (P3). If we denote these differences by 8c, then we can econometrically identify these

technical differences by estimating:

                                             c                   c
                                        ln Bfi ' 2c % $fi % Rfi


where exp(2 c) = 8c. Estimation of this specification requires us to choose a normalization for the

2 c. A convenient one is to set 2 US equal to zero (or equivalently 8US = 1)

        We have also suggested that it might be possible that production might be characterized

by a continuum of goods DFS model in which industry input coefficients in tradables depend on



        16
             Sectors with no value added were given a zero weight in our regressions.

                                                     25
country capital abundance (P4). The latter feature may arise also if FPE breaks down and

countries are in different production cones (P4), in which case this will affect production

coefficients in non-traded sectors as well. These models can be easily implemented. We postulate

that input coefficients are characterized by the following equation:



                                      c                       Kc    c
                                 ln Bfi ' 2c % $fi % (fi ln        Nfi
                                                              Lc



Once again we need to choose a normalization. A convenient choice is that country capital-to-

labor ratios should not affect country productivity levels. This is tantamount to requiring that


                                          ∑γ   fi   =0
                                          fi
.
This last specification can be estimated either in an unpooled specification in which we allow each

sector to have a different (fi or in a pooled specification in which we only allow the (fi to vary by

factor and whether the good is traded or non-traded.

       Table 1 presents the results of estimating these equations. As one can see in all

specifications the 2c’s (8c’s) are estimated very precisely and seem to have plausible values. The

US is the most productive country with a 8c of unity and Italy is the least productive with a 8c of

about two. Interestingly, one also sees that industry capital-to-labor ratios seem to move in

concert with country capital-to-labor ratios. Our Schwartz model selection criterion clearly

favors the pooled model with neutral technical differences and no factor price equalization (P5).17


       17
          Implicitly, we are assuming no problems arising from the fact that we had to impute
certain elements of our technology matrix. There are two points to bear in mind on this point.
First, since our imputation method replaced missing values with average international values, this

                                                     26
The continuum model seems to be not only the statistical model of choice, but very important

economically as well. The estimated coefficients indicate that a one percent increase in the

country’s capital-to-labor ratio typically raises each industry ratios by about 0.85 percent. Given

that capital-to-labor ratios move by a factor of two across the ten countries for which we have IO

data, this translates into large systematic movements in unit input coefficients across countries and

within industries.

       Furthermore, we can use this approach to test for factor price equalization within our

model. If (approximate) FPE holds, then specialization in traded goods may give rise to the

observed differences in input coefficients within industries across countries. However, in the non-

traded goods sector there should be no systematic variation in factor input ratios. Our estimates

indicate that a one percent increase in a country’s capital-to-labor ratio corresponds to a 0.8

percent increase in capital intensity in tradables and a 0.9 percent increase in non-tradables.18

Furthermore in both sectors we can reject the hypothesis that input coefficients are independent of

country capital-to-labor ratios.

       Hence, the technology data strongly support the hypothesis that the OECD production

structure can be best explained by a model of specialization in tradables with Hicks-neutral

technical differences and no factor price equalization (P5).



tended to work against models P3-P5. Second, when we tried industry by industry estimation of
   c  c
BKi/BLi on a constant and Kc/Lc we found a very strong positive relationship between industry and
country capital intensity in almost every sector even when we dropped all constructed data.
       18
          The evidence here that capital to labor ratios employed in non-traded production rise
systematically with country capital abundance strongly suggests the existence of underlying
differences in wage to rental ratios. This provides an interesting counterpoint to the results of
Repetto and Ventura (1997).

                                                  27
                                          B. Estimating Demand

        In the theoretical section we introduced our gravity model:
                               c c)                  Tc    c)                       c c)
                          ln Mi       ' "0i %"1i ln s i Xi      % *i lndc c ) % ln .i


In a zero trade cost world with perfect specialization, we have the following parameter

restrictions, "0i = *i = 0. If there are trade costs that increase with distance, these parameter

restrictions cease to hold. We can statistically test for the existence of trade costs simply by

estimating this equation and testing whether "0i = *i = 0 for all i. Not surprisingly, the data

resoundingly reject this hypothesis.

        We therefore decided to use a gravity model as the basis for our demand predictions. One

of the problems that we faced in implementation, however, was how to calculate the distance of

any individual country to the ROW. In all specifications we calculated this distance as the GDP-

weighted average distance from a particular country to all the other countries in the ROW. In

some sectors we found large systematic errors in predicting trade with the ROW. This may be the

result of mis-measurement of distance or the fact that the true ROW is some multiple of our

sample of countries. We therefore added a dummy variable corresponding to the exporting

country being the ROW and a dummy corresponding to the importing country being the ROW.

        Other than this, the results of our estimation of the gravity model are entirely

conventional. Typically "1i is close to one in most specifications and *i is significant and negative

in all sectors. We statistically reject the hypothesis of costless trade. We will incorporate the new

gravity-based absorption model into trade specification T7.




                                                      28
       One concern is that by employing a gravity specification, we are allowing the data to

generate the “prediction.” We share this concern but believe that on balance our approach is

sensible for several reasons. First, costs of trade are an obviously important feature of the world

which cannot be ignored if there is to be any hope of matching theory and data. Second, it is

inevitable that any manner of considering the consequences of trade costs will have to use the data

if only to calculate import demand elasticities and relate these to primitive measures of trade costs

-- approaches which have serious drawbacks of their own. Third, both the theory and our results

on technology strongly endorse a gravity specification as the appropriate way to introduce trade

costs precisely because they have led us to a model with specialization in tradables. Finally, each

industry gravity regression has 110 observations of bilateral imports, which are used to estimate

just five parameters. In short, we have deliberately treated the data with a light hand in order to

avoid unduly prejudicing the results.




                       V. Implications for Net Factor Trade

       If one takes a narrow statistical approach to the data, our work is done. Trade is a model

of production and absorption. The production model has been tested using the technology

matrices and the evidence clearly favors production hypothesis P5, which in turn underlies trade

models T5 through T7. Furthermore, anyone familiar with the log form of the a gravity model

knows that the constant term is not zero and that distance enters negatively. Hence, from a

statistical point of view, model T7, which postulates a continuum model, no-FPE, and trade costs,

is preferred. Why bother reading on?



                                                 29
       The reason is that the trade literature is replete with proposed amendments to the HOV

model that in the end do not help us to understand actual factor service flows. We have already

evaluated the hypotheses statistically, so in this section we examine the extent to which these

hypotheses help us to understand real world factor trade flows. In order to understand the

economic significance of our models, we conduct tests of the HOV model of production and trade

under a variety of specifications, as developed in Section II and summarized in Table 2. Here our

tests are designed not for model selection, but rather to help us see the economic implications for

the HOV model of each of the hypotheses that we have considered. We will begin by working

primarily on the production side. Once we have made the major improvements we anticipate in

that area, we move on to consider an amendment to the absorption model.



                                  A. Production and Trade Tests

       For each specification, we provide two tests of the production model. In all cases the

technology matrices that we use are based on the fitted values obtained in the previous section.

Furthermore, we express both measured and predicted factor content numbers as a share of world

endowments in efficiency units. This adjustment eliminates the units problem and enables us to

plot both factors in the same graph. The production Slope Test examines specifications P1 to P5

by regressing the measured factor content of production (MFCP) on the predicted factor content

of production (PFCP). For example, in specification P1 this involves a regression of BYc on Vc.

The hypothesized slope is unity, which we would like to see measured precisely and with good fit.

The Median Error Test examines the absolute prediction error as a proportion of the predicted

factor content of production. For example, for P1 this is *B US Y c & V c* / V c .


                                                  30
       We provide three tests of the trade model. The first is the Sign Test. It asks simply if

countries are measured to be exporting services of the factors that we predict they are exporting,

i.e. is sign MFCT ' sign PFCT ? For example, in trade specification T1, it asks if

sign B f T c ' sign V fc & s c V fW . The statistic reported is the proportion of sign matches. The

trade Slope Test examines specifications T1 to T5 by regressing the MFCT on the PFCT. For

example, in specification T1 this involves a regression of BfTc on (Vfc ! sc VfW). The hypothesized

slope is again unity, which we would like to see measured precisely and with good fit. The

Variance Ratio Test examines the ratio Var(MFCT)/Var(PFCT). One indicator of “missing

trade” is when this ratio is close to zero, whereas if the model fit perfectly the variance ratio

would be unity. We also consider several robustness checks.

       Before turning to our own results, it is well to have in mind how the HOV model has fared

under these tests in prior work. Results from the most relevant studies are summarized in Table 3.

The results lend themselves to a simple bottom line: All prior studies on international data have

failed disastrously by at least one of these measures.

       We now turn to tests of our various production and trade specifications.



               B. The Simple HOV Model Employing US Technology: P1 and T1

       We have the same point of departure as prior studies: an assumption that all countries

share a common technology matrix and an implementation that uses that of the United States.

However, our study is the first to examine directly the production component of this model. As

one can see in Table 4, specification P1 fails miserably, but in an interesting way. A plot of P1 for

all countries appears as Figure 3. The US is excluded, since it fits perfectly by construction. A


                                                  31
glance at the plot reveals two key facts. First, for all countries and factors, measured factor

content of production is always less than predicted. Second, this gap is most severe for ROW.

This carries a simple message: if these countries used the US technology matrix to produce their

actual output, they would need much less of each factor than they actually employ. The slope

coefficient of measured on predicted factor trade is only 0.24. Excluding the ROW raises the

slope coefficient to 0.67, still well short of the theoretical prediction of unity. The results by factor

are presented in Table 5. The median prediction error is 34 percent for capital and 42 percent for

labor. Thus our direct data on production suggest strongly that adjusting for productivity

differences will be an important component in getting HOV to work.

        Now consider trade specification T1. A plot appears as Figure 4. Factor abundance

correctly predicts the sign of measured net factor trade only 32 percent of the time. This is

significantly worse than relying on a coin flip! 19 The variance ratio is 0.0005, indicating that the

variance of the predicted factor content of trade is about two-thousand times that of measured.

This is missing trade big-time! And the slope coefficient is zero (actually !0.0022, s.e. = 0.0048).

        Since the production specification P1 performs so poorly, it is perhaps no surprise that the

trade specification T1 is likewise a debacle. Nonetheless, this provides an extremely important

baseline for our study precisely because it reveals that our data exhibit all of the pathologies that

plague prior studies. Hence we can rule out that changes in the country sample, aggregation of

many countries into a composite ROW, or the selection of productive factors suffice to account

for positive results that may follow.




        19
             This does worse than a coin flip at the 7 percent level of significance.

                                                    32
                          C. An Average Technology Matrix: P2 and T2

       Examination of specification P1 strongly suggested that the US technology matrix is an

outlier. Is it useful to think of there being an average technology matrix B̄ that is a good

approximation to a common technology? That is the question explored in specifications P2 and

T2. If we focus first on regressions based on our ten OECD countries, the slope rises sharply to

1.27, reflecting most strongly the influence of high productivity in the US. If we exclude the US

as well, the slope falls to about 0.90. The R2 in each case is respectably above 0.9. Also, in both

cases, the median production errors are approximately 20 percent. The ROW continues to be a

huge outlier, given its significantly lower productivity. These results suggest that use of an

average technology matrix is a substantial improvement over using that of the US, since median

production errors fall by one-third to one-half. Nonetheless, the fact that prediction errors are still

on the order of 20 percent for the OECD group, and much larger for the ROW, suggests that

there remains a lot of room for improvement.

       Examination of T2 can be brief. The sign test correctly predicts the direction of net factor

trade only 45 percent of the time. The variance ratio continues to be essentially zero, again

indicating strong missing trade. The Slope Test coefficient is !0.006. In short, factor abundance

continues to provide essentially no information about which factors a country will be measured to

export. These statistics are reinforced by the pictures in Figure 5 and Figure 6. Overall, this

model is a complete empirical failure.




                                                  33
                                 D. Hicks-Neutral Technical Differences: P3 and T3

          Specifications P3 and T3 are predicated on the existence of Hicks-neutral differences in

efficiency across countries.20 The estimation of these efficiency differences is discussed above in

Section IV and here we view the implementation. A plot of P3 appears as Figure 7. There

continue to be substantial prediction errors, the largest by far being for the ROW, but also sizable

ones for the UK and Canada. Nonetheless, the median prediction error falls to about one-third of

its previous level, now around 7 percent. The slope coefficient varies somewhat according to the

inclusion or exclusion of the ROW, although typically it is around 0.9. When all data points are

included, the R2 is about 0.9. When we exclude ROW, the R2 rises to 0.999.

          There is an additional pattern in the production errors. If we define capital abundance as

capital per worker, then for the four most capital abundant countries, we underestimate the capital

content of production and overestimate the labor content. The reverse is true for the two most

labor abundant countries. These systematic biases are exactly what one would expect to find when

using a common or neutrally-adjusted technology matrix in the presence of a continuum of goods.

Moreover these biases are not small. Quite often these biases in over- or under-predicting the

factor content of production were equal to 20 percent of a country’s endowment. Thus, while




          20
           In this and all subsequent specifications we were forced to calculate ROW endowments
in efficiency units. Since we did not have a technology matrix for the ROW we were forced to
estimate this matrix based on our parameter estimates generated in section IV. We then set
                 ROW                    ROW
8c'L/2(B̂L             Y ROW) % K/2(B̂K       Y ROW) .

In later cases where we forced the technology to fit for the ROW, we picked two 8’s such that
  c             ROW
8f ' f /(B̂ f         Y ROW) .

                                                         34
allowance for Hicks-neutral efficiency differences substantially improves the working of the

production model, prediction errors remain both sizable and systematic.

       We have seen that the Hicks-neutral efficiency shift did give rise to substantial

improvements for the production model. Will it substantially affect our trade results? The answer

is definitely not. A plot of T3 appears as Figure 8. The sign test shows that factor abundance

correctly predicts measured net factor trade exactly 50 percent of the time. The trade variance

ratio is 0.008, indicating that the variance of predicted factor trade still exceeds that of measured

factor trade by a factor of over 100. The slope coefficient is essentially zero. In sum, while the

adjustment for efficiency differences is useful in improving the fit of the production model, it has

done next to nothing to resolve the failures in the trade model.



 E. The D-F-S Continuum Model with Industry Variation in Factor Employment: P4 and T4

       As we discussed in the section on estimating the technologies, there is a robust feature of

the data that has been completely ignored in formal tests of the HOV model: capital to labor input

ratios by industry vary positively with country factor abundance. We consider this first within the

framework of the Dornbusch-Fischer-Samuelson (1980) continuum model, as this allows us to

conserve yet a while longer the assumption of (approximate) factor price equalization.

       Consider production specification P4, as in Figure 9. The production slope coefficient

remains at 0.89, but the median production error falls slightly to 5 percent. What is most

surprising is how the continuum model affects the trade specification T4. A plot appears as Figure

10. The proportion of correct sign tests rises sharply to 86 percent (19 of 22) — significantly

better than a coin flip at the 1 percent level. The variance ratio remains relatively low, although at


                                                  35
7 percent it is much higher than in any of the previous tests. The most impressive statistic is the

slope coefficient of 0.17, where all of the previous trade slopes were zero. Clearly, allowing

country capital to labor ratios to affect industry coefficients is moving us dramatically in the right

direction.



        F. A Failure of FPE and Factor Usage in Non-Traded Production: P5 and T5

        Our next specification considers what happens if the endowment differences are

sufficiently large to leave the countries in different cones of production. In such a case, FPE will

break down and non-tradables will no longer be produced with common input coefficients across

countries. This specification of the production model was preferred in our statistical analysis of

technology in Section IV. Our trade tests now require us to focus on the factor content of

tradables after we have adjusted the HOV predictions to reflect the differences in factor usage in

non-tradables arising from the failure of FPE.

        This is our best model so far. Plots of production and trade specifications P5 and T5

appear in Figures 11 and 12. The production slope coefficient rises to 0.97, with an R2 of

essentially unity. The median production error falls to just 3 percent. We again achieve 86 percent

correct matches in the sign test. The variance ratio rises to 19 percent. The slope coefficient is

0.43 for all factors, and 0.57 and 0.42 for capital and labor respectively. Again, the slopes still fall

well short of unity. But this must be compared to prior work and specifications T1 to T3, all of

which had a zero slope, and T4, which had a slope that is less than half as large. Under

specification T5, for example, a rise of one unit in Canadian “excess” capital would lead to the




                                                  36
export of nearly 0.6 units of capital services. The amended HOV model is not working perfectly,

but given the prior results, the surprise is how well it does.21



                             G. Corrections on ROW Technology: T6

        We have seen that production model P5 works quite well for most countries. There are a

few countries for which the fit of the production model is less satisfying. There are relatively large

prediction errors (ca. 10 percent) for both factors in Canada, for capital in Denmark, and for labor

in Italy. Given the simplicity of the framework, the magnitude of these errors is not surprising.

Since we would like to preserve this simplicity, neither do these errors immediately call for a

revision of our framework.

        There is one case, however, in which a closer review is appropriate. For the ten OECD

countries, we have data on technology which enters into our broader estimation exercise. But this

is not the case for ROW. The technology for ROW is projected from the OECD data based on the

aggregate ROW endowments and the capital to labor ratio. Because the gap in capital to labor

ratios between the ten and the ROW is large, there is a good measure of uncertainty about the

adequacy of this projection. As it turns out, the prediction errors for ROW are large: the

estimated technology matrix under-predicts labor usage by 9 percent, and over-predicts capital

usage by 12 percent. Moreover, these errors may well matter because ROW is predicted to be the

largest net trader in both factors and because its technology will matter for the implied factor

content of absorption of all other countries.



        21
        Implementing production model P5' (i.e. not pooling across sectors) yields results that
are almost identical to model P5, and so we do not report them.

                                                   37
       Hence we will consider specification T6, which is the same as T5 except that we force the

technology for ROW to match actual ROW aggregate endowments, i.e. BROW YROW = VROW. 22 A

plot appears as Figure 13. This yields two improvements over specification T5. The slope

coefficient rises by over one-third to 0.59 and the trade variance ratio doubles to 0.38. This

suggests that a more realistic assessment of the labor intensity of ROW production materially

improves the results.



                        H. Adding Gravity to the HOV Demand Model: T7

       As we note in the theory section, one of the more incredible assumptions of the HOV

model is costless trade. With perfect specialization and zero trade costs, one would expect most

countries to be importing well over half of all goods they absorb. Simple inspection of the data

reveals this to be a wild overestimate of actual import levels.

       By estimating the log form of the gravity equation introduced earlier, we can obtain

estimates of bilateral import flows in a world of perfect specialization with trade costs. We then

use these estimates of import and own demand in order to generate the HOV factor service

predictions. The results are presented in column T7 and illustrated in Figure 14. By almost every

measure, this is our best model of net factor trade. The slope coefficient rises from 0.59 under T6

to 0.82 under T7. That is, measured factor trade is over 80 percent of that predicted. The

standard errors are small and the R2 is 0.98. Signs are correctly predicted over 90 percent of the



       22
          To maintain consistency with the foregoing, we report the results here and in T7 with all
eleven countries. Because the move to T6 forces the production model of ROW to fit perfectly,
we will want to consider below whether excluding the ROW points affects the main thrust of
these results. We will see that it does not.

                                                 38
time. The variance ratio rises to nearly 0.7. The results look excellent for each factor considered

separately, and especially for capital, which has a slope coefficient of 0.87 and correctly predicts

the direction of net factor trade in all cases. These results strongly endorse our use of the gravity

equation to account for the role of distance or trade frictions in limiting trade volumes and net

factor contents.



                                       I. Robustness Checks

       There are a variety of robustness checks that we would like to make. The first notes that

specifications T6 and T7 have included the ROW point even though both force the ROW

production model to fit perfectly. We have already provided reasons for believing that adjustment

of the ROW technology is appropriate. Nonetheless, it would be troubling if the steady

improvement in the model owed solely to inclusion of the ROW points once this adjustment is

made. Our check on this is to return to models T4 through T7, excluding ROW in each case. The

results are presented in Table 6. Exclusion of ROW does tend to reduce the slope coefficients in

each case. And the improvement of T6N over T5N seems somewhat less substantial than that of T6

over T5. Nonetheless, the key observation is that the results are broadly consistent across the two

sets of tests. Most importantly, the slope coefficient and the trade variance ratio rise consistently

across both sets of tests, beginning and culminating at very similar levels. Even if we exclude

ROW, the model correctly predicts the direction of net factor trade 90 percent of the time and the

measured factor trade is over three-fourths the level predicted. Thus the results are highly robust

to exclusion of ROW.




                                                  39
        A second robustness check is to note that by sheer size, not only the ROW, but also the

US, frequently provides influential data points. The US is a major exporter of capital and importer

of labor while the reverse is true for the ROW. While these countries are extremely important to

include in the analysis because they contribute so much variance, it would be troubling if our

results were only a result of their inclusion. In Table 7 we drop the US and ROW and repeat our

experiments. The slope coefficient in T7 rises to 0.64 and is precisely measured with an R2 of

0.76. The overall pattern is very similar to the tests including the US and ROW. Specifications T1

through T3 show little improvement in the HOV predictions. The movement to T4 provides a

very substantial improvement, those to T5 and T6 somewhat smaller improvements, and finally a

substantial improvement in the move to T7. Hence the amended HOV model works quite well

even when we drop two points that contribute a great deal to the variance.

        A third robustness check is to consider the various ways that previous papers on factor

service trade have weighted the data in order to account for heteroskedasticity. Up to now we

have been focusing on untransformed data because all graphs and regressions have a clear

interpretation in terms of actual factor service flows when these units are used. However, it is

reasonable to ask whether our results are fragile when we shift weighting schemes.

        The first weighting scheme that we try is one suggested by Trefler (1995). In that paper,

Trefler deflates the data by the square root of a country’s absorption share multiplied by the

standard deviation of the predicted factor service flows (expressed in natural units).23 This

weighting scheme reduces the importance of large countries and factors with substantial variation


        23
           Instead of the standard deviation of predicted factor service flows in natural units,
Trefler actually uses Ffc - (Vfc - scVfW), where Ffc is his measured factor trade. However, since Ffc in
his data is essentially zero, this weighting scheme is essentially the same as the one we implement.

                                                  40
in country abundance. In Table 8 we repeat our trade results obtained above and also present our

results when recast in Trefler units. The switch to Trefler units matters little. Now the coefficient

on predicted factor trade actually rises from 0.82 to 0.88. Our variance ratio test statistic falls a

little but overall the same basic picture emerges.. Clearly our results are robust to this

specification.

        Xavier Gabaix (1997) has suggested a second weighting scheme for evaluating factor

content studies. If one deflates both sides of the HOV trade equation by the country’s share of

absorption, one eliminates all size-based variation from the data. This adjustment is tantamount to

projecting each country’s endowment point on to the same iso-income line. The results also

appear in Table 8. Once again we see a steady rise in the slope coefficient as we move from T3 to

T7. The final specification has a slope coefficient of 0.83, again quite similar to our primary

specification.

        We conclude that our results are robust to a wide variety of weighting schemes. It

appears that relaxing neutral technical differences, FPE, and allowing for non-traded goods results

in dramatic improvements in the HOV model regardless of the units chosen. Furthermore,

accounting for the influence of trade costs on bilateral trade volumes results in further strong

improvements.

        An additional remaining question regarding our results is why in T7 we obtain a

coefficient of only 0.82 when theory says it should be unity. There are three basic reasons. The

first is attenuation bias due to measurement error. By conducting the reverse regression of

predicted factor trade on measured, we can obtain maximum likelihood bounds for the effects of

measurement error. Under specification T7, the high R2 leaves little room for measurement error


                                                  41
to matter, with an upper bound for the coefficient of 0.84. Under specification T7N, measurement

error places an upper bound on the coefficient of 0.89.

       The second reason is that our adjustments apply only to the impact that country capital to

labor ratios have on average technology matrices, not export technology matrices. Theory

suggests that this will still under-measure factor service trade because exported goods within an

industry use more extreme factor proportions than goods which in equilibrium are non-traded in

the same industry. While our analysis has adjusted for the fact that average input coefficients shift

with country factor proportions, we have not adjusted for differences in factor intensity between

export and average sectors. This will tend to result in apparent missing trade.

       Finally, and most obviously, trade barriers, demand irregularities, and non-neutral

technological differences really do exist. Hence, it would be astonishing if we could ignore all of

these and describe global factor trade flows perfectly. The real surprise is just how well we do.




                                       VI. Conclusion

       The empirical validity of the factor proportions theory has been a focus of research for

nearly one-half century. In the process, researchers have accumulated a great deal of experience

that has informed our work. Leontief’s (1953) seminal work provided the first true factor content

study. The work of Maskus (1985) and Bowen, Leamer and Sveikauskas (1987) is extremely

important not only for the methodological contributions, but also for the extraordinary energy

they brought to their studies. The same could be said of the work of Trefler (1993, 1995, 1997),

which (among other contributions) provides extremely lucid characterizations of anomalies in the

data. These important contributions notwithstanding, this half-century of empirical research failed

                                                 42
to produce a set of simple departures that allow the theory to match the salient features of the

international data.

       Our study starts from a simple premise. Since the principal hypotheses of the nature of

HOV’s failures in prior work concern technological differences and absorption patterns, it is

crucial to address these directly on the relevant technological and absorption data. We develop a

small set of hypotheses, some traditional, some novel, of why prior tests of HOV fail. We then

estimate the crucial parameters directly from the relevant data and impose these restrictions on

our empirical implementation of the HOV theory.

       Our results provide striking support for the HOV theory, suitably amended. Countries

export their abundant factors and they do so in approximately the right magnitude. The results are

extraordinarily consistent across specifications and are robust to changes in the sample.

       Perhaps the most exciting feature of our results is the simple and unified picture they draw

of the global economy. No doubt much is left out of our account. Yet it is startling that such a

plausible and simple set of departures from the conventional model allows us to so accurately

match the international data.




                                                 43
                                        References

Anderson, James, “A Theoretical Foundation for the Gravity Equation,” American Economic
        Review; 69(1), March 1979, pages 106-16.
Antweiler, Werner; and Trefler, Daniel (1998) “Increasing Returns and All That: A View From
        Trade,” mimeo, U. of Toronto.
Bergstrand, Jeffrey H. (1990) “The Heckscher-Ohlin-Samuelson Model, the Linder Hypothesis
        and the Determinants of Bilateral Intra-industry Trade,” Economic Journal, 100(403), pp.
        1216-29.
Bernstein, Jeffrey and David E. Weinstein (1998) “Do Endowments Predict the Location of
        Production? Evidence from National and International Data,” University of Michigan,
        mimeo.
Bowen, Harry P., Edward Leamer, and Leo Sveikauskas (1987) “Multicountry, Multifactor Tests
        of the Factor Abundance Theory,” American Economic Review, v. 77.
Davis, Donald R. (1997) “Critical Evidence on Comparative Advantage? North-North Trade in a
        Multilateral World.” Journal of Political Economy, October.
Davis, Donald R. (1998) “Does European Unemployment Prop up American Wages? national
        Labor Markets and Global Trade,” American Economic Review, June.
Davis, Donald R., David E. Weinstein, Scott C. Bradford and Kazushige Shimpo (1997) “Using
        International and Japanese Regional Data to Determine When the Factor Abundance
        Theory of Trade Works,” American Economic Review, v. 87.
Deardorff, Alan V. (1994) “The Possibility of Factor Price Equalization, Revisited,” Journal of
        International Economics; 36(1-2), February, pages 167-75.
Deardorff, Alan V. (1998) “Determinants of Bilateral Trade: Does Gravity Work in a Neoclassical
        World?” in Jeffrey Frankel, ed., Regionalization of the World Economy, Chicago: U. of
        Chicago and NBER.
Dixit, Avinash K., and Stiglitz, Joseph E. (1977) “Monopolistic Competition and Optimum
        Product Diversity,” American Economic Review 67 (3), 297-308.
Dixit, Avinash K., and Norman, Victor (1980) Theory of International Trade, Cambridge:
        Cambridge University Press.
David Dollar and Edward Wolff, Baumol, William “The Factor-Price Equalization Model and
        Industry Labor Productivity: An Empirical Test across Countries,”(1988) in Feenstra,
        Robert ed., “Empirical methods for international trade,” Cambridge, Mass. and London:
        MIT Press, 1988.
Dollar, David and Eward N. Wolff (1993) Competitiveness, Convergence, and International
        Specialization, Cambridge: The MIT Press.
Dornbusch, Rudiger, Stanley Fischer and Paul A. Samuelson (1980) “Heckscher-Ohlin Trade
        Theory with a Continuum of Goods,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 95, 203-224.
Frankel, Jeffrey A.; Stein, Ernesto; Wei, Shang-Jin, “Regional Trading Arrangements: Natural or
        Super-Natural?” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper: 5431, January
        1996.
Gabaix, Xavier (1997) “The Factor Content of Trade: A Rejection of the Heckscher-Ohlin-
        Leontief Hypothesis,” Harvard University, mimeo.
Harrigan, James (1995) “Factor Endowments and the International Location of Production:
       Econometric Evidence from the OECD, 1970-1985,” Journal of International Economics.
Harrigan, James (1997) “Technology, Factor Supplies and International Specialization: Testing
       the Neoclassical Model,” forthcoming American Economic Review.
Helpman, Elhanan (1981) “International Trade in the Presence of Product Differentiation,
       Economies of Scale and Monopolistic Competition: A Chamberlin-Heckscher-Ohlin
       Approach,” Journal of International Economics, 11:3.
Helpman, Elhanan (1998) “The Structure of Foreign Trade,” mimeo, Harvard University.
Helpman, Elhanan and Krugman, Paul (1985) Market Structure and Foreign Trade, Cambridge:
       MIT Press.
Jorgenson, Dale and Masahiro Kuroda (1990) “Productivity and International Competitiveness in
       Japan and the United States, 1960-1985,” in Hulten, Charles R. ed. Productivity Growth
       in Japan and the United States, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Krugman, Paul R., “But For, As If, and So What? Thought Experiments on Trade and Factor
       Prices,” mimeo, MIT, November 1996.
Lawrence, Robert Z., and Slaughter, Matthew J. “International Trade and American Wages in the
       1980s: Giant Sucking Sound or Small Hiccup?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
       Microeconomics, 1993, pp. 161-210.
Leamer, Edward (1980) “The Leontief Paradox Reconsidered,” Journal of Political Economy,
       88, 495-503.
Leamer, Edward E., “In Search of Stolper-Samuelson Effects Between Trade and US Wages”
       mimeo 1995, Yale and UCLA.
Leamer, Edward and James Levinsohn (1995) “International Trade Theory: The Evidence” in
       Gene Grossman and Kenneth Rogoff, eds., Handbook of International Economics, vol. 3,
       New York: Elsevier.
Leontief, Wassily (1953) “Domestic Production and Foreign Trade: The American Capital
       Position Re-Examined,” Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society, 97, 332-
       349.
Linder, Staffan Burenstam (1961) An Essay on Trade and Transformation, NY: John Wiley and
       Sons.
McCallum, John (1995) “National Borders Matter: Canada-US Regional Trade Patterns,”
       American Economic Review, 85:3.
Markusen, James R. (1986) “Explaining the Volume of Trade: An Eclectic Approach,” American
       Economic Review, 76, 1002-1011.
Markusen, James R. and Wigle, Randall M. (1990) “Explaining the Volume of North-South
       Trade,” Economic Journal, 100, 1206-1215.
Maskus, Keith E. (1985) “A Test of the Heckscher-Ohlin-Vanek Theorem: The Leontief
       Commonplace,” Journal of International Economics, November, 9, pp. 201-212.
O'Rourke, Kevin; Williamson, Jeffrey G. (1994) “Late Nineteenth-Century Anglo-American
       Factor-Price Convergence: Were Heckscher and Ohlin Right?” Journal of Economic
       History; 54(4), December, pages 892-916.
Samuelson, Paul A. (1949) “International Factor Price Equalization Once Again,” Economic
       Journal, Vol.LIX, No. 234, pp. 181-197.
Samuelson, Paul A. (1953) “Prices of Goods and Factors in General Equilibrium,” Review of
       Economic Studies, 21, No. 54.
Samuelson, Paul A. (1954) “The Transfer Problem and Transport Costs: Analysis of Effects of
        Trade Impediments,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 46, No. 2.
Stern, Robert M. and Maskus, Keith E. (1981) “Determinants of the Commodity Structure of US
        Foreign Trade, 1958-1976,” Journal of International Economics, 11, pp. 207-224.
Trefler, Daniel (1993) “International Factor Price Differences: Leontief was Right!”, Journal of
        Political Economy, 101.
Trefler, Daniel (1996) “The Case of the Missing Trade and other Mysteries,” American Economic
        Review.
Trefler, Daniel (1998) “The Structure of Factor Content Predictions,” mimeo, U. of Toronto.
Wei, Shang-Jin (1996) “Intra-National versus International Trade: How Stubborn are Nations in
        Global Integration?” NBER Working Paper #5531.
Wood, Adrian (1994) North-South Trade, Employment and Inequality: Changing Fortunes in a
        Skill-Driven World, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Xu, Yingfeng (1993) “A General Model of Comparative Advantage with Two Factors and a
        Continuum of Goods,” International Economic Review, 34, May, pp. 365-380.
                                           Table 1
                               Tests of Technological Variation
Model            Measurement Hicks Neutral   Continuum       Pooled      Unpooled
                    Error     Technical      Model with   Helpman No-   Helpman No- Implied
                              Differences    HNTD and      FPE Model    FPE Model     8c
                               (HNTD)           FPE       with HNTD     with HNTD
                     P2           P3             P4            P5           P5'
2 Aus                –           0.531          0.531         0.530        0.528      1.7
                                (0.035)        (0.035)       (0.035)      (0.035)

2 Can                –            0.381         0.381        0.380         0.381      1.5
                                 (0.035)       (0.035)      (0.035)       (0.034)

2 Den                –            0.508         0.504        0.508         0.508      1.7
                                 (0.036)       (0.036)      (0.036)       (0.034)

2 Fra                –            0.494         0.493        0.494         0.492      1.6
                                 (0.034)       (0.034)      (0.034)       (0.035)

2 Ger                –            0.112         0.111        0.112         0.111      1.1
                                 (0.034)       (0.034)      (0.034)       (0.035)

2 Italy              –            0.709         0.707        0.709         0.704      2.0
                                 (0.034)       (0.034)      (0.034)       (0.036)

2 Japan              –            0.431         0.430        0.431         0.430      1.5
                                 (0.033)       (0.033)      (0.033)       (0.034)

2 Neth               –            .057          .057         .056          .058       1.1
                                 (0.035)       (0.035)      (0.035)       (0.035)

2 UK                 –            0.520         0.516        0.520         0.542      1.7
                                 (0.034)       (0.034)      (0.034)       (0.040)

2 US                 –             0              0            0             0        1.0

(KT                  –             –            0.408        0.364          –
                                               (0.046)      (0.061)

(KN                  –             –              –          0.493          –
                                                            (0.071)

(LT                  –             –            -0.408      -0.449          –
                                               (0.046)      (0.060)

No. of Param.        68            77            78           80            144

- Log L            -1741.5       -934.4        -855.7        -802.8       -740.7

Schwartz Crit.     -1963.3      -1185.5        -1110.1      -1063.7       -1210.3
Standard errors are reported in parentheses. (LN = - (LT - (KT - (KN. There is very little variation in the 2’s as we
move across specifications because of the constraint that capital to labor ratios cannot affect productivity.
                                                              Table 2
                                                         Key Specifications

     KEY                      PRODUCTION             TRADE
     ASSUMPTION               SPECIFICATIONS         SPECIFICATIONS
P1   Conventional HOV         BYc'Vc            T1   B T c ' B (Y c & D c) ' V c & s c V W
     Average Technology
P2                            B̄ Y c ' V c      T2   B̄ T c ' V c & s c V W
     Matrix
     Hicks-Neutral
P3                            B Y c ' VcE       T3   B T c ' V cE & s c V WE
     Efficiency Adjustment
     Continuum Model:
                              B cKT Y c ' V c
     Different Input Ratios
                                                     B cK Y c & B cK D cc % j B c K M cc ' V c & s c V W
                                                                                      )     )
P4                                              T4
     in Traded Goods and
                                                                              c )…c
     H-N Efficiency
     Helpman No-FPE
P5   Model, Diff Input        B cK Y c ' V c    T5   BcT YcT ! [BcT DccT + 3cN…c BcNT MccN] = [Vc ! sc VW ] ! [VcN ! sc VWN]
     Ratios in All, H-NE

     Forces ROW Prod.
                                                T6   As above
     Model to Work
                                                     B cK Y c & B cK D cc % j B c K M cc ' V c & B CK D̂ % j B c K M̂ cc
                                                                                      )     )                  cc              )   )
     Adds Gravity-Based
                                                T7
     Demand Determ.                                                           c )…c                                 c)… c
                                             Table 3

                           Prior Production and Trade Tests

Production Slope and Median Error Tests

Neither Bowen, et al. (1987) nor Trefler (1995) conduct production tests. Davis, Weinstein, et
al. (1997) do report international production tests based on three factors and the Japanese
technology matrix. The results are disappointing, featuring very large prediction errors
(frequently over 100 percent).

Trade Sign Tests

BLS report trade sign tests for 12 factors and 27 countries. They conclude that measured
factor abundance provides no more insight than a coin flip in identifying which factor services a
country will export. Trefler (1995) reports two types of sign tests for 9 factors and 33
countries. The first is, as above, a simple proportion of sign matches. He also reports a
weighted-sign test, where the weights are given by an observation’s absolute share in the
measured factor content of trade. The simple HOV model is correct 50 percent of the time
under the simple sign test or 71 percent under the weighted-sign test, which he terms
“uncomfortably close” to a coin flip. Trefler’s preferred specification, with a home bias in
demand and Hicks-neutral technical differences, correctly predicts the sign 93 percent of the
time in the weighted-sign test (unweighted not reported).

Trade Variance Ratio Tests

Trefler (1995) is the only prior paper that reports the variance ratio test (theoretical prediction
is unity). Under the simple HOV model, the ratio is 0.032. Under his preferred specification,
the ratio is 2.226. While this remains far from unity, Trefler concludes that this is a great
improvement over the simple HOV model.

Trade Slope Test

Neither BLS nor Trefler report a slope test. Gabaix (1997), using the same data as Trefler
(1993, 1995), reports several variants of a slope test scaled by country size (theoretical
prediction is unity). The model performs reasonably well for the resource-based factors
cropland and pasture. However, for the factors that dominate incomes — production labor,
aggregate labor, and capital — the results are disastrous. In almost all specifications and
restrictions of the sample, the estimated coefficients are insignificant, or where significant,
negative.
                                               Table 4

                                Production and Trade Tests
                                        All Factors


      Production Tests: Dependent Variable MFCP
              P1       P2       P3        P4       P5
 Predicted    0.24     0.33     0.89      0.89     0.97

 se           0.09     0.11     0.06      0.05     0.01

 R2           0.27     0.29     0.92      0.94     1.00

 Median       0.34     0.21     0.07      0.05     0.03
 Error
 obs.         20       22       22        22       22




                Trade Tests: Dependent Variable MFCP
              T1       T2       T3       T4        T5       T6       T7

 Predicted    -0.002   -0.006   -0.05    0.17      0.43     0.59     0.82

 se           0.005     0.003    0.02    0.02      0.02     0.04     0.03

 R2           0.01      0.14     0.31    0.77      0.96     0.92     0.98

 Sign Test    0.32     0.45     0.50     0.86      0.86     0.82     0.91

 Var. Ratio   0.0005   0.0003   0.008    0.07      0.19     0.38     0.69

 obs.         22       22       22       22        22       22       22



The theoretical coefficient on “predicted” is unity. The theoretical value of the sign test is unity
(100 percent correct matches). The Variance Ratio is var(MFCT)/var(PFCT) and has a theoretical
value of unity.
                                         Table 5
                                Production and Trade Tests
                                         Capital

Production Tests: Dep. Var. MFCP                Trade Tests: Dep. Var. MFCT
           P1     P2      P3     P4      P5      T1     T2        T3      T4       T5       T6      T7
Pred.    0.77    0.99    0.87   0.90    0.99    0.06    0.02     -0.03    0.25     0.57     0.65    0.87

se       0.11    0.15    0.08   0.05    0.01    0.01    0.01     0.02     0.05     0.07     0.15    0.07

R2       0.84    0.84    0.92   0.94    1.00    0.80    0.28     0.14     0.77     0.88     0.68    0.95

Median   0.34    0.20    0.07   0.06    0.02
Error
Sign                                            0.45    0.64     0.73     0.91     0.77     0.80    1.00
Test


                                Production and Trade Tests
                                          Labor

Production Tests: Dep. Var. MFCP               Trade Tests: Dep. Var. MFCT
           P1     P2      P3     P4     P5      T1       T2         T3       T4       T5      T6      T7
Pred.    0.07    0.12    0.92   0.87   0.94    -0.008   -0.008    -0.07     0.14     0.42    0.59    0.81

se       0.06    0.09    0.09   0.08   0.02     0.002   0.003      0.03     0.01     0.03    0.05    0.03

R2       0.15    0.16    0.92   0.93   0.997    0.627   0.529      0.43     0.94     0.96    0.94    0.99

Median   0.42    0.22    0.08   0.05   0.05
Error
Sign                                           0.18     0.27      0.27      0.82     1.00    0.80    0.81
Test


The theoretical coefficient on “predicted” is unity. The theoretical value of the sign test is unity
(100 percent correct matches). The Variance Ratio is var(MFCT)/var(PFCT) and has a theoretical
value of unity.
                                                   Table 6

                                            Trade Tests
                                     All Factors, Excluding ROW


                           Trade Tests: Dependent Variable MFCP
                                      (excluding ROW)
                                           T4N        T5N     T6N           T7N

                               Pred.       0.19       0.35    0.42          0.77

                                se         0.02       0.03    0.04          0.07

                                R2         0.80       0.87    0.86          0.86

                          Sign Test        0.90       0.90    0.80          0.90

                          Var. Ratio       0.04       0.14    0.20          0.68

                               obs.           20       20     20            20




                                                   Table 7

                                         Trade Tests
                                  Excluding ROW and the US
                                          All Factors


                                     Trade Tests: Dep. Var. MFCT
             T1           T2             T3            T4            T5            T6     T7
 Pred.       -0.05        -0.04          0.05          0.30          0.35          0.42   0.64

 se           0.01        0.01           0.07          0.07          0.11          0.14   0.09

 R2           0.47        0.33           0.03          0.51          0.41          0.36   0.76



The theoretical coefficient on “predicted” is unity. The theoretical value of the sign test is unity
(100 percent correct matches). The Variance Ratio is var(MFCT)/var(PFCT) and has a theoretical
value of unity.
                                              Table 8

             Trade Tests With Various Heteroskedasticity Corrections
                                  All Factors

                                        Trade Tests: Dependent Variable MFCT

                         T1          T2          T3     T4       T5        T6    T7
        Standard
          Units
        Predicted       -0.002      -0.006     -0.049   0.17     0.43     0.59   0.82

            se           0.005      0.003       0.016   0.02     0.02     0.04   0.03

            R2           0.01        0.14        0.31   0.77     0.96     0.92   0.98

         Trefler
          Units
        Predicted        0.02       -0.01       0.005   0.18     0.44     0.55   0.88
            se           0.01       0.002       0.022   0.03     0.06     0.10   0.04
            R2           0.12        0.60       0.003   0.72     0.74     0.63   0.95
         Gabaix
          Units
        Predicted       -0.01       -0.013     -0.006   0.21     0.44     0.59   0.83
            se           0.01       0.009       0.041   0.05     0.06     0.09   0.06
            R2           0.04       0.110       0.001   0.51     0.71     0.66   0.90

The theoretical coefficient on “predicted” is unity.
Figure 1




Figure 2
                                                                    Figure 3
                                                                       P1
                                                   Production with Common Technology (US)

                                        0.70



                                        0.60
Measured Factor Content of Production




                                        0.50



                                        0.40

                                                                              Theoretical Prediction

                                        0.30



                                        0.20



                                        0.10



                                        0.00
                                            0.00   0.10     0.20      0.30       0.40        0.50      0.60   0.70
                                                          Predicted Factor Content of Production
                                                                 Figure 4
                                                                    T1
                                                    Trade with Common Technology (US)


                                                               0.6



                                                                                Theoretical Prediction

                                                               0.4
Measured Factor Content of Trade




                                                               0.2




                                                                 0
                                   -0.4   -0.3   -0.2   -0.1          0   0.1       0.2      0.3     0.4   0.5   0.6




                                                               -0.2




                                                               -0.4
                                                         Predicted Factor Content of Trade
                                                                     Figure 5
                                                                        P2
                                                   Production with Common Technology (Average)
                                        0.70



                                        0.60
Measured Factor Content of Production




                                                                     Theoretical Prediction

                                        0.50



                                        0.40



                                        0.30



                                        0.20



                                        0.10



                                        0.00
                                            0.00   0.10   0.20       0.30       0.40          0.50   0.60   0.70
                                                          Predicted Factor Content of Production
                                                                        Figure 7
                                                                           P3
                                                   Production with Hicks-Neutral Technical Differences

                                        0.50


                                                                                    Theoretical Prediction


                                        0.40
Measured Factor Content of Production




                                        0.30




                                        0.20




                                        0.10




                                        0.00
                                            0.00       0.10            0.20           0.30             0.40   0.50
                                                              Predicted Factor Content of Production
                                                            Figure 8
                                                               T3
                                          Trade with Hicks-Neutral Technical Differences



                                                       0.15




                                                                     Theoretical Prediction
                                                         0.1
Measured Factor Content of Trade




                                                       0.05




                                                          0
                                   -0.1      -0.05             0           0.05               0.1   0.15




                                                       -0.05




                                                        -0.1
                                                     Predicted Factor Content of Trade
                                                                    Figure 9
                                                                       P4
                                               Production with Continuum of Goods Model and FPE

                                        0.60

                                                                                Theoretical Prediction


                                        0.50
Measured Factor Content of Production




                                        0.40




                                        0.30




                                        0.20




                                        0.10




                                        0.00
                                            0.00      0.10     0.20      0.30          0.40        0.50   0.60
                                                        Predicted Factor Content of Production
                                                               Figure 10
                                                                  T4
                                             Trade with Continuum of Goods Model and FPE



                                                            0.2

                                                                          Theoretical Prediction

                                                           0.15
Measured Factor Content of Trade




                                                            0.1



                                                           0.05



                                                              0
                                   -0.15   -0.1    -0.05           0    0.05        0.1        0.15   0.2


                                                           -0.05



                                                            -0.1



                                                           -0.15
                                                     Predicted Factor Content of Trade
                                                  Figure 11
                                                      P5
                                            Production without FPE


                          0.50

                                                             Theoretical Prediction



                          0.40
Measured Factor Content




                          0.30




                          0.20




                          0.10




                          0.00
                              0.00   0.10        0.20         0.30         0.40       0.50
                                              Predicted Factor Content
                                                         Figure 12
                                                            T5
                                           Trade with No-FPE, Non-Traded Goods


                                                      0.15

                                                                  Theoretical Prediction



                                                       0.1
Predicted Factor Content of Trade




                                                      0.05




                                                         0
                                    -0.1   -0.05              0         0.05          0.1   0.15




                                                     -0.05




                                                       -0.1
                                                   Measured Factor Content of Trade
                                                             Figure 13
                                                                T6
                                      Trade with No-FPE, Non-Traded Goods, and Adjusted ROW
                                                                  0.10

                                                                                     Theoretical Prediction
                                                                  0.08


                                                                  0.06
Measured Factor Content of Trade




                                                                  0.04


                                                                  0.02


                                                                   0.00
                                   -0.08   -0.06   -0.04     -0.02     0.00   0.02     0.04    0.06    0.08   0.10

                                                                  -0.02


                                                                  -0.04


                                                                  -0.06


                                                                  -0.08
                                                           Predicted Factor Content of Trade
                                                                 Figure 14
                                                                    T7
                                              Trade with No-FPE, Gravity Demand Specification,
                                                             and Adjusted ROW


                                                       0.10
                                                                             Theoretical Prediction

                                                       0.08
Measured Factor Content of Trade




                                                       0.06


                                                       0.04


                                                       0.02


                                                       0.00
                                   -0.06   -0.04   -0.02    0.00    0.02     0.04     0.06       0.08   0.10

                                                       -0.02


                                                       -0.04


                                                       -0.06
                                                    Predicted Factor Content of Trade
