1 Introduction
The purpose of this paper is to survey and discuss in‡ation targeting in the context of monetary
policy rules, to clarify the essential characteristics of in‡ation targeting, to compare in‡ation
targeting to other monetary policy rules, and to draw some conclusions for the monetary policy
of the European System of Central Banks (ESCB).
In section 2, I provide a general conceptual discussion of monetary policy rules, starting from
the current conventional wisdom about the transmission mechanism. In particular, I distinguish
between instrument rules and targeting rules. In section 3, I discuss the general characteristics
of in‡ation targeting and argue that in‡ation targeting is a stronger commitment to a systematic and optimizing monetary policy than other monetary policy regimes. I discuss both the
loss function that can be associated with in‡ation targeting and the corresponding operating
procedure, “in‡ation-forecast targeting,” that is, that in‡ation targeting can be interpreted as
a targeting rule for a synthetic intermediate variable, namely a conditional in‡ation forecast. I
also discuss the role of transparency in in‡ation targeting, as well as issues of model uncertainty
and model robustness.
In section 4, I use the general framework of section 2 to make a comparison with some other
monetary policy strategies, namely money-growth targeting and nominal-GDP targeting. In
section 5, I draw some conclusions for the monetary policy of the ESCB. In section 6, I present
some general conclusions.
Appendices A-D contain some technical details, including a method for constructing conditional forecasts for arbitrary reaction functions in forward-looking models (appendix A).

2 Monetary policy rules
One of the main points in this paper is the usefulness of distinguishing between instrument
rules and targeting rules, for discussing monetary policy rules in general and for understanding
in‡ation targeting in particular. To avoid misunderstandings, it also seems desirable to clearly
de…ne the de…nition of “targeting.” In this paper, as in Rogo¤ [81], Walsh [108], Svensson [91]
and [93], Cecchetti [21], Clarida, Gali and Gertler [25] and Rudebusch and Svensson [83], target
variables are variables appearing in loss functions. In some of the literature, targets sometimes
refer to variables in reaction functions.1 These de…nitions of targets and targeting are not
equivalent. As shown in Svensson [94], it is usually ine¢cient to let the instrument respond to
target variables, compared to letting the instrument respond to the determinants of the target
variables.
In order to avoid ambiguity, this section outlines some central de…nitions for discussing
monetary policy rules. To be concrete, the de…nitions to be used are presented within a linear
model with a quadratic loss function.2
1
For examples see, especially, Bryant, Hooper and Mann [19], chapter 1, but also Judd and Motley [57],
McCallum [70] and Bernanke and Woodford [11].
2
The discussion extends the corresponding discussion in Rudebusch and Svensson [83] by using a model with
forward-looking variables, by providing a general de…nition of monetary policy rules, by distinguishing reaction
functions and rules, and by allowing for both explicit and implicit instrument rules. Thus, Rudebusch and
Svensson [83] do not explicitly de…ne reaction functions, and restrict instrument rules to be prescribed (explicit)
reaction functions, whereas the current treatment allows instrument rules to be both explicit and implicit reaction
functions.

1

2.1 The transmission mechanism
Since the transmission mechanism for monetary policy is central to the discussion of monetary policy rules, this subsection starts by discussing the conventional wisdom concerning the
transmission mechanism. This conventional wisdom appears to grow increasingly dominant.3
In a closed economy, standard transmission channels include an aggregate demand channel
and an expectations channel. With the aggregate demand channel, monetary policy a¤ects
aggregate demand, with a lag, via its e¤ect on the short real interest rate (and possibly on
the availability of credit).4 Aggregate demand then a¤ects in‡ation, with another lag, via
an aggregate supply equation (a Phillips curve). The expectations channel allows monetary
policy to a¤ect in‡ation expectations which, in turn, a¤ect in‡ation, with a lag, via wage- and
price-setting behavior. Appendix C gives an example (from Svensson [96] and [93]) of a very
simple model of the transmission mechanism for a closed economy, which abstracts from the
expectations mechanism (or, alternatively, treats expectations as adaptive), where monetary
policy a¤ects aggregate demand with a one-year lag and in‡ation with a two-year lag. This
example will frequently be used to illustrate some of the points below.
In an open economy, there are additional channels for the transmission of monetary policy.
The exchange rate is a¤ected by the di¤erence between domestic and foreign nominal interest
rates and expected future exchange rates, via an interest parity condition. With sticky prices,
the nominal exchange rate a¤ects the real exchange rate. The real exchange rate will a¤ect
the relative price between domestic and foreign goods, which, in turn, will a¤ect both domestic
and foreign demand for domestic goods, and hence contribute to the aggregate-demand channel
for the transmission of monetary policy. There is also a direct exchange rate channel for the
transmission of monetary policy to CPI in‡ation, in that the exchange rate a¤ects domestic
currency prices of imported …nal goods, which enter the CPI and hence CPI in‡ation. Typically,
the lag of this direct exchange rate channel is considered to be shorter than that of the aggregate
demand channel. Hence, monetary policy can a¤ect CPI in‡ation with a shorter lag by inducing
exchange rate movements. Finally, there is an additional exchange rate channel to in‡ation:
The exchange rate will a¤ect the domestic currency prices of imported intermediate inputs.
Eventually, it will also a¤ect nominal wages via the e¤ect of the CPI on wage-setting. In
both cases, it will a¤ect the cost of domestically produced goods, and hence domestic in‡ation
(in‡ation in the prices of domestically produced goods).
Appendix D gives an example (from Svensson [96]) of a relatively rich model of the transmission mechanism in a small open economy. The crucial building blocks are an aggregate supply
equation (a Phillips curve) for domestic in‡ation, an aggregate demand equation for domestically
produced goods and services, a real interest parity equation for the real exchange rate, and an
equation de…ning CPI in‡ation as a weighted sum of domestic in‡ation and in‡ation in imported
goods. Both aggregate supply and aggregate demand are derived with some microfoundations
3

See Mishkin [75] and the contributions mentioned there. See Fuhrer and Moore [44], King and Wolman
[62], Yun [113], McCallum and Nelson [72], Woodford [112], Rotemberg and Woodford [82], Goodfriend and King
[45], and Clarida, Gali and Gertler [25] for building blocks, microfoundations and discussions of di¤erent versions
of this conventional wisdom of the transformation mechanism for closed economies. Some contributions ignore
control lags and persistence, though. Svensson [96] provides an open-economy extension.
More elaborate large models actually used by central banks include Bank of Canada’s QPM model [28], Reserve
Bank of New Zealand’s Forecasting and Policy System [12], and the Federal Reserve Board’s FRB/US model [18].
4
The aggregate demand channel can be separated into an interest rate channel and a parallel credit channel.
The latter is, for instance, discussed in Bernanke and Gertler [6].

2

and forward-looking rational expectations. Domestic in‡ation depends on expected future in‡ation, the expected future output gap, and the expected future real exchange rate. Aggregate
demand depends on an expected future long real interest rate (which, in turn, is a¤ected by
expected future short real interest rates) and the expected future real exchange rate. Monetary
policy a¤ects the exchange rate and the CPI in the current period, aggregate demand in one
period, and domestic in‡ation in two periods. The relative lags are consistent with …ndings
from VAR studies, for instance, Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans [22], Bernanke and Mihov
[8] and Cushman and Zha [31] (although some of the lags may actually be imposed as identifying
restrictions).
In this view of the transmission mechanism, it is apparent that, perhaps somewhat paradoxically and heretically, money only plays a minor role. For instance, many models, including the
central bank models mentioned in footnote 3, do not even specify a demand function for money,
although such a demand function is easily introduced (see the discussion of money-growth targeting in section 4.1). Then, the central bank simply supplies whatever quantity of money that
is demanded at the preferred level of the short interest rate. Money becomes an endogenous
variable, as emphasized in Taylor [102] and [104] and, consistent with empirical …ndings, a high
long-run correlation between the price level and money supply arises. Moreover, in the short
and medium run, monetary aggregates in these models have little or no predictive power over
other determinants of in‡ation. Thus, in the transmission mechanism, the focus is not on money
supply growth but on the short nominal rate, the resulting short real rate and exchange rate,
and the e¤ects on expectations, aggregate demand, domestic in‡ation and CPI in‡ation.
2.2 A fairly general linear model for monetary policy
The di¤erent models of the conventional transmission mechanism described above (in particular
the examples in appendices C and D) can (as long as they are linear) be written as the following
fairly general linear model of an economy,
¸
¸
·
¸
·
·
Xt+1
Xt
vt+1
;
(2.1)
=A
+ Bit +
xt+1jt
xt
0
where Xt is a column vector of n1 predetermined variables (state variables), xt is a column vector
of n2 forward-looking variables (non-predetermined variables), it is a column vector of ni central
bank instruments (control variables), vt+1 is a column vector of n1 exogenous iid shocks with
zero means and a constant covariance matrix §vv , and A and B are matrices of appropriate
dimensions. In order to include the possibility that the variables may have non-zero means, it is
understood that the …rst element of Xt is unity and that corresponding means are incorporated
in the …rst column of A.5 6
At the beginning of period t, vt and Xt are realized. Then, it is set by the central bank.
Finally, xt results, and period t ends. Each variable is observable. Although the information set
5

The predetermined variables Xt depend on exogenous shocks in period t and on lagged variables (predetermined, forward-looking, instruments). This de…nition is consistent with Klein [63], that is, that predetermined variables have exogenous one-period-ahead forecast errors. The forward-looking variables xt depend on
the predetermined variables in period t, the instruments in period t, and the expectations in period t of future
forward-looking variables.
6
One generalization is when Bit is replaced by §T¿=0 B ¿ it+¿jt . See Svensson [96] and appendix D for an
example with T = 1. Another generalization is when the left side is premultiplied by a singular matrix.

3

at the beginning of period t is fvt ; Xt ; vt¡1 ; Xt¡1 ; it¡1 ; :::g, Xt is a su¢cient statistic, that is, a
state variable, at the beginning of period t. Hence, Xt comprises the indicators at the beginning
of the period, that is, the prices and quantities conveying information to the central bank. The
expression xt+1jt denotes Et xt+1 , the expectation of xt+1 conditional upon information available
at the end of period t (that is, Xt ; it and xt ).7
Furthermore, let Yt be a column vector of n3 target variables, given by
·
Yt = C

Xt
xt

¸
+ Dit ;

(2.2)

where C and D are matrices of appropriate dimension. (Intermediate target variables are discussed below.) Let Y^ be a column vector of n3 target levels.8 For a given positive-de…nite n3 £n3
weight matrix K, let the period loss function, Lt , be the quadratic form
Lt = (Yt ¡ Y^ )0 K(Yt ¡ Y^ );

(2.3)

(where 0 denotes the transpose) and, for a given discount factor ± (0 < ± < 1), let the intertemporal loss function be
1
X
± ¿ Lt+¿ :
(2.4)
Et (1 ¡ ±)
¿ =0

For ± = 1, the intertemporal loss function (2.4) can be interpreted as the unconditional mean
of the period loss function,
(2.5)
E[Lt ] = E[(Yt ¡ Y^ )0 K(Yt ¡ Y^ )]:
An unambiguous de…nition of a reaction function is convenient. Let a(n explicit) reaction
function be a single-valued mapping from the predetermined variables to the instruments. Thus,
a linear reaction function can be written
it = fXt ;

(2.6)

where f is an ni £ n1 matrix. The elements of f can be called response coe¢cients.
In a commitment equilibrium for a given linear policy rule, the model (2.1) is solved with
(2.6) for a given f. The forward-looking variables will be an endogenous linear function of the
state variables,
(2.7)
xt = HXt ;
where the matrix H depends on A, B and f.9 The dynamics will then be given by
xt = HXt

(2.8)

Yt = (C1 + C2 H + Df)Xt

(2.9)

Xt+1 = G11 Xt + vt+1 ;

(2.10)

where the matrix G is given by
G = A + B [f 0ni £n2 ] ;
7
Thus, this formulation abstracts from non-linearity, model uncertainty, unobservable variables, and private
information.
8
The target levels may be time-dependent, Y^t .
9
See Blanchard and Kahn [15], King and Watson [61], Klein [63] and Sims [87] for di¤erent solution algorithms.

4

where 0ni £n2 denotes an ni £ n2 matrix of zeros, and the matrices C and G are decomposed
according to Xt and xt ,
¸
·
¸
·
G11 G12
C1
; G=
:
C=
C2
G21 G22
If the instruments depend on both the predetermined variables and the forward-looking
variables, we have an implicit reaction function, for instance,
it = fXt + gxt ;

(2.11)

where g is a matrix of appropriate dimension. In order to …nd the (explicit) reaction function,
that is, to express the instruments as a function of predetermined variables only, the model (2.1)
must be solved with the restriction (2.11), for given f and g. If a solution exists, the forwardlooking variables will ful…ll (2.7) (where the matrix H depends on f and g), and in equilibrium,
the instruments will obey the reaction function
it = (f + gH)Xt :

(2.12)

In a discretion equilibrium,10 the central bank minimizes (2.4) in each period t, subject to Xt ,
(2.1), (2.2), and the knowledge that the policy in period t + 1 will be the result of reoptimization
in period t+1. The optimal reaction function under discretion will be linear and will be denoted
^ t.
it = fX

(2.13)

As in (2.7), the forward-looking variables will in equilibrium be a linear function of the predetermined variables.
2.3 Monetary policy rules
What is a monetary policy rule? I will interpret “rule” in a fairly broad sense, namely “a
prescribed guide for conduct or action,” which is the …rst de…nition given in Merriam-Webster
[74]. Accordingly, I de…ne a monetary policy rule as a prescribed guide for monetary policy
conduct.
As mentioned above, I …nd it useful to distinguish between two kinds of monetary policy
rules, namely instrument rules and target(ing) rules.
2.3.1 Instrument rules
Instrument rules are the monetary policy rules most frequently referred to in the literature and
they are what is frequently meant by “rules”.11 An instrument rule expresses the instruments
as a prescribed function of predetermined or forward-looking variables, or both. If the instruments are a prescribed function of predetermined variables only, that is, a prescribed reaction
function, the rule is an explicit instrument rule. If the instruments are a prescribed function of
forward-looking variables, that is, a prescribed implicit reaction function, the rule is an implicit
10

See Oudiz and Sachs [78], Backus and Dri¢ll [2], Curry and Levine [30], Blake and Westaway [14] and
Svensson [89] for further discussions of discretion and commitment equilibria with forward-looking variables.
11
For instance, these are the kind of rules discussed by Taylor [104].

5

instrument rule. In the latter case, the instrument rule is an equilibrium condition (there are
nontrivial endogenous variables on both sides of the equation describing the instrument rule).
Thus, a linear explicit instrument rule in the above model can be written as (2.6), where
f is prescribed. Similarly, a linear implicit instrument rule can be written as (2.11), where f
and g are prescribed. A simple instrument rule has few arguments; that is, it depends on few
predetermined or forward-looking variables.
A well-known example of a simple instrument rule is the Taylor rule [100],
it = ¹i + 1:5(¼t ¡ 2) + 0:5yt ;
where it is the federal funds rate in quarter t, ¹i is the average federal funds rate (4 percent in
[100]), ¼t is 4-quarter in‡ation, yt is the output gap, and the federal funds rate responds to
deviations of in‡ation from the 2 percent level and to the output gap with coe¢cients 1.5 and
0.5, respectively.12 If yt and ¼t are predetermined in period t, the Taylor rule is an explicit
instrument rule; if they are forward-looking in period t the Taylor rule is an implicit instrument
rule, that is, an equilibrium condition. A second example is the Henderson-McKibbin [53], [54]
rule,
\
+ y);
it = ¹i + 2(¼t + yt ¡ ¼
where ° > 0, ¹i is the average federal funds rate, and the federal funds rate responds to deviations
\
between the sum of in‡ation and output from the “target” level ¼
+ y. Again, whether it is an
explicit or implicit rule depends on whether ¼ t and yt are predetermined or forward-looking. A
third example is McCallum’s [69] rule for the (log) monetary base, bt ,
c +
bt ¡ bt¡1 = ¢x

1
[(bt¡1 ¡ xt¡1 ) ¡ (bt¡17 ¡ xt¡17 )] ¡ ®(xt¡1 ¡ x
^t¡1 );
16

(2.14)

c is a target for nominal GDP growth, and
where ® > 0, xt is (log) nominal GDP in quarter t, ¢x
c is a corresponding target path for the level. In this explicit instrument rule, the
^t¡1 + ¢x
x
^t = x
growth rate of the monetary base responds to deviations of nominal GDP from the target path
and to changes in the income velocity of the base.13
An example of an implicit reaction function is the one used in Bank of Canada’s QPM model
[28] and in Reserve Bank of New Zealand’s Forecasting and Policy System [12],
^ ),
it = iL
t + °(¼ t+T jt ¡ ¼

(2.15)

where it is a short nominal interest rate, iL
t is a long nominal interest rate, ¼ t+T jt is a T -quarterahead “rule-consistent in‡ation forecast” (a T -quarter-ahead in‡ation forecast conditional upon
the model and the implicit instrument rule (2.15); T is usually 6–8 quarters), ¼
^ is the midpoint
12

The Taylor rule is often equivalently written
^ ) + 0:5yt ;
it = r¹ + ¼ t + 0:5(¼t ¡ ¼

where r¹ is the average real rate (2 percent in [100]) and ¼
^ is average in‡ation (or an in‡ation target).
13
McCallum has emphasized that in order to be operational, a monetary policy rule should only rely on
information explicitly available at the time when the instrument is set, and which takes the fact that quarterly
GDP and the GDP de‡ator are reported with a lag into account. Therefore, his rule explicitly uses nominal GDP
data from the last quarter. Alternatively, the arguments of instrument rules can be forecasts of current variables,
say ¼ tjt¡1 and ytjt¡1 for the Taylor rule. This presents no operational di¢culty, although it clearly makes it more
di¢cult for outsiders to verify whether the rule is obeyed.

6

of the in‡ation target range, and ° > 0. That is, the instrument it is adjusted such that the
(reverse) slope of the yield curve, it ¡ iL
t , is proportional to the deviation of the rule-consistent
in‡ation forecast from the in‡ation target. This is an example of an implicit reaction function,
since both the long interest rate and the in‡ation forecast are forward-looking and depend on
the reaction function itself.14
A variant of (2.15),
^ ),
(2.16)
it = ¹i + °(¼t+T jt ¡ ¼
where the instrument responds directly to deviations of the rule-consistent in‡ation forecast from
the in‡ation target, is discussed in Haldane [49], and further examined in Haldane and Batini
[50] and Rudebusch and Svensson [83]. These implicit reaction functions would be examples of
implicit instrument rules, if they were prescribed guides for monetary policy.
The implicit reaction functions (2.15) and (2.16) are simple, in the sense that few forwardlooking variables enter on the right-hand side. However, the corresponding equilibrium (explicit)
reaction functions (2.12) resulting when the model is solved are complex, in that they depend
on all the predetermined variables that determine the in‡ation forecast and, for (2.15), the long
interest rate, and in that the response coe¢cients are complex functions of the parameters of
the model and the implicit reaction function.
From equation (C.13) in appendix C (following Svensson [91], equation (6.10)), it is apparent
that implicit reaction functions of the form (2.16) are generally not optimal, in spite of their
being used by Bank of Canada and Reserve Bank of New Zealand, since other variables, for
instance output, contain is additional useful information, beyond what is contained in the in‡ation forecast. This is also the case for strict in‡ation targeting, when only in‡ation enter the
loss function. It is also demonstrated numerically in Haldane and Batini [50] and Rudebusch
and Svensson [83] that (2.16) is generally not optimal.
2.3.2 The role of instrument rules
What is generally the role of instrument rules in monetary policy? In practice, no central bank
follows an instrument rule, either explicit or implicit. Every central bank uses more information
than the frequently suggested simple rules rely on, especially in open economies. In particular, no
central bank reacts in a prescribed mechanical way to a prescribed information set. As is known
by every student of modern central banking, the bank’s Board or Monetary Policy Committee
reconsiders its monetary policy decisions more or less from scratch at frequent intervals, by
taking all the relevant information into account (with the possible exception of a …xed exchange
rate). The bank frequently reconsiders (and, at best, reoptimizes); rather than considers (and,
at best, optimizes) once and for all, and then simply applies the resulting reaction function
forever after. This reconsideration of the bank’s decisions means that the situation is best
described as decision-making under discretion rather than commitment; there will inevitably
be reconsiderations and new decisions in the future, and there is in practice no commitment
mechanism to prevent this.15
14

The reaction function is also used in Black, Macklem and Rose [13]. Implicit reaction functions are problematic, in that nonexistence or multiplicity of equilibria can occur, which has been demonstrated by Woodford
[111] and Bernanke and Woodford [11].
15
Although one might conceive of a law mandating the central bank to follow a simple instrument rule, such
an instrument rule would have to be so exceedingly simple in order to be veri…able, that it would be manifestly

7

Therefore, the role of simple or complex instrument rules is, in practice, never to commit
the banks. Instead, they serve as base-lines, that is, as comparisons and frames of reference,
for the actual policy and its evaluation. In contrast, targeting rules, as in Rogo¤ [81], Walsh
[108], Svensson [91] and [93], Cecchetti [21], Clarida, Gali and Gertler [25], and Rudebusch and
Svensson [83], have the potential to serve as a kind of commitment (namely a commitment to a
loss function, although it is still minimized under discretion), and are potentially closer to the
actual practice and decision framework of (at least) in‡ation-targeting central banks.
2.3.3 Targeting rules
By a targeting rule, I mean, at the most general level, the assignment of a particular loss function
to be minimized. More precisely, a target(ing) rule speci…es a (vector of) target variable(s) Yt , a
(vector of) target level(s) Y^ , and a corresponding loss function (2.3) and (2.4) (that is, a weight
matrix K and a discount factor ±) that is to be minimized.16
At a more speci…c level, a targeting rule can be expressed as an equation (a system of
equations) that the targets variables must ful…ll. Consider the special case when (1) the central
bank has perfect control over the goal variables and (2) there is no intratemporal or intertemporal
tradeo¤ between the goal variables.17 Then, there is a trivial …rst-order condition for a minimum
of the loss function,
(2.17)
Yt = Y^ :
In this case, the targeting rule can equivalently be expressed as an equation which must be
ful…lled by the target variables.
When the central bank has imperfect control over the target variables, and as long as there is
no intratemporal or intertemporal tradeo¤ between the goal variables, the …rst-order condition
is still trivial,
Yt+¿jt = Y^ ,
for ¿ ¸ T , where Yt+¿ jt denotes a conditional forecast of Yt+¿ (to be de…ned below) and T ¸ 0
is the shortest horizon at which the instrument has an e¤ect on the goal variables.
For the realistic case with imperfectly controlled target variables for which there is an intertemporal or intratemporal tradeo¤, the situation is more complex. However, the targeting
rule can still be expressed as a system of equations representing a …rst-order condition for a
minimum of the loss function.
To show this, it is necessary to provide a more rigorous de…nition of conditional forecasts.
More precisely, for a …xed period t, let Xt+¿ jt , xt+¿ jt , Yt+¿ jt and it+¿ jt for ¿ ¸ 0 denote predetermined variables, forward-looking variables, and target variables and instrument settings,
respectively, in period t + ¿ , for the corresponding deterministic model (2.1) when the shocks
after period t are all zero (vt+¿ = 0 for ¿ ¸ 1). For any variable », let » t denote the future
path » t ; » t+1jt ; » t+2jt ; ::: Since the model is linear and the shocks are additive, we realize that
these paths can also be interpreted as conditionally expected paths, expected values of future
ine¢cient in many circumstances and therefore likely to be strongly resisted by both legislators and central
bankers.
16
The target levels can be time-dependent, Y^t .
17
The latter generally requires as many linearly independent instruments as there are target variables. Hence,
if there is only one instrument, there must be only one target variable.

8

random variables, conditional on the information available in period t (that is, Xt , the model
(2.1) and (2.2), and the zero means of the shocks). This is why they can be called conditional
forecasts.18 More precisely, consider the set It of paths it of instrument settings, for which there
exist bounded paths X t , xt and Y t of predetermined, forward-looking and target variables, respectively. For each it 2 It , let » t (it ) denote the corresponding path for variable » = X, x and
Y , and call it the corresponding conditional forecast (conditional on Xt , it , (2.1), (2.2), and
E[vt+¿ ] = 0, ¿ ¸ 1.). Accordingly, the conditional forecast of target variables is denoted Y t (it ):
Finally, let
Yt ´ fY t (it )jit 2 It g
denote the set of feasible conditional forecasts.
Constructing conditional forecasts in a backward-looking model (that is, a model without
forward-looking variables) is straightforward. Constructing such forecasts in a forward-looking
model raises some speci…c di¢culties, which are explained and resolved in appendix A.
Due to the certainty-equivalence that holds in a linear model with a quadratic loss function
and additive shocks, it is now apparent that the stochastic optimization problem to minimize
the expected loss function over future random target variables (2.4), subject to (2.1) and (2.2),
is equivalent to the deterministic problem to minimize the deterministic loss function over the
deterministic paths of conditional forecasts of the target variables Y t ;
1
X
± ¿ (Yt+¿ jt ¡ Y^ )0 K(Yt+¿ jt ¡ Y^ );
(2.18)
¿ =0

subject to

Y t 2 Yt .

(2.19)

The …rst-order condition for a minimum of (2.18) subject to (2.19) can be written as the
system of equations
(2.20)
Gt (Yt ; Yt+1jt ; Yt+2jt ; :::) = 0;
which the conditional forecasts of the target variables must ful…ll (see appendix B for details).
Thus, the targeting rule for target variables under incomplete control can be formulated as the
system of equations (2.20) for the conditional forecasts.
A targeting rule in a given model implies a particular reaction function, in the sense that the
…rst-order conditions (2.17) or (2.20) can be interpreted as an implicit reaction function, in the
following way. Let Y t be the solution to the …rst-order condition, and let it = it ; it+1jt ; :::; be the
corresponding instrument path. The …rst element, it , gives the instrument setting for period t.
Obviously, it will be a function of the predetermined variables, Xt , in this period. In a linear
model with a quadratic loss function, it will be a linear function of Xt , and the corresponding
(explicit) reaction function can be written as (2.6).
2.3.4 Intermediate-targeting rules
An intermediate-targeting rule speci…es an (a vector of) intermediate target variable(s), Zt ; given
by
·
¸
Xt
+ DZ it
Zt = CZ
xt
18

Alternatively, they can be called “projections,” as in the publications of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand.

9

where CZ and DZ are matrices of appropriate dimensions, a target level (vector), Z^t ; and an
intermediate (intertemporal) loss function to be minimized,
Et (1 ¡ ±)

1
X

± ¿ (Zt+¿ ¡ Z^t+¿ )0 KZ (Zt+¿ ¡ Z^t+¿ );

(2.21)

¿ =0

where KZ is a positive-de…nite weight matrix of appropriate dimension.
An “ideal” intermediate target variable is highly correlated with the goal, easier to control
than the goal, easier to observe than the goal, and transparent (for instance in the sense of
simplifying communication between the central bank and the general public as well as public
understanding of monetary policy) (cf. the discussion in Svensson [91]). Then, the appropriate
intermediate-targeting rule is e¢cient in minimizing the loss function (2.4). For instance, suppose that the intermediate target variables Zt+¿ ;t in period t predict the goal variables in period
t + ¿ according to
Yt+¿ = MZt+¿ ;t + "Z;t+¿ ;
where "Z;t+¿ is an iid shock with zero mean which is uncorrelated with Zt+¿ ;t and M is a given
matrix of appropriate dimension. Let the intermediate target level Z^ ful…ll
^
Y^ = M Z:

(2.22)

Then we have
^ 0 M 0 KM(Zt+¿ ;t ¡ Z)
^ + "0Z;t+¿ K"Z;t+¿
(Yt+¿ ¡ Y^ )0 K(Yt+¿ ¡ Y^ ) = (Zt+¿ ;t ¡ Z)
^ 0 KZ (Zt+¿ ;t ¡ Z)
^ + "0Z;t+¿ K"Z;t+¿ ;
´ (Zt+¿ ;t ¡ Z)
(2.23)
where

KZ ´ M 0 KM:

(2.24)

Since the last term on the right side of (2.23) is exogenous, we realize that minimizing (2.21)
with Z^ and KZ given by (2.23) and (2.24) will be equivalent to minimizing (2.4).
Intuitively, an intermediate-targeting rule will be optimal if the instruments only a¤ect the
target variables via the intermediate target variables, schematically illustrated as
it ! Zt+T;t ! Yt+¿
for 0 · T · ¿ :
In general, the monetary transmission mechanism is too complex, with too many channels
with di¤erent relative lags, for an intermediate variable to exist (except the “canonical” intermediate variables to be discussed next).
2.3.5 The canonical intermediate target
We immediately realize that a natural and optimal intermediate target, the “canonical” intermediate target, arises if the intermediate target variables Zt+¿;t are identi…ed with the conditional
forecast of the target variables Yt+¿ jt , the intermediate target levels Z^t+¿ ;t with the target levels

10

Y^ , and the intermediate weight matrix KZ with the weight matrix K (that is, the matrix M
above is the identity matrix)
Zt+¿ ;t ´ Yt+¿ jt
Z^t+¿ ;t ´ Y^
KZ ´ K:
This intermediate-targeting rule obviously leads to the same equilibrium as the original targeting
rule.
Thus, it appears that using conditional forecasts as intermediate target variables is optimal.
In this case, the intermediate target variables are synthetic; they are theoretical constructions.
Whether conditional forecasts are ideal intermediate targets depends on their being easily observed and transparent, an issue that I shall return to in the discussion of in‡ation targeting in
section 3.
2.3.6 An example of a targeting rule
In Svensson [91], a simple backward-looking model (that is, there are no forward-looking variables xt in (2.1)) is presented, where the …rst two elements of the vector of predetermined
variables are in‡ation, ¼t , and the output-gap, yt (see appendix C). The instrument, a short
interest rate, it , a¤ects the output gap with a one-period control lag, and in‡ation with a twoperiod control lag. The target variables are also in‡ation and the output gap, and the period
loss function is
1
^ )2 + ¸yt2 ];
Lt = [(¼t ¡ ¼
2
where ¸ ¸ 0 is the relative weight on output-gap stabilization. Hence, the vector of target
¼; 0)0 and a diagonal weight matrix K with
variables is Yt = (¼t ; yt )0 , with target levels Y^ = (^
1
diagonal 2 (1; ¸).
The …rst-order condition can be written in several di¤erent ways. One is
¼ t+2jt ¡ ¼
^ = c(¸)(¼t+1jt ¡ ¼
^ );

(2.25)

where the coe¢cient c(¸) ¸ 0 is increasing in ¸, with c(0) = 0 and lim¸!1 c(¸) = 1, the oneperiod-ahead conditional in‡ation forecast ¼t+1jt is predetermined, and the two-period-ahead
conditional in‡ation forecast ¼t+2jt depends on the predetermined variables and the instrument
in period t. Thus, the targeting rule can be formulated as “adjust the instrument such that
the deviation of the two-year-ahead conditional in‡ation forecast from the in‡ation target is a
fraction c(¸) of the same deviation of the one-year-ahead forecast.”
Alternatively, the targeting rule can be expressed as an intermediate-targeting rule. Let the
intermediate-target variable in period t be the two-period-ahead conditional in‡ation forecast,
Zt ´ ¼t+2jt , and let the intermediate-target level be time-dependent and ful…ll
Z^t ´ ¼
^ + c(¸)(¼t+1jt ¡ ¼
^ ):
Then, the same equilibrium can be reached with an intermediate-targeting rule with the intermediate loss function
1
(Zt ¡ Z^t )2 ,
2
11

or, equivalently, with the intermediate target ful…lling the …rst-order condition
Zt = Z^t .
Appendix C shows several other ways of expressing the targeting and intermediate-targeting
rules for this example and derives the corresponding reaction function.
2.4 Some confusing terminology
In the taxonomy outlined above, target variables are variables that appear in the loss function,
while the variables that appear in the reaction function are indicators, predetermined variables
(that cause and/or predict the target variables and therefore convey information). This terminology seems logical and consistent to me.
In the literature, “targeting variable Yt ” or “having a target Y^ for variable Yt ” sometimes
implicitly or explicitly refer to a situation with a reaction function that is restricted in a particular
way.19 Thus, the instrument is restricted to only respond to deviations between the target
variable and the target level (and possibly to lagged instrument levels, to incorporate instrument
smoothing), for instance,
(2.26)
it = ¹i + g(Yt ¡ Y^ );
or

it = (1 ¡ ½)¹i + ½it¡1 + g(Yt ¡ Y^ ):

(2.27)

I …nd this use of the term “targeting” confusing and misleading, for several reasons. First,
it is simply unrealistic. “In‡ation targeting” in the real world does not correspond to central
banks having reaction functions of the form
^ ).
it = ¹i + g(¼t ¡ ¼

(2.28)

In‡ation-targeting central banks simply use much more information when setting their instrument than only the deviation of current in‡ation from the in‡ation target.20
Second, reaction functions of the form (2.26) or (2.27), where the instrument responds only
to the deviation of a target variable from its target level, are generally ine¢cient, in the sense
that they do not minimize relevant loss functions. Even though they may succeed in making
the mean of the target variable equal to the target level, they generally lead to high variability
in the target variable compared to other reaction functions. For instance, in Rudebusch and
Svensson [83], the reaction function (2.28) preforms so badly in stabilizing in‡ation and output
that we do not even report its results. It follows that any central bank trying to implement
a reaction function like (2.26) or (2.27) would have strong incentives to deviate from it; the
reaction function is not incentive-compatible.
Third, I …nd the above use of the term misleading, because a moment’s thought makes it
obvious that the appropriate policy is for the instrument to respond to the determinants of the
target variables, the indicators that cause or predict the target variables, rather than to respond
19
For examples, see, especially, Bryant, Hooper and Mann [19], chapter 1, but also Judd and Motley [57],
McCallum [70] and Bernanke and Woodford [11].
20
For reasons explained at the end of section 2.3.1, in‡ation targeting in the real world does hardly imply
it = ¹i + g(¼ t+T jt ¡ ¼
^ ) either.

12

to the target variables themselves (see Svensson [94] for further discussion and a few examples).
This is, obviously, the reason why reaction functions of the form (2.26) and (2.27) are ine¢cient
in stabilizing target variables around their target levels. Normally, target variables and indicator
variables do not coincide. For instance, as shown in Svensson [91] and [93], even under strict
in‡ation targeting (when the central bank is only concerned with stabilizing in‡ation around
the in‡ation target), it is best for the central bank to respond to both in‡ation and output,
since both are useful for predicting future in‡ation. Similarly, as discussed in Svensson [94],
if the central bank wants to stabilize nominal GDP growth around a target growth rate, it is
better to respond separately to the determinants of nominal GDP growth than just to respond
to the deviation between nominal GDP growth and the target growth rate. Or, if the central
bank wants to stabilize M3 growth around a target growth rate, it is better to respond to the
determinants of M3 growth rather than to just respond to the deviation of M3 growth from the
target growth rate (see section 4.1 below).21
Generally, what is in the loss function is generally not what is best to respond to, and what
is best to respond to need not be in the loss function. It therefore seems better to describe the
reaction function (2.26) more neutrally as “responding to Yt ¡ Y^ ” than as “targeting Yt .”22

3 In‡ation targeting
The main points in this section are the following: First, real-world in‡ation targeting can be
interpreted as a targeting rule, with a relatively explicit loss function to be minimized. Uncontroversially (by now), this loss function also contains concerns about the stability of the
real economy, for instance, output variability. That is, it corresponds to “‡exible” rather than
“strict” in‡ation targeting. Second, the targeting rule can also be expressed as an intermediatetargeting rule, which I shall call “in‡ation-forecast targeting” (although arguably a more precise
but somewhat clumsy name would be “in‡ation-forecast-and-output–gap-forecast targeting”).
Then the conditional in‡ation forecast is an intermediate target variable (or both the conditional
in‡ation and output-gap forecast are intermediate target variables). Third, in‡ation targeting
appears to be a commitment to a systematic and rational (that is, optimizing for the given loss
function) monetary policy to a greater extent than any other monetary policy regime so far.
This is because the operating procedure under in‡ation targeting, in‡ation-forecast targeting,
can be interpreted as a way of ensuring that …rst-order conditions for a minimum of the loss
function are (approximately) ful…lled. Also, the high degree of transparency and accountability
associated with in‡ation targeting allows outsiders to monitor that those …rst-order conditions
are ful…lled and creates strong incentives for the central bank not to deviate.
3.1 Characteristics
During the 1990’s, New Zealand, Canada, U.K., Sweden and Australia have shifted to a new
monetary policy regime, in‡ation targeting.23 This regime is characterized by
21
It is optimal to respond only to lagged values of the target variables and to the instrument only in the special
case when the target variables depend only on lags of themselves and the instrument.
22
For a defense of “targeting Yt ,” see McCallum and Nelson [73], appendix A.
23
Finland and Spain also have an explicit in‡ation target. However, since they participate in ERM, they also
have an exchange rate target. Since both countries have been very anxious to qualify for membership in the EMU,
it is likely that the exchange rate target would receive priority if a con‡ict between the in‡ation target and the

13

1. an explicit quantitative in‡ation target,
2. an operating procedure, in‡ation-forecast targeting, which uses an internal conditional
in‡ation forecast as an intermediate target variable,
3. a high degree of transparency and accountability.24
The explicit in‡ation target is either in the form of an interval or a point target, where
the center of the interval or the point target currently varies across countries from 1.5 to 2.5
percent. The target refers to the Consumer Price Index or a variant of this that excludes some
transitory components. For instance, mortgage costs or credit services may be excluded (to
eliminate contradictory short-run e¤ects of monetary policy on the CPI), or taxes and subsidies
(to eliminate short-run e¤ects of …scal policy). Alternatively, a list of factors to be disregarded
in the evaluation of monetary policy may be speci…ed in advance.
The remaining part of this section discusses the loss function under in‡ation targeting, the
operating procedure (in‡ation-forecast targeting), transparency and, …nally, issues related to
model uncertainty and model-robustness.
3.2 The loss function
Which loss function is then associated with in‡ation targeting? As reported below, there seems
to be considerable agreement among academics and central bankers that the loss function is of
the conventional form
¤
1£
(3.1)
(¼t ¡ ¼
^ )2 + ¸yt2 ;
Lt =
2
where ¼t is the in‡ation in period t, ¼
^ is the in‡ation target (or the midpoint of the target
25
range), yt is the output gap, and ¸ ¸ 0 is the relative weights on stabilizing the output
gap. In terms of the general framework in section 2, the vector of target variables is given by
¼; 0)0 , and the weight matrix K is the
Yt = (¼t ; yt )0 , the vector of target levels is given by Y^ = (^
diagonal matrix with the diagonal 12 (1; ¸). As in Svensson [93] and [96], the case when ¸ = 0 and
only in‡ation enters the loss function is called strict in‡ation targeting, whereas the case when
¸ > 0 and the output gap (or concern about stability of the real economy in general) enters the
loss function is called ‡exible in‡ation targeting.26
In‡ation targeting obviously always involves an attempt to minimize deviations of in‡ation
from the explicit in‡ation target, corresponding to the …rst term in (3.1). Whereas there may
previously have been some controversy about whether in‡ation targeting involves concern about
real variability, represented by output-gap variability and corresponding to the second term in
(3.1), there is now considerable agreement in the literature that this is indeed the case. In‡ation
targeting central banks are not what King [60] called “in‡ation nutters.” For instance, Fischer
exchange rate target were to arise.
24
The rapidly increasing literature on in‡ation targeting includes the conference volumes Leiderman and
Svensson [65], Haldane [47], Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City [40], Lowe [67], and Macklem [68]. See also the
surveys by Bernanke and Mishkin [10] and Bernanke, Laubach, Mishkin and Posen [7].
25
For a symmetric unimodal probability distribution, the probability of falling within the target range is
maximized if the mean is set equal to the midpoint of target range. This provides some rationale for selecting the
midpoint of a target range as the point target of a quadratic loss function.
26
As in‡ation-targeting central banks, like other central banks, also seem to smooth instruments, the loss
function (3.1) may also includes a term º(it ¡ it¡1 )2 with º > 0.

14

[41], King [59], Taylor [101] and Svensson [90] in Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City [40] all
discuss in‡ation targeting with reference to a loss function of the form (3.1) with ¸ > 0. As
shown in Svensson [91] and Ball [3], concern about output-gap stability translates into a more
gradualist policy. Thus, if in‡ation is away from the in‡ation target, it is brought back to target
more gradually. Equivalently, in‡ation-targeting central banks lengthen their horizon and aim
at meeting the in‡ation target further in the future. As further discussed in Svensson [93],
concerns about output-gap stability, model uncertainty, and interest rate smoothing all have
similar e¤ects under in‡ation targeting, namely a more gradualist policy. Sveriges Riksbank [98]
has explicitly expressed very similar views.27 The Minutes from Bank of England’s Monetary
Policy Committee [5] are also explicit about stabilizing the output gap.28 Several contributions
and discussions by central bankers and academics in Lowe [67] express similar views. Ball [4]
and Svensson [92] give examples of a gradualist approach of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand.
Thus, it is seems noncontroversial that real-world in‡ation targeting is actually ‡exible in‡ation
targeting, corresponding to ¸ > 0 in (3.1).
The loss function above does not induce an average in‡ation bias, since the implicit output
target is taken to be capacity output and therefore consistent with the natural-rate hypothesis
(that monetary policy cannot systematically a¤ect average unemployment/capacity utilization).
Indeed, motivations for in‡ation targeting, by governments, parliaments and central banks,
put much emphasis on the natural-rate hypothesis, and it can be argued that the hypothesis
constitutes one of the foundations of in‡ation targeting. The high degree of transparency and
accountability in in‡ation targeting may then ensure that any concern about the real economy
is consistent with the natural-rate hypotheses and therefore reduces, or eliminates, any in‡ation
bias, which arguably translates into an output level target in (3.1) which is given by capacity
output.
This highlights a fundamental asymmetry between in‡ation and output in in‡ation targeting.
There is both a level goal and a stability goal for in‡ation, and the level goal, that is the in‡ation
target, is subject to choice. For output, there is only a stability goal and no level goal. Or, to
put it di¤erently, the level goal is not subject to choice; it is given by the capacity of the output
level. Therefore, I believe it is appropriate to label minimizing (3.1) as “(‡exible) in‡ation
targeting” rather than “in‡ation-and-output-gap targeting,” especially since the label is already
used for the monetary policy regimes in New Zealand, Canada, U.K., Sweden and Australia.29
For convenience, I shall consequently use the term “in‡ation-forecast targeting” below, rather
than the somewhat clumsy “in‡ation-forecast-and output-gap-forecast targeting.”
3.3 In‡ation-forecast targeting
The greatest problem with in‡ation targeting is arguably the central bank’s imperfect control of
in‡ation. In‡ation control is imperfect due to lags in the transmission mechanism, uncertainty
about the transmission mechanism, the current state of the economy and future shocks to the
27

See box on p. 26 in Sveriges Riksbank [98].
See Bank of England [5], para. 40: “... [I]n any given circumstances, a variety of di¤erent interest rate paths
could in principle achieve the in‡ation target. What factors were relevant to the preferred pro…le of rates?...
There was a broad consensus that the Committee should in principle be concerned about deviations of the level
of output from capacity.”
29
However, admittedly the label “in‡ation targeting” seems inappropriate if ¸ is very large, so it is understood
that the label refers to (3.1) with a ¸ of at most moderate size.
28

15

economy, and the in‡uence of other factors than monetary policy on in‡ation, in particular
shocks that occur within the control lag. The imperfect control makes the implementation of
in‡ation targeting hard. It also makes the monitoring of in‡ation targeting di¢cult, since it is
hard to extract how much of observed in‡ation is due to monetary policy some two years ago
rather than to shocks and other factors having occurred during the control lag. With monitoring
made di¢cult, the accountability and transparency of in‡ation targeting is reduced, and many
potential bene…ts of in‡ation targeting may not materialize.
In Svensson [91], it is argued that there is a solution to this formidable problem, namely to use
a conditional in‡ation forecast as an intermediate target variable.30 As emphasized in section 2,
using conditional forecasts as intermediate target variables is arguably the most e¢cient way of
implementing monetary policy, since it can be interpreted as implementing …rst-order conditions
for a minimum of the loss function, using all the relevant information.
With this view, in‡ation-forecast targeting can be seen as an optimal intermediate-targeting
rule. In short, it can be interpreted as a way for the central bank of implementing …rst-order
conditions for an optimum, and as a way for outsiders of monitoring and verifying that those
…rst-order conditions are ful…lled.31
In terms of the analysis in section 2, according to (3.1) the target variables (in‡ation and the
output gap) are given by the vector Yt = (¼t ; yt )0 . The corresponding “canonical” intermediate
target variables in period t are given by Zt+¿ ;t ´ Yt+¿ jt = (¼t+¿ jt ; yt+¿ jt )0 . The task for the
central bank is then to …nd a future path for the instrument, it = (it ; it+1jt ; :::) 2 It such that the
corresponding paths for in‡ation and the output gap, Y t = (Yt ; Yt+1jt ; :::) 2 Yt , are optimal, that
is, to minimize the intermediate loss function (2.4) and thereby ful…ll the …rst-order conditions
(2.20).
How can this be achieved in practice? The sta¤ at the central bank can generate a collection
of feasible in‡ation and output gap paths for di¤erent instrument paths for the MPC (or the
Board). In this way, the sta¤ shows the set feasible conditional forecasts, Yt , to the MPC. The
MPC then selects the conditional forecasts of in‡ation and the output gap that “look best,”
that is, that return in‡ation to the in‡ation target and the output gap to zero at an appropriate
rate. If this selection is done in a systematic and rational way, it is approximately equivalent
to minimizing a loss function like (3.1) over the set of feasible conditional forecasts, Yt . The
corresponding instrument path is then the basis for the current instrument setting.
This operating procedure implies that all relevant information is used in conducting monetary
policy. It also implies that there is no explicit instrument rule, that is, the current instrument
setting is not a prescribed explicit function of current information. Instead, the procedure results
in an endogenous implicit reaction function, where the instrument ends up as an implicit function
of the relevant information. The reaction function will, in general, not be a Taylor-type reaction
function (where a Taylor-type reaction function denotes a reaction function rule which is a linear
30
As far as I know, the idea that the in‡ation forecast becomes an intermediate target under in‡ation targeting
was …rst expressed in print by King [58], p. 118: “The use of an in‡ation target does not mean that there is no
intermediate target. Rather, the intermediate target is the expected level of in‡ation at some future date chosen
to allow for the lag between changes in interest rates and the resulting changes in in‡ation. In practice, we use a
forecasting horizon of two years.”
31
As is emphasized in Svensson [91] and [93], it is important that the forecast is the central bank’s internal
structural forecast, and not an external forecast or market expectation. If the central bank instead lets the instrument react to market expectations in a mechanical way, there may be instability, nonuniqueness or nonexistence
of equilibria, as has been shown by Woodford [111] and further discussed in Bernanke and Woodford [11]

16

function of current in‡ation and output only), except in the special case when current in‡ation
and output are su¢cient statistics for the state of the economy. Typically, it will be dependent
on much more information; indeed, on anything a¤ecting the central bank’s conditional in‡ation
and output forecasts. Especially, the more open the economy, the more the reaction function
will depend on foreign variables, for instance foreign in‡ation, output and interest rates, since
these will then have e¤ects on the conditional in‡ation and output forecasts.
As an alternative to selecting the conditional in‡ation and output forecast that “look best”,
the sta¤ and the MPC can choose to follow a more speci…c targeting-rule in the form of an
equation that the relevant forecasts must ful…ll. In the example in appendix C, one such targeting
rule is the …rst-order condition (C.6),
^=¡
¼t+2jt ¡ ¼

®y c(¸)
y
;
1 ¡ c(¸) t+1jt

(3.2)

“select the instrument such that deviation between the two-year conditional in‡ation forecast is
®y c(¸)
1¡c(¸) times the negative of the one-year output-gap forecast.”
This example involves both in‡ation and output forecasts. What about targeting rules that
involve only in‡ation forecasts? Within the same example, one such trivial rule arises under
strict in‡ation targeting, when ¸ = c(¸) = 0,
^;
¼t+2jt = ¼
“set the instrument such that the conditional in‡ation forecast at the two-year horizon (or, more
generally, at the shortest horizon at which in‡ation can be a¤ected) equals the in‡ation target.”
Under more realistic ‡exible in‡ation targeting, the targeting rule can be written as (C.9),
¡
¢
^ = c(¸) ¼t+1jt ¡ ¼
^ ;
¼t+2jt ¡ ¼

(3.3)

“set the instrument such that the two-year conditional in‡ation forecast’s deviation from the
in‡ation target is the fraction c(¸) of the one-year conditional in‡ation forecast’s deviation.”32
Another targeting rule for ‡exible in‡ation targeting is “set the instrument such that the
conditional in‡ation forecast hits the in‡ation target in quarter T ,” where T is selected to be
larger than the minimum control lag (the shortest horizon at which in‡ation can be a¤ected).
Note that this targeting rule, “aiming at the in‡ation target T quarters ahead,” does not mean
that, in the absence of future shocks, in‡ation is actually likely to hit the in‡ation target T
quarters ahead. Instead, it implies a gradual approach, much like (3.3), since after one quarter,
the central bank will still be aiming T rather than T ¡ 1 quarters ahead. In order to see this,
assume for simplicity that the in‡ation forecast is predetermined up to 4 quarters ahead but
can be controlled from 5 quarters ahead and that the in‡ation forecast is a straight line from
quarter 4 to quarter T > 5. This means that the deviation of the in‡ation forecast 5 quarters
ahead from the in‡ation target is the fraction TT ¡5
¡4 of the deviation of in‡ation 4 quarters ahead,
that is,
T ¡5
¼t+5jt ¡ ¼
(¼
^=
¡¼
^ );
T ¡ 4 t+4jt
32

Note that if (3.2) and (3.3) are used to eliminate ¼
^ t+2jt ¡ ¼
^ , the following targeting rule for the output-gap
1¡c(¸)
forecast arises: yt+1jt = ¡ ®y (¼t+1jt ¡ ¼
^ ):

17

which with appropriate choice of T is similar to (3.3).33
Another targeting rule, that can arguably be inferred from the minutes of Bank of England’s
MPC (see footnote 28), is to “select the instrument path such that the deviation of output from
capacity output are minimized, subject to the in‡ation forecast hitting the in‡ation target eight
quarters ahead.”
These examples of speci…c in‡ation-forecast targeting rules (with or without involving explicit conditional output-gap forecasts) can be seen as “rules of thumb” that may simplify the
selection of the optimal path of forecasts for the MPC. They can also serve a role in simplifying
communication with the private sector, as discussed in the next section. However, they are of
course only optimal for the loss function (3.1) under special circumstances (for instance, if the
model is similar to the model in appendix C). The performance and robustness of these and
other speci…c targeting rules for other models remain an unexplored issue.
In‡ation-targeting central banks will no doubt continue to develope and experiment with
di¤erent speci…c targeting rules, both in order to simplify the selection of the optimal paths of
the target variables and in order to simplify communication with the private sector; in this way
developing and improving the practice of in‡ation targeting.
von Hagen [107] emphasizes that an intermediate target provides a focal point in the monetary policy discussion and de…nes the admissible arguments in the discussion preceding monetary
policy decisions. Thus, using a conditional forecast as an intermediate target makes the forecast
the focal point in the discussion. One aspect of this is that the advantage of relying on conditional in‡ation forecasts is that this induces some discipline when applying judgements and
extra-model information. In order to allow judgements and extra-model information to a¤ect
the current instrument setting, a coherent and convincing argument for why such judgements
or information a¤ect the conditional in‡ation forecast at the appropriate horizon must be presented. Only if the conditional forecast can be shown to be thus a¤ected, can any corresponding
current instrument adjustment be motivated.
Generally, practical monetary policy, especially forecasting, cannot rely on models alone (at
least not yet). It seems that judgemental adjustments and extra-model information will always
be necessary and constitute a natural part of practical monetary policy. It is far from obvious
how to make judgemental adjustments of models and their results, and how to include extramodel information, in reasonably consistent ways.34 Still, in terms of the forward-looking model
used in section 2, judgemental adjustments can be incorporated by adjusting the coe¢cients
of matrices A and B in (2.1), for instance by shifting intercepts of model equations (so-called
“add-factors” in the jargon of modelers and forecasters). As a result, the matrices become timedependent. The algorithms used to calculate conditional forecasts and discretion equilibria, cf.
appendix A, are easily adapted to time-varying matrices.
The above examples of targeting rules also generally show how the central bank should
respond to new information, for instance to various shocks: Decide whether the shock a¤ects
the conditional forecasts at the relevant horizon. If so, adjust the instrument to counter (wholly
or partially, depending upon the desire to smooth interest rates) the e¤ect of the shocks on the
forecast.35
33
34
35

Note that under the assumptions made, ¼ t+¿ jt = ¼
^ + TT ¡¿
^ ); ¿ = 4; 5; :::; T:
¡4 (¼ t+4jt ¡ ¼
See Reifschneider, Stockton and Wilcox [80] for further discussion of judgemental adjustements.
Freedman [42] provides an insightful and more detailed discussion of the implementation of in‡ation targeting.

18

3.4 Transparency
Real-world in‡ation-targeting regimes are characterized by a high degree of transparency and
accountability. In‡ation-targeting central banks issue regular reports explaining and motivating
their policy to the general public. The Reserve Bank of New Zealand, the Bank of England and
Sveriges Riksbank publish graphs of a conditional in‡ation forecast. Bank of England publishes
the minutes of the meeting of its Monetary Policy Committee within six weeks of each meeting.
In New Zealand, the Reserve Bank Governor’s performance will be evaluated by the Reserve
Bank’s Board of Directors, and his job potentially at risk, if in‡ation moves outside the 0–
3 percent target range. In the U.K., the Chancellor of Exchequer has announced the “Open
Letter System”: If in‡ation deviates more than 1 percentage point from the 2.5 percent in‡ation
target, the Governor of the Bank of England shall explain in an open letter why the divergence
has occurred and what steps the Bank is taking to deal with it.
Which is the role of transparency in monetary policy in general, and in in‡ation targeting
in particular? Building on previous work by Cukierman and Meltzer [29], Faust and Svensson
[39] have recently examined the general role of transparency in monetary policy. They examine
a model with a central bank that is tempted to deviate from an announced in‡ation target
due to ‡uctuations in an idiosyncratic employment target. The employment target is private
information to the central bank and unobservable to the private sector. For instance, it represents
changes in the composition of the MPC/Board, or the response of the bank to external pressure
from various special interests. The private sector observes the macroeconomic outcome and
imperfectly infers the central bank’s employment target, which gives rise to the bank’s reputation
in the private sector and corresponding private-sector in‡ation expectations.
Increased transparency allows the private sector to infer the bank’s employment target with
greater precision, which makes the bank’s reputation and corresponding private-sector in‡ation
expectations more sensitive to the bank’s actions. This, in turn, increases the cost for the bank
of deviating from the announced in‡ation target and pursuing its idiosyncratic employment
target. Consequently, increased transparency induces the bank to follow the announced policy
more closely. It simply provides an implicit commitment mechanism.
Whereas society almost always prefers more transparency to less, the central bank often
prefers less transparency, since it allows the bank to pursue its idiosyncratic goals with less cost
to its reputation. An obvious conclusion from this …nding is that society, rather than the bank,
should decide on the degree of transparency.
I believe these results from Faust and Svensson [39] to be consistent with the general view that
transparency facilitates public understanding of monetary policy and increases the incentives
for the central bank to pursue the announced goals for monetary policy and thereby to improve
credibility for those goals. Consider the three-part scheme of e¢cient delegation of monetary
policy: (1) society announces goals for monetary policy, (2) the central bank receives instrument
independence to pursue the goals, (3) the central bank is accountable to society for ful…lling the
goals for monetary policy. Transparency is then crucial for the accountability of the central
bank, that is, for society’s monitoring of monetary policy.
Under in‡ation targeting, reporting the central bank’s conditional in‡ation and output forecasts (including the information, assumptions, models and judgements used in its construction)
allows outsiders to monitor and scrutinize the conditional forecasts, both with regard to their
19

being consistent with the in‡ation target, and their having been constructed in a professional
and unbiased way (for instance, by comparison with reputable outsiders’ competing forecasts).
In particular, the evaluation of monetary policy does not have to be postponed some two years
for in‡ation to be observed, instead evaluation can be made almost in real time. The more
explicit the bank is about the applied targeting rule, the easier it is for the outsiders to monitor
the extent to which it is ful…lled, and the stronger the incentives for the bank to actually ful…ll
it.
The in‡ation-targeting central banks explain and motivate their policy in regular In‡ation
Reports or Monetary Policy Statements. Three of the in‡ation-targeting banks, Reserve Bank of
New Zealand, Bank of England, and Sveriges Riksbank, publish graphs of conditional in‡ation
forecasts, such that outside observers can check whether the targeting rule, that is, the …rstorder conditions, are ful…lled. Reserve Bank of New Zealand comes closest to plotting optimal
conditional forecasts for the crucial variables. It plots paths for in‡ation, the output gap, a
three-month interest rate and the exchange rate (including nominal and real MCI paths) for the
next three years.
Bank of England (since its …rst In‡ation Report in February 1993) and Sveriges Riksbank
(since its In‡ation Report of December 1997) plots a conditional in‡ation forecast for a constant
unchanged interest rate, it+¿ jt = it (¿ ¸ 0). Since November 1997, Bank of England also plots a
corresponding forecast for output. The role of an unchanged-interest-rate forecast is, of course,
to illustrate the likely future outcome if interest rates are held constant, and in this way motivate
any required interest rate adjustment. If the corresponding forecasts are not consistent with the
in‡ation target, this indicates both that an adjustment of the interest rate is warranted and in
which direction this adjustment should be made. If the forecasts are consistent with the in‡ation
target, this indicates that no immediate change in the interest rate is required.
Furthermore, Bank of England stands out by publishing minutes of the MPC meetings,
including voting records. These minutes provide an exceptional opportunity for outsiders to
monitor the quality and the appropriateness of the information and the arguments presented
during the monetary policy discussion. The published voting records assign individual responsibility to MPC members. I believe it fair to say that never before in monetary history has an
incentive system been set up with such strong incentives for optimal monetary policy decisions.36
I believe that the characteristics of in‡ation targeting imply that it is a much stronger
commitment to a systematic and rational optimizing monetary policy than other monetary
policy regimes. The explicit target implies a relatively explicit loss function. The operating
procedure is a rational way of minimizing that loss function. The operating procedure can be
interpreted as a way of ensuring that …rst-order conditions for minimizing the loss function are
approximately ful…lled. The high degree of transparency and accountability allows outsiders to
monitor whether monetary policy is indeed optimizing and thereby reinforces the incentives to
such policy. The In‡ation Reports can be interpreted as reports on whether …rst-order conditions
are approximately ful…lled.37
36
A problem with publishing MPC minutes is that the discussion might be inhibited and that crucial discussions
might be moved outside the MPC meetings. Bank of England’s minutes do not state what was said by whom
and only present summaries of the arguments, which should mitigate the …rst problem. Members with su¢cient
personal integrity not to consent to moving crucial discussions elsewhere should mitigate the second.
37
Sometimes I have met the objection that, when modeled as minimizing a loss function, in‡ation targeting is
no di¤erent from any other kind of monetary policy. So what is new? I believe that the false inference in such
objections is that any other monetary policy is always adequately modeled as optimizing. Indeed, I would like to

20

3.5 Model uncertainty and model robustness
So far, the discussion has assumed that the model is known, and that there is only additive
uncertainty with shocks with known stochastic properties. With additive uncertainty in a linear
model with a quadratic loss function, certainty equivalence holds.
The consequences of parameter uncertainty in the form of exogenous random parameters
were analyzed early in Brainard [17]. As is by now well-known, parameter uncertainty implies
multiplicative rather than additive uncertainty, and certainty-equivalence breaks down. In many
cases, the optimal policy is then characterized by increased caution and less aggressive responses.
In the context of in‡ation targeting, this implies a more gradual approach of in‡ation towards
the in‡ation target and has similar e¤ects as more weight on stabilizing output-gap variability
(a higher ¸) (see Svensson [93]). However, di¤erent patterns of covariance between random
parameters can overturn this result and lead to more aggressive responses.
In situations when model parameters are stable or serially correlated but unknown to the
central bank, the central bank’s learning, for instance in the form of accumulating more data,
allows the central bank to estimate the unknown parameters with greater precision (see for
instance Sargent [85]). As demonstrated by Wieland [109] and [110], the central bank may
then have an incentive to experiment and in the short run pursue a policy that generates more
informative data in order to achieve a better policy in the long run. Then the variance and
covariance of parameters are endogenous and not exogenous as in the Brainard case. The
optimal response seems to be a compromise between the certainty-equivalent policy and the
cautious Brainard policy.
Naturally, the optimal reaction function generally depends on the precise model structure.
With uncertainty about the model structure, one possibility is to look for robust policy rules that
are not necessarily optimal in any given model but perform reasonably well in a set of potential
models. McCallum has, in several papers, developed his monetary-base instrument rule (2.14)
as a potentially robust rule (see McCallum [70] for a summary of this work). Recently, Levin,
Wieland and Williams [66] examined robust instrument rules in a set of di¤erent models used
at the Federal Reserve Board. Their results indicate that optimal instrument rules are not very
robust, whereas some simple instrument rules may be relatively robust. Furthermore, for the
models examined, the optimal unrestricted instrument rules provide only little gain over the
optimal simple instrument rules.
Work on so-called robust control under model uncertainty (Hansen and Sargent [52]) uses a
argue that other kinds of monetary policy have often not been optimizing. Instead, behind a thick veil of central
bank secrecy and mystique, it has often been unsystematic and ad hoc, without stable explicit or implicit goals,
or with contradictory or arbitrarily shifting goals.
For instance, the Humphrey/Hawkins bill arguably lists contradictory goals for the Federal Reserve System,
and any move towards a more consistent bill about the goals of monetary policy seems stalled. FOMC members
are sometimes reported to have di¤erent objectives and di¤erent perceived models of the economy. Kohn [64]
notes that FOMC members need not necessarily agree on what monetary policy strategy to pursue. Some FOMC
members have expressed sympathy for the so-called opportunistic approach to disin‡ation. Speeches by the current
Fed Chairman are often ambiguous. The result is a considerable uncertainty about the goals of the FOMC, also
among insiders.
For a few years, it seemed as if the hypothesis of the FOMC having a 3 percent per year in‡ation target could
not be rejected. Now, when in‡ation has fallen below 2 percent per year, there is uncertainty (also expressed by
insiders) about whether the FOMC will take 2 percent in‡ation as an implicit target, or whether the FOMC will
let in‡ation drift up to 3 percent again. “One doesn’t know whether the FOMC wants in‡ation to move up or
down,” as Alan Blinder expressed it during the conference.
Faust [38] documents and formalizes a historical and political-economy argument that the Fed’s structure
nevertheless was an e¢cient response to public con‡ict over in‡ation’s redistribution e¤ects.

21

minimax criterion for choosing the robust instrument rule. Then the reaction function is chosen
so as to minimize the loss function for the least favorable model in the set of potential models.
As Sargent [86] and Stock [88] show, this criteria may imply more aggressive responses than
under model certainty, counter to standard result of Brainard [17].
As concerns the di¤erence between targeting rules and instrument rules, the optimal instrument rules generally depend on all model parameters, whereas even rather speci…c targeting
rules are arguably more model-robust than instrument rules in that they may depend on only
parts of the model. For instance, the di¤erent targeting rules that arise in the model of appendix
C depend only on the parameters of the aggregate supply equation and the loss function, and
they are, in contrast to the corresponding instrument rule, independent of the parameters of
the aggregate demand equation. In general, a targeting rule like “aim for the in‡ation target 8quarters ahead” could be relatively model-robust, in the sense that it provides good performance
in several di¤erent potential models. However, the construction of the relevant conditional in‡ation forecast of course depends also on the aggregate demand equation and generally on the
whole model of the economy.
It goes without saying that more research on model uncertainty and model-robustness should
be both of considerable theoretical and practical interest.

4 Other monetary policy strategies
This section discusses two other monetary policy strategies. In the discussion in Europe about
the monetary policy strategy of the ESCB, the main competitor to in‡ation targeting is monetary targeting or, more precisely, money-growth targeting. In the United States, there are
many proponents of nominal-GDP targeting. Hence, I will brie‡y discuss money-growth targeting and nominal-GDP targeting, as well as provide some comparisons with in‡ation targeting.
Another alternative, namely the absence of an explicit monetary strategy, which is one way of
characterizing the monetary policy of the Federal Reserve System, will not be discussed here.38
Both money-growth targeting and nominal-GDP targeting are interpreted as intermediatetargeting rules, that is, the assignment or adoption of an intermediate loss function with money
growth or nominal GDP as a target variable. Since the purpose of an intermediate-targeting
strategy is to ful…ll some …nal loss function, the performance of the intermediate-targeting rule
must be evaluated according to that …nal loss function rather than to the intermediate loss
function. The …nal loss function is taken to be (3.1) and hence corresponds to (‡exible) in‡ation
targeting.
4.1 Money-growth targeting
The main point in this subsection is that money-growth targeting, seen as a strategy for achieving
price stability by stabilizing in‡ation around a given in‡ation target, faces an unpleasant choice
between being either ine¢cient and transparent or e¢cient and nontransparent.
Money-growth targeting would be the optimal way of ful…lling an in‡ation target, if money
growth were the sole predictor of future in‡ation. More speci…cally, and with reference to the
38
See, for instance, Blinder [16], Bernanke, Laubach, Mishkin and Posen [7] and Rudebusch and Walsh [84] for
the few pros and the many cons incurred by the absence of an explicit monetary strategy.

22

discussion in section 2.3.4, for money growth to be the ideal intermediate target, the monetary
policy instrument should a¤ect the future price level only via its e¤ect on money, schematically
represented as
it ! mt+1 ! ¼t+2 .
That is simply not the case. The increasingly dominating conventional wisdom about the transmission mechanism of monetary policy, outlined in section 2.1, heretically only assigns a minor
role to monetary aggregates. Accordingly, money growth is generally not an ideal intermediate target. Money-growth targeting must be conditional to be e¢cient, in the sense that the
money-growth target is frequently revised in a complex way, where the role of the money-growth
target is simply to generate an instrument level corresponding to a complex reaction function.
Alternatively, the money-growth target is left unconditional, but must then be frequently and
intentionally missed. The complex reasons for target revisions, or for target misses, thus make
money-growth targeting non-transparent. It is then simply “in‡ation targeting in disguise”.
Let ¹t ´ mt ¡mt¡1 denote money growth, where mt is the (log) quantity of a given monetary
aggregate, say M3. Let ¹
^ denote the target level for money growth, and interpret money-growth
targeting as implying an intertemporal loss function (2.4) with the period loss function
1
^ )2 :
Lt = (¹t ¡ ¹
2

(4.1)

That is, the target variable and the target level are given by Yt ´ ¹t and Y^t = ¹
^ . Thus, moneygrowth targeting can be interpreted as a targeting rule: “Use all available information to bring
^ as possible.”39
money growth ¹t as close to ¹
Under perfect control of money growth, the …rst-order condition for a minimum of (4.1) is
trivial,
^:
¹t = ¹
Under more realistic imperfect control of money growth, the …rst-order condition can be written
^;
¹t+T jt = ¹

(4.2)

where T ¸ 0 is the (shortest) control lag for money growth. That is, the T -period-ahead
conditional forecast of money growth, ¹t+T jt , should equal the money growth target. As observed
in Svensson [91], under imperfect control, money-growth targeting is indeed money-growthforecast targeting, and can be stated as the targeting rule: “Set the instrument so as to bring
the conditional money-growth forecast at the appropriate horizon equal to the target.”
In order to see the implications, assume, for example, a simple money demand equation with
a one-period lag,
(4.3)
mt+1 ¡ pt+1 = 'y yt ¡ 'i (it ¡ ¹i) ¡ ³ t+1 ;
where 'y > 0, 'i > 0, it is a short nominal interest rate, ¹i is the steady state level of the
nominal interest rate that, with yt = ³ t = 0, results in mt ¡ pt = 0, and ³ t is an iid shock to
demand (and velocity) with zero mean and variance ¾2³ .40 This money-demand equation should
39
40

Note that we could consider “‡exible” money-growth targeting corresponding to Lt = 12 [(¹t ¡ ¹
^ )2 + ¸yt2 ].
Note that velocity, wt+1 ´ pt+1 + yt+1 ¡ mt+1 , then ful…lls
wt+1 = yt+1 ¡ 'y yt + 'i (it ¡ ¹i) + ³ t+1 :

23

be interpreted as referring to a broad money aggregate, say M3, which is an endogenous variable
and not under perfect control by the central bank. Instead, the central bank uses its instrument,
the short nominal rate it , to a¤ect the demand for real balances, mt ¡ pt . Real-balances are
considered to be demand-determined and adjust to the output gap and the interest rate with a
one-period lag. That is, the control lag, T , ful…lls T = 1.
With this money-demand equation, money growth is given by
¹t+1 ´ mt+1 ¡ mt = ¼t+1 + 'y (yt ¡ yt¡1 ) ¡ 'i (it ¡ it¡1 ) ¡ (³ t+1 ¡ ³ t ):

(4.4)

Hence, the one-period-ahead conditional money-growth forecast is
¹t+1jt ´ ¼ t+1jt + 'y (yt ¡ yt¡1 ) ¡ 'i (it ¡ it¡1 ) + ³ t :

(4.5)

The …rst-order condition (4.2) for T = 1, the targeting rule for money-growth targeting, then
results in the reaction function
it ¡ it¡1 =

'y
1
1
(¼t+1jt ¡ ¹
^) +
(yt ¡ yt¡1 ) + ³ t
'i
'i
'i

(4.6)

(it is assumed that ¼t+1jt is predetermined, as in the models in appendices C and D).
Thus, as discussed in Taylor [102], money-growth targeting implies a particular reaction
function for the interest rate. We note that very little information about the economy is used
in the construction of this reaction function. The instrument only depends on the parameters
of the money-demand function, the money-growth target and the information predicting money
demand. No other information about the model is used, for instance the equations for aggregate
supply and demand, nor is any other information about the state of the economy that predicts
future in‡ation.41
We immediately realize that, relative to a loss function like (3.1), the reaction function (4.6)
is generally ine¢cient, notwithstanding if ¸ = 0 or ¸ > 0, . If the money-growth target is set
equal to the in‡ation target,
¹
^=¼
^;
(4.7)
^ , but (3.1) will not
we realize that the average in‡ation will equal the in‡ation target, E[¼t ] = ¼
be minimized. The variability of in‡ation or of the output gap, or of both, will be unnecessarily
large.
We also note that money-growth targeting in the above sense does not imply
^ ):
it ¡ it¡1 = °(¹t ¡ ¹

(4.8)

Thus, it does not necessarily follow from the empirical observation that money or money growth
does not enter Bundesbank’s reaction function, that Bundesbank is not targeting money growth
(in the sense of minimizing (4.1)), counter to the apparent conclusion in Clarida, Gali and
Gertler [24]. Additional (easily available) evidence is needed for this conclusion, for instance,
that Bundesbank has systematically and intentionally missed its money growth target (in the
sense that it has accepted conditional money-growth forecasts at the appropriate horizon, in
order to deviate from the money-growth target). The di¤erence between (4.6) and (4.8) is
41

For instance, compared with the optimal reaction function (C.11) in appendix C, there is no reaction to zt :

24

another example of the result that it is better to respond to the determinants of target variables
than to the target variables themselves, as is further discussed in Svensson [94].
As discussed in Svensson [91], money-growth targeting can be e¢cient relative to (3.1), if it is
“conditional”, such that the money-growth target level is conditional on period-t information.42
Let ¹
^ t+1jt denote this conditional money-growth target, so that the …rst-order condition and
targeting rule is
^ t+1jt .
¹t+1jt = ¹
The conditional money-growth target ¹
^ t+1jt can be set such that the resulting reaction function
(4.6) with ¹
^ replaced by ¹
^ t+1jt coincides with the optimal reaction function for minimizing (3.1),
namely (2.13). Then, ¹
^ t+1jt is simply given by the right side of (4.5), where (2.13) is substituted
for it . For instance, in the model laid out in appendix C, with the optimal reaction function
(C.11), ¹
^ t+1jt should ful…ll
¹
^ t+1jt = ¼t+1jt + 'y (yt ¡ yt¡1 )
"
#
¶
µ
~y
¯
¯z
1 ¡ c(¸)
(¼t+1jt ¡ ¼
^ ) + yt + zt ¡ it¡1 + ³ t
¡ 'i r¹ + ¼
^+ 1+
®y ¯ r
¯r
¯r
Ã
!
µ
¶¸
·
~y
¯
1 ¡ c(¸)
(¼ t+1jt ¡ ¼
= ¼
^ + 1 ¡ 'i 1 +
^ ) + 'y ¡ 'i
yt ¡ 'y yt¡1
®y ¯ r
¯r
¡ 'i

¯z
zt + 'i [it¡1 ¡ (¹
r+¼
^ )] + ³ t :
¯r

However, this complex conditional money-growth target is hardly transparent. In addition, it
requires very precise information about the money demand function.
Therefore, money-growth targeting seems to face the unpleasant choice between being either
unconditional, ine¢cient and transparent or conditional, e¢cient, and non-transparent. The
di¢culty with money-growth targeting is apparently that money growth is not the sole predictor
of in‡ation. In the models in appendices C and D, in particular, money growth has no additional
predictive power beyond that of the other predetermined variables. For the simple model in C,
causality is schematically:
it ! it ¡ ¼t+1jt ! yt+1 ! ¼ t+2
&
mt+1
The only role of the money-growth target is to generate the appropriate reaction function for
the instrument.43
It is sometimes argued that monetary targeting should have the advantage over in‡ation targeting that it avoids reactions to one-time price level disturbances, and instead focuses on the
trend rate of in‡ation. As far as I can see, no inherent feature in in‡ation targeting necessarily
42
This is consistent with the discussion in von Hagen [107] about the observational equivalence of closed-loop
monetary strategies.
43
The so-called P ¤ -model (see, for instance, Hallman, Porter and Small [51]) is often used in discussions of
monetary targeting (for instance, von Hagen [106], Neumann [76] and Tödter and Ziebarth [105]). This may
create the impression that the P ¤ model gives some rationale for monetary targeting. As is examined in Svensson
[95], the P ¤ -model implies a conventional Phillips curve with an interest term added, which, by itself, does not
provide any speci…c rationale for monetary targeting.

25

implies reactions to such one-time disturbances. The forward-looking nature of in‡ation targeting, for instance a two-year horizon, means that short term price-changes are ignored unless they
a¤ect in‡ation two years ahead. Furthermore, nothing prevents the index of in‡ation to focus on
trend in‡ation. This can easily be done, and has already been done by some in‡ation-targeting
central banks, by excluding some transitory components like mortgage costs, taxes and subsidies
from the index, or by having an explicit index of trend in‡ation, “underlying” in‡ation.
How does the above discussion relate to Bundesbank monetary targeting? First, one must
distinguish between stylized Bundesbank monetary targeting and the actual practice. In the
above framework, stylized Bundesbank money-growth targeting corresponds to unconditional
money-growth targeting, setting the money-growth target equal to the in‡ation target, (4.7).
^
Each year, Bundesbank sets its money-growth target equal to the sum of an in‡ation target, ¼
(called a price norm, “normative” in‡ation, or a “medium-term price assumption,” previously 2
percent per year, currently 1.5–2 percent per year), a forecast of the growth of potential output,
and an estimated trend in velocity. In the above framework, the growth of potential output is
zero, and by (4.3) the trend in velocity is also zero.
In practice, Bundesbank has frequently deviated from its money-growth targets (see the
graph on p. 69 in Bundesbank [34]). It appears that when a con‡ict has arisen between the
money-growth target and the in‡ation target, Bundesbank has given priority to the latter.
Indeed, Bundesbank’s credibility and reputation de…nitely appears to be due to its in‡ation
performance, and not to its money-growth performance.44 Thus, Bundesbank’s monetary policy
indeed appears to have been in‡ation targeting in disguise.45
4.2 Nominal GDP-growth targeting
Nominal-GDP targeting comes in two variants, level targeting and growth targeting. The discussion here refers to nominal GDP-growth targeting, but it is easily adapted to nominal GDP-level
targeting.
The main points in this subsection are that nominal GDP-growth targeting does not seem
to have any advantages relative to in‡ation targeting. There is no apparent rationale for the
implicit constant unitary marginal rate of substitution between in‡ation and output growth. One
possibility is that nominal GDP targeting is a left-over from a previous, somewhat simplistic,
view of the transmission mechanism for monetary policy. According to this view, monetary
policy only determines nominal GDP, but cannot a¤ect the distribution of nominal GDP between
in‡ation and output growth.
Thus, consider nominal GDP-growth targeting. Assume that the natural output level is
constant, so that output varies with the output gap. Let
gt ´ ¼t + yt ¡ yt¡1

(4.9)

denote nominal GDP growth. Interpret nominal GDP-growth targeting as involving a period
loss function
1
(4.10)
Lt = (gt+¿ ¡ g^)2 ;
2
44

Cf. von Hagen [106], p. 108: “As Issing [56] emphasizes, the Bank’s credibility depends on its performance
with regard to price stability, i.e. the in‡ation target.”
45
See Bernanke and Mihov [9] and Clarida and Gertler [26].

26

where g^ is the nominal GDP-growth target. That is, the target variable and the target level are
given by Yt ´ gt and Y^ ´ g^. (The “reaction-function” interpretation of nominal GDP-growth
targeting, where the reaction function is restricted to be (similar to)
it = ¹i + °(gt ¡ g^)
is examined below.)
First, relate the period loss function (4.10) to the loss function under in‡ation targeting
(3.1). We can write (4.10) as
1
1
1 2
¡ yt yt¡1 + (¼t ¡ g^)¢yt :
Lt = (¼t + yt ¡ yt¡1 ¡ g^)2 = [(¼t ¡ g^)2 + yt2 ] + yt¡1
2
2
2

(4.11)

If g^ = ¼
^ , the term within brackets on the right side corresponds to the in‡ation-targeting
loss-function (3.1), with ¸ = 1. Furthermore, the two loss functions di¤er by the other terms
on the right side of (4.11). Intuitively, the loss function for in‡ation targeting has a variable
“decreasing” intra-temporal marginal rate of substitution between in‡ation and the output gap,
dyt
¼t
¹ t = ¡ ¸yt , whereas the loss function for nominal GDP-targeting has a unitary intrad¼ t jL
temporal marginal rate of substitution between in‡ation and output growth
The …rst-order condition for a minimum of (2.4) with (2.3) is
gt+T jt = g^;

d(yt ¡yt¡1 )
jL¹ t
d¼ t

= ¡1.
(4.12)

where T ¸ 1 is the control lag (the shortest horizon at which the central bank can a¤ect nominal
GDP).
Thus, under realistic imperfect control, nominal GDP-growth targeting is nominal GDPgrowth forecast targeting, and can be formulated as the targeting rule: “Set the instrument so
as to bring the conditional nominal-GDP forecast at the appropriate horizon in line with the
target.”46
Generally, nominal GDP-growth targeting will results in an optimal reaction function of the
form,
it = fXt ;
that results from inverting (4.12). Generally, the optimal reaction function will not imply responding only to the deviation of nominal GDP-growth from the target, for instance,
it = ¹i + °(gt ¡ g^):

(4.13)

As further discussed in Svensson [94], the optimal reaction function does not imply a response
to this deviation at all. Instead, it involves responding to the di¤erent determinants of nominal
GDP-growth.
The current framework does not seem to provide any rationale for the “reaction-function”
interpretation of nominal GDP, (4.13). This reaction function is ine¢cient for stabilizing in‡ation and output according to (3.1), as well as (perhaps somewhat surprising) being ine¢cient
for stabilizing nominal GDP growth around the target according to (4.10).47
46
As shown in Ball [3] and further discussed in Svensson [93], (4.12) leads to instability with a backward-looking
model and lag structure as in Svensson [91]. As shown in [93], the lag structure with a shorter control lag for
aggregate demand than for in‡ation seems necessary for this instability result. McCallum [71] and Dennis [35]
emphasize the sensitivity of Ball’s instability result.
47
See McCallum and Nelson [73] for arguments in favor of reaction-function nominal income targeting.

27

As noted in Svensson [93], a sometimes-mentioned rationale for nominal GDP targeting is
that monetary policy can only determine nominal GDP growth, but not the decomposition of
nominal GDP growth into in‡ation and real GDP growth. It is sometimes claimed that little is
understood about the determinants of that decomposition. Given such lack of understanding,
it is considered safer for the central bank to achieve a certain nominal GDP growth rate, rather
than to attempt to control in‡ation and/or output separately. Interestingly, the increasingly
dominant conventional wisdom about the transmission mechanism outlined in section 2.1 is very
di¤erent. There, the transmission mechanism of monetary policy goes via aggregate demand to
in‡ation, with a longer control lag for in‡ation. Hence, in this model, the knowledge about the
separate e¤ects of the instrument on aggregate demand and in‡ation is substantial, in particular
the di¤erent lags of those e¤ects, and the nominal aggregate demand does not play any role in
the transmission of monetary policy by itself.

5 Monetary policy in the ESCB
The European System of Central Banks (ESCB), consisting of the European Central Bank in
Frankfurt (ECB) and the national central banks in the EMU (NCBs), faces some formidable
problems, technical as well as political, for its monetary policy. The technical problems involve
de…ning operational targets (specifying the loss function) that correspond to the goals stated in
the Maastricht treaty, specifying operational procedures to …nd the feasible set of future paths
for target variables (conditional forecasts of target variables, the set Yt in section 2) and selecting
the optimal path for the target variables and the corresponding instrument path. These technical
problems are made much more di¢cult by the unavoidable uncertainty about the transmission
mechanism for monetary policy in the new EMU and the resulting imperfect control of in‡ation.
Also, and not least important, the ECB’s Executive Board and Council and the sta¤ of the ECB
and the NCBs must have incentives to ful…ll the goals of the institution.
The political problems include what legitimacy (for instance, the degree of public acceptance)
the institution will receive, and what credibility and reputation the institution will have with
regard to its commitment and ability to achieve its goals. These political problems are made
more di¢cult by the possible (and even likely) con‡ict between national and EMU-wide interests.
I will …rst discuss the technical problems and then proceed to the political ones.
5.1 Technical problems
According to Article 105(1) in the Maastricht Treaty, “The primary objective of the ESCB shall
be to maintain price stability. Without prejudice to the objective of price stability, the ESCB
shall support the general economic policies in the Community with a view to contributing to
the achievement of the objectives of the Community as laid down in Article 2...” According
to Article 2, the Community shall have as its task “to promote throughout the Community a
harmonious and balanced development of economic activities, sustainable and non-in‡ationary
growth respecting the environment, a high degree of convergence of economic performance, a
high level of employment and of social protection, the raising of the standard of living and
quality of life, and economic and social cohesion and solidarity among Member States.”
EMI [36] and the newly appointed Executive Board of the ECB [37] have de…ned price
28

stability as an in‡ation rate between 0 and 2 percent per year. This can be interpreted as a
target range for an EMU-wide in‡ation of 0–2 percent per year, or as a point in‡ation target of
1 percent per year with a tolerance interval of §1 percentage point.48
The second sentence in Article 105(1) can arguably be interpreted as including stabilization
of real variables around their natural levels, that is, ‡exible rather than strict in‡ation targeting.
This can be represented by an ESCB period loss function that includes stabilization of the output
gap, as in (3.1) with ¸ > 0. As emphasized above, this translates into a gradual adjustment
of in‡ation towards the in‡ation target, and aims at the in‡ation target at a longer horizon.
Furthermore, a loss function, as above, implies that the conditional in‡ation forecast will become
an intermediate target at an appropriate horizon, say 2–2.5 years ahead. The task of the ECB is
then to set its instrument, an EMU-wide short nominal interest rate, such that the corresponding
conditional in‡ation forecast 2–2.5 years ahead hits the in‡ation target of 1 percent per year.
This is easier said than done. The main technical challenge for the ESCB will be to compute reliable and unbiased conditional forecasts for EMU-wide in‡ation, conditional upon the
current state of the European economy, the ESCB’s view of the transmission mechanism for
EMU monetary policy, and given instrument paths, in order to …nd an instrument path that is
consistent with meeting the in‡ation target. The lack of experience of an EMU-wide transmission mechanism for monetary policy and the corresponding unavoidable uncertainty about the
transmission mechanism will then present a formidable di¢culty. The introduction of the new
common currency is obviously a major structural change in the economic structure of the EMU
area. What are the consequences for the EMU transmission mechanism?
Interestingly, the view of the transmission mechanism outlined in section 2.1 de-emphasizes
the role for money in the transmission mechanism; instead the focus is on the short real interest
rate and aggregate demand and supply.49 A crucial issue then is the extent to which aggregate
demand and supply relations change with the introduction of the new currency. One possibility
is to think in terms of national transmission mechanisms, that is, with a common short nominal
interest rate but di¤erent aggregate demand and aggregate supply relations in each country,
giving rise to national in‡ation and output gaps (obviously with strong spill-over e¤ects between
countries, e¤ects that should be stronger with a common currency). EMU in‡ation and output
gaps will then be weighted averages of national ones. It is possible that the national aggregate
demand and supply relations only change moderately with the new currency, and that previous
relations continue to hold to a considerable extent. Constructing conditional national in‡ation
forecasts may then be less di¢cult than one might at …rst think. In general, constructing
national forecasts and then adding up to EMU-wide forecasts seems to be a more e¢cient use
of national information, rather than trying to construct an EMU-wide forecast directly.
Thus, one possibility is that each national central bank is responsible for making conditional
in‡ation forecasts for its national in‡ation, with the ECB being responsible for scrutinizing these
forecasts as well as providing its own competing national forecasts. These forecasts can then
be added up by ECB to provide EMU forecasts. ECB scrutiny in order to detect any bias in
national forecasts may of course be rather important.50
48
Alternatively, the 0–2 statement might be interpreted in the way that any point in‡ation target ¼
^ in the
range 0–2 percent would be consistent with price stability.
49
Since EMU as a whole will be a less open economy than the individual countries, the open-economy aspects
discussed in section 2.1 are arguably of less importance for EMU than for a small open economy.
50
It is an irony of history that the two European central banks with explicit in‡ation targeting and the

29

In order to ensure su¢cient independence from the national central banks, and in order to be
able to e¤ectively scrutinize the national forecasts, the ECB will also need to develope its own
forecasting capacity, either by having a set of models for each country in the EMU, or by having
an aggregate model for the EMU, or perhaps both. One possible advantage with an aggregate
model is that some spillover e¤ects between countries may cancel, and that errors in national
forecasts may cancel in the aggregate forecast. Competition between the ECB and the national
central banks may improve the total quality of the forecasts.
The ECB’s Executive Board and Council, as well as the sta¤ of the ECB and the NCBs,
must also have the right incentives to ful…ll the monetary goals. Such incentives are provided
by peer pressure, and by a high degree of accountability to the European Parliament and to the
general public. Transparency, with regular reports modeled on those of the Reserve Bank of
New Zealand, Bank of England and Sveriges Riksbank, clear and explicit motivations for policy
decision, and perhaps published minutes and voting records of the Council, are likely to be
necessary. (A good name for the regular report may be Price Stability Report.) Accountability
and transparency may also be crucial for dealing with the potential political problems of the
ESCB.
5.2 Political problems
By all likelihood, a sustained successful monetary policy by the ESCB requires acceptance and
legitimacy of the institution and its goals by politicians and the general public in the EMU.
Monetary policy is also much more likely to be successful if it has credibility, that is, if market
participants, politicians and the general public expect the ESCB to achieve its primary goal,
that is, price stability. A high degree of transparency is likely to be essential for this purpose.
By having an explicit in‡ation target, and by issuing a regular Price Stability Report with
an explicit conditional in‡ation forecast (as well as the analysis and assumptions behind it), the
ESCB can increase its accountability, simplify outside monitoring of monetary policy, improve
its own incentives to achieve its goals, and increase public understanding of monetary policy. By
providing a good analysis and sound motivation for its policy, including a convincing explanation
for ex post deviations from the in‡ation target, it should be able to convince the public of its
having both the means and the desire to achieve its goals and in this way increase its credibility,
that is, bring in‡ation expectations in line with the in‡ation target.
Published minutes and voting records of ECB Council meetings are also important both for
outside monitoring whether monetary policy is conducted in a professional way and for giving
Council members personal responsibility for their decisions.
A considerable risk, and a likely source of limited legitimacy and credibility, is that Council
decisions will be, or will be suspected to be, in‡uenced by strong national interests rather
than EMU-wide interests. The spectacle surrounding the appointment of the Executive Board
on May 2, 1998, has not contributed to reducing that risk. Thus, suspicions may arise that
in‡uential members of the Executive Board or the Council may pursue national rather than
corresponding considerable experience and competence in making conditional forecasts will not participate in the
EMU from the start. Some other participating national central banks, due to membership in the ERM and the
absence of a crucial role for in‡ation forecasts under exchange rate targeting, may su¤er from considerable lack of
competence and experience in making such forecasts. Crash programs to learn the skill and estimate the essential
relations may therefore be a wise investment for those NCBs before the end of 1998.

30

European interests. Peer pressure in the Executive Board and the Council may dampen such
behavior. However, an explicit in‡ation target, an explicit use of a conditional in‡ation forecast
as an intermediate target, and a high degree of transparency may be the most e¤ective ways of
deterring from such behavior.
As emphasized by von Hagen [107], and as discussed in section 3.3, one role of an intermediate
target is to serve as a focal point in the policy discussion, and to de…ne what arguments are
admissible in the discussion preceding the policy decision. With an EMU-wide conditional
in‡ation forecast as an intermediate target, the policy discussion naturally focuses on the quality
of the forecast, the appropriate horizon, and the position of the forecast relative to the in‡ation
target. Thus, in order to argue that a particular piece of information has implications for the
ECB’s instrument setting, a member of the Council must provide a convincing argument that
this information has an e¤ect on the EMU-wide in‡ation forecast at the relevant horizon. This
requirement should provide considerable discipline to the discussion, and exclude many vacuous
cases for instrument changes (or for no change in the instrument).
Within such a framework, it seems appropriate to publish minutes of the Council meetings,
where the main arguments for instrument adjustments are summarized. This way, outsiders can
monitor the quality and the appropriateness of the discussion, and spot any weak or irrelevant
arguments. The argument against publishing minutes is that it may inhibit honest and frank
discussions in the Council. In order to avoid that, it seems appropriate to publish summaries
of the main arguments and discussion points, without attributing these to individual Council
members.51 It may also be appropriate to publish voting records, to give individual responsibility
to Council members to vote for achieving the EMU in‡ation target, and to allow the deviations
from such voting to be spotted.
However, with regard to voting records, one has to admit the possibility that Council members, in particular the NCB governors, may be subject to considerable pressure in their home
countries if published voting records reveal that they have voted against the national interest in
favor of the EMU-wide interest. Nevertheless, with a high degree of transparency, clear analyses
and explicit in‡ation forecasts in the ESCB, Council members can easily defend their position
with reference to their EMU-wide responsibility. But, in the unfortunate case that the ESCB
announces ambiguous targets, provides fuzzy analyses and does not publish explicit in‡ation
forecasts, the resulting ambiguity may arguably make it much more di¢cult for national governors to defend their position in the face of domestic pressure. Keeping voting records secret
may then be the appropriate second-best solution.52
One might wish that central banks in general, and the ECB in particular, would choose
openness and transparency as the default case, and only resort to secrecy and obfuscation when
the arguments for this are strong. Unfortunately, central bank tradition is usually the other way
around. In case the ECB should chose secrecy and obfuscation rather than transparency and
accountability, the best solution for outside monitoring, as suggested by Tabellini [99], seems to
be that the European Parliament and the general public evaluate monetary policy performance
as if the ECB had an explicit in‡ation target. In particular, if the ECB chooses not to publish
conditional in‡ation forecasts, monetary policy can be monitored by comparing reputable outside
51

This is the alternative chosen for the MPC meetings of Bank of England, see [5].
However, voting records will most likely still be known by national governments, so this does not shield NCB
governors from pressure from governments and …nance ministries.
52

31

forecasters’ forecasts with the in‡ation target. In any case, independent bodies of experts will
play a crucial part in scrutinizing and evaluating ECB monetary policy, and there will certainly
be several such bodies publishing competent evaluations.
5.3 The role of monetary aggregates and money-growth targeting
What is the role of di¤erent monetary aggregates and money-growth targeting in ESCB monetary policy? A rational role for monetary aggregates seems simply to be one set of indicators
among many others, whose usefulness depend exclusively on their performance in predicting
in‡ation. Due to the major structural change that the introduction of a new common currency
means, and the potential instability of money demand functions during such a change, it is
obvious that any such performance is likely to be extremely tenuous, and cannot be assessed
and estimated until several years of data have been collected.
In particular, money-growth targeting does not provide any solution to the formidable problem of the uncertainty about the transmission mechanism in the EMU. As emphasized above,
and as thoroughly documented in the literature, a most pragmatic application of money-growth
targeting, which is best described as in‡ation targeting in disguise and corresponds to conditional money-growth targeting as discussed in section 4.1, lies behind the success of Bundesbank’s monetary policy. The success of this policy is dependent on exploiting the transmission
mechanism and, in particular, intentionally deviating from money-growth targets when in‡ation
forecasts reveal that money-growth targets con‡ict with the in‡ation target. In‡ation targeting
in disguise requires the same information about the transmission mechanism as explicit in‡ation
targeting. In practice, the di¤erence seems to be the degree of transparency, that is, that the
true circumstances are not explicitly revealed to the public.
Money-growth targeting does not seem to provide a short-cut to credibility for ESCB. As
argued above, Bundesbank’s credibility is apparently due to its in‡ation performance, and in
spite of its frequent money-growth misses rather than thanks to monetary targeting. The ESCB
will, in all likelihood, be obliged to earn its credibility by good in‡ation performance. And the
best in‡ation performance arises from setting the instrument such that the conditional in‡ation
forecast approaches the in‡ation target at the appropriate rate.
Indeed, according to the discussion in section 4.1, e¢cient money-growth targeting is inherently non-transparent, since the frequent revisions of the conditional money-growth target or
the frequent misses of an unchanged money-growth target require complex explanations that
are di¢cult to verify. Therefore, the main role of money-growth targeting would seem to be
to shroud ESCB monetary policy in an opaque veil, by turning explicit in‡ation targeting into
in‡ation targeting in disguise.
The alternative kind of money-growth targeting is unconditional money-growth targeting,
that is, sticking to a constant money-growth target regardless of the consequences. According
to section 4.1, this is transparent but ine¢cient. As mentioned above, it is possible that the
introduction of a common currency may have less drastic e¤ects on the transmission mechanism
than one might …rst think if, as suggested in the conventional wisdom, money is not essential
to the transmission mechanism. However, the introduction of a common currency will certainly
have drastic e¤ects on the …nancial structure and on the demand for money. In particular,
money demand will naturally be quite unpredictable with such a drastic structural change.
32

Furthermore, money demand could also be quite unstable, when economic agents learn their
ways in the new environment. Both circumstances imply that any unconditional money-growth
targeting, where in‡ation performance is totally dependent on the predictability and stability of
money demand, is likely to cause considerable instability and have dire consequences for EMU
price stability.

6 Summary and conclusions
The purpose of this paper is to discuss in‡ation targeting in the context of monetary policy rules.
It provides a general conceptual framework for monetary policy rules, clari…es the essential
characteristics of in‡ation targeting, compares in‡ation targeting to money-growth targeting
and nominal-GDP-growth targeting, and draws some conclusions for the monetary policy of the
ESCB.
The discussion of the conceptual framework for monetary policy rules starts by recalling
the increasingly dominant conventional wisdom about the transmission mechanism of monetary
policy, in which the monetary policy instrument, a short nominal interest rate, a¤ects in‡ation
and output via several channels with di¤erent lags. This transmission mechanism emphasizes
the role of the short nominal and real interest rates. The money stock becomes an endogenous
variable which, in the long run, is highly correlated with the price level, but it only plays a
minor role in the transmission mechanism, and it has little or no predictive power for in‡ation
beyond other determinants of in‡ation. The discussion provides de…nitions of crucial concepts
concerning monetary policy rules. Importantly, target variables are variables that enter the loss
function to be minimized, rather than, as in some of the literature, variables that enter the
reaction function.
In particular, the paper distinguishes between instrument rules and targeting rules, the former being the kind of monetary policy rules mostly discussed in the literature. In practice,
however, there appears to be no commitment mechanism by which central banks can be committed to follow a particular instrument rule (or any conceivable commitment mechanism would
require such a simple instrument rule that the rule would be manifestly ine¢cient). They are,
at best, guidelines for monetary policy decisions and frames of reference for monetary policy
evaluation. Targeting rules, in contrast, provide potential commitment mechanisms, in the sense
of commitment to a particular loss function, whereas the actual decision about the instrument,
by necessity, remains discretionary.
This framework is consistent with a principal-agent view of monetary policy, where society
is seen as the principal and the central bank as its agent, and where society can achieve e¢cient delegation of monetary policy and improve monetary policy performance by assigning an
appropriate loss function to the central bank and creating an institutional framework, with, for
instance, instrument independence and appropriate accountability of the central bank.
The unavoidable lags in the e¤ects of monetary policy create a crucial rule for conditional
forecasts of target variables. Conditional forecasts can be interpreted as intermediate target variables. Targeting rules for these conditional forecasts can be interpreted as …rst-order conditions
for minimizing the assigned loss functions.
In‡ation targeting, as practiced in New Zealand, Canada, U.K., Sweden and Australia is
characterized by (1) an explicit quantitative in‡ation target, (2) an operating procedure that
33

can be described as “in‡ation-forecast targeting”, namely the use of an internal conditional
forecast of in‡ation and output as an intermediate target variable, and (3) a high degree of
transparency and accountability. The main points argued in the discussion of in‡ation targeting
are: (1) In‡ation targeting can be interpreted as a targeting rule, with a relatively explicit loss
function to be minimized. Uncontroversially, this loss function also contains concerns about
the stability of the real economy, for instance, output variability. That is, it corresponds to
“‡exible” rather than “strict” in‡ation targeting. (2) The targeting rule can also be expressed
as an intermediate-targeting rule, “in‡ation-forecast targeting,” where the conditional in‡ation
forecast is the intermediate target variable (or where both the conditional in‡ation forecast and
the conditional output-gap forecast are intermediate target variables). (3) In‡ation targeting
appears to be a commitment to a systematic and rational (that is, optimizing) monetary policy
to a greater extent than any other monetary policy regime so far. This is because the operating
procedure under in‡ation targeting, in‡ation-forecast targeting, can be interpreted as a way of
ensuring that …rst-order conditions for a minimum of the loss function are (approximately) ful…lled. Importantly, the high degree of transparency and accountability associated with in‡ation
targeting allows outsiders to monitor that those …rst-order conditions are ful…lled and creates
stronger incentives for the central bank not to deviate from minimizing the relatively explicit
loss function than in other monetary policy regimes.
In the comparison between in‡ation targeting and money-growth targeting, money-growth
targeting is seen as a intermediate-targeting rule to indirectly achieve an in‡ation target. Since
the money-growth target and the in‡ation target will, unavoidably, frequently con‡ict, the
priority between these two targets is crucial. Money-growth targeting can then, as under Bundesbank’s pragmatic policy, be conditional, in the sense of giving priority to the in‡ation target.
It is e¢cient for achieving the in‡ation target, but unavoidably nontransparent, since it is really “in‡ation targeting in disguise” rather than in the open, and the explanations for missing
the money-growth target must frequently be complex, ad hoc, and di¢cult to verify. Alternatively, money-growth targeting can be unconditional, in the sense of giving priority to the
money-growth target. It will then be ine¢cient for stabilizing in‡ation, but transparent. Hence,
money-growth targeting faces the unpleasant choice of being either e¢cient and nontransparent
or ine¢cient and transparent.
In the comparison between in‡ation targeting and nominal-GDP-growth targeting, the main
di¤erence is that the intermediate loss function under nominal-GDP-growth targeting implies a
constant unitary marginal rate of substitution between in‡ation and real GDP growth, whereas
the loss function under in‡ation targeting involves a variable marginal rate of substitution between in‡ation and the output gap. There seems to be no good rationale for this constant
unitary marginal rate of substitution.
More generally, the di¢culties with both money-growth targeting and nominal-GDP targeting are, I believe, due to the fact that neither money nor nominal GDP is an intermediate
variable for in‡ation, in the sense that the monetary policy instrument would a¤ect in‡ation
only via money or nominal GDP. Instead, the transmission mechanism is more complex and
involves several channels that do not directly involve either money or nominal GDP. Therefore,
money or nominal GDP are not the best predictors of in‡ation, and stabilizing money growth
or nominal GDP growth is not an e¢cient way of stabilizing in‡ation (or a weighted sum of
in‡ation and output variability).
34

Interestingly, both money-growth targeting and nominal-GDP targeting result in reaction
functions where the instrument does not respond to either money growth or nominal GDP but
to the di¤erent determinants of these.
With regard to the conclusions for the ECB, the paper argues that in‡ation targeting is
the obvious way of achieving the Maastricht treaty’s price-stability goal for the ECB, with the
in‡ation target being one percent, the midpoint of the range 0-2 percent for CPI in‡ation that
earlier EMI and more recently the ECB’s Executive Board have declared consistent with price
stability. A rational role for monetary aggregates is then to be one set of indicators among
many, whose usefulness depend solely on their predictive power for future in‡ation. For obvious
reasons, that predictive power is likely to be small or insigni…cant in the …rst few years of the
EMU, and therefore monetary aggregates are likely to be of little help. The other alternative for
ECB is conditional money-growth targeting, which would boil down to being in‡ation targeting
in disguise rather than in the open, and therefore less transparent by focussing the discussion
on potentially irrelevant changes in monetary aggregates for in‡ation.
Several important issues have received little or no attention in the discussion here. Prominent among these are issues of model uncertainty and model-robustness, which are only brie‡y
discussed in section 3.5 and remain urgent areas for further research. Another issue is how to
pursue in‡ation targeting when some shocks are unobservable, something that will be examined in Svensson and Woodford [97]. A relevant issue is the potential drawbacks of too low
an in‡ation target due to nonnegative nominal interest rates and potential downward rigidity
of nominal wages. Recent work by Orphanides and Wieland [77] indicates that the former is
not a problem for the United States when the in‡ation target is 2 percent or higher, but that
in‡ation targets below 1 percent would cause output losses. However, if the average real interest
rate is assumed to be 2 percent rather than 1 percent, output losses only occur for in‡ation
targets below 0 percent. On the other hand, if the variance of shocks is higher, a higher in‡ation
target is needed to avoid output losses. Recent work by Akerlof, Dickens and Perry [1] indicates
that downward nominal rigidity of wages is not a problem for an in‡ation target of 2 percent
or higher, but that an in‡ation target of 1 percent or lower would cause output losses. For
reasons laid out in Gordon [46], I believe that Akerlof, Dickens and Perry’s results may be too
pessimistic. A further issue is the consequences of any nonlinearity of the Phillips curve, cf.
Debelle and Laxton [32] and Isard and Laxton [55].

35

A A consistent conditional forecasts with forward-looking variables
Constructing the required internal forecasts is, in principle, straightforward within the backwardlooking model used in [91] and [93] (see Rudebusch and Svensson [83] and appendix C), but
requires some special considerations in a model with forward-looking expectations of the kind
used here. In this appendix, I will show that a consistent in‡ation forecast can be constructed
for a given time path of the instrument in the model (2.1) and (2.2).
For a …xed t, we would like to produce a conditional forecast of Xt+¿ jt , xt+¿ jt and Yt+¿ jt
(¿ ¸ 0), conditional upon Xt , a given instrument path it+¿ jt (¿ ¸ 0), and the model (2.1) and
(2.2). In order to reduce the number of indices, …x t = 0, let X0 be given, and let X¿ , x¿ ,Y¿
and i¿ for ¿ ¸ 0 denote X¿ j0 , x¿ j0 , Y¿ j0 and i¿ j0 , respectively.
Let the given instrument path be arbitrary for a …xed number, T , of periods, 0 · ¿ · T ¡ 1,
but restrict it to follow a given reaction function f^ after these periods, that is, for ¿ ¸ T . More
precisely, let
i¿ = f¿ X¿ ,
where the sequence of T row n1 -vectors, f¿ , 0 · ¿ · T ¡ 1, is exogenous and arbitrary, and
where f¿ = f^ for ¿ ¸ T . Note that since one element, say the …rst, is unity, for 0 · ¿ · T ¡ 1,
the …rst element of f¿ , f1¿ is a state-independent component of the instrument. Hence, this
formalization admits the constant or time-variable but state-independent instrument paths that
central banks sometimes use in their reported conditional forecasts.
Then, for given X0 and f¿ , ¿ ¸ 0, we look for X¿ and x¿ , ¿ ¸ 0, that solve
¸
·
¸
·
X¿
X¿ +1
= G¿
;
(A.1)
x¿ +1
x¿
where
G¿ ´ A + BF¿

(A.2)

where F¿ ´ (f¿ ; 01£n2 ) denotes the n-vector (where n = n1 + n2 ) formed by inserting n2 zeros
to the right of f¿ .53
From the analysis in section 2, we know the solution for ¿ ¸ T , namely
^ ¿;
x¿ = HX
^
^ is the solution for the forward-looking variables that result from the reaction function f.
where H
Furthermore, for ¿ ¸ T , the dynamics are given by (2.8)–(2.10). The solution for 0 · ¿ · T ¡ 1
remains to be found. Without restriction, we can write
x¿ = H¿ X¿ ,

(A.3)

where the n2 £ n1 matrices H¿ for 0 · ¿ · T ¡ 1, remain to be determined.
53

For the generalization when Bit in (2.1) is replaced by B 0 it + B 1 it+1jt , the matrix G¿ depends on both f¿
and f¿+1 according to
G¿ ´ (I ¡ B 1 F¿ +1 )¡1 (A + B 0 F¿ );
where the matrix I ¡ B 1 F¿+1 is assumed to be invertible.

36

If H¿ +1 is known, we can derive an expression for H¿ . Hence, the problem can be found by
backward induction. To show this, note that by multiplying the …rst n1 rows in (A.1) and using
(A.3) for ¿ + 1, we get
H¿ +1 X¿ +1 = H¿ +1 (G¿ 11 X¿ + G¿ 12 x¿ ) = x¿ +1 = G¿ 21 X¿ + G¿ 22 x¿ ;
where

·
G¿ ´

G¿ 11 G¿ 12
G¿ 21 G¿ 22

(A.4)

¸

has been decomposed according to X¿ and x¿ . Then, we can solve (A.4) for x¿ in terms of X¿ ,
which results in (A.3), where H¿ is given by
H¿ ´ (G¿ 22 ¡ H¿ +1 G¿ 12 )¡1 (H¿ +1 G¿ 11 ¡ G¿ 21 )

(A.5)

and we assume that G¿ 22 ¡ H¿ +1 G¿ 12 is invertible. Hence, given H¿ +1 we can …nd H¿ from
^ we can use backward induction to …nd all H¿ , 0 · ¿ · T ¡ 1.
(A.5). Since we have HT = H,
It follows that X¿ , x¿ and Y¿ are given by
x¿

= H¿ X¿

Y¿

= (C1 + C2 H¿ + Df¿ )X¿

X¿ +1 = (G¿ 11 + G¿ 12 H¿ )X¿
for ¿ ¸ 0 and X0 given.
Thus, consistent conditional forecasts Xt+¿ jt , xt+¿ jt and Yt+¿ jt can be constructed for exogenous f¿ , ¿ ¸ 0, as long as there is eventually a shift in policy to a reaction function for which
the corresponding matrix H is known. Note that in the end, only the matrix H for ¿ ¸ T
is explicitly used above. Hence, only a consistent assumption about how the forward-looking
variables x¿ depend on the vector of state variables X¿ at some given horizon T is actually required. It follows that matrix H need not necessarily correspond to an optimal reaction function
for some particular targeting case. The crucial aspect for the internal consistency of the above
construction of the conditional forecast is that H is consistent with some reaction function, such
that a rational-expectations equilibrium exists at ¿ = T .54

B A …rst-order condition for the conditional forecast of target variables
0
0
~ be the block-diagonal matrix
Let t Y denote the stacked vector (Yt0 ; Yt+1jt
; Yt+2jt
; :::)0 , let K
with the diagonal (K; ±K; ± 2 K 2 ; :::), and let the e¢cient set of Yt be denoted by the equation
t T (t Y ) = 0, which is assumed di¤erentiable. Then the problem to minimize (2.18) subject to
(2.19) can be written

~ t Y ¡ t Y^ ) subject to t T (t Y ) = 0.
min(t Y ¡ t Y^ )0 K(
Then, the …rst-order condition (2.20) can be written
~ t Y ¡ t Y^ ) + ¹ @ t T (t Y ) = 0;
K(
@ tY
where ¹ is (half) a Lagrange multiplier and @ t@Tt(Yt Y ) is a column vector of stacked derivatives of
t T (t Y ) with respect to conditional forecasts of the target variables.
54

For the generalization of (2.1) when Bit is replaced by B 0 it + B 1 it+1jt , we need to use both H and f .

37

C A simple closed-economy backward-looking model
This example of a simple backward-looking model of a closed economy is due to Svensson [91]
and [93]. The model has a one-year control lag for the output gap, and a two-year control lag
for in‡ation. The model is also used in Ball [3].
Suppose aggregate supply (the Phillips curve) is given by
¼ t+1 = ¼t + ®y yt + "t+1 ;

(C.1)

where ®y > 0, ¼t is in‡ation in year t, yt is the output gap, and "t is an iid cost-push shock with
zero mean and variance ¾ 2" .55 Let aggregate demand (in terms of the output gap), be given by
~ yt + ¯ zt ¡ ¯ (it ¡ ¼t+1jt ¡ r¹) + ´ ;
yt+1 = ¯
y
z
r
t+1

(C.2)

~ y ¸ 0, ¯ r > 0, it is a short nominal interest rate and the central bank’s instrument, r¹ is
where ¯
the average real interest rate, and ´ t is an iid demand shock with zero mean and variance ¾2´ .
Let zt be an exogenous variable given by
zt+1 = ° z zt + µt+1 ;

(C.3)

where 0 · ° z < 1 and µt is an iid shock with zero mean and variance ¾2µ .
Note that the one-period-ahead conditional in‡ation forecast is predetermined,
¼t+1jt = ¼t + ®y yt :

(C.4)

This model can be written on state-space form, as in (2.1), where the vector of predetermined
variables are given by Xt = (¼t ; yt ; ¼t+1jt ; zt ; 1)0 and the vector of shocks are vt = ("t ; ´ t ; "t +
®y ´t ; µ t ; 0)0 .
The period loss function is
i
1h
(¼t ¡ ¼
^ )2 + ¸yt2 :
(C.5)
Lt =
2
¸ ¸ 0 (relative) weight on output-gap stabilization. Thus, the vector of target variables is
¼; 0)0 .
Yt = (¼t ; yt )0 , with the target levels Y^ = (^
As shown in Svensson [91] and [93], the …rst-order condition for a minimum of the loss
function can be written
®y c(¸)
y
^=¡
;
(C.6)
¼t+2jt ¡ ¼
1 ¡ c(¸) t+1jt
where the coe¢cient c(¸) is a function of ¸ and given by
c(¸) ´
k(¸) ´
55

¸
¸ + ±®2y k(¸)
sµ
Ã
!
¶
1
¸(1 ¡ ±) 2 4¸
¸(1 ¡ ±)
1+
1¡
+
+ 2 ¸ 1:
2
±®2y
±®2y
®y

In Svensson [91] and [93], aggregate demand is written
yt+1 = ¯ y yt + ¯ x xt ¡ ¯ r (it ¡ ¼ t ) + ´ t+1 ;

~ + ®y ¯ . This follows from eliminating ¼ t+1jt from (C.2) and (C.4) and setting r¹ = 0
where ¯ y = ¯
y
r

38

@c
> 0, c(0) = 0, c(1) ´ lim¸!1 c(¸) = 1.
Furthermore, c(¸) ful…lls 0 · c(¸) < 1, with @¸
The one-period-ahead conditional output-gap forecast is given by

¡
¢
~ yt + ¯ zt ¡ ¯ it ¡ ¼t+1jt ¡ r¹ ;
yt+1jt ´ ¯
y
z
r

(C.7)

and the 2-period-ahead conditional in‡ation forecast ful…lls
¼t+2jt ´ ¼t+1jt + ®y yt+1jt
¡
¢
~ y yt + ®y ¯ z zt ¡ ®y ¯ r it ¡ ¼t+1jt ¡ r¹ :
= ¼t+1jt + ®y ¯

(C.8)

The …rst-order condition can also be written
¡
¢
^ = c(¸) ¼t+1jt ¡ ¼
^ ;
¼t+2jt ¡ ¼

(C.9)

1 ¡ c(¸)
(¼t+1jt ¡ ¼
^ ):
®y

(C.10)

or
yt+1jt = ¡

The optimal reaction function can be written as a function of ¼t+1jt ; yt and zt (by combining
(C.9) and (C.8)),
¶
µ
~
¯
1 ¡ c(¸)
¯
y
(¼t+1jt ¡ ¼
^ + 1+
^ ) + yt + z zt :
it = r¹ + ¼
®y ¯ r
¯r
¯r
By (C.4) it can also be written as a function of ¼t , yt and zt ,
" µ
¶
¶ ~ #
µ
¯y
1
¡
c(¸)
1
¡
c(¸)
¯
(¼t ¡ ¼
+
it = ¹i + 1 +
^ ) + ®y 1 +
yt + z zt :
®y ¯ r
®y ¯ r
¯r
¯r

(C.11)

(C.12)

Note that by eliminating yt+1jt (it ) from (C.6) and (C.7), we can also write the implicit
reaction function
it = r¹ + ¼t+1jt +

~
¯
1 ¡ c(¸)
¯
y
(¼t+2jt ¡ ¼
^ ) + yt + z zt :
®y ¯ r c(¸)
¯r
¯r

(C.13)

This is an implicit reaction function (hence an equilibrium condition) rather than an (explicit)
reaction function, since ¼t+2jt on the right side is endogenous and depends on it . Note that the
coe¢cients of ¼t+1jt , yt and zt are positive, independent of ¸, and hence independent of whether
there is strict (¸ = 0) or ‡exible in‡ation targeting (¸ > 0). Hence, it is clear that, in general,
implicit reaction functions of the form (2.15) or (2.16) are not optimal.

D An open-economy forward-looking model
An example of an open-economy model with forward-looking variables is given in Svensson [96].
The aggregate supply equation (Phillips curve) of the form
¼t+2 = ®¼ ¼t+1 + (1 ¡ ®¼ )¼t+3jt + ®y [yt+2jt + ¯ y (yt+1 ¡ yt+1jt )] + ®q qt+2jt + "t+2 :

39

(D.1)

Here, for any variable x, xt+¿ jt denotes Et xt+¿ , that is, the rational expectation of xt+¿ in period
t + ¿ , conditional on the information available in period t. Furthermore, ¼t denotes domestic
(log gross) in‡ation in period t. The output gap, yt , is de…ned as
yt ´ ytd ¡ ytn ;

(D.2)

where ytd is (log) aggregate demand and ytn is the (log) natural output level. The latter is
assumed to be exogenous and stochastic and follows
n
= ° ny ytn + ´ nt+1 ;
yt+1

(D.3)

where the coe¢cient ° ny ful…lls 0 · ° ny < 1 and ´ nt+1 is a serially uncorrelated zero-mean shock
to the natural output level (a “productivity” shock). The variable qt is the (log) real exchange
rate, de…ned as
(D.4)
qt ´ st + p¤t ¡ pt ;
where pt is the (log) price level of domestic(ally produced) goods, p¤t the (log) foreign price level
(measured as deviations from appropriate constant trends), and st denotes the (log) exchange
rate (measured as the deviation from a constant trend, the di¤erence between the domestic
in‡ation target and the mean of foreign in‡ation; the real exchange rate will be stationary in
equilibrium). The term "t+2 is a zero-mean iid in‡ation shock (a “cost-push” shock). Thus,
there are two distinct “supply” shocks, namely a productivity shock and a cost-push shock. The
coe¢cients ®¼ , ®y , ¯ y and ®q are constant and positive; furthermore ®¼ and ¯ y are smaller
than unity. The supply function is derived, with some micro-foundations in Svensson [96], as
(roughly) an open-economy extension of Woodford [112] and Rotemberg and Woodford [82]. The
term including qt+2jt in (D.1) represents the e¤ect of expected costs of imported intermediate
inputs (or resulting wage compensation).
CPI in‡ation, ¼ ct , ful…lls56
¼ct = (1 ¡ !)¼ t + !¼ft = ¼t + !(qt ¡ qt¡1 );

(D.5)

where !, 0 · ! < 1 is the share of imported goods in the CPI.57 Here ¼ft denotes domesticcurrency in‡ation of imported foreign goods, which ful…lls
¼ft = pft ¡ pft¡1 = ¼¤t + st ¡ st¡1 = ¼t + qt ¡ qt¡1 ;
where

pft = p¤t + st

(D.6)

is the (log) domestic-currency price of imported foreign goods, and ¼¤t = p¤t ¡ p¤t¡1 is foreign
in‡ation. That is, I assume that there is no lag in the pass-through of import costs to domestic
prices of imported goods.
56
Since there is no interest-rate component in the CPI, it is best interpreted as CPIX; that is, CPI in‡ation
(and domestic in‡ation) are exclusive of any credit service costs.
57
The share of imported goods in the CPI is approximately constant for small deviations around a steady
state. It is exactly constant if the utility function over domestic and imported goods has a constant elatisticity
of substitution equal to unity (that is, is a Cobb-Douglas utility function), as is actually assumed.

40

Aggregate demand for domestically produced goods is given by the aggregate demand equation (expressed in terms of the output gap, (D.2)),
¤
+ ¯ q qt+1jt ¡ (° ny ¡ ¯ y )ytn + ´ dt+1 ¡ ´ nt+1 ;
yt+1 = ¯ y yt ¡ ¯ ½ ½t+1jt + ¯ ¤y yt+1jt

(D.7)

where yt¤ is (log) foreign output, all coe¢cients are constant and nonnegative, with 0 · ¯ y < 1;
and ´dt+1 is a zero-mean iid demand shock. The variable ½t is de…ned as
½t ´

1
X

rt+¿ jt ;

(D.8)

¿ =0

where rt , the (short domestic-good) real interest rate (measured as the deviation from a constant
mean, the natural real interest rate), ful…lls
rt ´ it ¡ ¼t+1jt ;

(D.9)

where it is the (short) nominal interest rate (measured as the deviation from the sum of the
in‡ation target and the natural real interest rate). The nominal interest rate is the instrument
of the central bank.
The aggregate demand is predetermined one period in advance. It depends on lagged expectations of accumulated future real interest rates, foreign output and the real exchange rate. The
aggregate demand equation is derived, with some microfoundations, and discussed in further
detail in Svensson [96].58
The exchange rate ful…lls the interest parity condition
it ¡ i¤t = st+1jt ¡ st + 't ;
where i¤t is the foreign nominal interest rate and 't is the foreign-exchange risk premium. In
order to eliminate the non-stationary exchange rate, I use (D.4) to rewrite this as the real interest
parity condition
(D.10)
qt+1jt = qt + it ¡ ¼t+1jt ¡ i¤t + ¼¤t+1jt ¡ 't :
I assume that foreign in‡ation, foreign output and the foreign-exchange risk premium follow
stationary univariate AR(1) processes,
¼¤t+1 = ° ¤¼ ¼¤t + "¤t+1

(D.11)

¤
yt+1

(D.12)

=

° ¤y yt¤

+ ´ ¤t+1

't+1 = ° ' 't + » ';t+1 ;

(D.13)

where the coe¢cients are nonnegative and less than unity, and the shocks are zero-mean iid.
Furthermore, I assume that the foreign interest rate follows a Taylor-type rule, that is, that it
is a linear function of foreign in‡ation and output,
i¤t = f¼¤ ¼¤t + fy¤ yt¤ + » ¤it ;

(D.14)

58
There is an obvious similarity to the closed-economy aggregate demand function of Fuhrer and Moore [44],
except that a lagged long real coupon-bond rate enters in their function.

41

where the coe¢cients are constant and positive, and » ¤it is a zero-mean iid shock. These speci…cations of the exogenous variables are chosen for simplicity; obviously the exogenous variables
may be cross-correlated in more general ways without causing any di¢culties, and additional
variables can be introduced to represent the state of the rest of the world.
In summary, the model consists of the aggregate supply equation, (D.1), the CPI equation,
(D.5), the aggregate demand equation, (D.7), the de…nitions of the sum of current and expected
future real interest rates and the real interest rate, (D.8) and (D.9), real interest-rate parity,
(D.10), and the equations for the exogenous variables: foreign in‡ation and output, the foreignexchange risk premium and the foreign interest rate, (D.11)–(D.14).
I assume that the central bank’s period loss function is given by
Lt = ¹c¼ ¼ct 2 + ¹¼ ¼2t + ¸yt2 + ¹i i2t + º i (it ¡ it¡1 )2 ;

(D.15)

where all weights are nonnegative. The …rst two terms correspond to CPI-in‡ation targeting and
domestic-in‡ation targeting, respectively. The third term corresponds to output-gap stabilization, the fourth to instrument or nominal interest-rate stabilization, and the …fth to instrument
or nominal interest-rate smoothing.
The model can be written in state-space form
¸
¸
·
¸
·
·
Xt+1
Xt
vt+1
1
(D.16)
= A
+ Bit + B it+1jt +
xt+1jt
xt
0
¸
·
Xt
Yt = C
+ Dit
(D.17)
xt
Lt = Yt0 KYt ;

(D.18)

where the predetermined variables, the target variables, the forward-looking variables and the
shocks are given by
Xt =

¢0
¡
¼t ; yt ; ¼¤t ; yt¤ ; i¤t ; 't ; ytn ; qt¡1 ; it¡1 ; ¼t+1jt

Yt = (¼ct ; ¼t ; yt ; it ; it ¡ it¡1 )0
¢0
¡
xt = qt ; ½t ; ¼t+2jt
³
´0
vt = "t ; ´ dt ¡ ´ nt ; "¤t ; ´ ¤t ; f¼¤ "¤t + fy¤ ´¤t + » ¤it ; » 't ; ´nt ; 0; 0; ®¼ "t + ®y ¯ y (´dt ¡ ´nt ) ;
and where K is a diagonal matrix with the diagonal
(¹c¼ ; ¹¼ ; ¸; ¹i ; º i ) :

42

References
[1] Akerlof, George A., William T. Dickens and George L. Perry (1996), “The Macroeconomics
of Low In‡ation,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1:1996, 1–76.
[2] Backus, David, and John Dri¢ll (1986), “The Consistency of Optimal Policy in Stochastic
Rational Expectations Models,” CEPR Discussion Paper No. 124.
[3] Ball, Laurence (1997), “E¢cient Rules for Monetary Policy,” NBER Working Paper No.
5952.
[4] Ball, Laurence (1998), “Policy Rules for Open Economies,” forthcoming in Taylor [103].
[5] Bank of England (1998), Minutes of the Monetary Policy Committee meeting on 4–5 March
1998, Bank of England.
[6] Bernanke, Ben S., and Mark Gertler (1995), “Inside the Black Box: The Credit Channel
of Monetary Policy Tranmission,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 9(4), 27-48.
[7] Bernanke, Ben S., Thomas Laubach, Frederic S. Mishkin, and Adam S. Posen (1998),
In‡ation Targeting: Lessons from the International Experience, manuscript.
[8] Bernanke, Ben S., and Ilian Mihov (1997a),“Measuring Monetary Policy,” Working Paper,
Princeton University.
[9] Bernanke, Ben S., and Ilian Mihov (1997b), “What Does the Bundesbank Target?” European Economic Review 41, 1025-1054.
[10] Bernanke, Ben S., and Frederic S. Mishkin (1997), “In‡ation Targeting: A New Framework
for Monetary Policy?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 11, 97-116.
[11] Bernanke, Ben S., and Michael Woodford (1997), “In‡ation Forecasts and Monetary Policy,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 29, 653-684.
[12] Black, Richard, Vincenzo Cassino, Aaron Drew, Eric Hansen, Benjamin Hunt, David
Rose, and Alasdair Scott (1997), “The Forecasting and Policy System: The Core Model,”
Research Paper No. 43, Reserve Bank of New Zealand, Wellington.
[13] Black, Richard, Ti¤ Macklem, and David Rose (1997), “On Policy Rules for Price Stability,” in Macklem [68].
[14] Blake, Andrew P., and Peter F. Westaway (1996), “Credibility and the E¤ectiveness of
In‡ation Targeting Regimes,” Manchester School Supplement, 20-50.
[15] Blanchard, Olivier, and Charles M. Kahn, (1980), “The Solution of Linear Di¤erence
Models under Rational Expectations,” Econometrica 48, 1305-1311.
[16] Blinder, Alan S. (1997), “What Central Bankers Could Learn from Academics—and Vice
Versa,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 11(2), 3-19.

43

[17] Brainard, William (1967), “Uncertainty and the E¤ectiveness of Policy,” American Economic Review 57, Papers and Proceeding; 411–425.
[18] Brayton, Flint, and Peter Tinsley (1996), “ Guide to FRB/US: A Macroeconometric Model
of the United States, “Federal Reserve Board, FEDS Working Paper 1996-42.
[19] Bryant, Ralph C., Hooper, Peter, and Catherine L. Mann (1993), “Evaluating Policy
Regimes and Analytical Models: Background and Project Summary,” in Ralph C. Bryant,
Peter Hooper and Catherine L. Mann, eds., Evaluating Policy Regimes: New Research in
Empirical Macroeconomics, The Brookings Institution, Washington D.C.
[20] Cecchetti, Stephen G. (1995), “In‡ation Indicators and In‡ation Policy,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 10, 189–219.
[21] Cecchetti, Stephen G. (1997), “Central Bank Policy Rules: Conceptual Issues and Practical Considerations,” Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
[22] Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles Evans (1996), “The E¤ects of
Monetary Policy Shocks: Evidence from the Flow of Funds,” Review of Economics and
Statistics 78, 16-34.
[23] Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali, and Mark Gertler (1997a), “Monetary Policy Rules and
Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory,” Working Paper, May 1997.
[24] Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali and Mark Gertler (1997b), “Monetary Policy Rules in Practice: Some International Evidence,” Working Paper, June 1997.
[25] Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali and Mark Gertler (1997c), “The Science of Monetary Policy,”
Working Paper.
[26] Clarida, Richard, and Mark Gertler (1997), “How the Bundesbank Conducts Monetary
Policy,” in Romer, Christina, and David Romer, eds., Reducing In‡ation: Motivation and
Strategy, Chicago University Press.
[27] Clark, Peter, Douglas Laxton, and David Rose (1996), “Asymmetry in the U.S. OutputIn‡ation Nexus,” IMF Sta¤ Papers 43, 216-251.
[28] Coletti, Donald, Benjamin Hunt, David Rose and Robert Tetlow (1996), “Bank of
Canada’s New Quarterly Projection Model. Part 3, The Dynamic Model: QPM,” Technical Report No. 75, Bank of Canada, Ottawa.
[29] Cukierman, Alex, and Allan H. Meltzer (1986), “A Theory of Ambiguity, Credibility, and
In‡ation under Discretion and Asymmetric Information,” Econometrica 54, 1099-1128.
[30] Currie, David, and Paul Levine (1993), Rules, Reputation and Macroeconomic Policy
Coordination, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
[31] Cushman, David O., and Tao Zha (1997), “Identifying Monetary Policy in a Small Open
Economy under Flexible Exchange Rates,” Journal of Monetary Economics 39, 433-448.
44

[32] Debelle, Guy, and Douglas Laxton (1997), “Is the Phillips Curve Really a Curve? Some
Evidence for Canada, the United Kingdom, and the United States,” Sta¤ Papers 44,
249–282.
[33] de Brouwer, Gordon, and James O’Regan (1997), “Evaluating Simple Monetary-policy
Rules for Australia,” in Lowe [67].
[34] Deutsche Bundesbank (1996), Annual Report 1995, Deutsche Bundesbank.
[35] Dennis, Richard (1998), “Instability Under Nominal GDP Targeting: The Role of Expectations,” Working Paper, Australia National University.
[36] European Monetary Institute (1997), The Single Monetary Policy in Stage Three: Elements of the Monetary Policy Strategy in the ESCB, European Monetary Institute.
[37] European Parliament (1998), Hearing of candidates to the Board of the ECB, 7 and 8
May 1988, Committee on Economic and Monetary A¤airs and Industrial Policy, European
Parliament.
[38] Faust, Jon W. (1996), “Whom Can We Trust to Run the Fed? Theoretical Support for
the Founders’ Views,” Journal of Monetary Economics 37, 267-283.
[39] Faust, Jon W., and Lars E.O. Svensson (1998), “Credibility and Transparency: Monetary
Policy with Unobservable Goals,” Working Paper.
[40] Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City (1996), Achieving Price Stability, Federal Reserve
Bank of Kansas City.
[41] Fischer, Stanley (1996), “Why Are Central Banks Pursuing Long-Run Price Stability?”
in Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City [40].
[42] Freedman, Charles (1996), “What Operating Procedures Should Be Adopted to Maintain
Price Stability?” in Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City [40].
[43] Fuhrer, Je¤rey C., and Brian F. Madigan (1997), “Monetary Policy When Interest Rates
Are Bounded at Zero,” Review of Economics and Statistics 79, 573-585.
[44] Fuhrer, Je¤rey C., and George R. Moore (1995), “Monetary Policy Trade-O¤s and the Correlation between Nominal Interest Rates and Real Output,” American Economic Review
85, 219-239.
[45] Goodfriend, Marvin, and Roberg G. King (1997), “The New Neoclassical Synthesis and
the Role of Monetary Policy,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1997, 231-283.
[46] Gordon, Robert J. (1996), “Comments and Discussion,” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity 1:1996, 60–66.
[47] Haldane, Andrew G., ed. (1995), Targeting In‡ation, Bank of England, London.
[48] Haldane, Andrew G. (1997a), “Designing In‡ation Targets,” in Philip Lowe, ed., Monetary
Policy and In‡ation Targeting, Reserve Bank of Australia, Sidney, 74-112.
45

[49] Haldane, Andrew G., ed. (1997b), “On In‡ation-Targeting in the United Kingdom,” Scottish Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.
[50] Haldane, Andrew G., and Nicoletta Batini (1998), “Forward-Looking Rules for Monetary
Policy,” in Taylor [103], forthcoming.
[51] Hallman, Je¤rey J., Richard D. Porter, and David H. Small (1991), “Is the Price Level
Tied to the M2 Monetary Aggregate in the Long Run?,” American Economic Review 81,
841-858.
[52] Hansen, Lars Peter, and Thomas J. Sargent (1998), “Alternative Representation of Discounted Robust Linear Quadratic Control,” Working Paper.
[53] Henderson, Dale W., and Warwick J. McKibbin (1993), “A Comparison of Some Basic
Monetary Policy Regimes for Open Economies: Implications of Di¤erent Degrees of Instrument Adjustment and Wage Persistence,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on
Public Policy 39, 221-317.
[54] Henderson, Dale W., and Warwick J. McKibbin (1993), “An Assessment of Some Basic
Monetary Policy Regime Pairs: Analytical and Simulation Results from Simple MultiRegion Macroeconomic Models,” in Bryant, Hooper and Mann [19]
[55] Isard, Peter, and Douglas Laxton (1996), “Strategic Choice in Phillips Curve Speci…cation:
What if Bob Gordon is Wrong?” Working Paper.
[56] Issing, Otmar (1994), “Die Geldmengenstrategie der Deutschen Bundesbank,” Deutsche
Bundesbank, Auszüge aus Presseartikeln 91, December 9, 1–11.
[57] Judd, John P., and Brian Motley (1992), “Controlling In‡ation with an Interest Rate
Instrument,” Economic Review, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, No. 3, 3–22.
[58] King, Mervyn A. (1994), “Monetary Policy in the UK,” Fiscal Studies 15, No. 3, 109–128.
[59] King, Mervin A. (1996), “How Should Central Banks Reduce In‡ation?—Conceptual Issues,” in Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City [40].
[60] King, Mervyn A. (1997), “Changes in UK Monetary Policy: Rules and Discretion in
Practice,” Journal of Monetary Economics 39, 81-97.
[61] King, Robert G., and Mark W. Watson (1995), “The Solution of Singular Di¤erence
Systems Under Rational Expectations,” Working Paper.
[62] King, Robert G., and Alexander L. Wolman (1996), “In‡ation Targeting in a St. Louis
Model of the 21st Century,” NBER Working Paper No 5507.
[63] Klein, Paul (1997), “Using the Generalized Schur Form to Solve a System of Linear Expectational Di¤erence Equations,” Working Paper, Institute for International Economic
Studies.

46

[64] Kohn, Donald L. (1996), “Commentary: What Operating Procedures Should Be Adopted
to Maintain Price Stability?” in Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City [40].
[65] Leiderman, Leonardo, and Lars E.O. Svensson, eds. (1995), In‡ation Targets, Centre of
Econonomic Policy Research, London.
[66] Levin, Andrew, Volker Wieland and John C. Williams (1998), “Robustness of Simple
Monetary Policy Rules under Model Uncertainty,” in Taylor [103], forthcoming.
[67] Lowe, Philip, ed., (1997), Monetary Policy and In‡ation Targeting, Reserve Bank of Australia.
[68] Macklem, Ti¤, ed. (1998), Price Stability, In‡ation Targets, and Monetary Policy, Bank
of Canada.
[69] McCallum, Bennett T. (1988), “Robustness Properties of a Rule for Monetary Policy,”
Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 29, 173-204.
[70] McCallum, Bennett T. (1997a), “Issues in the Design of Monetary Policy Rules,” NBER
Working Paper No. 6016.
[71] McCallum, Bennett T. (1997b), “The Alleged Instability of Nominal Income Targeting.”
NBER Working Paper No. 6291.
[72] McCallum, Bennett T., and Edward Nelson (1997), “An Optimizing IS-LM Speci…cation
for Monetary Policy and Business Cycle Analysis,” NBER Working Paper No. 5875.
[73] McCallum, Bennett T., and Edward Nelson (1998), “Nominal Income Targeting in an
Open-Economy Optimizing Model,” prepared for Sveriges Riksbank-IIES Conference on
Monetary Policy Rules, Stockholm, June 12–13, 1998.
[74] Merriam-Webster (1988), Webster’s Ninth New Collegiate Dictionary, Merriam-Webster.
[75] Mishkin, Frederic S. (1995), “Symposium on the Monetary Transmission Mechanism,”
Journal of Economic Perspectives 9(4), 3–10.
[76] Neumann, Manfred (1997), “Monetary Targeting in Germany,” in Kuroda, Iwao, ed.,
Towards More E¤ective Monetary Policy, St. Martin’s Press, New York.
[77] Orphanides, Athanasios, and Volker Wieland (1998), “Price Stability and Monetary Policy
E¤ectiveness when Nominal Interest Rates Are Bounded at Zero,” Working Paper, Federal
Reserve Board.
[78] Oudiz, Gilles, and Je¤rey Sachs (1985), “International Policy Coordination in Dynamic
Macroeconomic Models,” in William H. Buiter and Richard C. Marston, eds., International
Economic Policy Coordination, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
[79] Reserve Bank of New Zealand (1997), Monetary Policy Statement, June 1997, Wellington.

47

[80] Reifschneider, David L., David J. Stockton and David W. Wilcox (1997), “Econometric Models and the Monetary Policy Process,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on
Public Policy 47, 1–37.
[81] Rogo¤, Kenneth (1985), “The Optimal Degree of Commitment to an Intermediate Monetary Target,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 100, 1169–1190.
[82] Rotemberg, Julio J., and Michael Woodford (1997), “An Optimization-Based Econometric
Framework for the Evaluation of Monetary Policy,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1997,
297-346.
[83] Rudebusch, Glenn, and Lars E.O. Svensson (1998), “Policy Rules for In‡ation Targeting,”
in Taylor [103], forthcoming.
[84] Rudebusch, Glenn D., and Carl E. Walsh (1998), “U.S. In‡ation Targeting: Pro and Con,”
FRBSF Economics Letters 98-18.
[85] Sargent, Thomas J. (1998a), The Conquest of American In‡ation, Marshall Lecture, October 1996, Cambridge University.
[86] Sargent, Thomas J. (1998b), “Discussion of ‘Policy Rules for Open Economies’ by Laurence
Ball”, in Taylor [103], forthcoming.
[87] Sims, Christopher A. (1996), “Solving Linear Rational Expectations Models,” manuscript.
[88] Stock, James H. (1998), “Making Policies Robust to Model Uncertainty: Comment on
‘Policy Rules for In‡ation Targeting’ by Glenn Rudebusch and Lars E.O. Svensson,” in
Taylor [103], forthcoming.
[89] Svensson, Lars E.O. (1994b), “Why Exchange Rate Bands? Monetary Independence in
Spite of Fixed Exchange rates,” Journal of Monetary Economics 33, 157–199.
[90] Svensson, Lars E.O. (1996), ”Commentary: How Should Monetary Policy Respond to
Shocks while Maintaining Long-Run Price Stability?—Conceptual Issues,” in Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City [40].
[91] Svensson, Lars E.O. (1997a), “In‡ation Forecast Targeting: Implementing and Monitoring
In‡ation Targets,” European Economic Review 41, 1111-1146.
[92] Svensson, Lars E.O. (1997b), “In‡ation Targeting in an Open Economy: Strict vs. In‡ation
Targeting,” Public Lecture at Victoria University of Wellington, Reserve Bank of New
Zealand Discussion Paper G 97/8.
[93] Svensson, Lars E.O. (1997c), “In‡ation Targeting: Some Extensions,” NBER Working
Paper No. 5962.
[94] Svensson, Lars E.O. (1998a), “Better to Respond to Determinants of Targets than to
Targets Themselves,” in preparation.

48

[95] Svensson, Lars E.O. (1998b), “Does the P ¤ Model Provide Any Rationale for Monetary
Targeting?” Working Paper.
[96] Svensson, Lars E.O. (1998c), “Open-Economy In‡ation Targeting,” NBER Working Paper
No. 6545.
[97] Svensson, Lars E.O., and Michael Woodford (1998), “Indicators and Forecasts in In‡ation
Targeting,” in preparation.
[98] Sveriges Riksbank (1997), In‡ation Report, September 1997, Sveriges Riksbank.
[99] Tabellini, Guido (1998), “In‡ation Targeting and the Accountability of the European Central Bank,” statement prepared for a hearing organized by the Subcommitte on Monetary
A¤airs, European Parliament, January 6, 1998.
[100] Taylor, John B. (1993), “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy 39, 195-214.
[101] Taylor, John B. (1996), “How Should Monetary Policy Respond to Shocks while Maintaining Log-Run Price Stability—Conceptual Issues,” in Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas
City [40].
[102] Taylor, John B. (1998a), “A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules,” in Taylor
[103], forthcoming.
[103] Taylor, John B., ed. (1998b), Monetary Policy Rules, Chicago University Press, forthcoming.
[104] Taylor, John B., ed. (1998c), “The Robustness and E¢ciency of Monetary Policy Rules as
Guidelines for Interest Rate Setting by the European Central Bank,” prepared for Sveriges
Riksbank-IIES Conference on Monetary Policy Rules, Stockholm, June 12–13, 1998.
[105] Tödter, Karl-Heinz, and Gerhard Ziebarth (1997), “Price Stability vs. Low In‡ation in
Germany: An Analysis of Costs and Bene…ts,” NBER Working Paper No. 6150.
[106] von Hagen, Jürgen (1995), “In‡ation and Monetary Targeting in Germany,” in Leiderman
and Svensson [65].
[107] von Hagen, Jürgen (1998), “Money Growth Targeting,” prepared Sveriges Riksbank-IIES
Conference on Monetary Policy Rules, Stockholm, June 12–13, 1998.
[108] Walsh, Carl E. (1997), Monetary Theory and Policy, manuscript.
[109] Wieland, Volker (1996), “Monetary Policy, Parameter Uncertainty and Optimal Learning,”
Working Paper, Federal Reserve Board.
[110] Wieland, Volker (1998), “Monetary Policy and Uncertainty about the Natural Unemployment Rate,” Finance and Economics Discussion Paper No. 22, Federal Reserve Board.

49

[111] Woodford, Michael (1994), “Nonstandard Indicators for Monetary Policy: Can Their Usefulness Be Judged from Forecasting Regressions?” in Gregory N. Mankiw, ed., Monetary
Policy, University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
[112] Woodford, Michael (1996), “Control of the Public Debt: A Requirement for Price Stability,” NBER Working Paper No. 5684.
[113] Yun, Tack (1966), “Nominal Price Rigidity, Money Supply Endogeneity, and Business
Cycles,” Journal of Monetary Economics 37, 345-370.

50

