msfeldst@nber.org



                               Social Security Pension Reform in China

                                             Martin Feldstein*

          The reform of social security pensions is a critical issue for China – a key to enterprise reform,

sound public finance, and the well-being of current and future retirees. China has already begun to

develop an investment-based system of individual accounts for urban workers, especially those in

state owned enterprises. Looking to the future, China faces important issues both about improving

the design and implementation of this system and about the transition from the existing unfunded

system to the new arrangements.

1.         Principles of Social Security Pension Design

          A useful starting place for any academic discussion of pensions is the famous article by Paul

Samuelson (1958) in which he showed that in equilibrium a completely unfunded pay-as-you-go

(PAYGO) pension system has a positive real rate of return equal to the rate of growth of aggregate

real wages, i.e., to the sum of the growth rate of the population and the growth rate of productivity.

Samuelson’s theoretical analysis assumed an economy with no capital stock and showed that in such



          *
         Professor of Economics, Harvard University, and President of the National Bureau of
Economic Research. This paper is based on a talk given at the June 1998 Beijing conference of
the Chinese Economics Society. Although my original plan for this lecture was to discuss the
social security reforms occurring around the world (based on the information in Feldstein, 1998),
I decided instead to talk about the current policies in China and some of China’s options for the
future. My decision is a risky one since I am certainly not a specialist on the Chinese economy. I
recognize that some of my assumptions about the economy and about the current pension
arrangements may be wrong, especially since those arrangements are changing rapidly and
practice does not always correspond to the official rules. Several useful articles about the Chinese
pension system are identified in the references to this paper.

sschina.092898                                        1
a context a pay-as-you-go pension is a desirable policy.

          Actual economies do have capital stocks and the marginal product of capital is greater than

the growth rate of aggregate wages. This implies that a nation can buy retirement income with a

funded pension system at a lower long-run cost than with a pay-as-you-go system, i.e., the savings

deposits in a funded system are less than the tax required in a PAYGO system to provide the same

level of benefits.

          There is nevertheless a political temptation in any country to adopt a PAYGO system because

doing so permits giving a windfall benefit to current retirees and to those who will soon be retired

with the cost of that windfall deferred to future taxpayers. Many countries have succumbed to that

temptation since Bismark introduced the first formal pension system in Germany in the nineteenth

century. And countries with PAYGO systems have created new windfalls from time to time by

increasing benefits and expanding coverage, thus maintaining the popularity and political support for

the PAYGO system.

          But now countries around the world with PAYGO systems are recognizing that there is no

more scope for increased windfalls. There is a realization that the increasing longevity of populations

everywhere means that tax rates will have to rise in the future just to maintain the current relation

between retiree benefits and preretirement wages. As a result, we are seeing a shift from PAYGO to

funded systems in a number of countries and the active consideration of such reforms in others.

          China is already beginning the transition for workers in state owned enterprises from its

unique PAYGO system to a partially funded system based on individual accounts. To the extent that

China succeeds in this shift from a PAYGO to a funded system, it will keep future taxes lower than

they would otherwise be, will help to develop a more efficient capital market, and will facilitate both


sschina.092898                                     2
the management and privatization of the currently state-owned enterprises.

          The choice between a PAYGO system and a funded system is only one of the two important

aspects of designing a pension system. The second key characteristic is the choice between a defined

benefit and a defined contribution system. In a defined benefit program, retirees receive benefits based

on a formula that typically involves the number of years of work and the past history of wages. In

contrast, in a defined contribution program, employees (and/or their employers) make contributions

to individual accounts during working years. The balances in these accounts earn a rate of return

based on the assets in which those funds are invested. Retirees then receive an annuity based on the

amount accumulated in their accounts.

          It is of course possible to have a mixed system that combines defined benefits and defined

contributions. In 1995 China adopted such a combined two-tier system. Participants will receive a

defined benefit financed by pay-as-you-go taxes and also participate in a defined contribution program

to which employers and employees both contribute. I return below to discuss both aspects of this

system.

          It is also possible to have a conditional defined benefit system. In such a system, individuals

have defined contribution accounts but are also guaranteed a minimum amount (a defined benefit).

Any shortfall between the annuity provided by the defined contribution account and the guaranteed

defined benefit amount is made up by the government.

          Around the world, social security reforms now generally involve moving from pay-as-you-go

defined benefit systems to funded (investment based) defined contribution systems, often with some

form of conditional defined benefit guarantee. Other combinations are possible. A government

defined benefit plan can be financed by accumulating a centralized government fund that is invested


sschina.092898                                      3
in new capital. In yet a different approach, some governments are introducing defined contribution

plans with individual accounts that are nevertheless operated as a pay-as-you-go system. Such

unfunded defined contribution systems provide a notional rate of return, i.e., an accounting rate of

return without any real capital accumulation. Such notional unfunded defined contribution systems

provide a lower rate of return than a funded system; to be sustainable, the promised return in such

an unfunded system must not exceed the rate of growth of total wages.

2.        Potential Chinese Gain from an Investment Based System

          Before discussing the specific features of the current Chinese system, I will use some

estimated Chinese figures to discuss the magnitude of the advantage of an investment based system

and the extent to which an investment based system can reduce the long-term cost of providing a

given level of retirement benefits.

          Consider the following example of a PAYGO system. Assume that there are 3 workers per

retiree. The benefits given to retirees are 60 percent of the average wage. That implies that the tax

rate must be 20 percent of wages. What does it cost to provide the same 60 percent benefit with a

funded system? That depends on the future growth of aggregate wages and the future productivity

of capital investments.

          The World Bank estimates that over the next several decades as a whole real aggregate

wages in China will grow at about 7 percent or less per year (World Bank, 1997). I do not know

what the marginal product of capital will be in China in the future. But Gregory Chow (1993)

estimates that the marginal product of industrial capital in China has been 17 percent, with a higher

return on construction and a lower return on residential and retail capital. I will be very conservative

and assume that in the future the real marginal return on capital will be only 12 percent. A higher rate


sschina.092898                                     4
of return would make a funded system even more attractive.

          What do these two numbers imply? In a pay-as-you-go system the tax “contributions” earn

an implicit rate of return equal to the rate of growth of aggregate wages which, looking ahead in

China, can be taken to be approximately 7 percent. Consider an individual who contributes to the

PAYGO system from age 25 to age 64 and then receives benefits from age 65 to 85. To simplify the

calculation so that the nature of the result is transparent, assume that the contributions are all made

at the midpoint of the working years (i.e., at age 45) and that the benefits are paid at the midpoint of

the retirement years, i.e., at age 75. The funds are therefore earning a 7 percent implicit rate of

return for the 30 years from age 45 to age 75. At 7 percent, one dollar saved at age 45 grows to

$7.60 at age 75. In these calculations, all amounts are of course measured in the same price levels.

          Compare this now with the effect of saving in a funded system with a 12 percent rate of

return. One dollar saved at age 45 grows to $30 at age 75, about four times as much as in a PAYGO

system in an economy with a 7 percent growth rate of aggregate real wages.

          The implication of this is that the funded system can provide the same level of benefits with

a saving rate equal to only one fourth of the rate of tax required in the PAYGO system. If the

PAYGO system requires a tax equal to 20 percent of wages to provide a given level of benefits (e.g.,

benefits equal to 60 percent of concurrent wages), a funded system with a 12 percent rate of return

on capital (in comparison to the 7 percent rate of growth of aggregate real wages) can provide the

same benefits with savings equal to 5 percent of wages.

          This represents an enormous long-run “tax” saving, requiring individuals to set aside 5 percent

of their wages during each working year instead of 20 percent. This not only increases the spendable

income of future employees but also reduces the distortionary effect and deadweight loss of high


sschina.092898                                      5
marginal tax rates.

          This calculation is about the long-run. What about the transition from a pay-as-you-go system

to a funded system? Critics of such a transition argue that it would require current employees to “pay

double”. That seems to imply that if there is a tax equal to 20 percent of wages now, during the

transition to a funded system the combination of the tax required to finance existing benefits and the

saving required to fund future benefits would be double that or 40 percent.

          Such a statement is wrong in two ways. Most important, the cost of funding future benefits

is far less than the cost of the PAYGO system, a 5 percent saving rate in comparison to the 20

percent tax rate in the previous example. So the maximum additional cost to current employees

would be the 5 percent required to fund their own future retirement annuities. Second, the PAYGO

tax that starts at 20 percent would gradually decline over time during a transition as new retirees draw

on their funded individual accounts as a source of retirement income.

          As a result, a transition is feasible with only a very modest increase in the combined tax-plus-

savings rate in the early years and this combined burden would gradually decline and eventually

become less than the initial PAYGO tax rate (see Feldstein and Samwick, 1997, 1998).

3.        The Current Social Security Pension System in China

          Since 1995, most municipalities and provinces in China have adopted a two-part plan for

workers in state owned enterprises. The first part of this plan states that retirees in the future will

receive a defined benefit financed by a PAYGO system. More specifically, employees who have

worked for 40 years are scheduled to receive benefits equal to 25 percent of the regional average

wage, with a proportional reduction for those with shorter work histories in these state-owned

enterprises. This benefit would be financed by a payroll tax that the authorities estimate will equal


sschina.092898                                       6
9 percent of wages. This implicitly assumes that there will be about three workers per retiree (literally

25 workers per 9 retirees).

          The second part of the plan is a defined contribution system. Current employees and their

enterprises contribute 10 percent of wages to individual accounts managed by municipal or provincial

authorities. Government calculations imply that the resulting annuity benefits would replace about

35 percent of individual’s final year’s earnings.

          The official guidelines for this plan specify that 80 percent of the accumulated funds are to

be invested in government bonds and 20 percent in bank deposits. In practice, some funds are said

to be diverted into investments in local projects in pursuit of higher yields. The real returns on

government bonds and bank deposits have been very low and in some recent years have actually been

negative.

          As one considers this new plan, an important question is whether the funding of the defined

contribution part really represents new incremental capital? Or is it really just a notional PAYGO

plan with no impact on national capital accumulation (as the World Bank implies in its 1997 report)?

          This cannot be resolved by looking at the fact that the personal retirement accounts are

invested primarily in government bonds. It depends on whether the bonds purchased for the personal

retirement accounts would otherwise have been sold to the public (including the banks), thus

crowding out other borrowing by enterprises.

          If the existence of these defined contribution accounts causes the government of China to run

correspondingly larger budget deficits, then there is no increase in capital accumulation and the

defined contribution accounts are purely notional investments like any other PAYGO system. This

would be true because the government would then have to raise future taxes to pay interest (and


sschina.092898                                      7
possibly principal) on these additional government bonds.

          But while that is a logical possibility, I see no reason to believe that the existence of these

defined contribution accounts does cause (or will cause) the government of China to run larger

budget deficits. If my inference is correct, the additional saving that is accumulated in these defined

contribution accounts represent increases in the nation’s capital stock. The individuals and financial

institutions that would otherwise buy the government bonds purchased by the defined contribution

accounts will now buy other private market securities.

          What is the rate of return earned on the incremental saving? If I am correct that the defined

contribution deposits represent increased national saving and are not offset by increases in the

government’s budget deficit, the real rate of return on these incremental savings is the double digit

marginal product of capital (assuming also that the imperfections and misallocations in the capital

markets do not cause too much reduction in the effective rates of return.) This is true at the margin

for changes in the defined contribution saving even if the government has a budget deficit and uses

some of the defined contribution funds to finance that deficit as long as the amount of deficit financing

does not increase with increases in the amount of defined contribution funds.

          The fact that the defined contribution accounts are credited with much lower real rates of

interest than the 12 percent marginal product of capital reflects an implicit tax that the government

levies by requiring these defined contribution balances to be invested in government bonds and bank

deposits with low rates of interest, a tax which reached 100 percent in recent years when the real rate

of interest was driven to zero.

          As restrictions on investments are relaxed in the future, these defined contribution accounts

will invest in non-government securities – i.e., in enterprise stocks and bonds – and earn higher


sschina.092898                                      8
returns.

           According to official Chinese projections, the 10 percent defined contribution rate is expected

to provide an annuity equal to 35 percent of the pre-retirement wage. With a seven percent growth

of real wages, this relation between the defined contribution rate and the replacement rate implies a

real rate of return of only about 4 percent. If the defined contribution accounts could earn a real

return equal to the 12 percent marginal product of capital, the proposed crediting of a four percent

real return is equivalent to an effective tax rate of about 65 percent on the defined contribution

return.1

           If broadening the allowable set of investment options eventually allows a higher rate of return,

the same benefits can be financed with a lower contribution rate or the same 10 percent contribution

rate can be used to obtain a higher level of benefits. For example, doubling the return from 4 percent

to 8 percent would permit cutting the contribution rate from 10 percent to 5 percent while

simultaneously raising the replacement rate from 35 percent to 60 percent.

           The promise of future social security pension benefits can induce households to decrease their

own direct saving. The exact extent of this displacement is unclear but a credible promise of benefits

equal to more than 60 percent of preretirement wages substantially reduces an individual’s perceived

need for other retirement income. Such a reduction in other saving can of course only occur if the

individuals would otherwise have a high saving rate. As I understand the official Chinese statistics,

households currently save a very large fraction of their incomes, an average of more than 25 percent.



           1
         Since the contribution rate in the individual account is fixed by law, the high tax rate on
the return to that saving does not distort saving decisions. The tax is in effect a payroll tax rather
than a capital income tax. It distorts work incentives rather than saving incentives. Whether this
is a good way to collect such revenue in the Chinese context deserves a careful examination.

sschina.092898                                        9
I do not know how that average is distributed among different kinds of employees and between urban

and rural sections of the workforce. But with overall saving so high, it is natural to consider the

possibility that the provision of social security causes a substantial reduction in other household

saving. In the extreme, a funded defined contribution plan could displace an equal amount of existing

saving, leaving no net change in national saving. Similarly, a promise of benefits in a PAYGO system

could reduce private saving with no offsetting rise in government or pension saving, thus causing a

net decease in national saving.

          The key point to note is that, regardless of the induced reduction in other saving, a funded

plan still causes a higher national saving rate than an unfunded PAYGO plan. The PAYGO plan with

the same benefits would displace an equal amount of household saving – but unlike a funded plan

would have no pension saving with which to replace it.

4.        Alternative Options for the Chinese Defined Benefit Plan

          I return now to the first tier of China’s new social security pension system: the flat rate benefit

equal to 25 percent of the average regional wage for those who have worked the full 40 years.

          The rationale for providing such a benefit in addition to the defined contribution annuity is

clear: some individuals with low lifetime earnings would have unacceptably low retirement incomes

if they had to depend only on the defined contribution plan. The uniform defined benefit part of the

pension would raise the total pension income and guarantee that it is at least equal to 25 percent of

the average wage in the region.

          It is however possible to achieve this goal in a much more cost effective way by modifying

this part of the pensions system in either of two ways (or in both ways).

          The first possible modification would be to substitute a funded system for the currently


sschina.092898                                       10
planned PAYGO financing. According to official calculations, the PAYGO financing is expected to

require a nine percent payroll tax on top of all of the others taxes and mandatory contributions.

Substituting a funded plan – based on investments in existing government bonds or non-government

enterprise securities – could cut the cost by a factor of three or four, from a 9 percent tax to just three

percent or less. This would achieve a major reduction in the distortions caused by the Chinese tax

system as a whole.

          The second possible modification would be to focus or target the defined benefit pension on

those with unsatisfactorily low Tier 2 defined contribution pensions instead of giving the full defined

benefit payment to all retirees. Stated differently, this part of the overall pension could be a

conditional defined benefit -- filling the gap between the defined contribution annuity and the level

of retirement income that is regarded as acceptable. If such a reform has the effect of focusing these

benefits on the lower income half of annuity recipients, the financing cost would be cut by more than

50 percent.

          A targeted or conditional defined benefit pension would not be a general means tested

program but would focus on the shortfall associated with the defined contribution plan. It would

therefore not have adverse effects on work or other saving. The combined effect of both of these

options would be to reduce the required tax from the projected 9 percent to less than 2 percent of

earnings.

5.        The Transition Path

          China must deal with the existing retirees and those who will soon retire as well as with the

long-term problem of future retirees.

          The magnitude of the existing unfunded liabilities to current retirees and workers are


sschina.092898                                      11
particularly difficult to assess in the Chinese context. In the past, retirement benefits were paid by

the worker’s enterprise without any explicit pension fund or accounting reserves. Often enterprises

simply continued to pay the preretirement wage to workers when they reached retirement age and

stopped working. These payments to retirees automatically reduced any surplus that the enterprise

would otherwise have earned. And if it led the firm to a net loss, that loss would be absorbed by the

central government or as nonperforming bank loans. In effect, the past system of providing retirement

income to employees of state enterprises was effectively a PAYGO system of defined benefits linked

to the final wage and administered by the retiree’s lifetime workplace.

          Now China is adjusting to the change in enterprise ownership and in lifetime work patterns.

Even state owned enterprises must face a more rigorous market test and are not supposed to incur

losses. As part of this shift to a more market based system, the enterprises’ current pension

obligations have been transferred to municipal or provincial governments. Enterprises as a whole are

still taxed to meet these inherited obligations but the tax is no longer based on the specific retiree

obligations of the particular enterprise.

          Although such a shift of obligations from the enterprises to the government may help the

transition to a more market based system of corporate management and facilitate greater employee

mobility, it is not a necessary concomitant of the move to market based principles for corporate

management and employment. In the United States, when companies have unfunded obligations for

private pensions, this is reflected in lower share prices (reflecting lower future net earnings). If the

unfunded pension obligations are so large that they imply losses in all future years and a negative

present value of the company’s future earnings, the company is technically bankrupt. Shareholders

have no residual value. Pensioners are then paid by a government insurance fund (the Pension Benefit


sschina.092898                                    12
Guarantee Corporation). This is of course the extreme case. Usually, unfunded pension obligations

are not that large, leaving a positive stream of future earnings and therefore positive but diminished

share values. In Germany and certain other European countries, there is no external funding of

private pensions and the unfunded company pension obligations are reflected in earnings and share

values. China could in principle have followed this approach , leaving the unfunded obligations with

the Chinese enterprises. In practice however this may be harder in present-day China than in the

United States or Germany because it is harder to enforce a profitability test on state owned

enterprises that lack the discipline of share prices and experienced arms-length banks.

          Even with the shift of pension obligations from enterprises to government agencies, there is

much talk in China about ways to provide collateral for these obligations. Although explicit

government bonds might be a useful way to guarantee a future income stream to the pension

beneficiaries, the discussion is generally about providing some form of real capital as collateral.

Suggestions include transferring to the pension fund an explicit claim on land rents or on the income

generated by some other state owned enterprises. In my judgement, the concern about collateralizing

the existing pension obligations with a transfer of existing assets from the state is largely irrelevant.

If the local or provincial government now owns an asset, there is no real difference between giving

the associated income stream – e.g., the rental income on land or existing housing -- and giving a

new government bond with the same stream of payments. Collateralizing the obligation of the

government is largely irrelevant. This is particularly true if the obligations are regarded as ultimately

the obligations of the central government that have been transferred to municipal and provincial

governments for administrative reasons.

          It would of course be different if designating some real asset as collateral causes it to be used


sschina.092898                                       13
differently, i.e., if the collateral owner is not merely the passive recipient of an income stream but is

able to manage the use of the asset to achieve greater output and profitability. To the extent that the

pension reforms can be used to put assets into the hands of better managers with clearer motives and

incentives, the result will be to improve the use of China’s resources.

          But even if shifting assets to entities responsible for pension benefits causes them to be better

managed, such a shift is economically efficient only if it leads to the best use of those resources

among all the politically feasible options. If it is not, it would increase national income more if China

privatized the state assets or land or housing in the most efficient available way and then gave bonds

to current employers, employees or pension institutions to acknowledge the government’s future

obligations. If the World Bank is correct in its assessment of the value of these obligations, the bonds

could be amortized over a 40 year period by a tax of about 1.5 percent of GDP.



6.        Concluding Comment

          China is noteworthy for its decision to develop a mixed system of defined benefit and defined

contribution social security pensions. In doing so, it can provide protection for future retirees while

strengthening national saving and expanding the market for enterprise securities. A greater emphasis

on funded benefits and a shift from an unconditional defined benefit system to a conditional defined

benefit guarantee would reduce the distortionary taxes and focus assistance on those in greatest need.

The current system focuses on a limited fraction of the population, primarily urban workers in state

owned enterprises. But the experience gained in doing this and thinking about this population can

provide the basis for a stronger national system that can eventually provide retirement security for

the entire Chinese population.


sschina.092898                                       14
Cambridge, Massachusetts
June 1998




                                             References

Chow, Gregory C. “Capital Formation and Economic Growth in China,” Quarterly Journal of

          Economics, 1993, 108(3): pp 809-42.

Feldstein, Martin. Privatizing Social Security, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1998.

Feldstein, Martin and A. Samwick. “The Transition Path in Privatizing Social Security,” in

          Privatizing Social Security, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp 215-65, 1998.

Feldstein, Martin and A. Samwick. “The Economics of Prefunding Social Security and Medicare

          Benefits,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1997, (eds.) B. Bernanke and J.

          Rotemberg, Cambridge: The MIT Press, pp 115-147, 1997.

Freidman, Barry and Leonard Hausman. “Sustainable Social Protection in China: Concluding


sschina.092898                                   15
          the Reforms.” Mimeo, 1998.

Hu, Aidi. “Reforming China’s Social Security System: Facts and Perspectives,” International

          Social Security Review, Vol. 50, No. 3, 1997, pp 45-60.

Hussain, Athar. “Social Security in Present-Day China and Its Reform,” American Economic

          Review, 84:2, 1994, pp 276-80.

Samuelson, Paul A. “An Exact Consumption Loan Model of Interest With or Without the Social

          Contrivance of Money,” Journal of Political Economy, 1958, Vol. 66, pp 467-82.

Song, Shunfeng and G. Chu. “Social Security Reform in China: The Case of Old Age

          Insurance,” in Contemporary Economic Policy, April 1997, Vol. XV, pp 85-93.

West, Loraine. “Pension Reform in China: Preparing for the Future,” Journal of Development

          Studies, forthcoming.

The World Bank, Old Age Security: Pension Reform in China, China 2020 Series, Washington,

          DC, 1997.




sschina.092898                                  16
