       PRICE INDEXES FOR ACUTE PHASE TREATMENT OF DEPRESSION

                   by Ernst R. Berndt, Susan H. Busch and Richard G. Frank

                                  TABLE OF CONTENTS

                                                                                    Page
I. Introduction                                                                      1

II. Current Procedures for Measuring Medical Care Price Indexes                      3
             A. BLS Procedures for Medical Care Related PPIs                         4
             B. BLS Procedures for Medical Care Related CPIs                         8
             C. BLS Procedures for Pricing Medical Treatments: Comments              9

III. The Nature and Prevalence of Major Depression                                   11

IV. Alternative Treatments for Acute Phase Major Depression                          12
            A. Recent Developments in Psychotherapy and Antidepressant Medication    13
            B. Results from Comparative Efficacy Studies                             15

V. Identifying Comparable Treatment Bundles from Claims Data                         16
            A. The MEDSTAT Data                                                      16
            B. On Guideline Compatibility                                            22
            C. Adequacy of Treatment: Findings from Other Studies                    25

VI. Quantities and Prices of Alternative Treatment Bundles                           27

VII. Aggregate Price Indexes for the Treatment of Depression                         33

VIII. Hedonic Price Indexes                                                          37

IX. Discussion                                                                       41

X. Concluding Remarks                                                          44
           References                                                                47
           Endnotes                                                                  54

Corresponding Author:
Ernst R. Berndt
MIT Sloan School of Management
50 Memorial Drive, E52-452
Cambridge, MA 02142
(617) 253-2665 (tel)
EBERNDT@MIT.EDU
        PRICE INDEXES FOR ACUTE PHASE TREATMENT OF DEPRESSION
                    by Ernst R. Berndt, Susan H. Busch and Richard G. Frank


                     “It is not well to sneer at political economy in its
                     relation to the insane poor. Whether we think it right or
                     not, the question of cost has determined and will
                     continue to determine their fate for weal or woe.”
                     (Asylum Superintendent George Cook, 1866)



I. INTRODUCTION

            Much has been written in the last decade on broad trends in medical care spending in

the US. Although the most recent evidence is somewhat ambiguous, the apparent slowdown in

the rate of increase in aggregate health expenditures over the last five years has been welcomed by

many governments, employers, patients and insurers. Relatively little attention, however, has

focused on components of the change in expenditures. Is the trend change in medical care

expenditures due to changes in price, quantity, quality or a combination of all three? What has

been the role of organizational change, such as the growth of managed care, relative to

technological/pharmaceutical innovation, such as new medications, on expenditure trends?

            A standard procedure for economists analyzing changing expenditures over time is to

employ official government price indexes, divide nominal expenditures by such a price index, and

thereby decompose expenditures into price and quantity components. Further analysis might then

focus on factors affecting real quantity growth, such as productivity gains.

            In fact, the BLS’ medical Consumer Price Index (CPI) is often used by analysts

interested in undertaking such expenditure decompositions. It is well known that such a practice

is frequently inappropriate and misleading, for the medical CPI deals only with consumers’ direct

out of pocket payments, and does not include payments from employers to insurers.

            A deeper issue, however, involves the conceptual foundations underlying the medical

CPI and Producer Price Indexes (PPIs). Although some revisions are gradually being

implemented, currently the BLS price indexes are based on the repricing over time of a fixed



                                                 2
bundle of inputs. For decades, health economists have argued that a more appropriate price index

is one based on the entire episodic treatment of selected illnesses and conditions, incorporating

technological and institutional innovations that change the mix of inputs used to treat the

condition, and including any effects on changed medical outcomes.

            Developing a price index in health care can be viewed in terms of the unique

characteristics of the health services in question. Consider creating a price index for a good that

displays the following features:

            ♦ Consumers pay only a portion of the gross price due to insurance. The insurance

                is associated with moral hazard resulting in “too much” use of the good.

            ♦ There has been dramatic technical change and great advances in the benefits

                offered by the good. Yet, the full range of benefits are difficult to measure.

            ♦ There is great variety in the forms that the good takes and consumers value those

                forms differently.

            ♦ The supply side of the market for the good has experienced fundamental changes

                in its organization.

            ♦ The good is viewed as so important in some cases that the government compels

                people to use it.

The treatment of major depression, one of the most prevalent and disabling mental disorders,

exhibits all of the features listed above. In this paper we report on the first three years of a

research program aimed at measuring prices and output for the treatment of this important

disease. The approach taken in this program of research builds on several recent efforts to

construct price indexes for medical care. That recent research includes work by Cutler,

McClellan, Newhouse and Remler [1996] that contrasts input price indexes for the treatment of

heart attacks that rose by 6.7% per year over 1983-94, with an outcomes adjusted index that

takes into account a conservative valuation for the extension of life expectancy attributable to new

heart attack treatments and increases by only 2.3% per year, implying a net bias of 4.4% annually.

Focusing on a price index for cataract surgery, Shapiro and Wilcox [1996] find that a CPI-like


                                                   3
fixed weight input-based index increases by a factor of about nine between 1969 and 1993,

whereas their preferred alternative index incorporating realized reductions in hospital lengths of

stay, but ignoring any improvements in the quality of medical outcomes, increases by only a factor

of three, implying an annual differential of 4.6%.

               Because depression is a chronic recurring illness and mortality is not an end point, we

must rely on indirect methods of incorporating information on clinical effectiveness and outcomes.

In our research we have made use of results from the published clinical literature, and from official

treatment guideline standards, to identify therapeutically similar treatment bundles that can then be

linked and weighted to construct price indexes for treatment of specific forms of major

depression. Preliminary results from this research have been published in Frank, Berndt and

Busch [1998] and Frank, Busch and Berndt [1998].

               In this paper we consolidate our findings, and extend our analysis considerably.

Specifically, we refine our definition of eligible treatment episodes, develop new imputations for

missing data, expand the set of treatment bundles from five to seven, and estimate hedonic price

regressions.

               We begin the paper with an overview of current BLS procedures for constructing

medical care price indexes, and then provide a background on the nature of and alternative

treatments for acute phase major depression. We outline features of the retrospective medical

claims data base from MEDSTAT, and then discuss our implementation of treatment episode

definition and identification. We then report on quantities and prices of the treatment bundles

from 1991 to 1995, we construct and interpret CPI-like and PPI-like aggregate price indexes, and

we comment on an initial analysis involving hedonic price procedures. We end the paper with a

discussion section, followed by concluding remarks.



II. CURRENT PROCEDURES FOR MEASURING MEDICAL CARE PRICE INDEXES

               In the US context, it is useful to distinguish “supply” and “demand” prices for medical

care. By supply prices we mean the total payments received by health care providers for a


                                                     4
particular medical treatment, consisting of the sum of payments from health insurance plans (both

private and public) plus that from patients’ direct out-of-pocket payments (OOPPs). At this level

of generality, our supply price concept relates to components of the Producer Price Index (PPI)

published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS).

            The demand price notion we employ here is the consumers’ direct OOPPs, consisting

of co-payments and deductible cash payments made by the patient/consumer to providers for a

particular medical treatment. Thus, in our price index changes in supply price are indicative of

changes in the cost of treatment, while changes in the demand price can be traced both to changes

in the cost of treatment and changes in benefit design. Our demand price concept relates to the

medical care component of the BLS’ Consumer Price Index (CPI). As we discuss below, the

presence of insurance clouds the interpretation of the demand price index for depression as a CPI.

We also discuss important differences concerning the treatment of indirect consumer payments

via, for example employees’ contributions to employment-related health insurance.

            To associate the notion of a price index for treatment episodes of care with official

price indexes published by the BLS, we now describe index number procedures currently

employed by the BLS, beginning with its PPI.1

            II.A. BLS Procedures for Medical Care Related PPIs

            The PPI “...measures average changes in selling prices received by domestic

producers for their output”, separately by industry.2 The PPI takes as its definition of an industry

that based on the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) code, using 4-digit SIC industries and

their aggregates.3 Since its inception in 1902, the PPI has focused rather heavily on the goods-

producing sectors of the US economy. In 1986, in recognition of the growing importance of

services, the BLS gradually began to broaden the PPIs scope of coverage in the services sectors,

including medical care.

            Within each industry, the BLS calculates aggregate PPIs using a modified fixed

weight Laspeyres price index formula over individual price quotes, where fixed weights are based

on value of shipments data. The primary price quote at the “cell index” level of disaggregation is


                                                 5
“...the net revenue accruing to a specified producing establishment from a specified kind of buyer

for a specified product shipped under specified transactions terms on a specified day of the

month”.4 Although the BLS seeks transactions rather than list prices for its price quotes, the

agency is well aware that compliance by firms is easier with list than with actual transactions

prices. Participation by firms in the PPI is voluntary, with a “productive” compliance rate being

about 63% in 1992.5

            The BLS currently draws a sample of items for each industry on average about every

seven years, and then reprices this fixed set of items monthly until an entirely new sample is

drawn. In 1995 the BLS announced that for certain industries, particularly technologically

dynamic ones such as pharmaceuticals and electronics in which seven year time lags could yield a

sample of products and services much older and quite unrepresentative of market transactions,

samples would be supplemented at one or two-year intervals.

            For quite some time, the BLS has published PPIs for certain medical-related

manufacturing industries, such as pharmaceuticals and diagnostic equipment. It is only recently,

however, that the BLS has begun publishing PPIs for medical service industries such as hospital

services and physician services. The BLS initiated a PPI for an aggregate of health services in

December 1994, for offices and clinics of doctors of medicine in December 1993, and for

hospitals in aggregate and by type in December 1992.

            A central measurement issue in the construction of medical price indexes involves the

specification and implementation of a concept of industry output. For obvious reasons, the SIC

structure is not well-equipped to provide guidance to the BLS on what is the appropriate real

output concept in medical care industries, nor on how this output quantity and output price can

best be measured.

            An alternative source for guidance on implementation of a medical care output

concept is provided by the Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA). In 1983 HCFA

implemented a prospective payment schedule for inpatient hospital care whereby hospitals

received a fixed payment for each Medicare patient admission, regardless of the amount or


                                                  6
duration of services actually provided the patient. These Medicare prospective payment schedules

distinguish treatments by 24 major diagnostic categories, which are broken down further into 495

groupings of medical diagnoses and surgical procedures, known as diagnostic related groups

(DRGs).6

            DRGs provide one possible output concept, but currently DRGs only measure output

for inpatient hospital care; many outpatient commodities (e.g., prescription pharmaceuticals) and

services are not included in the DRG system. Classification schemes used by health care payers

include version four of Current Procedural Terminology (CPT4) codes, a list containing

thousands of procedures for which physicians and hospitals can bill; these CPT4 codes can be

envisaged as inputs into the treatment of an illness or condition.7 A systematic structure of

diagnostic codes for illnesses and conditions is version nine of the International Classification of

Diseases (ICD-9).8 Relationships among ICD-9, CPT4 and DRG codes are multifaceted; a single

DRG encompasses treatment of somewhat arbitrary aggregations of distinct ICD-9 diagnoses,

alternative combinations of CPT4 codes can be used in the treatment of a particular ICD-9

diagnosis, and a given CPT4 procedure can be used in the treatment of various ICD-9 diagnoses.

The DRG system makes use of both ICD-9 and CPT4 coding systems. Other diagnostic-related

systems used in setting risk-adjusted capitation rates include the Ambulatory Care Group

algorithm9 and the Hierarchical Coexisting Conditions model.10

            The BLS’ PPI program has initiated procedures for construction of medical service

PPIs at two rather aggregate levels, physician services and hospital services. In turn these

encompass a variety of more detailed industries, such as physician services from psychiatrists,

general/family practitioners, internists, and hospital services from general medical and surgical

hospitals, psychiatric hospitals, and specialty non-psychiatric hospitals.

            With respect to physician services, based on a sampling universe of all physician

practices in the US, the BLS constructs a sample frame of physician practice units. From this

sample unit, the BLS randomly chooses a bill that measures the net price paid to the practice for

the entire set of services and procedures provided during an office visit, distinguished by payor


                                                  7
type. The physician’s output from this visit is represented by the content of the patient’s bill,

including CPT codes associated with that visit, and is related to a particular ICD-9 diagnosis.

Given this sample bill, the BLS contacts the physician practice unit each month and asks it to

reprice what the current net transactions prices would be for that particular fixed bundle/payor of

services. Since the organization of physician practices has undergone considerable upheaval and

consolidation in the last few years, however, sample attrition in the BLS’ physician services PPI

has been considerable, and maintaining a sufficiently large response rate for repricing has proven

to be difficult.11

             The hospital services PPI measures net prices paid to hospitals for the entire bundle of

services received during a hospital stay associated with a particular ICD-9 diagnosis, given the

payor type. Hospital output is represented by the content of a patient’s bill, including all room,

medical supplies, drugs and ancillary services provided the patient during a single hospital stay.

             The sampling universe for the hospital services PPI is taken from the American

Hospital Association, stratified by hospital size, public vs. private ownership, and type of medical

specialty. Once a hospital is identified as a sample unit, the BLS chooses a fixed subset of DRGs,

and each hospital is then asked on a monthly basis to report on net transactions prices of a single

representative patient bill (typically the last patient bill on file for that DRG). Since the identical

treatment bundle is not always observed in subsequent months, BLS reporters construct

subsequent fictitious DRG bundle prices by repricing the identical inputs.12

             It is worth noting that with both the physicians’ services and hospital services PPIs,

BLS use of fixed itemized components for obtaining price quotes does not capture major input

substitution of treatment for a condition, such as the changing mix of psychotherapy and

psychotherapeutic drugs used for the treatment of acute phase depression. Such a zero-

substitutability definition of physician and hospital output leads to the existence of a substitution

bias, but that bias is of course not confined to medical PPIs, for it pervades the entire fixed weight

Laspeyres price index computational procedures.

             Finally, for our purposes it is also useful to note that the BLS publishes a PPI for


                                                    8
prescription pharmaceuticals. Although pricing the output of prescription pharmaceuticals

presents some particularly interesting issues involving treatment of generic drugs, and of quality

improvements in new products, those issues are beyond the scope of this paper.13

            II.B BLS Procedures for Medical Care Related CPIs

            According to the BLS, the CPI is “...a measure of the average change in the prices

paid by urban consumers for a fixed market basket of goods and services.”14 Based on data from

its Consumer Expenditure Surveys (CEX), the BLS identifies and defines a fixed ‘market basket’

of goods, employing a classification system known as the item structure, which is updated

approximately every ten years. In January 1998 the BLS introduced its most recent major item

structure and fixed weight revisions, based on the 1993-95 CEX; from January 1987 until January

1998, fixed weights had been based on the 1982-84 CEX.

            In contrast to the BLS’ recently initiated medical PPI program, the medical CPI has

been published regularly since 1935.15 Currently the BLS publishes a monthly aggregate medical

care CPI (MCPI), sub-indexes for medical care commodities and medical care services, as well as

for prescription drugs and medical supplies, nonprescription drugs and medical supplies,

physicians’ services, hospital and related services, and health insurance. Each of these medical-

related CPIs is based on consumers’ out-of-pocket expenditures (OOPPs), and thereby excludes

all medical payments by governments, as well as employers’ contributions to employee health

insurance; only medical OOPPs plus that portion of third party insurance paid for out-of-pocket

by employees is included within the scope of the MCPI. Thus, although national health spending

in 1996 constituted 13.6% of GDP, the total weight given medical care items in the CPI in 1997 is

only 5.4%.16

            Recently the medical CPI has introduced a number of changes, some of which are

similar to those implemented several years earlier in the PPI. Until at least 1990, in most cases the

MCPI priced specific input items at list prices, e.g., “chargemaster” fees for x-rays, laboratory

tests, and physicians’ office visits, rather than at the average actual transaction price for treatment

of, say, a child’s forearm fracture to a managed care organization obtaining a hospital discount.17


                                                   9
Since 1993 the BLS has attempted to obtain hospital transaction rather than list prices, but

through 1996, efforts “...yielded slow progress to date.”18 Beginning with the January 1998

major revisions, more aggressive efforts have been made to obtain actual hospital prices by payor,

but information is not yet available on the composition and nature of hospital quotes now being

obtained. While DRG hospital quotes have been considered for use in the MCPI, the BLS is

instead contemplating pricing “package” treatments, consisting of “highly standardized and tightly

defined components and risk factors” for conditions such as appendectomies, tonsillectomies and

cataract surgery.19 Details on how such treatment packages would be defined have not been

released. Finally, while revisions involving hospital service components of the MCPI have been

announced, the BLS has not yet published comparable information on revisions to the physician

service components of the MCPI.20

            II.C BLS Procedures for Pricing Medical Treatments: Comments

            For some time now, health economists and government statisticians have pointed to

directions toward which the pricing of medical care services should move. Here we briefly

summarize several of the directions suggested by this literature. First, as early as 1962 Anne

Scitovsky proposed
              “...an index which would show changes, not in the costs of such
              items of medical care such as drugs, physicians’ visits, and hospital
              rooms, but in the average costs of the complete treatment of
              individual illnesses such as, for example, pneumonia, appendicitis,
              or measles.”21

In Scitovsky [1967], this treatment episode approach was implemented on an illustrative basis for

five medical conditions. Discussions of shortcomings and biases inherent in the BLS’ MCPI

approach, and of the preference for the treatment episode approach to medical price

measurement, have appeared steadily since 1967; see, for example, the “Measuring Changes in the

Price of Medical Care” chapter in various editions of the well-known health economics textbook

by Paul Feldstein [1979, 1983, 1988], and in the Baxter Foundation Prize Address by Joseph

Newhouse [1989].

            Second, experts agree, the measurement of changes in the price of medical services


                                                10
should incorporate major quality changes, such as those involving adjustments for improvements

in health care outcomes. In 1992, for example, Paul Armknecht noted that
                “A new dimension needs to be included in the pricing of medical
                services that includes outcomes, so that if cancer treatment results
                in improved survival rates, this is reflected in the index.”22

The Boskin Commission final report went further, asserting that “...we strongly endorse a move in

the CPI away from the pricing of health care inputs to an attempt to price medical care

outcomes.”23 Although incorporation of quality and outcomes changes into medical price indexes

presents some significant conceptual challenges24 and implementation difficulties, it is clear that

failing to address these aspects is likely to result in price measures that are unreliable and

inaccurate.

              Third, use of fixed weights over extended periods such as 10-12 years in constructing

sub- and aggregate price indexes is particularly inappropriate in the medical care sector, where

both institutional and technological changes are rapidly occurring. Note that the frequency with

which fixed weights are updated is distinct from the issue of which index number formula (e.g.,

Laspeyres, Paasche, or Tornquist approximation to the Divisia) is preferable. For the rapidly

changing medical care sector, decennial updates of fixed weights with old weights being fifteen

years out of date before the new revision occurs (i.e., use of 1982-84 CEX weights through

December 1997) results in price indexes whose accuracy and reliability can legitimately be called

into question.

              In the research reported here, we extend previous research aimed at constructing

CPI- and PPI-like medical price indexes that deal with prices of treatment episodes rather than

prices of discrete inputs, that are based on transaction rather than list prices, that take quality

changes and expected outcomes into account, and that employ more current expenditure weights

in the aggregation computations. Before describing the components of this research, however,

we digress to discuss the illness whose treatment price we measure, namely, acute phase major

depression.




                                                   11
III. THE NATURE AND PREVALENCE OF MAJOR DEPRESSION

            Depression is commonly characterized by melancholy, diminished interest in pleasure

in all or most activities, sleep disorders, and feelings of worthlessness. In order for a patient’s

condition to be considered as an episode of major depression, a clinician must determine that a

very specific set of clinical criteria have been met. According to the Diagnostic and Statistical

Manual of the American Psychiatric Association (Fourth Edition, DSM IV), major depression is

diagnosed when the following is observed:
             The presence of one of the first two symptoms, as well as at least
             five of nine total symptoms. The symptoms must be present most
             of the day almost every day, for at least two weeks. The symptoms
             include:

               1)   depressed mood most of the day nearly every day;
               2)   markedly diminished interest or pleasure in almost all activities most of the day;
               3)   significant weight loss/gain;
               4)   insomnia/hypersomnia;
               5)   psychomotor agitation/retardation;
               6)   feelings of worthlessness (guilt);
               7)   fatigue;
               8)   impaired concentration (indecisiveness); and
               9)   recurrent thoughts of death or suicide.25

            Two dimensions of depression involve its persistence. A single episode of the illness

is self-explanatory given the above diagnostic criteria. A recurrent depression is defined by two

or more major depressive episodes each separated by at least eight weeks of return to usual

functioning.26 Episodes of illness come and go, last from several weeks to several months, and

are followed by periods of relatively normal mood and behavior. Untreated, the average

depressive episode lasts from four to six months. Although the vast majority of individuals who

experience an episode of major depression return to their original level of functioning, between 20

and 35% experience persistent symptoms; when these persistent symptoms last for 24 months or

longer, these cases are referred to as chronic depression.27 Approximately 50% of all people

having a depressive episode can be expected to have a recurrence, usually within two or three

years. Once an individual has a second episode, additional recurrence is 70% likely.28 The



                                                  12
lifetime average for depressive episodes is five to seven, but as many as forty episodes have been

reported.29

              A number of studies have shown that depression has similar or greater functional

impairments than those attributed to other episodic and chronic medical illnesses.30 Episodes of

depression can be classified according to severity: mild, moderate or severe. Mild depression

typically involves the minimum number of symptoms required to meet clinical criteria and minor

functional impairment. Moderately severe episodes are characterized by an excess in symptoms

above the minimum to meet clinical criteria and by greater degrees of functional impairment.

Severe major depression involves a number of excess symptoms above the minimum and

significant degrees of functional impairment including the ability to work or conduct usual

activities.

              Epidemiological research indicates that in the early 1990s, 10.3% of the U.S.

population met the criteria for major depression at some time during a 12 month period.31

Depression is often accompanied by other forms of ill health, such as anxiety, eating disorders,

substance abuse or other medical conditions.32 Although the reasons are still not well understood,

women -- particularly women under age 25 -- are much more likely to suffer from depression than

are men; the relative lifetime female/male prevalence rate is about 1.7. Rates of recurrence and

chronicity for major depression appear to be no different for women and men.33



IV. ALTERNATIVE TREATMENTS FOR ACUTE PHASE MAJOR DEPRESSION

              The acute phase of major depression is typically defined as the stabilization of most

acute symptoms. In practice, standards of care typically identify the acute phase as occurring

over a 12-week period. In this research we allow protocol levels of acute phase treatment to

occur over a 6-month period to recognize that actual practice departs from the controlled

environment of efficacy research. In clinical practice, continuation therapy frequently follows on

acute phase treatment in hopes of preventing relapse. If a recurrent episode of major depression

occurs, maintenance treatments are often initiated to prevent further recurrences [Kupfer, 1991].


                                                  13
            Given the information available in claims data, distinguishing between acute and

continuation phase treatment is difficult. We employ acute phase standards of care to establish

expected outcomes, but in our empirical implementation we undoubtedly will mix acute and other

phases of care. Clinical research on the continuation phase of treatment is less developed, and

definitive protocols have not been as widely adopted in many clinical settings.

            A. Recent Developments in Psychotherapy and Antidepressant Medication

            Treatments for acute phase major depression have advanced considerably during the

last two decades. In the area of psychotherapy, a variety of new techniques has expanded

treatment options well beyond traditional psychodynamic or psychoanalytic approaches.

Interpersonal therapy (IPT), behavior therapy (BT), family therapy, and cognitive behavior

therapy (CBT) are each relatively new. Evidence from controlled clinical trials suggests that

when applied as the single mode of treatment for less severe forms of acute phase major

depression, each of these therapies reduces depressive symptoms. Moreover, relative to

antidepressant medication as the sole treatment, each has generally been shown to perform at

comparable levels of efficacy and to have similar outcomes.34

            Extraordinary advances have been achieved in the last two decades in the area of

antidepressant medication. Although very recent developments expand the therapy set even

further, over the 1991-95 period examined here three general classes of antidepressant

medications were employed. These are: (i) cyclic antidepressants that include the widely used

tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) and a number of lesser known drugs such as trazodone; (ii)

selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) which include brand name drugs such as Prozac,

Zoloft, Paxil and Luvox;35 and (iii) monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitors which, due to

considerable side effects and dangerous interactions, are generally used only for patients resistant

to other forms of treatment.

            Newer SSRIs offer some distinct advantages over older TCAs, although in

randomized controlled trials, clinical efficacy rates are similar. SSRIs are associated with lower

risk of overdose, and reduced levels and numbers of side-effects. Important side effects


                                                 14
frequently associated with TCAs include drowsiness, dry mouth, impaired ability to concentrate,

seizures and weight gain.36 The side effects most prominently associated with use of SSRIs relate

to sexual dysfunction (particularly for males) and anxiety. The advantages of SSRIs come at a

significantly higher pecuniary cost than most TCAs.

             Psychotherapeutic interventions have frequently been combined with antidepressant

medication as a combination strategy for treating major depression. The specific interventions

that have been most intensively studied are the use of TCAs in combination with either IPT, BT

or a general unspecified form of short-term psychotherapy. To date, no clinical studies have been

reported in the literature which systematically assess the combination of the newer SSRIs and

psychotherapy.37 It is generally presumed, however, that such combinations will be at least as

efficacious as the combination of TCAs and psychotherapy.

             Finally, electroconvulsive therapy (EPT) is an effective treatment, but ECT is typically

limited to rather special circumstances when the patient’s depression is severe and is complicated

by a number of other psychiatric symptoms including psychosis, catatonic stupor, or high risk of

suicide.

             In the analysis reported below, we focus on outpatient treatments for major

depression; these constitute the vast majority of treatment episodes (75 to 80%). We do this for

several reasons. First, inpatient claims data typically do not contain information on the drugs

prescribed for treatment; thus characterizations of inpatient care are inherently incomplete.38

Second, because of other incomplete information regarding illness severity and comorbid

conditions, it is difficult to use administrative claims data to characterize fully an illness diagnosis,

and therefore to make judgments about the appropriate use of hospital services for treating major

depression. Third, few clinical trials specifically address inpatient treatment for major depression,

making it difficult to assign outcomes to treatments. Finally, because there was considerable

evidence of overuse of hospital services in the aggregate during the late 1980s and early 1990s,

the inclusion of hospital services in our 1991 base year could make interpretation of price changes

troublesome.39 This strategy of limiting severity cases by excluding individuals hospitalized for


                                                   15
treatment of depression is likely to be only partly successful. During the 1990’s there has been a

substantial reduction in inpatient psychiatric admissions and in the length of stay for hospitalized

cases. The implication of this is that the population of people treated only on an outpatient basis

may be getting sicker over time.

            In our analysis, we therefore focus on the use of various antidepressant medications

alone, several forms of psychotherapy alone, and several drug-psychotherapy combination

treatments. Because of very small sample sizes, we do not incorporate treatment involving ECT

or the MAO inhibitors.

            B. Results From Comparative Efficacy Studies

            We now provide a brief summary of research results comparing the efficacy of

alternative treatments for depression of varying severity. We divide depression severity into two

classes: severe and less severe (hereafter, mild). We have reviewed approximately 30 major

clinical trials and meta-analyses from the clinical literature on comparative efficacy of acute phase

treatments.40 This literature points to several key conclusions.

            First, psychotherapies of all kinds have been shown to result in superior outcomes

compared to no treatment. When compared amongst themselves, the different forms of

psychotherapy appear to have no significant differences in outcomes.41

            Second, for less severe forms of depression, psychotherapies alone, TCAs with

medical management, and SSRIs with medical management appear to produce comparable

outcomes. Each of these therapies produced significantly better outcomes than placebo

treatments. Versions of these results have been reported in numerous large treatment trials and by

meta-analyses of smaller clinical trials. Combination treatments with these as components also

generate equivalent levels of efficacy for less severe forms of depression.

            Third, for more severe forms of depression, the bulk of the evidence suggests that

TCAs alone, SSRIs alone, and combinations of drugs and psychotherapy have comparable levels

of efficacy, and each results in superior outcomes compared to psychotherapy alone. Recently

some evidence has emerged showing some extra improvement from the combination treatments


                                                  16
relative to medication alone.42 We believe it is premature to conclude that combination treatments

offer significantly higher levels of efficacy than do antidepressant medications alone (or with

medical management, as is typically the case).

            Based on these observations from the literature, we view all the major treatment

technologies as offering comparable expected outcomes for the average care of less severe acute

phase depression. For severe depression, we view TCAs and SSRIs alone as comparable to each

other and to combinations of TCAs and SSRIs with psychotherapy.



V. IDENTIFYING COMPARABLE TREATMENT BUNDLES FROM CLAIMS DATA

            The results from our review of the clinical trials literature enable us to develop a set

of treatment “bundles” that groups therapies into what we envisage as therapeutically similar

groups for treatment of a specific form of major depression. This identification of treatment

bundles that result in similar expected health outcomes is a crucial step in the construction of

medical treatment price indexes that take expected outcomes into account. The implicit

assumption we adopt here is that obtaining therapeutically similar outcomes from alternative

treatments provides a useful approximation to achieving similar expected utility levels.43

            A. The MEDSTAT Data

            To identify empirically comparable treatment bundles for acute phase major

depression, we employ a dataset consisting of retrospective insurance claims from four large self-

insured employers that offered 25 health plans to 428,168 employees and their dependents for the

years 1991 through 1995. The data were obtained from MEDSTAT Inc., and contain information

on prescription drug claims, inpatient hospital treatment, outpatient visits, ICD-9 diagnoses,

CPT4 procedures, and the demographic characteristics of all covered individuals. The health

benefits offered to enrollees in this data base are quite generous relative to the general market for

private health insurance in the US.

            During the five years observed, important changes occurred in the terms of insurance

coverage for mental health care. While the vast majority of plans represent so-called managed


                                                  17
indemnity plans (90%-94%), the management of mental health care benefits changed for a

substantial number of enrollees between 1991 and 1995. Beginning on January 1, 1994, about

eight percent of enrollees had their mental health coverage “carved out” to a specialty mental

health managed care company.44 In January 1995 an additional 35% of enrollees had their mental

health benefits carved out.

            It is reasonable to expect that these carve-out arrangements affected both the input

prices and the quantities of specific delivered services, such as visits.45 Changes in the extent of

carve-out arrangements might also have affected the general clinical strategies used in treating

major depression. Recent analyses by Wells et al. [1996] and by Berndt, Frank and McGuire

[1997] show clear differences in treatment patterns between carve-out managed care plans and

treatment of mental health care financed by general health insurers, with carve-out arrangements

being associated with a higher likelihood of using prescription drug treatments.

            Each outpatient and prescription drug claim can accommodate two ICD-9 diagnostic

codes. In identifying cases of major depression, we used ICD-9 codes 296.2 (major depressive

disorder - single episode) and 296.3 (major depressive disorder - recurrent episode) to define

patients diagnosed with major depression. We do this for three reasons. First, the clinical trials

literature has for the most part employed these definitions in their entry criteria. Second, chart

reviews have indicated that the specificity of these two diagnoses is high, i.e., the proportion of

true positives and false negatives is high, while the proportion of false positives is very low.

Third, clinicians could employ a more ambiguous diagnosis such as “depression not elsewhere

classified” or “neurotic depression”. That clinicians designated their diagnosis as either 296.2 or

296.3 indicates a conscious act of volition.46

            Using the diagnostic information and dates contained in the claims, we construct

episodes of treatment. Since we do not directly observe symptoms in retrospective claims data,

we cannot make our claims-based definition of an episode of treatment correspond directly to an

episode of the illness.47 When claims data indicate that psychotherapeutic drugs were prescribed,

we consider the number of days of treatment provided by the prescription as the time period over


                                                  18
which an individual received care. We follow American Psychiatric Association [1993] guidelines

in defining an episode of depression as new if a diagnosis is preceded by a period of at least eight

weeks of not meeting clinical criteria for depression.48 Thus we use an eight week period without

treatment to define new treatment episodes. In preliminary analyses, we experimented with

alternative definitions, such as those involving six or twelve week intervals; results were

essentially unaffected. For treatments lasting longer than six months we count quantities of visits

and drugs meeting guideline standards for acute care occurring with the first six months of care

(e.g., 15 psychotherapy visits even if year totals were 25 visits). To ensure that we consider the

full set of claims associated with the acute phase of treatment, we exclude episodes beginning in

the last six months of 1995, the last year in our sample.

            When these criteria were applied to the MEDSTAT dataset, we defined 18,920

episodes of acute phase outpatient care over the 1991-95 time period. Because we cannot fully

observe the treatment received for censored cases, we confine our attention to the 15,750

uncensored episodes in which we observe at least eight weeks without treatment before the

beginning of an episode; as noted above, 1548 episodes beginning in the last six months of 1995

were also excluded. In order to limit the sample to less severe forms of depression, we eliminated

individuals with episodes involving inpatient hospital treatment for a mental illness any time

during the five years. This reduced the number of episodes to 10,067.

            Using information on procedures (e.g., type of visit, whether drug prescribed) as

given by the CPT4 codes, we can describe the composition of treatment that occurred within a

treatment episode. Drug treatment is based on the national drug codes (NDC) reported on the

claim. The NDC classification of antidepressant medications revealed use of seven TCAs, three

SSRIs, two other serotonin-related drugs49, three MAO inhibitors, four anxiolytics and four

heterocyclics for treatment of depression. In terms of composition, 54% of the drug claims

involved SSRIs, 19% TCAs, 19% anxiolytics and 7% heterocyclics.50

            In previous research, we have reported that in the MEDSTAT claims data base, the

share of treatment accounted for by treatment involving psychotherapy claims appeared to


                                                 19
increase significantly in 1995, after having fallen steadily from 1991 to 1994.51 Subsequent

research has indicated to us that while procedure codes are missing for many outpatient claims --

a common problem with claims data, the extent of missing claims in the MEDSTAT dataset is

particularly large in 1991 through 1994. Thus, the apparent sudden increase in psychotherapy

claims in 1995 could simply reflect considerable missing claims from 1991 through 1994.

Hereafter we call the data underlying this previous research our “old” dataset.

             To identify missing psychotherapy claims not explicitly delineated by CPT4 codes, for

our “new” dataset we have developed an algorithm in which a psychotherapy procedure code is

assigned to claims with missing CPT4 codes if two visits are within 14 days of each other, if they

have the same charge, and if a previously psychotherapy-identified claim in the episode has the

same charge.52 Use of this algorithm contributed to an increase in the number of identified

episodes.

             Our primary analysis of the claims data considers only “pure” or “strict guideline”

treatments. That is, initially we will only consider episodes of care that adhere strictly with

treatment definitions as tested in the clinical trials literature. In this way we can directly link the

“price” of an episode of a well-defined treatment to the price of other therapeutically similar

treatments. However, we will also report results based on findings derived from episode

treatment definitions that relax this stringent guideline restriction, in which we include treatment

slightly below guideline criteria and those involving some continuation phase treatment.

             In our strict guideline analyses we identify seven major classes of treatments that have

been proven effective in the treatment of depression: (i) psychotherapy alone, 6-15 visits -- “PT

alone”; (ii) short term TCA treatment alone or with medical management -- “TCA alone”; (iii)

short term SSRI treatment alone or with medical management, 31-180 days -- “SSRI alone”; (iv)

short term TCA treatment (31-180 days) with some psychotherapy -- “TCA+PT”; (v) short term

SSRI treatment (31-180 days) with some psychotherapy -- “SSRI+PT”; (vi) short-term combined

TCA/SSRI treatment, 31-180 days -- “TCA/SSRI”; and (vii) short term combined TCA/SSRI

treatment (31-180 days) with some psychotherapy -- “TCA/SSRI+PT”. With the exception of


                                                   20
psychotherapy alone, episodes with anxiolytics also being prescribed are combined into the

appropriate class defined above. Use of seven major classes of treatments in this new dataset

represents an expansion from the five used in our previously published research. Another

significant change in the new data was to include episodes that involved long-term treatments or

those extending beyond 20 visits or six months. For those episodes we included the components

of care consistent with the acute phase bundles specified above and excluded spending on the

remainder of the “episode.” Using this expanded definition of an episode, we are more likely to

include continuation treatment in the analysis. This may be especially true in the later years as

new recommendations about continuation treatment diffused into practice. Thus, the new dataset

may be “pricing” acute plus early continuation phase care in the later years. This would tend to

bias an index upward. Evidence for this is reflected by an upward trend in the average duration of

SSRI treatment during the five years (from 87 days in 1991 to 126 in 1995). This change

contributed to a substantial increase in the number of cases used in the analyses.

            The new dataset also improved the definition of censoring. In the “old dataset” to

limit our analysis to episodes for which we had information on the entire episode, all cases which

included treatments in the last 8 weeks of 1995 were eliminated. This means that more episodes

were eliminated form 1995 than any other year. More severe episodes in need of longer term

treatment may therefore have been disproportionately dropped from previous analyses. This may

have biased the price index downward. We have now corrected that “late 95” censoring problem

limiting our analysis to the first 6 months of treatment. As mentioned previously, to ensure we

consider all treatments in the first 6 months of the episode, we do not consider episodes begun in

the last half of 1995.

            Finally, the new dataset allows drug switching if they are consistent with standards of

care in clinical trials. Again, the change would tend to increase the severity and complexity of the

treated population. Drug switching has been increasing over time as new pharmaceutical agents

have become available (SSRIs and SNRIs).

            It is informative to compare episodes defined in our new dataset, with that from the


                                                 21
old. As seen in Table 1, the most obvious change is that the number and proportion of episodes

receiving guideline-compatible treatments increase very substantially, from 2348 to 5039, or, from

23% to 50%. There are 2980 guideline compatible episodes in the new dataset that were not in

the old, and 289 in the old that do not appear in the new dataset.

            There is also some evidence suggesting that in the new dataset, a greater number of

episodes are associated with other mental health comorbidities. While new-old differences are

relatively small in terms of substance abuse comorbidities in guideline compatible episodes (2.5%

vs. 2.8%), 17.9% of acute phase depression episodes in the new dataset simultaneously involve

treatment of schizophrenia or bipolar depression, while in the old dataset this proportion was a

smaller 15.8%. For the various panic and anxiety comorbidities, the new-old proportions are

3.3% vs. 2.9. The literature, as well as our own discussions with clinician, suggest (1) that major

depression and bipolar illness are often mistaken for one another, and (2) treatment of depression

with comorbid psychoses and substance abuse is both common and difficult.

            We interpret differences between the new and old datasets as therefore moving us

away from the more pristine world of clinical trials to a more realistic and more complicated

treatment environment in which mental illness comorbidities are more prevalent.

            It is worth noting that differences between the new and old datasets in terms of other,

non-mental health comorbidities are rather minor. As seen in the bottom panel of Table 1, for

example, the proportion having no such comorbidities is 48.2% in the new dataset, and 48.3% in

the old; relative to the old dataset, the proportion having one other medical comorbidity is slightly

higher (37.9% vs. 36.2%), but is slightly lower for two or more comorbidities (13.9% vs. 15.6%).




                                                 22
                                              Table 1

COMPARISON OF DATASETS BASED ON NEW AND OLD EPISODE DEFINITIONS

                                    New Data       Old Data       In New but        In Old but Not
                                                                  Not in Old         in New Data
                                                                     Data
Total Episodes                    10,067              10,368
Episodes Guideline Compatible      5,039               2,348          2,980               289
Mental Health Comorbidities*
      Substance Abuse              2.5%                2.8%           2.6%                4.2%
      Schizophrenia / Bipolar      17.9%              15.8%          20.1%               23.2%
      Anxiety / Panic              3.3%                2.9%           3.9%                6.2%
Sum of Other Medical Comorbidities**
      0                            48.2%              48.3%          47.5%               41.5%
      1                            37.9%              36.2%          39.3%               38.8%
      ≥2                           13.9%              15.6%          13.2%               19.7%

* Panic/anxiety diagnoses are ICD-9 300, 300.1-300.4; schizophrenia/bipolar are all 295s, 296.0-
  296.1, 296.4-296.8; other includes obsessive/compulsive disorders (300.3), bulimia (783.6),
  depression not otherwise specified (311) and dysthymia (300.4).

** Other medical comorbidities are sense organs, circulatory system, cerebrovascular, digestive
  system, kidneys, prostate, pregnancy, and nervous system.


            B. On Guideline Compatibility

            Earlier we noted that of the 10,067 episodes identified in the new dataset from 1991

through 1995, 5039 (50%) were guideline-compatible. It is interesting to note that in our new

dataset the proportion of episodes receiving guideline-compatible treatment rose from 35% in

1991 to 42% in 1992, then increased sharply in 1993 to 56%, and remained at 56% in 1994 and

1995.

            The interpretation of guideline-incompatible treatments is difficult with claims data.

For example, 1308 episodes (33% of the 3965) treated with psychotherapy alone consisted of a

single visit. In addition, 1672 or 16% of all episodes received neither psychotherapy nor an

antidepressant drug. Such single visits might have taken place for the purpose of “ruling out”


                                                 23
major depression as the relevant condition to be treated in favor of a somatic condition or another

mental disorder. In such cases, the visit should not be viewed as “inappropriate treatment” but

rather as an appropriate assessment, consistent with the Depression Guideline Panel statement

[1993, p. 36]:
                 “Effective treatment rests on accurate diagnosis. The practitioner
                 must first determine whether the patietn has a clinical depression or
                 is simply suffering normal sadness or distress...For patients who
                 have very mild cases of major depression or whose diagnosis is
                 unclear and who are not in immediate danger or are not suffering
                 significant functional impairment, the practitioner may want to
                 schedule one or two additional weekly evaluation visits to
                 determine whether symptoms will abate without formal
                 treatment...”

The implication of this is that with retrospective claims data, distinguishing treatment and

assessment is quite uncertain. Hence we are somewhat unclear as to whether only 50-60% of

care lies on the production frontier, or whether another 10-20% of treatments were dealt with

properly but did not require treatment of the type studied here. It is important to note here that

our use of guideline standards of care imposes a rather unrealistic shape to the production

function for treatment of depression. It takes on a step function form. For example, if one were

to receive 6 psychotherapy visits for treatment of depression, our analysis would treat the case as

“effective” whereas 4 or 5 visits would be viewed as “ineffective.” This is unlikely to be an

accurate representation of clinical reality. Nevertheless, there is little systematic analysis upon
which to make alternative assumptions. Thus, we use the step function production model as a

point of departure.

            With these difficulties in appropriate interpretation as a caveat, we now examine in

greater detail the extent of guideline compatibility in the various treatment bundles of the new

dataset.

            Of the 10,067 episodes, 3765 were treated with psychotherapy alone, and 376 with

psychotherapy and anxiolytics. Within the claims data, no distinction was made between different

types of psychotherapy. Considering the 3044 treatments involving 50 minute psychotherapy



                                                  24
sessions, we find that 1658 received four or fewer visits, and 800 only a single visit. Of the 921

episodes involving 20 minute psychotherapy alone, 508 involved just one brief visit, while 178

episodes were treated with between two and five brief sessions. An additional 20 episodes

involved some form of group therapy treatment, with only 25% of those having more than three

visits.

            While clinical trials data indicate that individuals show partial response to

psychotherapy with six weeks of treatment (with weekly sessions) and remission in twelve weeks,

published guidelines for the treatment of acute phase depression do not indicate any demonstrated

effectiveness for fewer than six visits. The benefits of short psychotherapy visits, in the absence

of antidepressant medication, have not been studied and therefore cannot be considered either

effective or ineffective treatment. Although clinical trials and published treatment guidelines

indicate psychotherapeutic treatment alone is an effective treatment, in our data, of the 3044

episodes given this treatment, only 1386 episodes (46%) can be considered to have completed a

psychotherapy regimen that is consistent with guideline treatments.53

            Turning attention now to treatments involving antidepressant medications, we begin

by noting that claims data do not include information on how many days’ medication was actually

taken; as a proxy, we use the number of days of treatment for which a prescription was filled.

            Of the 10,067 episodes considered, 231 were treated with TCA either alone (176) or

in combination with anxiolytic medication (55). Of these 231 episodes, 55 (24%) were treated

with less than 30 days of medication and 29 with ten or fewer days. Generally, the clinical

literature (and the APA guidelines) indicate that while patients may show some improvement to

antidepressant medication by the end of the first week, full response to acute phase depression

may take four to six weeks.

            An additional 741 episodes were treated with SSRIs either alone (604) or in

combination with anxiolytic medication (137); 77 (10%) of these episodes were treated with

fewer than 30 days of medication. Because individuals have differing reactions to drugs, some

individuals are appropriately treated with one class of antidepressants, and then switched to


                                                 25
another class. In our sample, 95 episodes were treated with both TCAs and SSRIs, but 20 of

these episodes had less than 30 days of both drugs.

            Several episodes were treated with medications other than SSRIs and TCAs. In our

sample ten episodes were treated with MAO inhibitors, while 164 were treated with heterocyclics.

An additional 124 episodes were treated with anti-anxiety medication alone, a protocol which has

not been approved by the FDA for the treatment of major depression. The use of anti-anxiety

medication in the treatment of depression remains controversial. The use of alprazolam may be

appropriate, if other medication is contraindicated. There is no clinical trial evidence for the

efficacious use of other anxiolytic medications.54

            Finally, in terms of combination treatments, the share of episodes treated with

psychotherapy and antidepressant medication grew over time. Over the entire five year time

period, 552 treatment episodes involved both some TCA and some psychotherapy, while 2169

included both SSRI and some psychotherapy. A large share (36%) of the episodes treated with

combination treatments had three or fewer psychotherapy visits, and an additional 382 episodes

were treated with some TCA, some SSRI and some psychotherapy.

            C. Comparison With Results From Other Studies

            The patterns of care observed in this dataset raise issues related to the likely

effectiveness of treatment, given the substantial proportion of episodes involving guideline-

incompatible treatments. One potential criticism of the patterns of treatment bundle data

presented above is that it is based on retrospective claims data. Claims data are useful in that the

retrospective medical treatment of many individuals can be analyzed efficiently and at minimal

expense. In addition, such observational data reveal the “real world” practice of medicine, not the

pristine clinical trial environment. Claims data are also used for quality assessment by

organizations constructing “report cards” on health care organizations. Yet claims data has been

fairly criticized for several reasons. The accuracy of diagnoses and recorded data are sometimes

questioned, and omissions in records are common. For example, depression has been shown to be

under-diagnosed by primary care physicians and over-diagnosed by psychiatric clinicians.55


                                                  26
             Other studies have found treatment patterns for depression that are generally

consistent with the patterns we observe here. The Medical Outcomes Study (MOS) consisted of

635 individuals diagnosed with depression or with current depressive symptoms for whom data

was collected by self-administered questionnaires, patient diaries, phone interviews and health

examinations. The MOS found that only 23% of depressed patients had used an antidepressant

medication in the prior month or used it daily for a month or more in the prior six months. Of

those patients using an antidepressant medication, 39% used an inappropriately low dose.56

             The MOS did not report number of psychotherapy visits. Instead it reported

‘counseling’, defining it as three or more minutes of counseling during the screening interview.

This makes comparison with published standards of care difficult. Although 90% of patients of

mental health specialists were counseled, among general medical practitioners where most study

participants were treated, only 20% of managed care and 40% of fee-for-service patients were

counseled.

             Another study of 88 outpatients enrolled in the NIMH Clinical Research

Collaborative Program on the Psychobiology of Depression found that prior to entry into the

study, only 19% of patients received an adequate dose and duration of antidepressant medication,

while 24% received some anti-anxiety medication. Regarding psychotherapy visits, 44% were

seen for at least one hour weekly.57

             Thus, the substantial proportion of patients in the MOS and NIMH studies apparently

not obtaining efficacious treatments, while perhaps surprising, is consistent with the treatment

patterns found in the claims data we observe here.

             For our purposes of constructing price indexes for the treatment of acute phase major

depression, we must decide whether to utilize the data suggestive of treatment not consistent with

FDA approvals and AHCPR guidelines. Since the interpretation of such treatments is

problematic, in our “strict guideline” analysis we confine our attention to episodes of treatment

defined as being consistent with AHCPR guidelines; however, in a separate analysis we also

include treatment bundles that are “close” to guideline standards. Additional research on


                                                 27
guideline-incompatible care and the shape of the production function for treatment of depression

is currently underway.



VI. QUANTITIES AND PRICES OF ALTERNATIVE TREATMENT BUNDLES

            We begin our empirical analysis by characterizing quantities and prices of the seven

treatment bundles. In Table 2 we report guideline-compatible treatment quantities, by year.

Censoring at the beginning and end of our time span implies that in 1991 and in 1995, about 1500

episodes are identified, whereas in 1992-1994 the number is considerably larger at about 2400 per

year. The two most common treatment bundles are SSRI+PT and PT alone. Because of varying

sample size by year, quantity trends are more easily discerned by examining quantity proportions

rather than absolute levels; guideline-compatible treatment bundle quantity proportions are

reported in Table 3.

                                           Table 2

   GUIDELINE-COMPATIBLE TREATMENT BUNDLE QUANTITIES, BY YEAR

Treatment                           1991      1992       1993      1994       1995      Total
PT Alone                             214       311        321       311        229       1386
TCA Alone                            32        45         43        37         19        176
SSRI Alone                           52        113        188       205        110       668
TCA+PT                               63        111        129       73         33        409
SSRI+PT                              125       292        528       644        400       1989
TCA/SSRI                              9        14         23        23          6         75
TCA/SSRI+PT                          27        53         121       98         37        336
Sum                                  522       939       1353      1391        834       5039
Total Episodes                      1479      2211       2426      2468       1483      10067
Percent Guideline-Compatible       35.3%     42.5%      55.8%     56.4%      56.4%      50.1%


            A number of notable trends appear in Table 3. First, there has been a very substantial

decline in PT alone treatments, from 41% in 1991 to 22% in 1994, and then up slightly to nearly

28% in 1995. Second, for the medication only treatments, SSRI alone has grown from 10 to

13%, even as TCA alone declined from six to two percent; the sum of the two medication only



                                                28
treatments has remained relatively constant at 15-16%. Third, most of the compositional change

among treatment bundles has involved the medication-psychotherapy combination treatments.

While the TCA+PT combination fell from 12 to 4% between 1991 and 1995, the SSRI+PT

treatment share doubled, from 24 to 48% of all treatments. By 1995, the SSRI+PT combination

had become the modal treatment bundle.

                                        Table 3

      GUIDELINE-COMPATIBLE TREATMENT BUNDLE QUANTITY
                   PROPORTIONS, BY YEAR

Treatment               1991         1992         1993      1994       1995       Total
PT Alone                0.409        0.331        0.237     0.224      0.275      0.275
TCA Alone               0.061        0.048        0.032     0.027      0.023      0.035
SSRI Alone              0.100        0.120        0.139     0.147      0.132      0.133
TCA+PT                  0.121        0.118        0.095     0.052      0.040      0.081
SSRI+PT                 0.239        0.311        0.390     0.463      0.480      0.395
TCA/SSRI                0.017        0.015        0.017     0.017      0.001      0.015
TCA/SSRI+PT             0.052        0.056        0.089     0.070      0.044      0.067



            In Table 4 we report the average supply price for each treatment bundle, by year;

recall that this supply price captures the sum of payments from insurers and patients/consumers to

providers. As is seen there, annual price movements represent a mix of increases and decreases.

Between 1993 and 1994, for example, the price of one bundle increases and that of all other six

bundles decreases, while for 1994-95, price movements are reversed -- six up, and one down. Of

particular interest is the extent to which compositional changes in quantities of treatment bundles

appear to be negatively related to changes in relative prices. When entries in Tables 3 and 4 are

considered together, it becomes clear that compositional quantity changes do not follow simple

conceptions of downward sloping demand curves where quantity and “price” changes are clearly

negatively related. From 1991 to 1992, for example, even as the supply price of SSRI alone more

than doubled from $52 to $113, the SSRI alone share increased from four to six percent;

similarly, the cost of the SSRI+PT combination bundle increased by about 150% from $125 to


                                                  29
$292 between 1991 and 1992, yet the quantity share grew from 24% to 31%. It is important to

note that the quality of treatment bundles may vary (e.g., side-effects). Also, insurance coverage

drives a wedge between the supply and demand prices. Both of these may help explain observed

patterns and they are discussed below.


                                                 Table 4

   AVERAGE SUPPLY PRICE OF TREATMENT BUNDLE, IN DOLLARS BY YEAR

Treatment                   1991         1992           1993     1994        1995       Average**
PT Alone                    $876         $853           $866     $818        $819         $846
TCA Alone                    236          310            318     204         226*          267
SSRI Alone                   311          387            309     308          344          328
TCA+PT                       932          882            745     706          941          820
SSRI+PT                      941          983            949     958          972          961
TCA/SSRI                    649*         361*            449     423         328*          439
TCA/SSRI+PT                 1002         1021           1062     953          977         1010
AVERAGE**                    805          817            802     788          825


Notes:   * denotes a cell with less than 20 observations
         ** denotes a weighted average


            This positive relationship between changes in supply price and quantity share is

observed in other years as well. From 1992 to 1993, for example, the supply price of TCA+PT

fell by about 18% from $882 to $745, but its quantity share also dropped from 12% to 10%.

Between 1993 and 1994, while the cost of PT alone fell about 5% from $866 to $818, the PT

quantity share fell from 26% to 23%. Similarly, for both TCA alone and TCA+PT, between 1993

and 1994 both prices and quantity shares fell.

            What these quantity and supply price data suggest, therefore, is that factors other than

supply price are likely to have induced compositional changes among treatment bundles for acute

phase major depression. Prominent among these, we conjecture, is the increased knowledge and

experience gained by physicians on the efficacy and effectiveness of the SSRI medications,



                                                   30
particularly in combination with a limited amount of psychotherapy and changing insurance

arrangements.

            Although compositional changes among treatment bundles may reflect a host of price

and non-price influences, it is clear that the dollar expenditure shares among the seven treatment

bundles have been greatly affected between 1991 and 1995. These dramatic changes are evident

in Table 5. While the expenditure share going to PT alone fell from 45% to 27% between 1991

and 1995, by 1995 the SSRI+PT bundle was responsible for more than half (56%) of all dollar

expenditures, up from 28% in 1991. In 1991 the three singleton bundles of PT alone, TCA alone

and SSRI alone accounted for 50% of all treatment dollars in 1991, but by 1995 they only

captured 33% of expenditures.


                                          Table 5

   TOTAL EXPENDITURE SHARES BY TREATMENT BUNDLE, BY YEAR

Treatment                 1991        1992        1993       1994        1995     Average
PT Alone                  0.446      0.346        0.256      0.232       0.273     0.310
TCA Alone                 0.018      0.018        0.013      0.007      0.006*     0.012
SSRI Alone                0.038      0.057        0.054      0.058       0.055     0.052
TCA+PT                    0.140      0.128        0.089      0.047       0.045     0.090
SSRI+PT                   0.280      0.374        0.461      0.563       0.565     0.449
TCA/SSRI                 0.014*      0.007*       0.010      0.009      0.003*     0.008
TCA/SSRI+PT               0.064      0.071        0.118      0.085       0.053     0.078

Note: * denotes a cell with less than 20 observations


            Together, the patterns observed in Tables 2 through 5 suggest to us that rather than

PT and the SSRIs being viewed as simple singleton substitutes in the production of treatments for

acute phase depression, they are more accurately envisaged as being complementary in the sense

that the PT+SSRI combination has now become the modal treatment.

            To this point, our discussion of treatment bundle price has focussed on the supply

price -- the sum of payments received from insurers and patients/consumers. The demand price


                                                 31
notion reflects the fact that patients receiving treatment for acute phase depression provide direct

payments in the form of copayments and deductibles. In Table 6 we report average demand

prices for each of the seven treatment bundles, annually. Trends in the demand price differ quite

markedly from those of the supply price.

            Recall from Table 4 that the average supply price across all bundles fell slightly from

$805 in 1991 to $788 in 1994, and then increased to $825 in 1995. In contrast, as seen in Table

6, from 1991 to 1994 the average demand price increased from $100 to $105, and then it

increased very sharply to $128 in 1995. This sharp increase of 22% between 1994 and 1995 in

the average demand price across all treatment bundles reflects corresponding jumps in the PT

alone bundle (26%), SSRI alone (19%), SSRI+PT (17%), and TCA/SSRI+PT (21%).

            Two main factors may account for changes in demand prices that differ so starkly

from supply price changes. First are the changes in cost sharing provisions. These are

documented in the MEDSTAT datset. The MEDSTAT data indicated to us that in 1995, for a

number of insurance plans, benefit changes were introduced that increased substantially the

copayments and deductibles required of plan enrollees.58 Second is the tendency to use out of

network providers in the context of managed care. Coverage of care provided by non-network

providers typically carries higher copayments than does care received from a network clinician.

During the time period observed, networks were becoming more restrictive and behavioral health

carve-outs were introduced, which may have increased the share of care provided by non-network

providers. The impact of these benefit design changes can be seen by computing the portion of

the total treatment cost borne directly by the patient, i.e., computing the ratio of the demand price

in Table 6 to the corresponding supply price in Table 4; we call this the OOPPs ratio.




                                                 32
                                            Table 6

             AVERAGE DEMAND PRICE OF TREATMENT BUNDLE,
                        IN DOLLARS BY YEAR

Treatment                   1991        1992          1993    1994      1995      Average**
PT Alone                    121         122            122    123       155          128
TCA Alone                    39          46            46      48        51          46
SSRI Alone                   23          30            24      27        32          27
TCA+PT                      128         124            116    113       117          120
SSRI+PT                     102         105            115    121       142          120
TCA/SSRI                    43*         47*            46      51       21*          45
TCA/SSRI+PT                 102         121            131    135       163          132
AVERAGE**                   100         101            102    105       128


Note:    * denotes a cell with less than 20 observations
         ** denotes a weighted average



            For the SSRI alone bundle, the OOPPs ratio increased only marginally, from 7% in

1991 to 9% in 1995. For the very low total cost TCA alone bundle, the OOPPs ratio increased

more markedly, from 16% in 1991 to 23% in 1995; in absolute terms, this additional burden borne

by the patient was only $12 (from $39 to $51). For the combination treatments involving PT and

the SSRIs, however, the increase was much more substantial, both in terms of OOPPs ratio and
absolute dollar burden. In the SSRI+PT bundle, for example, the OOPPs ratio rose from 11% to

15% between 1991 and 1995, with the demand price increasing $40 from $102 to $142; even

more dramatically, for the TCA/SSRI+PT bundle the OOPPs ratio rose from 10% to 17%, while

the demand price jumped $61 from $102 in 1991 to $163 in 1995. The changes resulted from

increased cost sharing for psychotherapy.

            One important implication of these findings is that when considering construction of

price indexes for the treatment of a medical condition such as depression, it is imperative that

demand prices be distinguished from supply prices, for changes in insurance plan design benefits



                                                 33
over time can introduce sharp differences into their time trends.



VII. AGGREGATE PRICE INDEXES FOR THE TREATMENT OF DEPRESSION

            With the prices and quantities of the seven treatment bundles as elementary building

blocks, we now move on to the construction of aggregate supply and aggregate demand price

indexes. A variety of price indexes can be computed, each having implicit assumptions on the

extent of ex ante substitutability among the seven bundles. Since we have discussed these

alternative index number formulae and underlying assumptions elsewhere59, and since they are

well-known in the literature on index numbers60, we provide only a very brief discussion here.

            Fixed quantity weight indexes such as the Laspeyres and the Paasche reflect an

assumption of zero ex ante substitutability among the seven treatment bundles; the Laspeyres

employs a base period fixed weight, the Paasche the final period fixed weight. The Cobb-Douglas

employs a fixed expenditure weight (here, equal to the mean expenditure share for each bundle

over time), and assumes the elasticity of substitution among treatment bundles equals unity for all

pairs of bundles. When demand curves are downward sloping and bundle prices are all increasing,

between any two adjacent time periods the Laspeyres price index is greater than the Paasche.

            In general the chained, or sequentially updated price indexes are viewed as being

preferable to the fixed weight indexes. The Tornquist discrete approximation to the Divisia, and

the Fisher Ideal, make no a priori assumptions on the extent of substitutability among treatment

bundles. The Tornquist weights percentage changes in each of the treatment bundles by the

arithmetic mean of the expenditure share in the two time periods, whereas the Fisher Ideal is the

geometric mean of the corresponding Laspeyres and Paasche indexes. A commonly observed

empirical pattern is that the Tornquist and Fisher Ideal price indexes are very close to one

another, and both tend to be in between the Laspeyres and Paasche price indexes.

            With this as background, we now report results of various aggregate price index

calculations, first in Table 7 as viewed from the supply price (i.e., PPI) vantage, and then in Table

8 from the demand side (i.e., CPI).


                                                 34
            The most striking result that immediately emerges from Table 7 is that, regardless of

which index number procedure is employed, over the 1991-95 time period the treatment price

index for acute phase major depression has hardly changed, remaining at 1.00 or falling slightly to

around 0.97. Each of the price indexes reveal an increase from 1991 to 1992, they all fall in 1993,

all fall again in 1994 (to between 0.95 and 0.97), and then all increase in 1995. Given some of the

data problems in 1995, this last finding should be viewed cautiously. Differences among the

various fixed and chained indexes are relatively minor.

                                         Table 7

 ALTERNATIVE AGGREGATE PRODUCER (“SUPPLY”) PRICE INDEXES
   FOR THE TREATMENT OF ACUTE PHASE MAJOR DEPRESSION

Price Index                      1991        1992         1993        1994        1995
Fixed Weights:
   Laspeyres                     1.000       1.003        0.975       0.931       0.976
   Paasche                       1.000       1.027        0.996       0.974       1.000
   Cobb-Douglas                  1.000       1.018        0.985       0.953       0.992
Chained Weights:
   Laspeyres                     1.000       1.003        0.969       0.938       0.968
   Paasche                       1.000       1.011        0.976       0.952       0.978
   Fisher Ideal                  1.000       1.007        0.97        0.945       0.973
   Tornquist                     1.000       1.007        0.972       0.945       0.972
BLS PPIs*
   Aggregate PPI                 1.000       1.012        1.025       1.031       1.051
   Health Services                                                    1.000       1.024
   Antidepressants               1.000       1.076        1.134       1.162       1.204
   Psychiatric Hospitals                     1.000        1.024       1.060       109.9

* BLS indexes normalized to appropriate base year


            By comparison, in the bottom panel of Table 7 we report various PPIs published by

the BLS. Over the 1991-95 time period, the aggregate PPI for all finished goods increased about

5%, and that for antidepressant prescription drugs increased by about 20%. From 1992 to 1995,

the PPI for psychiatric hospital services increased by about 10%, while between 1994 and 1995




                                                35
the overall health services PPI increased 2.4%. Thus, while our various supply price indexes for

the treatment of acute phase depression are either flat or very slightly falling, they all grow

considerably less than the various official PPIs, i.e., the “real”, inflation adjusted price index for

the treatment of acute phase depression has fallen over the 1991-95 time span.


                                          Table 8

ALTERNATIVE AGGREGATE CONSUMER (“DEMAND”) PRICE INDEXES
   FOR THE TREATMENT OF ACUTE PHASE MAJOR DEPRESSION

Price Index                        1991         1992         1993        1994         1995
Fixed Weights:
   Laspeyres                      1.000         1.028       1.041        1.063        1.266
   Paasche                        1.000         1.037       1.080        1.118        1.334
   Cobb-Douglas                   1.000         1.037       1.069        1.110        1.300
Chained Weights:
   Laspeyres                      1.000         1.028       1.048        1.081        1.281
   Paasche                        1.000         1.032       1.065        1.104        1.317
   Fisher Ideal                   1.000         1.030       1.056        1.092        1.299
   Tornquist                      1.000         1.030       1.057        1.093        1.298
BLS CPIs*
   All Items                      1.000         1.030       1.061        1.088        1.119
   Medical Care                   1.000         1.075       1.146        1.205        1.266
   Prescription Drugs             1.000         1.075       1.117        1.155        1.177

* BLS indexes normalized to 1991 base year


            Index number afficionados might notice, however, that the typically observed

inequality relationships among the Laspeyres and Paasche price indexes are not present here. For

example, for both fixed and chained weight versions, the Paasche price index is larger than the

Laspeyres. The reason this occurs is that, as noted in Section VI above, in a number of cases

changes in treatment bundle supply prices and quantity shares are positively rather than negatively

correlated. Because the price index calculations do not take into account factors affecting

demand other than price, and because consumers do not face supply prices, there is the

appearance of a positive relation between quantity and supply price. We discuss other price-


                                                    36
related issues in Section VII below, where we deal with hedonic price indexes. Finally, note that

as is usually the case, the Fisher Ideal and Tornquist indexes are always in between the chained

Paasche and Laspeyres indexes.

            We now turn to a discussion of aggregate price indexes viewed from the demand side,

i.e., the patient/consumers’ OOPPs expenditures. As seen in Table 8, the demand aggregate price

indexes have very different time trends than do the supply aggregate price indexes. Each of the

price indexes exhibits an increase between each pair of adjacent years, with the 1994-95 price

increase being particularly dramatic. By 1995, the fixed weight price indexes (normalized to

1.000 in 1991) ranged between 1.27 and 1.33, while the chained indexes had a slightly smaller

variation, between 1.28 and 1.32. Between 1991 and 1994, the price indexes increased by only

about 10%, but in 1995 the increase was much larger, averaging around 20%. As discussed in

Section VI, we attribute this sharp increase to benefit design changes in 1995 that increased

patient copayments and deductibles.

            The discrepancy between the PPI and CPI results highlight several important points in

interpretation of the data. First is that if the elasticity with respect to the demand price is less than

unity (in absolute value), spending must increase. Since cost sharing increased notably and

demand estimates suggest an elasticity of less than unity, it is not surprising that the CPI increases

over time. Second, and more important, is the welfare interpretation of these changes. It is well

known that low levels of demand side cost sharing in medical insurance is associated with welfare

losses due to moral hazard [Newhouse, 1993]. Thus, changes in the CPI for depression may

reflect reduced moral hazard in addition to higher prices per unit of “effective care.” Research by

Manning and Marquis [1993] suggests that 50% cost sharing for mental health care was optimal

in a fee-for-service context. Because observed rates in our data are quite a bit lower, gains from

reduced moral hazard may be significant. Because interpretation of the CPI is unclear, we focus

more attention on the PPI.



VII. HEDONIC PRICE INDEXES


                                                   37
            An enduring issue in price index measurement is how one should make adjustments

for quality change. Quality adjustments could be significant here, for it is reasonable to expect

that the characteristics and attributes of the acute phase of treatment for depression has changed

over time, and that changes in the underlying patient population might also have occurred.

            Although its use to date in the medical marketplace has been limited, the hedonic

price approach has been used in many other contexts to adjust price movements for (not fully

priced) quality changes.61 We now briefly outline our implementation of hedonic price

measurement for the treatment of acute phase depression.

            We expect that treatment costs for depression are affected by patient characteristics,

various attributes of antidepressant medications, the type of treatment given the patient, and the

year in which the treatment episode began.

            Patient characteristics for which we have data include the patient’s gender, age,

general medical condition (measured by the number of comorbid general medical conditions, as

noted on the bottom of Table 1), the industry in which the plan enrollee is employed

(transportation, communication, utilities; services; or government), and information on the

patient’s mental health comorbidities. With respect to these mental health comorbidities, we

construct dummy variables for whether the patient is also diagnosed with a substance abuse

disorder, a panic/anxiety disorder, schizophrenia or bipolar depression, depression not otherwise

specified, and whether the current episode involves a recurrence of major depression.

            For attributes of the various antidepressant medications, we employ data on the half-

life of the medication, and on the number of side effects that frequently accompany use of the

medication.62

            Regarding treatments, we create dummy variables for each of the seven guideline-

compatible treatment bundles described earlier. We also create a dummy variable indicating

whether at the start of the episode the individual was enrolled in a behavioral health carve-out.

Finally, we create dummy variables indicating the year in which the treatment episode began.

            The dependent variables in the hedonic regressions are the natural logarithm of the


                                                 38
supply price and of the demand price. The explanatory variables are the patient, medication,

treatment and time variables discussed above. The set of omitted dummy variables, and thus the

reference case, is that for a female; where the enrollee is employed in the transportation,

communication or utilities industry; has none of the mental health comorbidities noted above; is

not being treated for a recurrent episode of acute phase depression; treatment consists of PT

alone; and the treatment episode began in 1991. Parameter estimates for the supply price

equation are in the left panel of Table 9, while estimates for demand price equation are in the right

panel. A number of results are worth mentioning in detail. We begin with the supply price.

             First, characteristics of the patient and their illness have a statistically significant

impact on treatment costs. While age does not appear to affect the supply price, mental health

comorbidities such as anxiety/panic, schizophrenia/bipolar depression, and depression not

otherwise specified all have a positive and significant impact. Somewhat surprisingly, comorbid

substance abuse has a negative coefficient estimate, although not significant. The sum of the

patient’s other general medical comorbidities is also negative, but not significant. Finally,

treatment costs for patients in which the enrollee is employed in the services or government

sectors are considerably lower than if the industry involves transportation, communications and/or

utilities.

             Second, attributes of the antidepressant medications also affect supply prices of

treatment, even when one controls for type of treatment. Specifically, within the various bundles

involving prescription drugs, greater side effects are associated with lower supply prices (lower

side effects with higher supply prices), and increased half-life of the drug (mitigating the negative

impacts of occasional forgetting to take the medication) also raises the supply price. Relative to

PT alone, treatment with TCA alone or SSRI alone reduces the supply price significantly, while

use of SSRI+PT or TCA/SSRI+PT increases supply price.




                                                    39
                                         Table 9

        PARAMETER ESTIMATES FROM HEDONIC PRICE REGRESSIONS
         (Absolute value of t-statistic in parentheses, from robust standard error)

   Variable        Supply Price (“PPI”) Equations       Demand Price (“CPI”) Equations

   Constant             6.528              6.587             4.614              4.658
                      (112.60)            (98.91)           (51.88)            (47.39)
     Male               -0.016             -0.005            -0.090             -0.056
                        (0.75)             (0.18)            (2.26)             (1.29)
      Age               0.003              0.000             0.011              0.008
                        (3.38)             (0.09)            (6.71)             (4.19)
 Anxiety/Panic          0.258              0.350             0.126              0.266
                        (5.68)             (7.06)            (0.89)             (1.84)
 Schizophrenia/         0.235              0.393             0.233              0.458
    Bipolar             (9.94)            (14.62)            (5.86)            (10.56)
Other Depression        0.128              0.183             0.070              0.125
                        (5.32)             (6.16)            (1.75)             (2.61)
Substance Abuse         -0.136             -0.093            -0.529             -0.478
                        (1.38)             (0.87)            (2.71)             (2.36)
   Recurrent            0.080              0.124             0.050              0.132
                        (4.04)             (5.32)            (1.44)             (3.42)
 Sum Medical            -0.025             -0.024            -0.029             -0.031
 Comorbidities          (2.04)             (1.58)            (1.29)             (1.24)
 Government             -0.121             -0.172            -0.858             -0.936
                        (3.07)             (3.74)           (17.21)            (16.10)
    Services            -0.184             -0.225            -0.991             -1.053
                        (4.62)             (4.92)           (21.59)            (19.53)
Sum Side Effects        -0.084             -0.129            0.025              -0.104
                        (3.33)            (10.45)            (0.78)             (6.26)
   Half-Life            0.001              0.001             0.000              -0.001
                        (4.01)             (4.47)            (1.31)             (3.53)
  TCA Alone             -1.170               na              -1.483               na
                       (10.15)                               (8.77)
  SSRI Alone            -0.892              na               -1.847               na
                       (13.50)                              (19.18)
   TCA+PT               0.137               na               -0.116               na
                        (1.38)                               (0.89)
   SSRI+PT              0.195               na               -0.122               na
                        (3.21)                               (1.41)
  TCA/SSRI              -0.654              na               -1.320               na



                                            40
                          (5.71)                                   (8.32)
 TCA/SSRI+PT              0.301                  na                0.007                  na
                          (4.15)                                   (0.07)
   Carve-Out              -0.047               0.025               -0.028               0.092
                          (0.90)               (0.43)              (0.44)               (1.24)
   Start 1992             0.048                0.072               0.108                0.099
                          (1.23)               (1.60)              (1.62)               (1.35)
   Start 1993             0.004                0.054               0.114                0.094
                          (0.11)               (1.21)              (1.71)               (1.30)
   Start 1994             -0.021               0.025               0.145                0.097
                          (0.54)               (0.58)              (2.09)               (1.31)
   Start 1995             0.026                0.059               0.366                0.296
                          (0.59)               (1.14)              (4.92)               (3.53)
      R2                  0.328                0.088               0.277                0.083
     RMSE                 0.689                0.802               1.168                1.315
      N                    5034                 5034                5034                 5034


            Somewhat surprisingly, we find that whether at the beginning of the treatment

episode the patient was enrolled in a mental health carve-out has no significant impact on supply

price. To check whether the carve-out impact was diluted because of differential treatment

bundles used by the carve-out, we also estimated a supply price equation in which the treatment

bundle dummy variables were deleted; results are given in the second column of parameter

estimates in Table 9. Although the goodness of fit was reduced considerably when the treatment

bundle variables were deleted, the carve-out parameter estimate remained insignificant. This may

be due in part to the fact that the comparison conditions involved managed indemnity

arrangements which tend to negotiate price discounts and shift care patterns.

            Of particular interest are the parameter estimates on the 1992-95 yearly dummy

variables. In the context of the hedonic price equation, these parameter estimates indicate how

the supply price changed relative to 1991, holding constant the various patient characteristics,

medication attributes, and the treatment bundle composition. Each of the four parameter

estimates is small and insignificantly different from zero; hedonic price indexes computed as anti-

logarithms of these coefficients are 1.049, 1.004, 0.980 and 1.027 for 1992 through 1995,

respectively (1991=1.000). These quality-adjusted hedonic price indexes are consistent with



                                                 41
traditional aggregate supply price indexes reported in Table 7 above. Adjusting for various

patient, medication and treatment changes over time does not appear to affect the central finding

that from 1991 to 1995, there was very little change in the supply price for treating acute phase

major depression.

            We now turn to the demand price hedonic equations, whose parameter estimates

appear in the last two columns of Table 9. In general, the pattern of results from the hedonic

demand price equations involving quality attributes is not as strong and dramatic as is that of the

hedonic supply price equation. For example, while parameter estimates on the patient’s mental

health comorbidities are of the same sign, in the demand price equation a number are no longer

statistically significant; attributes of the antidepressant medication are not significant as well. As

with the supply equation, the mental health carve-out coefficient is insignificant.

            However, in contrast to the supply price equation, for the demand hedonic price

equation the parameter estimates on the 1992-95 year dummy variables are positive, and by 1994

and 1995 they become statistically significant. Relative to 1991 = 1.000, holding constant patient

characteristics, medication attributes and treatment composition, the hedonic price indexes for

1992-95 (computed as anti-logs of the estimated parameters) are 1.114, 1.121, 1.155 and 1.443.

Compared to the traditional aggregate demand price indexes reported in Table 8, the time trends

in these hedonic price indexes are broadly similar. While the traditional aggregate demand price

index in Table 8 averages about 1.30 in 1995, the corresponding hedonic quality-adjusted demand

price index is 1.44; if one takes the antilog of the 1995 parameter estimate in Table 9 minus one

times the robust standard error, one obtains a 1995 price index of about 1.34, not much different

from that in Table 8. We conclude, therefore, that traditional and hedonic approaches to price

index measurement yield broadly similar results.



IX. DISCUSSION

            Our goal in this research project has been to extend previous research aimed at

constructing CPI- and PPI-like medical price indexes that deal with prices of treatment episodes


                                                   42
rather than prices of discrete inputs, that are based on transaction rather than list prices, that take

quality changes and expected outcomes into account, and that employ more current expenditure

weights in the aggregation computations. Although we have made considerable progress in

achieving this goal, we believe a number of caveats are in order.

            First, the results reported here differ considerably from those reported earlier in

Frank, Busch and Berndt [1998] and Frank, Berndt and Busch [1998]; there we reported

substantial supply and demand price declines over the 1991-95 time period. Although we are still

examining why the differences occurred, we believe that the primary difference is that in the new

dataset we bring in many more patients. The evidence suggests that over time the new data has

an increasing share of patients with: (1) more complicated conditions, (2) greater severity of

illness, and (3) elements of longer term treatments such as continuation phase care. While the

older dataset may have corresponded with episodes more closely approximating the pristine world

of clinical trials, the larger, new dataset involves patients with more typical complicated illnesses.

            It is therefore of interest to examine how robust are our new dataset findings when

one relaxes the strict guideline-compatible standards we imposed in defining episodes of care. We

have created yet another dataset, where now we relaxed the definitions of the seven bundles.

Bundles which consider drugs alone as treatment remain unchanged at 30-180 days of treatment.

Definitions of bundles which include psychotherapy have been expanded such that the cost of up

to 20 psychotherapy visits is now included in the cost of the episode. Furthermore, for the

treatment “psychotherapy alone” we previously allowed for a minimum of 5 visits. This

constraint was relaxed to include episodes treated with 3 or 4 visits. The appendix table shows

that with the broader definition of standards of care the price indexes are largely unchanged.

Specifically, they are rather flat, not falling below 2 percentage points in comparing 1991 and

1995.

            It is also useful to comment on implications of our research findings. Using

alternative index number procedures, we find that over the 1991-95 time period, the nominal

supply price of acute phase treatment for depression is essentially unchanged, while the real


                                                   43
supply price (relative to GDP deflator) has declined. Note that this may well create an upward

bias in estimated price movements for acute phase treatment of depression. Recall that we

showed that the percentage of episodes meeting guideline standards has increased over time. The

price indexes reported above do not take account of this apparent move toward the production

frontier. Improved compliance with standards of care implies greater benefits are being generated

over time, thereby understating price reductions of effective care. The demand price index

revealed a steady 2-3% per year increase from 1991 to 1994, which is then followed by a sharp

20% increase in 1995. Since the demand price encompasses only consumers’/patients’ direct

OOPPs expenditures, and since the supply price is the sum of consumer plus insurer payments, it

follows that from 1991 to 1994 there was a steady 2-3% annual decrease in insurers’

expenditures, and that in 1995 a very substantial 20% decrease took place. While the nominal

supply price of acute phase treatment for depression was apparently unchanged between 1991 and

1995, the compositional burden shifted from third party insurer to patient. The change in

incidence of payment, in large part due to increased patient copayments and deductibles, likely

reflects efforts by insurers to deal with moral hazard via design of mental health benefits and

tightening of the size of provider networks used in managed care.

            Our research findings based on index number procedures are broadly consistent with

those based on simple hedonic price methods, particularly with the supply price. On the demand

side, the hedonic price index increases more rapidly to 1994, and then increases more sharply in

1995 than do the traditional index numbers. Note that what we call “traditional” here, however,

represents a substantial departure from current BLS practice, in that we have used as elementary

building blocks the transaction prices accompanying alternative treatment bundles, and not the

(list) prices of fixed set of inputs. Nevertheless, it is interesting that, as in Berndt, Cockburn and

Griliches [1996], the marginal impact of incorporating hedonic pricing methods is not that

significant, once one defines output quantities carefully. Our hedonic research could have gone

several steps further, allowing for changing parameters over time and integrating the estimated

hedonic price equations with index number procedures, but we leave those nuances for further


                                                  44
research.63

              Finally, it is worth commenting on implications of this research for procedural

revisions currently under possible consideration at the BLS. The BLS is responsible for

constructing and publishing PPIs and CPIs for a very large number of medical-related services and

commodities. Our research has focussed on but one disorder -- major depression -- albeit one

whose output measurement presented considerable challenges. We believe that economies of

scope and scale are undoubtedly available, and we have experienced a steep learning curve in

working with the MEDSTAT data. We also believe that extension of the treatment episode

approach to other illnesses and disorders is feasible. Nevertheless, we are struck by how difficult,

time-consuming and expensive this research has been for us. If a treatment episode approach is to

be implemented efficiently at the BLS (or elsewhere, such as at HCFA), considerable care needs

to be exercised in choosing a set of illnesses/disorders for which treatment bundles can be well-

defined, for which quality comparisons can readily be made (facilitated by AHCPR or other

published professional guideline standards), and for which claims data can readily be employed.



X. CONCLUDING REMARKS

              A very brief summary of our research is as follows. We have implemented an

approach that employs transaction data from a publicly available retrospective medical claims data

base of almost half a million lives, annually from 1991 to 1995. Based on a review of the clinical

research literature dealing with the acute phase of treatment for depression, we identify seven

alternative service bundles that combine varying types and quantities of prescription drugs,

medical management and psychotherapy. We construct data on episodes of treatment, and their

cost. Because the treatment bundles are viewed by the medical community as being

therapeutically similar in terms of ex ante efficacy, our linking of treatment bundles provides an

important step toward incorporation of expected medical outcomes. We distinguish a supply

price index, similar to the BLS’ Producer Price Index, that represents the total receipts received

by providers of medical treatment (from the insurer and the patient), from a demand price index


                                                  45
(similar to the Consumer Price Index) that incorporates only the out of pocket payments (via

copayments and deductibles) by the patient/consumer. Finally, we employ a variety of traditional

aggregate index number formulae, consistent with varying assumptions concerning the ex ante

substitutability among the seven treatment bundles, as well as hedonic price procedures in

computing price indexes.

            For the supply side price index, the various price indexes all point to a flat and

essentially unchanging price over the 1991-95 time period. Since the BLS’ various producer price

indexes all indicate a significant increase over the same time period, our results suggest that in real

terms, the supply price for treatment of acute phase depression has fallen over time. On the

demand side, however, the indexes show a total increase in price of about 10% between 1991 and

1994, and then a very sharp 20% increase. The usual welfare interpretation of the CPI is not

possible in this case. The price increase largely reflects increased cost sharing arrangements

which are certain to reduce welfare losses stemming from moral hazard. This is especially the

case in MEDSTAT data which generally covers plans with substantially lower cost sharing for

mental health care than is typical in the economy as a whole (20% vs. 50%).

            Our research can be extended in a number of ways. Two issues are particularly

important. First, although we have experimented with use of both strict and somewhat relaxed

guideline criteria to define episodes of care, in each case we have assumed an “all or nothing”

treatment. The implicit production function therefore involves a steep step or cliff in which

treatment either is or is not effective. An alternative is to consider some sub-guideline treatment

bundles as having a lower probability of being efficacious than are those meeting guideline

criteria, and therefore to assign the sub-guideline episodes a lower quantity weight. Together

with a group of clinicians and psychiatric researchers, we are currently initiating an effort to more

completely define the specific depression treatment production function.

            Second, we have adhered rather closely to the notion of defining output in terms of

episodes of acute phase treatment. This involves a somewhat arbitrary delineation of an output

that often does not correspond well to the reality of clinical practice. Since depression is often a


                                                  46
chronic recurring illness, continuation and maintenance phase care are part of the overall

treatment of the disorder. Unfortunately, since the bulk of clinical research has focused on the

acute phase of treatment, our links to outcomes were tied to a somewhat imperfect

characterization of care. It is therefore important to more completely specify treatment in this

context.

            Finally, and perhaps most surprisingly, all of our results point to the fact that given a

budget for treatment of depression, much more could be accomplished in 1995 than in 1991.

That is, real prices of care have fallen. This runs counter to most public and expert perceptions.

The implications for interpreting spending changes are enormous. For years the view has been

that spending increases on mental health care (of which depression is 50% in private insurance)

was due to (a) provision of increasing low benefit services, and (b) higher payments to providers.

Our results point to a different story where spending increases are due to a larger number of

“effective” treatments being provided. These treatments represent a shift towards new treatment

technologies that are provided under a new set of organizational arrangements.

                                    Appendix Table

  AGGREGATE PRODUCER (“SUPPLY”) PRICE INDEXES CALCULATED
       USING BROADER STANDARD OF CARE DEFINITIONS

Price Index                      1991         1992         1993         1994         1995
Fixed Weights:
   Laspeyres                     1.000        1.015        0.984        0.929        0.997
   Paasche                       1.000        1.029        1.000        0.968        1.010
   Cobb-Douglas                  1.000
Chained Weights:
   Laspeyres                     1.000        1.015        0.981        0.941        0.985
   Paasche                       1.000        1.017        0.986        0.952        0.993
   Fisher Ideal                  1.000        1.016        0.983        0.946        0.989
   Tornquist                     1.000        1.016        0.983        0.946        0.988




                                                 47
                                         REFERENCES

American Medical Association [1990], Current Procedural Terminology (CPT), 4th edition,
      Chicago: American Medical Association.

American Psychiatric Association [1994], Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,
      Fourth Edition, Washington DC.

American Psychiatric Association [1993], “Practice Guidelines for Major Depressive Disorder in
      Adults,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 150:4, Supplement, April, 1-26.

Armknecht, Paul A. [1996], “Improving the Efficiency of the U.S. CPI in the Future,”
     Washington DC: International Monetary Fund, unpublished manuscript, March.

Armknecht, Paul A. and Daniel H. Ginsburg [1992], “Improvements in Measuring Price Changes
     in Consumer Services: Past, Present and Future,” in Zvi Griliches, editor, assisted by Ernst
     R. Berndt, Timothy F. Bresnahan and Marilyn E. Manser, Output Measurement in the
     Service Sectors, Conference on Research in Income and Wealth, Studies in Income and
     Wealth, Vol. 56, Chicago: University of Chicago Press for the National Bureau of
     Economic Research, 109-156.

Armknecht, Paul A., Brent R. Moulton and Kenneth J. Stewart [1994], “Improvements to the
     Food at Home, Shelter and Prescription Drug Indexes in the U.S. Consumer Price Index,”
     US Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, CPI Announcement-Version I,
     October 20.

Beach, S.R.H., E.E. Sandeen and K.D. O’Leary [1990], Depression in Marriage, New York:
       Guilford Press.

Beck, A.T., A. John Rush, B.F. Shaw and G. Emergy [1979], Cognitive Therapy of Depression,
       New York: Guilford Press.

Berndt, Ernst R. [1991], The Practice of Econometrics: Classic and Contemporary, Reading, MA:
       Addison Wesley.

Berndt, Ernst R., David Cutler, Richard G. Frank, Zvi Griliches, Joseph Newhouse and Jack E.
       Triplett [1998], “A Review of Issues in Measuring Medical Care Prices”, paper prepared
       for the NBER/CRIW Conference, Medical Care Output and Productivity, Bethesda, MD,
       June 12-13.

Berndt, Ernst R., Iain Cockburn and Zvi Griliches [1996], “Pharmaceutical Innovations and
       Market Dynamics: Tracking Effects on Price Indexes for Antidepressant Drugs,”
       Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics 1996, 133-188.

Berndt, Ernst R., Richard G. Frank and Thomas G. McGuire [1997], “Alternative Insurance


                                               48
       Arrangements and the Treatment of Depression: What Are The Facts?,” American Journal
       of Managed Care, 3:2, February, 243-250.

Berndt, Ernst R. and Zvi Griliches [1993], “Price Indexes for Microcomputers: An Exploratory
       Study,” Chapter 2 in Murray F. Foss, Marilyn E. Manser and Allan H. Young, eds., Price
       Measurements and their Uses, Studies in Income and Wealth, Vol. 57, Chicago:
       University of Chicago Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research, 63-93.

Berndt, Ernst R., Zvi Griliches and Neal Rappaport [1995], “Econometric Estimates of Price
       Indexes for Personal Computers in the 1990’s,” Journal of Econometrics, Vol. 68, No. 1,
       July 1995, pp. 243-268.

Broadbent, W. Eugene., Dan G. Blazer, Linda K. George and Chiu Kit Tse [1990], “Depression,
      Disability Days and Days Lost from Work in a Prospective Epidemiologic Survey,”
      Journal of the American Medical Association, 264:2524-2528.

Busch, Susan H., Richard G. Frank and Ernst R. Berndt [1996], “Effectiveness, Efficacy and
       Price Indexes for Depression: A Review of the Literature,” unpublished manuscript,
       Boston: Harvard Medical School, Department of Health Care Policy, December.

Cardenas, Elaine M. [1996a], “The CPI for Hospital Services: Concepts and Procedures,”
      Monthly Labor Review, 119:7, July, 34-42.

Cardenas, Elaine M. [1996b], “Revision of the CPI Hospital Services Component,” Monthly
      Labor Review, 119:12, December, 40-48.

Catron, Brian and Bonnie Murphy [1996], “Hospital Price Inflation: What Does the New PPI Tell
       Us?”, Monthly Labor Review, 119:7, July, 124-31.

Croghan, Thomas W., Catherine A. Melfi, Deobrah G. Dobrez and Thomas J. Kniesner [1998],
      “Effect of Mental Health Specialty Care on Antidepressant Length of Therapy,” Medical
      Care, in press.

Crown, William E., Robert L. Obenchain, Luella Englehart, Tamra Lair, Don P. Buesching and
      Thomas W. Croghan [1996], “Application of Sample Selection Models to Outcomes
      Research: The Case of Evaluating Effects of Antidepressant Therapy on Resource
      Utilization,” unpublished manuscript, Cambridge, MA: The MEDSTAT Group, January.

Depression Guideline Panel [1993], Depression in Primary Care, Vol. 2, Rockville, MD: U.S.
       Department of Health and Human Services, AHCPR publication 93-0551.

Diewert, W. Erwin [1981], “The Economic Theory of Index Numbers: A Survey,” in Angus
      Deaton, ed., Essays in the Theory and Measurement of Consumer Behavior in Honour of
      Sir Richard Stone, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 163-208.




                                              49
Diewert, W. Erwin [1976], “Exact and Superlative Index Numbers,” Journal of Econometrics,
      4:2, 115-145.

Elkin, Irene, T. Shea, J.T. Watkins, S.D. Imber, S.M. Sotsky, J.F. Collins, D.R. Glass, P.A.
        Pilkonis, W.R. Leber, J.P. Docherty, S.J. Fiester and M.B. Parloff [1989], “National
        Institute of Mental Health Treatment of Depression Collaborative Research Program:
        General Effectiveness of Treatments,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 46, 971-982.

Ellis, Randall P., Gregory C. Pope, Lisa I. Iezzoni, John Z. Ayanian, David W. Bates,
            Helen Burstin and Arlene S. Ash [1996], “Diagnosis-Based Risk Adjustment for
        Medicare Capitation Payments,” Health Care Financing Review, 17:3, Spring, 101-128.

Feldstein, Paul J. [1988], Health Care Economics, Third Edition, New York: Wiley.

Feldstein, Paul J. [1983], Health Care Economics, Second Edition, New York: Wiley.

Feldstein, Paul J. [1978], Health Care Economics, First Edition, New York: Wiley.

Fixler, Dennis and Mitch Ginsburg [1997], “Health Care Output and Prices in the Producer Price
        Index,” slides from presentation to the NBER Summer Institute, Franco-American
        Seminar, Cambridge, MA, July 23.

Ford, Ina Kay and Daniel H. Ginsburg [1997], “Medical Care in the CPI,” paper given in
        presentation to the NBER Summer Institute, Franco-American Seminar, Cambridge, MA,
        July 23.

Frank, Ellen, David J. Kupfer, J.M. Perel, Cleon Cornes, D.B. Jarrett, A.G. Mallinger, Michael E.
       Thase, A.B. McEachran, and V.J. Grochocinski [1990], “Three-year Outcomes for
       Maintenance Therapies in Recurrent Depression, Archives of General Psychiatry, 47,
       1093-1099.

Frank, Richard G., Susan H. Busch and Ernst R. Berndt [1998], “Measuring Prices and Quantities
       of Treatment for Depression,” American Economic Review, 88:2, May, 106-111.

Frank, Richard G., Ernst R. Berndt and Susan H. Busch [1998], “Price Indexes for the Treatment
       of Depression,” in Jack E. Triplett, ed., Measuring the Prices of Medical Treatments,
       Washington DC: The Brookings Institution, forthcoming.

Frank, Richard G., Thomas G. McGuire and Joseph P. Newhouse [1995], “Risk Contracts in
       Managed Mental Health Care,” Health Affairs, 14:3, 50-64.

Getzen, Thomas E. [1992], “Medical Care Price Indexes: Theory, Construction and Empirical
       Analysis of the US Series 1927-1990,” in Advances in Health Economics and Health
       Services Research, JAI Press, 83-128.




                                               50
Gilbert, Milton [1961], “The Problem of Quality Change and Index Numbers,” Monthly Labor
        Review, 84:9, September, 992-997.

Gilbert, Milton [1962], “Quality Change and Index Numbers: A Reply,” Monthly Labor Review,
        85:5, May, 544-545.

Goldman, William, Joyce McCulloch and Roland Sturm [1998], “Costs and Use of Mental Health
      Services Before and After Managed Care,” Health Affairs, 17:2, March/April, 40-52.

Griliches, Zvi [1962], “Quality Change and Index Numbers: A Critique,” Monthly Labor Review,
        85:5, 532-544.

Griliches, Zvi [1988], Technology, Education, and Productivity, New York: Basil Blackwell Inc.

Griliches, Zvi and Iain Cockburn [1994], “Generics and New Goods in Pharmaceutical
            Price Indexes,” American Economic Review, 84:5, December, 1213-1232.

Kanoza, Douglas [1996], “Supplemental Sampling in the PPI Pharmaceuticals Index,” Producer
      Price Indexes Detailed Price Report, January, 8-10.

Katon, Wayne, Michael von Korff, Elizabeth Lin, Terry Bush and Johann Ormel [1992],
       “Adequacy and Duration of Antidepressant Treatment in Primary Care,” Medical Care,
       30:67-76.

Keeler, Emmett B., Kenneth B. Wells, Willard G. Manning, J. David Rumpel and Janet M. Hanley
        [1986], “The Demand for Episodes of Mental Health Services,” Santa Monica, CA:
        RAND Report R-3432-NIMH, October.

Keller, Martin B., Gerald L. Klerman, Philip W. Lavori, William Coryell, Jean Endicott and John
        Taylor [1984], “Long-term Outcome of Episodes of Major Depression,” Journal of the
        American Medical Association, 252:6, August 10, 788-792.

Keller, Martin B., Philip W. Lavori, John Rice, William Coryell and Robert M.A. Hirschfeld
        [1986], “The Persistent Risk of Chronicity in Recurrent Episodes of Nonbipolar Major
        Depressive Disorder: A Prospective Follow-up,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 143:1,
        January, 24-28.

Keller, Martin B., Philip W. Lavori, Gerald L. Klerman, Nancy C. Andreasen, Jean Endicott,
        William Coryell, Jan Fawcett, John P. Rice and M. A. Robert [1986], “Low Levels and
        Lack of Predictors of Somatotherapy and Psychotherapy Received by Depressed
        Patients,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 43:5, 458-466.

Kelly, Gregory G. [1997], “Improving the PPI Samples for Prescription Pharmaceuticals,”
       Monthly Labor Review, 120:10, October, 10-17.




                                               51
Kendler, K.S., E.E. Walters, M.C. Neale, Ronald C. Kessler, A.C. Heath and L. J. Eaves [1995],
      “The Structure of Genetic and Environmental Risk Factors for Six Major Psychiatric
      Disorders in Women: Phobia, Generalized Anxiety Disorder, Panic Disorder, Bulimia,
      Major Depression, and Alcoholism,” Archives of General Psychiatry 52. (need to
      complete)

Kessler, Ronald C., Katherine A. McGonagle, Shanyang Zhao, Christopher B. Nelson, Michael
       Hughes, Suzann Eshlerman, Hans-Ulrich Wittchen, and Kenneth S. Kendler [1994],
       ‘Lifetime and Twelve-Month Prevalence of DSM-III-R Psychiatric Disorders in the
       United States: Results from the National Comorbidity Survey,” Archives of General
       Psychiatry, 51:1, 8-19.

Kessler, Ronald C., Katherine A. McGonagle, Marvin Swartz, Dan G. Blazer and Christopher B.
       Nelson [1993], “Sex and Depression in the National Comorbidity Survey I: Lifetime
       Prevalence, Chronicity and Recurrence,” Journal of Affective Disorders, 29:85-96.

Kupfer, David J., Ellen Frank, J.M. Perel, C. Cornes, A.G. Mallinger, Michael E. Thase, A.B.
       McEachran and V.J. Grochocinski [1992], “Five-year Outcomes for Maintenance
       Therapies in Recurrent Depression,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 49, 769-773.

Kupfer, David J. [1991], “Long-Term Treatment of Depression,” Journal of Clinical Psychiatry,
       52:5 (supplement), 28-34.

Langford, Elizabeth A. [1957], “Medical Care in the CPI: 1935-1956,” Monthly Labor Review,
      80:9, September, 1053-1058.

Levit, Katharine R., Helen C. Lazenby, Brandley R. Braden and the National Health Accounts
        Team [1998], “National Health Spending Trends in 1996,” Health Affairs, 17:1,
        January/February, 35-51.

Ma, Ching-to Albert and Thomas G. McGuire [1998], “Costs and Incentives in a Behavioral
      Health Carve-Out,” Health Affairs, 17:2, March/April, 53-69.

Marion Merrell Dow [annual], Managed Care Digest: HMO Edition, Kansas City, MO, 1993,
      1994 and 1996.

McGuire, Thomas G. [1989], “Financing and Reimbursement for Mental Health Services,” in
      Carl A. Taube, David Mechanic and Ann A. Hohmann, eds., The Future of Mental Health
      Services Research, Rockville, MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 87-
      112.

Mechanic, David [1989], “The Evolution of Mental Health Services and Mental Health Services
      Research,” in Carl A. Taube, David Mechanic and Ann A. Hohmann, eds., The Future of
      Mental Health Services Research, Rockville, MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human
      Services, 1-8.


                                               52
Newhouse, Joseph P. [1989], “Measuring Medical Prices and Understanding Their Effects,”
     Journal of Health Administration Education, 7:1, 19-26.

Newhouse, Joseph P. and the Insurance Experiment Group [1993], Free for All? Lessons from
     the RAND Health Insurance Experiment, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Papolos, Demitri F. and Janic Papolos [1992], Overcoming Depression, Revised Edition, New
       York: Harper Collins Publishers.

Prospective Payment Assessment Commission [1995] -- need to get reference

Schulberg, Herbert C., Marjorie Saul, Maureen McClelland, Mary Ganguli, Wallace Cristy and
       Ellen Frank [1985], “Assessing Depression in Primary Medical and Psychiatric Practices,”
       Archives of General Psychiatry, 42:12, 1164-1170.

Scitovsky, Anne A. [1964], “An Index of the Cost of Medical Care--A Proposed New
       Approach,” in The Economics of Health and Medical Care, Proceedings of the Conference
       on the Economics of Health and Medical Care, May 10-+12, 1962, The University of
       Michigan, Ann Arbor, 1964.

Scitovsky, Anne A. [1967], “Changes in the Costs of Treatment of Selected Illnesses, 1951-65,”
       American Economic Review, 57:5, December, 1182-1195.

Trajtenberg, Manuel [1990], Economic Analysis of Product Innovation: The Case of CT
       Scanners, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Triplett, Jack E. [1997a], SIC Code Foundation Paper -- need to get reference

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services [1980], International Classification of Diseases
       (ICD-9-CM), second edition, Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office (PHS)-
       80-1260, September.

U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics [1992], Handbook of Methods, Bulletin
       2414, Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, April.

U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics [1995], “Improvements to CPI Procedures:
       Prescription Drugs,” Washington DC.

U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics [not dated], “A Description of the PPI
       Hospital Services Initiative,” Washington DC.

U.S. Senate Finance Committee [1996], Final Report from the Advisory Commission To Study
       The Consumer Price Index, Washington DC: December 4, updated version.




                                               53
Weiner, Jonathan P., Allen Dobson, Stephanie L. Maxwell, Kevin Coleman, Barbara Starfield and
      Gerald Anderson [1996], “Risk-Adjusted Medicare Capitation Rates Using Ambulatory
      and Inpatient Diagnoses,” Health Care Financing Review, 17:3, Spring, 77-100.

Wells, Kenneth B., Wayne Katon, William Rogers and Patti Camp [1994], “Use of Minor
       Tranquilizers and Antidepressant Medications by Depressed Outpatients: Results from the
       Medical Outcomes Study,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 151:5, 694-700.

Wells, Kenneth B., Anita Stewart, R.D. Hays, William Rogers and K. Spritzer [1995],
       “Functioning and Well-being Outcomes of Patients with Depression Compared with
       Chronic General Medical Illness,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 52:11-19.

Wells, Kenneth B., Roland Sturm, Cathy D. Sherbourne and Lisa S. Meredith [1996], Caring for
       Depression: A RAND Study, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Wilde, Michelle I. and Paul Benfield [1998], “Fluoxetine: A Pharmacoeconomic Review of its Use
       in Depression,” Pharmacoeconomics, 13:5 (1), May, 543-561.

Wingert, Terence D., John E. Kralewski, Tammie J. Lindquist and David J. Knutson [1995],
      “Constructing Episodes of Care from Encounter and Claims Data: Some Methodological
      Issues,” Inquiry, Vol. 32, Winter, pp. 430-443.




                                              54
ENDNOTES
1
  A more detailed discussion of the medical CPI and PPI data construction procedures is given in
   Berndt, Cutler, Frank et al. [1998].
2
  U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics [1992], p. 140.
3
  See Triplett [1997a] for economic issues involved in defining and aggregating industries within
   the SIC system.
4
  U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics [1992], p. 141.
5
  Catron-Murphy [1996], Table A-2, p. 31.
6
  For a recent list of DRGs, see Prospective Payment Assessment Commission [1995], Appendix
   E. Note also that some private insurers and Medicaid programs make use of DRGs for
   purposes of hospital payment.
7
  For a discussion of CPT4, see American Medical Association [1990].
8
  ICD-9 codes are discussed and listed in U.S. Department of Health and Human Services [1980].
   The ICD-9 has recently been updated to version 10.
9
  Weiner et al. [1996].
10
   Ellis et al. [1996].
11
   For further discussion, see Fixler and Ginsburg [1997].
12
   For further details, see Catron-Murphy [1996], Fixler-Ginsburg [1997] and U.S. Department of
   Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics [not dated].
13
   For further discussion, see Berndt, Cockburn and Griliches [1996], Griliches-Cockburn [1994],
   Kanoza [1996] and Kelly [1997].
14
   U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics [1992], p. 176.
15
   For historical discussions, see Langford [1957] and Getzen [1992].
16
   Levit, Lazenby, Braden et al. [1998], and Ford-Ginsburg [1997].
17
   See, for example, Armknecht and Ginsburg [1992], and Cardenas [1996a,b].
18
   Cardenas [1996], p. 40.
19
   Cardenas [1996], p. 40.
20
   For a discussion of the pricing of prescription pharmaceuticals in the MCPI, and treatment of
   generic drugs, see Armknecht, Moulton and Stewart [1994], and U.S. Department of Labor,
   Bureau of Labor Statistics [1995].
21
   Scitovsky [1964]; also see Scitovsky [1967].
22
   Armknecht [1996], p. 33.
23
   U.S. Senate Finance Committee [1996], p. 60.
24
   See, for example, the discussion between Gilbert [1961,1962] and Griliches [1962].
25
   American Psychiatric Association [1994], p. 161.
26
   American Psychiatric Association [1993].
27
   See Keller, Klerman, Lavori et al. [1984], and Keller, Lavori and Rice et al. [1986].
28
   American Psychiatric Association [1993].
29
   Papolos and Papolos [1992], p. 7.
30
   See, for example, Broadbent, Blazer, George and Tse [1990]; Wells, Stewart, Hays et al.
   [1989]; Hays, Wells, Sherbourne et al. [1995].
31
   Kessler, McGonagle, Zhao et al. [1994], p. 12.
32
   Kendler, Walters, Neale et al. [1995].
33
   Kessler, McGonagle, Swartz et al. [1993], p. 91.



                                                55
34
   See Beck et al. [1979], Elkin et al. [1989], Frank et al. [1990], Kupfer et al. [1992] and Beach
   et al. [1990].
35
   Recent variations slightly distinct from the SSRIs include the brand name drugs Effexor,
   Serzone and Remeron.
36
   Considerable variation exists in side effects among the TCAs; see Berndt, Cockburn and
   Griliches [1996], Table 1, pp. 142-3 for details.
37
   Using MEDSTAT retrospective claims data, Croghan et al. [1998] provide evidence suggesting
   that the combination of SSRIs and psychotherapy is more effective than psychotherapy alone in
   patients' receiving continuous treatment. For a discussion of related SSRI-psychotherapy
   research, see Wilde-Benfield [1998].
38
   A significant portion of inpatient episodes have unspecified outpatient follow-up, thereby
   limiting that avenue for identifying treatments.
39
   For a discussion, see Mechanic [1989] and McGuire [1989].
40
   See Busch, Frank and Berndt [1996].
41
   The AHCPR Depression Guidelines Panel [1993] provides a summary and interpretation of the
   evidence on this point.
42
   See American Psychiatric Association [1993].
43
   We recognize this is only an approximation. This is particularly the case for depression, where
   the constellation of side effects across treatment can vary significantly, and can lead to
   differential patient compliance and patient preferences between the SSRIs and TCAs. See
   Crown, Obenchain, Englehart et al. [1996] and Wilde-Benfield [1998] for evidence on
   differential TCA-SSRI compliance among patients.
44
   Specialty carve-out management occurs when a portion of the health risk is separately managed
   from the rest of health care. See Frank, McGuire and Newhouse [1995] for further discussion.
45
   For discussion, see Goldman, McCulloch and Sturm [1998], and Ma and McGuire [1998].
46
   Thus we exclude other 296 ICD-9 diagnoses, depression not elsewhere classified, as well as
   some other broad depression-related conditions such as neurotic depression.
47
   For discussion of defining episodes of care, see Keeler et al. [1986] and Wingert et al. [1995].
48
   We count days without treatment only after the number of days of supply in a drug prescription
   has been exhausted, thereby assuming full compliance with the daily recommended dosage.
49
   These were brand name drugs Effexor and Serzone.
50
   These compositional figures are consistent with IMS aggregate national sales data for
   antidepressant medication over this time period, as reported by Berndt, Cockburn and Griliches
   [1996].
51
   See Frank, Berndt and Busch [1998] and Frank, Busch and Berndt [1998].
52
   Additional checks were done to ensure that these newly identified psychotherapy visits were not
   in fact instead a sequence of medical management visits. Robustness checks revealed that only
   a small number of claims were reclassified when cost thresholds of about $50 were used to mark
   medical management from psychotherapy.
53
   For a related discussion, see Katon et al. [1992].
54
   See Wells et al. [1994,1996] for further discussion.
55
   See Schulberg et al. [1985].
56
   Wells et al. [1994].
57
   Keller, Lavori, Klerman et al. [1986].



                                                56
58
   Data from Marion Merrell Dow's Managed Care Digest [1993-4,1996] indicate that over all
   HMOs surveyed, average copayment per prescription rose from $6.78 in 1993 to $7.43 in 1995
   for brand-name drugs, and from $4.75 to $5.22 for generics. While the MedStat increases
   appear to be larger, they also include deductibles for psychotherapy visits, not just copayments
   for drugs.
59
   See Frank, Berndt and Busch [1998] and Frank, Busch and Berndt [1998].
60
   See, for example, W. Erwin Diewert [1976,1981].
61
   For an introductory discussion to the hedonic method, see Griliches [1988], chapters 7 and 8,
   and Berndt [1991], chapter 4. Applications in the medical context include Trajtenberg [1990]
   and Berndt, Cockburn and Griliches [1996].
62
   The side effect data are discussed in detail in Berndt, Cockburn and Griliches [1996]. We sum
   up the 0 (rare) to 4 (common) ratings across the various side effects. Here we also assume that
   psychotherapy has no side effects.
63
   See Berndt and Griliches [1993] and Berndt, Griliches and Rappaport [1995].




                                                57
