       During 1995 and 1996, spectacular trading losses surfaced suddenly at Barings, Daiwa,

and Sumitomo banks. In each case, firm executives told regulatory authorities that a single

‘rogue’ trader had accumulated and hidden hundreds of millions of dollars in trading losses over

an extended period. Making use of memoirs, press reports, and documentation compiled in

official investigations, this paper describes and contrasts the technology of loss concealment used

in the Barings and Daiwa cases and probes the plausibility of top executives’ and regulators’

protestations of surprise and innocence.

       Our analysis confirms the hypothesis that top executives and regulators were surprised by

the size of accumulated losses, but shows that the longstanding nature of their blindness supports

a charge of culpable ignorance. Worldwide banking-industry resistance to reporting opportunity-

cost measures of performance facilitates top-management surprises. Precisely because this

resistance impairs top management’s ability to trace posted trading profits to their economic roots

in the short run, it creates a managerial duty to employ more-informative auditing standards in

longer-run internal and regulatory analyses.

       Accounting itemization and valuation rules that designate losses on untraded or intangible

items as mere ‘paper’ losses that need not be reported to outside stakeholders undermine

accounting transparency and loss control not just externally but inside a bank as well (Moore,

1995; Hogan, 1996). Preserving leeway for a bank’s top executives to engage in gains trading

and to under-reserve for opportunity losses in their traditional book of business makes it

staggeringly easy for innovative trading technologies to outrun adaptations in the information

systems by which top executives routinely strive to measure and control the performance of

traders they supervise.

       To prevent an opportunity loss from passing through to the bottom line of balance sheets

and income statements, double-entry cash-flow accounting requires only that the potentially nasty

debit be offset by a specious credit to an inadequately monitored ‘plug’ account. For mounting

trading losses to evade the periodic scrutiny of internal and external auditors, a trader need solve

only two problems. First, the trader must devise uninformative ways of either burying or posting


                                                                                                       3
each loss. Second, the trader must fund the loss by simultaneously booking offsetting trades or

internal transfers that record an equal amount of cash or other credits in settlement or custody

accounts that the trader (or a confederate) directly controls.

        The core accounting technology for covering up a trading loss of x dollars is illustrated in

Figure One. It is important to recognize that once mislabeled or unbooked losses become large

enough for their exposure to ruin the trader’s career, incentives push for going beyond simple

cover-up. When trading volume is growing rapidly, an amoral trader can create stupendous

accounting profits by booking specious credits far in excess of the loss. This Ponzi-esque

accounting ploy serves to inflate the apparent contribution the faithless trader is making to the

firm’s overall bottom line. Booking a fictitiously high level of trading profits directly enriches the

opportunistic trader at the same time that it enhances the trader’s intrafirm executive standing. As

long as the firm’s information system does not insist on documenting the opportunity costs of

trading activity, bureaucratic politics make it hard for suspicious or unfriendly superiors to tighten

or even to enforce the system of disciplinary accounting controls and nominal trading limits under

which a ‘superstar’ trader operates.



                             I. Creating Superstar Trading Profits at Barings

        Proprietary trading by Nicholas Leeson destroyed Barings Bank. Leeson (1996) indicates

that his accounting manipulation and unauthorized trading began by accident. As General

Manager of Baring Futures Singapore (BFS), a remote subsidiary, he sought to spare overworked

underlings from being punished for their trading mistakes.1 To offset mistaken trades, which were

aimed at arbitraging minute-to-minute differences in Nikkei futures prices between the Singapore

and Japanese exchanges, Leeson recorded large unmatched trades in an Error Account,

superstitiously numbered 88888. This settlement account had been placed under his control in

July 1992 by the firm’s London Office for the purpose of netting minor trading mistakes inside

1
 Official reports issued in Singapore and England offer no contradictory explanation for Leeson’s alleged
unauthorized activities.


                                                                                                            4
Singapore books. The net position was to be closed each day and the net value of gains and

losses incurred in negating the position were to be recorded as part of the Singapore unit’s daily

profit (Leeson, 38-39). This 88888 account -- and the authority to use it -- remained in Singapore

even after the reporting system was revised to book all errors straight through to London.

       Although never authorized to maintain open overnight positions, Leeson used Account

88888 to post losses from futures trading almost from the day it was created. On February 26,

1995 when Barings collapsed, the cumulative loss resulting from transactions in this account was

S$2.2 billion or approximately US$1.5 billion. Other Baring Group companies provided S$2.1

billion, while the remaining S$100 million came from creditor banks. It is important to note that

S$1.7 billion was actually remitted – S$1 billion in the last three weeks of Barings’ existence

alone – and S$400 million was “marked to market” payment from SIMEX for trades of the other

Baring Group companies that Leeson’s office simply retained (Lim and Kuang, Singapore

Ministry of Finance Report, B ii, vii).

       As his posted trading losses mounted, so did the difficulty Leeson faced in funding them.

However, the funding methods Leeson describes in his book do not square entirely with the

Singapore Report. Until the end of 1992, Leeson claims to have met margin calls from client float

and that, at the end of each month he balanced Barings’ profit-and-loss report by netting the loss

against his own commission income (Leeson, 58, 46-47). The Singapore Report (30, 181) states

that from July 1992, Leeson instructed the settlements staff to pass bank accounting entries at the

end of each month, which would later be reversed, to debit “bank funds received/receivable” and

credit “client account (88888)” to convert the deficit balance on that account to a small positive

balance or zero, and reflect the deficit balance as funds receivable. Until October 1994, Leeson

claims to have cooked the monthly profit-and-loss report by selling enough options at month-end

“to bring in the same amount of premiums in yen as the loss sitting in the 88888 account”

(Leeson, 61, 125). According to the Singapore Report (25), the premium collected from option

trades could only partly fund other trades because SIMEX credited the premium received into




                                                                                                     5
BFS’s bank account, and at the same time debited a similar amount from the account as margin

for the options.

       Leeson claims that it was not until late in the game – from July 1994 on – that he had to

book large fictitious trades and bogus cash transfers to placate London auditors and put off

queries from SIMEX. But the Singapore Report (22-24, 175) tells us that to avoid detection of

holding unhedged positions, Leeson would instruct floor traders to conduct “transfer trades,”

from the accounts of other Baring Group companies into Account 88888. The Report also

indicates that from May 1993 until the time of the collapse, at Leeson’s direction, line traders

recorded fictitious transfer trades and adjusted prices and quantities to “give the impression that

he had entered into perfectly matched profitable transactions”. As these fictitious trades also

reduced closing positions, they also reduced the total margins owed to SIMEX. The accounting

tricks Leeson used are summarized in Figure Two.

       Leeson strengthened the opinion higher-ups held of him by misrepresenting the

profitability of his trading by sending forward a long run of falsified reports. Despite this

spectacular record of misrepresentation and forgery, he was convicted and sentenced by the

Singapore government to 6 1/2 years in prison for only two crimes: “deceiving the auditors of

Barings in a way likely to cause harm to their reputation and to cheating SIMEX” (Lesson, 265).



Allegations of Supervisory Surprise

       Barings higher-ups and British authorities blamed Leeson for the debacle, characterizing

him as a ‘rogue’ who executed unauthorized trades. But, for tolerating suspicious cash transfers

to Singapore, Barings management team and its government supervisors are ethically culpable.

Although no evidence has surfaced that top managers acted in concert with Leeson, management

and British regulators failed in their duty to institute an information and reporting system that

could prudently monitor and control Barings global operations. Weaknesses in Barings control

systems were categorical and extensive.




                                                                                                      6
       First, the firm’s organizational structure was poorly articulated. It exhibited cloudy

reporting lines and internal controls, failed to segregate control of trading and settlement, and

embraced uninformative accounting standards. Each weakness underscores the value of an

opportunity-cost information system.

       In a characteristically British circumlocution, John Dare, Director of Barings plc,

rationalized the lack of control over the rapidly growing offshore financial operation:

       “They [Barings global arm] were usually in a bit of a catching-up position because their
       business had gone through a few periods of quite rapid growth, when it is challenging, to
       say the least, to keep your controls on top of a business that is growing rapidly. There
       were times when I was aware that this was a strain; that the front office were marching
       faster than the back office.” (Bank of England Report, p. 119)

Because adequate understanding of fast-growing operations is virtually impossible without an

opportunity-cost standard, cash-flow accounting can all too easily support pyramid schemes.

       Second, top management kept itself in the dark by disregarding rumors and market

responses to them. For example, in late January 1995, outsiders questioned repeatedly the size of

Barings net positions in Asia and its ability to meet margin calls. Inquiries from the Bank for

International Settlements and the press were treated only as public-relations problems. Inside the

firm, management locked itself into denial, refusing to test the contention that its Singapore

positions were fully hedged.

       Perhaps the greatest irony in the Barings tale is the unflagging respect for accounting

transparency expressed by top managers, a condition which their own financial statements and

operations never approached. After the shortage was revealed, Peter Norris, Chief Executive

Officer of Baring Investment Bank and Director of Barings plc, excused the firm’s complacency

on the grounds that: “the rumours could be rationalised by the contrast of the relative

transparency of OSE [the Japanese securities exchange], which published details of members’

activity, and SIMEX, which did not” (BoE Report, p.137, emphasis added). This defense lamely

begs two important questions. First, in the face of evidence that financial markets are

informationally efficient, how could management content itself without testing the hypothesis that


                                                                                                     7
such a significant market ‘misunderstanding’ could persist? Second, if it was aware of

opaqueness in its Singapore operations, didn’t it owe a duty to its customers and shareholders to

overcome it?

        Third, the self-proclaimed naiveté of the management of this 233-year old bank violated

the duties of competence and care they owed their shareholders. Their professional ignorance of

the open-outcry operations of SIMEX, and the overall business of the Singapore office cannot

reasonably be used as a defense for failing to test the inordinate profits Lesson’s ‘riskless’ trading

activities were booking. A conscientious manager must trace the roots of supernormal profits to

whatever unique capacities or quasi-rents they reflect. It is ridiculous to suppose – as Peter

Baring, Chairman of the Board of Barings plc. asserted – “... that it was not actually terribly

difficult to make money in the securities business” (BoE Report, p.199).

        It is doubtful that the London office had no knowledge of the existence of the 88888

account until the bank’s eminent collapse. To feign surprise is to admit incompetence. How

could individuals of reasonable intelligence fail to notice entries that were growing dramatically

for 2 1/2 years? The authors of the Singapore Report bluntly conclude that such a claim “gives

rise to a strong inference that key individuals of the Baring Group’s management were grossly

negligent, or willfully blind and reckless to the truth” (ibid., B vi).

        Beyond London’s inability to reconcile Leeson’s funding requests, there was direct

evidence of the 88888 account’s existence. It was included in the margin file (which contained

initial and maintenance margin by account and currency) transmitted each day to London.

Concerns about Account 88888 were highlighted in inquiries SIMEX sent to Leeson’s

supervisors. One letter, dated September 7, 1993, identified 15 specific breeches of SIMEX rules

and attached a trade ticket from February 18, 1993 for Account 88888. Another dated January

11, 1995, referencing the same account, raised the possibility that Barings had violated exchange

rules about financing customer margin. Follow-up letters on January 16 and 27, 1995 dealt with

rules violations and Barings’ ability to meet its financial obligations to the exchange. This

correspondence destroys the credibility of management’s claims to complete ignorance about


                                                                                                         8
Account 88888.



Allegations of Supervisory Innocence

       Barings’ monitoring of its Singapore operation showed two weaknesses. First, it lacked

proper controls and supervision. The most rudimentary accounting reconciliations and checks

were never performed. Second, it allowed the status Leeson had achieved as a “lone star” and

“turbo arbitrageur” to countervail efforts to monitor his activities (BoE Report, 49, 50). At

critical junctures, the two weaknesses reinforced each other.



Internal Audit 1994

       The Singapore operation received an internal audit during July and August, 1994. The

auditors issued three recommendations. First, Leeson should no longer be responsible for both

the back and front offices. Second, an independent risk management and compliance officer

should monitor trading activities “to ensure that regulations are followed and risk limits observed”

(BoE Report, 146). The auditors explicitly cited the “significant general risk that the controls

could be overridden” by Leeson and that, as the key manager, he could “initiate transactions on

the Group’s behalf and then ensure that they are settled and recorded according to his own

instructions.” Third, the audit called for a comprehensive review of Singapore’s funding

requirements by Group Treasury in London and for establishing gross position limits on SIMEX

to control funding requirements and exposure to market risk. None of these recommendations

was followed up.

       Moreover, the audit team’s recommendations were restrained by cover-up activities. Prior

to heading to Singapore, the auditors were told that: (1) Leeson had too dominant a role in the

trading and settlements business of the Singapore operation; (2) Leeson’s direct supervisor,

Simon Jones, Director of Barings Futures Singapore and Chief Operating Officer, Barings South

Asia, basically left Leeson “to his own devices”; (3) several senior managers within the Baring

Group had little faith in Jones’s management ability; (4) senior clerks would not likely speak up if


                                                                                                   9
something was amiss in Singapore; and (5) the margin calls paid by London to Singapore were

unintelligible to the point that it was not known on whose behalf the cash was being paid

(Singapore Report, 41, 45). These concerns directed auditors to analyze an operation led entirely

by a single individual – with basically no one to answer to – who requested large sums of money

on a daily basis for reasons that no one understood.

        Yet, the “task of reconciling the funds that were remitted to BFS [Singapore] from BSL

[London] ceased to occupy the attention of the internal audit team” (Singapore Report, 42). In

an early draft of the audit, there was a recommendation for a reconciliation between the SIMEX

margin calls and the amount paid to Singapore from other Baring companies to identify

discrepancies and to ensure the authenticity of all trades. They noted that fictitious house trades

could be booked and extra margin called. When Leeson alleged that reconciliation was both

unnecessary and cumbersome, a senior manager supported him and the Reconciliation of Margins

was dropped from the report.

        Although the auditors drew comfort from the “fact” that the Baring companies who dealt

with BFS implemented their own reconciliations, they were unaware that no such reconciliations

existed. Finally, not only was the internal audit kept from the external auditors, they were told

that no such document existed when they requested it.



Funding of Margin Calls2

        In late 1994, the format for US Dollar margin requests was changed, to provide more

detail about where the money was being applied. But Leeson directed his staff, who knew the


2
  Funding was dispersed through two equally flawed procedures - one for Yen, one for US Dollars (BoE Report, 97
- 100). At December 31, 1994, Leeson’s office had received funding totaling US$350.6 million from London and
Tokyo offices. The size of his requests increased substantially over the first two months of 1995, standing at
US$1.18 billion at February 24, 1995. Yen requests could not be independently reconciled in London, even though
the settlements staff used a software package to record and monitor futures and options transactions. This was
because the London office received all its key information directly from Singapore. Even more disturbing, London
was unable to reconcile the US Dollar requests to any trading records at all. The London staff seems to have filled
Leeson’s requests for funding blindly, without even attempting to distinguish trading for customer and house
accounts.


                                                                                                                10
total funding requirement necessary on any given day, to break down client and house positions

arbitrarily. Suspicions raised in London about these requests were blithely dismissed as

attributable to poor bookkeeping in Singapore. In internal correspondence dated December 28,

1994 to Brenda Granger (Head of Futures and Options Settlements), Tony Railton (Futures and

Options Settlements Senior Clerk) stated, “The best case scenario is that Nick is calling for the

right USD but is changing the wrong figures on his breakdown spreadsheet, worst case is that it’s

plain rubbish” (BoE Report, p.102).

       Reconciliation issues languished until early January 1995 when management devised the

‘Singapore Project’ to ‘formally’ investigate margin funding to BFS. In a classic case of the fox

getting control of the henhouse, Leeson captured this project. He was able to kill the initiative

with a foggy memo for London.



The SLK Receivable

       Leeson’s suspicious funding requests should have raised a bright red flag in January 1995

once the Yen 7.778 billion (S$115 million) hole was discovered in Barings balance sheet by the

external auditors, Coopers & Lybrand Singapore, C&L. This divergence between the general

ledger balance for the SIMEX Yen settlement variation account and the balance of the same

account as shown in SIMEX’s combined margins and positions report, represented 20 percent of

the gross assets of the Singapore office and 3.3 times its net shareholder’s funds at December 31,

1994 (Singapore Report, 118, BoE Report, 158). Although this discrepancy cried out for a

thorough and independent investigation to find and correct whatever systems weaknesses allowed

such an error to occur, the shortage was not conscientiously investigated. Even if one ignores

management’s prior laxities, this amateurish investigation implicates management in Barings

collapse.

       This discrepancy came to be known as the SLK Receivable, based on Leeson’s

unsupported claim that it represented a trade receivable overdue from Spear, Leeds & Kellogg, an




                                                                                                    11
American securities brokering firm. In fact, it represented the cumulated losses on Account

88888, and no such receivable existed.

       Seven days passed between the time C&L first met with Leeson to discuss this

discrepancy (January 27, 1995), and the time they signed off on it. They forwarded a final

clearance to C&L’s London office on February 3 despite the fact that four versions of the SLK

story had been given. Two more versions of the tale surfaced later. In the version accepted by

C&L, the Yen 7.778 billion represented refund of margin deposited with SLK for an OTC option

trade arranged by Leeson between SLK and Barings Securities Ltd (in London). This story

directly contradicted a handwritten note Leeson sent to his supervisors, which described the

counterparties as SLK and Banque Nationale de Paris (BNP). In this version, the receivable

represented a booking error in Singapore in which the maturity date was inputted as December 3,

1994 on the BNP leg, such that Singapore paid them Yen 7.778 billion on that date and were to

be reimbursed by SLK on December 30, 1994, the expiration date. It was suspicious that the risk

taken in the deal was said to originate as a favor to the contracting parties, but the deal offered

Barings no profit. Other versions described the problem as either an operational error, a mistaken

payment from Singapore to SLK, or as money due as settlement on maturity.

       In accordance with C&L’s efforts to document the SLK receivable, Leeson faxed forged

cut-and-pasted confirmations. One fax, supposedly from the Managing Director of SLK, stated

that the outstanding balance would be paid February 2, 1995. This document had the header

“Nick and Lisa” in its upper right hand corner because Leeson sent this fabrication from his home

fax machine. As evidence that the money was received from SLK, Leeson produced a photocopy

of a bank statement, with the payee omitted, showing such a deposit. In reality, the amount

shown was transferred from another Barings account. Leeson also forged a fax stating that

London had approved the transaction.

       Contradictory testimony has been offered by various parties among Barings’ management

about who knew what, when. But the flow of contradictory stories demanded a detailed inquiry.

Since the SLK transaction was entirely fabricated, London first learned of it from the auditors.


                                                                                                      12
The concern this initially drew from some individuals was quieted by assurances that the matter

was being handled “at the highest levels” (Singapore Report, 121).

        A premium of Yen 7.778 billion implies that the capital risk of the option was

approximately S$1 billion (US$690 million). It could not reasonably be conceived that SLK

would enter into a trade of this magnitude, especially since Barings’ Credit Unit believed that

SLK “had minimal substance, a net worth $2 [million] or $3 million (BoE Report, 129).3 Not

only was SLK never contacted directly, when Brenda Granger offered to contact SLK, she was

directed not to do so. Additionally, no one knew where Leeson would have gotten the money to

make such a payment, as Singapore had no external funding source of its own. The same

conclusion is reached in the Singapore Report, which states, “We find it inconceivable that the

question of where or how Mr. Leeson had been able to obtain S$115 million to make this

payment had not arisen…” (135). The effort to rationalize this incident as an ‘operational error’

supports the hypothesis that higher-ups in London mired themselves in an explicit or implicit

conspiracy of concealment. The failure to test the rationalization by insisting on documentation

indicates negligence or malfeasance by Barings top management.



Covering-Up SLK

        Supervisors’ claims to innocence are further undermined by their documented attempts to

keep information about the SLK transaction from appearing in the external audit report and

internal management letter. They profess to want suppression not just to protect the reputation of

the Singapore operation. They confess to wanting to protect the office from ‘unwarranted’

regulatory intervention and Leeson from unnecessarily harsh disciplinary action. Such

characterizations translate into a cover-up.



3
  This valuation is not correct, as SLK had net worth of US$268 million at September 30, 1994. The true value
still makes the point: SLK could not have supported a trade of this size. Furthermore, the only counterparty review
(prepared by London’s Credit Unit on June 11, 1993) established a Futures and Options limit of US$5 million.
(BoE Report, 129)


                                                                                                                13
       We have hypothesized that top management’s assignment of superstar status to Leeson

interfered with the proper handling of the investigation into the SLK receivable. This is evidenced

by actions taken by some members of the team to deter efforts initiated by others to investigate it,

denying others direct access to Leeson, and the direction Peter Norris gave to Leeson that he

need not address a series of pointed, written questions submitted by the Group Treasurer,

Anthony Hawes.

       The contention that management’s attempts to protect its star trader only appear

extraordinary in hindsight is easily dismissed. In the face of repeated reconciliation problems, it is

extraordinary that no disciplinary action was taken against Leeson. It is also extraordinary that he

was in line to receive a substantial bonus: nearly four times larger than his previous year’s bonus.

Finally, overt actions taken to suppress the flow of information to Barings’ ALCO and in the

Audit Management Letter trump all claims of managerial innocence. Even though London

management viewed the SLK issue as an extremely serious matter, and knew of it by January 30,

the problem was intentionally held out of discussion at ALCO until February 8. Even then Norris

downplayed its significance. It was explained as having arisen from an operational error due to a

misposting, or a “non-transaction,” and the secretary was directed to keep the minutes very brief

and exclude all details (Singapore Report, 131). The issue was discussed, but not minuted, at the

February 13 ALCO meeting.

       In a meeting with C&L London on February 9, management made a concerted effort to

keep the SLK Receivable from being mentioned in the Audit Management Letter. The impetus

for this action was the allegation that it would cause regulatory problems with SIMEX for the

Singapore office. False and misleading information was provided to the external auditors at this

juncture. The cover story centered on the version that designated BNP as the counterparty to the

transaction, contrary to the explanation C&L London had received just three days earlier in the

clearance letter from C&L Singapore, which described the trade as a transaction between SLK

and Barings Securities Ltd.




                                                                                                    14
       Had top management looked to install opportunity-cost accounting procedures rather than

to ride the coattails of a single trader’s ‘profits,’ the shortage would have been quickly exposed.




                                                                                                      15
The Final Discrepancy

       Anthony Railton was assigned in early 1995 to Singapore to improve the information

channels to London. Less than two weeks after the SLK issue first came to the attention of

London management, he realized, “If you close out all the positions there is absolutely no way on

God’s earth that you could actually return all the yen” (BoE Report, 10). By February 17, he had

discovered a 14 billion yen discrepancy between the margin funds remitted to Singapore and total

sum of funds held by that office.

       His arrangements to meet with Leeson were repeatedly postponed. Not until February 23

was he able to sit down with Leeson and the Director of the Singapore operation, Simon Jones, to

discuss this enormous, unreconcilable amount. Leeson excused himself from the meeting almost

as soon as it began. Claiming that he was going to visit his wife in the hospital, he fled to

Thailand. Given that Railton had informed London of Leeson’s evasions and the size of the

discrepancy he uncovered, Leeson’s departure for any reason should have been unacceptable.

       While they waited for Leeson to return, Jones, Railton, and the Financial Controller for

Barings Securities (Singapore) tried to resolve the discrepancy. In the process, the confirmation

documents from the SLK Receivable were reviewed. The tampered bank statement and the

confirmation from SLK, with the “Nick and Lisa” header, were recognized at that time as

forgeries. Jones testified that rather than jumping to conclusions, he just called it a night at 9:30

p.m. His only action that night was calling the Managing Director of Barings Asia Pacific, James

Bax, to alert him that Leeson had not returned. Railton reported the problem to his superiors in

London after Jones had left.

       The news that Leeson had not returned reached London at 3:30 p.m. local time. This was,

allegedly, the first time that Norris learned of the discrepancy. He gathered a team of other top

managers to “investigate whether unauthorized payments had been made to third parties, as it was

feared that Mr. Leeson may have embezzled money and disappeared” (Singapore Report, 153).

He also advised Hawes, who was due to arrive in Singapore at 2:30 am local time (6:30 p.m. in

London), of the task at hand in London and directed him to return to Leeson’s office with Railton


                                                                                                        16
to conduct a parallel review of the records. The concern expressed about embezzlement proved

short-lived. In what would be an amazing bit of detective work given the understanding of the

situation Barings’ officers claim, Railton, Hawes, and Bax, identified Account 88888 as the cause

of the discrepancy within 90 minutes of their arrival at Leeson’s office, around 4:30 am local time.

Even more amazing is the fact that Norris, working in London with incomplete documentation

was able to conclude that the problem was one of unauthorized trading around 7 p.m. London

time, without having to wait for the three men to arrive at the Singapore office. By mid-morning

in Singapore, Hawes sent a note to ALCO “identifying Account 88888 and describing, with a

substantial degree of accuracy, the nature and causes of the problem and the resulting exposures

faced by the Baring Group” (Singapore Report, 154).

        Leeson operated without line or head-office supervision. He controlled all accounting

reports out of Singapore. He defiantly acted against direct orders given by ALCO in late January

and February 1995 that “positions should not be increased from current levels and when possible

reduced pending further instructions…” (BoE Report, 125)4 Until the last, no one stopped

Leeson from continuing to double his exposures, gambling that the market might move in his

favor and eliminate his losses. The evidence supports the hypothesis that, from mid-1994 on, the

maintenance of a loose structure over the Singapore operation was intentional. This means that

Barings management chose to gamble, too. Unfortunately for Leeson, and Barings, the market

moved against their positions, collapsing the house of cards that had been used to balance Barings

accounting capital.




                                   II. Burying Trading Losses at Daiwa

        At Daiwa, as in Barings, a trader who operated out of a subsidiary office far from firm

headquarters ran up unacknowledged losses. Also as at Barings, higher-management checks and
4
  As further evidence of a cover-up, upon returning from a visit to Leeson, Norris directed ALCO on February 20
that the positions should not be reduced and should be left to run to maturity in March 1995 (Singapore Report,
144).


                                                                                                              17
balances on the settlement of trading activities were distressingly incomplete.

       Most of Daiwa’s $1.1 billion in trading losses were funded by the simple expedient of not

booking out of custody the transfer of the particular securities that were sold at a loss, as depicted

in Figure 3. Leeson controlled the posting of net settlements; conspiring with colleagues,

Toshihide Iguchi controlled postings to the custody account. Iguchi’s unprofitable trades moved

the securities physically out of Daiwa’s vaults, but their departure was simply not booked. From

an accounting point of view, this simple fraud served to transform losing trades into accounting

‘nonevents.’ Each unbooked trade became the accounting equivalent of a tree falling in a foreign

forest far beyond earshot of the firm’s Osaka headquarters.

       Three other significant differences emerge. First, the duration of the fraud at Daiwa was

four times longer than that at Barings. Second, Daiwa’s regulators and top management in the

home country admitted their involvement in the cover-up. Third, while the losses at each

institution were of similar magnitude, Leeson’s activities caused Baring’s collapse; Iguchi’s fraud

led to Daiwa’s expulsion from operating in the United States, but did not induce the bank’s

demise.



The Scandal Unfolds

       “The events at Daiwa point to a disturbing picture of illegal conduct, cover-up, deception,
       and inefficiencies. This picture includes collusion and cover-up by a foreign bank, its
       senior managers, and inadequate supervision by its home country supervisors and U.S.
       regulators.”
              Alfonse D’Amato, in hearings held by the Committee on Banking, Housing and
       Urban Affairs of the U.S. Senate, November 27, 1995



       According to their official testimony, Baring’s management had the misfortune of

discovering Leeson’s losses after he had abandoned his office and fled the country, at which time

it was too late to save the bank. The Iguchi dealings came to light under less climactic

circumstances. After twelve years of unauthorized trading of U.S. Treasury obligations that



                                                                                                    18
cumulated to $1.1 billion in losses, Toshihide Iguchi, Executive Vice President of The Daiwa

Bank, Ltd, articulated his activities in a July 17, 1995 thirty-page confession letter to Daiwa

President Akira Fujita. On August 8, Fujita informally notified Yoshimasa Nishimura, Banking

Bureau Chief of the Japanese Ministry of Finance (MoF) about the losses. Daiwa did not inform

U.S. regulators of the scandal until September 18, when it formally reported the losses to the

Federal Reserve Bank of New York (FRBNY). Japanese regulators also received formal notice

on that date.

          Once informed of the scandal, U.S. authorities acted quickly – Iguchi was arrested on

September 23 and Cease and Desist Orders were issued jointly by the New York State Banking

Department, FRBNY, the Board of Governors, and the FDIC on October 2. These orders

severely limited the activities of both the bank and Daiwa Trust Co., and called for an independent

CPA firm to conduct a forensic review of the $1.1 billion in securities trading losses, to prepare a

complete reconciliation and verification of bank assets, and to perform a comprehensive audit of

internal controls, custody business, risk-management, and management information systems for

both Daiwa and Daiwa Trust (Senate Hearing, 54)5.

          The U.S. Attorney initiated a criminal investigation of Daiwa while examiners from the

appropriate U.S. regulatory arms scrutinized the records and reviewed past examinations of

Daiwa Bank and Daiwa Trust. Authorities soon learned that it was not just Toshihide Iguchi who

had misled them. Daiwa management had actively concealed information and filed falsified

reports – and this was not the first time. Worse yet, the MoF had misrepresented its knowledge

of Daiwa’s affairs.



Allegations of Managerial Surprise

          Our analysis of the Barings collapse impugns managerial claims of surprise and innocence.

Claims of top-management innocence are not even offered in the Daiwa case. Daiwa took a

critical, lead role in concealing Iguchi’s losses. Revelation of this role led to the resignation of
5
    The Banking Department retained Arthur Anderson for this purpose on October 13.


                                                                                                       19
Daiwa’s president and other top executives, the conviction of the former general manager of

Daiwa’s New York office, and arguably to the investigation and prosecution of corruption at

MoF. Furthermore, Daiwa pled quilty to charges of conspiracy to hide the trading losses, the

misprison of a felony, falsification of bank books and records, wire fraud, conspiracy to conceal

material information from the Federal Reserve, and obstruction of a bank examination for its

direct role in the coverup.

       Allegations of managerial surprise were nevertheless put on the table. We contend that

Daiwa’s management cannot reasonably claim ignorance of Iguchi’s trading losses. Daiwa

maintained so lax a supervisory framework for so extended a period and embraced a corporate

culture so insistent on the internal handling of criminal indiscretions as to implicate top

management in willfully covering-up illegal activities.



Cover-up at Daiwa Trust

       On October 9, shortly after having received the Cease and Desist orders, Daiwa informed

the Banking Department of an earlier cover-up of $97 million in losses incurred by the Daiwa

Bank Trust Company during 1984 - 1987. The losses resulted from unauthorized trading activity

which came to the attention of Daiwa Trust in 1984, when they posted $31 million of unrealized

losses in off-balance sheet trading in U.S. Treasury bonds. Those losses ballooned in the wake of

authorized trading, undertaken by officers of Daiwa in hopes of recouping the original loss. By

September 1987, those losses had reached the $97 million figure. To hide the losses from

regulators, they were assigned to a newly established nonbank corporation in the Cayman Islands.

By 1994, the losses were zeroed out and the non-bank corporation was dissolved. Senior

management at the home office in Osaka instructed Daiwa’s U.S. management “not to disclose

the losses to federal regulators” (Board Report, 10).

       Daiwa’s U.S. operations included two branches in New York City, five other branches,

seven agency offices, and 14 representative offices in 11 other states, but only Daiwa Trust had

FDIC-insured deposits. Although the FDIC had primary responsibility for supervising Daiwa


                                                                                                    20
Trust, its responsibility was shared with the New York Banking Department and the Federal

Reserve. Because losses were wholly absorbed by Daiwa, the deposit insurance fund bore no

financial burden.

        Still, the insurance fund was exposed to risk by these patterns of loss concealment. This

transgression was not uncovered by U.S. monitoring procedures. U.S. knowledge of this affair

surfaced in the belated notification initiated by Daiwa officials. This notification appears to have

been forced on Daiwa by references to the matter in Iguchi’s confession letter.

        In testifying as chair of the FDIC, Ricki Helfer stated that Daiwa and Daiwa Trust

“concealed a pattern of unsafe and unsound banking practices and violations of law over an

extended period of time dating back to 1983.” (Senate Hearing, 39). In addition to unauthorized

trading, this pattern included “significant deficiencies in internal controls for monitoring

compliance with laws and regulations and risks” and the “long-term, conscious effort by senior

managers to deceive regulators concerning losses stemming from trading activities” (ibid., 38).

Instead of reporting the losses and unauthorized trading to U.S. authorities, as they were legally

required to do, senior management falsified the records and financial statements of Daiwa Trust to

conceal the activities.



Concealment: Within Daiwa and Within the Ministry of Finance

        Neither shareholders, the public, nor U.S. regulators were privy to that information

possessed by high-ranking officials at Daiwa and the MoF for nearly two months. U.S.

investigators later learned that Iguchi’s confession and subsequent communications with Daiwa

officials “urged concealment of the bank’s losses, concealment of [his] own crimes from U.S.

authorities, and counseled the bank as to how it might reorganize its affairs in a manner that

would escape U.S. regulatory authority and for a period” (Court transcript, 34). Iguchi also

“participated in the bank’s efforts to delay disclosure and otherwise to fail to conform to its

responsibilities under American law” (ibid., 34). It was Daiwa’s duty to report the losses to U.S.

regulators. In violation of U.S. law, Daiwa maintained secrecy, and knowingly filed a false Call


                                                                                                     21
Report with the Federal Reserve. In violation of its own regulatory duties, the MoF endorsed this

response.

        On October 19, 1995, Toshihide Iguchi pled guilty to six counts of misapplication of bank

funds, falsifying bank books and records, forgery, and money laundering. He admitted conspiring

with the “senior management of Daiwa to conceal the losses of the New York branch… and

deceiving Federal Reserve examiners during the course of their examinations of …Daiwa” (Board

Report, 8). For his crimes, Iguchi was sentenced to 48 months in prison and was ordered to pay

the maximum allowable fine of $2 million and $570,000 in restitution to Daiwa for two separate

incidents of embezzlement dating to 1988. Judge Lewis Kaplan acknowledged the gravity of

those crimes when he sentenced Iguchi in December 1996; “There is no question that this was a

crime of historical dimensions and potentially world shattering implications. It threatened the

stability of an enormous bank in a world economy that today is so complex and interdependent

that the degree of that complexity and interdependence is probably quite literally beyond human

comprehension” (Court transcript, 30).



Daiwa

        Daiwa’s tenure in the U.S. is a record of deceit. Besides the cover-up at Daiwa Trust, the

bank had a long history of misleading U.S. regulators. The Federal Reserve first examined

Daiwa’s New York branch in November 1992. One year later, branch management admitted to

examiners that “it had purposefully deceived them about the location of the branch’s securities

trading operations in 1992” (Senate Hearing, 33). The deceit included physically moving traders

from the downtown office to the midtown office and disguising the trading room as a storage

area. The MoF had not authorized trading at the downtown office. Daiwa sought to mislead the

Fed to prevent it from notifying the MoF that trading was taking place at an unauthorized

location.

        In November 1993, over a year and a half before Iguchi confessed, Daiwa alerted the Fed

of Iguchi’s dual role as senior vice president in charge of custodial services and securities trading


                                                                                                    22
at the branch. When examiners criticized the conflict of interest inherent in allowing one

individual to hold both positions, a senior official at Daiwa’s downtown branch submitted written

confirmation that Iguchi’s duties had been separated. That official also indicated that the traders

were relocated to the midtown branch, to comply with the MoF’s directives. Both statements

were false. The bottomline is that Daiwa had been alerted to the dangers in Iguchi’s

responsibilities and lied about remedying the situation. Compounding their involvement,

management intentionally deceived foreign and domestic regulators about other aspects of the

bank’s trading activities.

        The deception of U.S. regulators continued through 1994. During a joint Fed-state

examination in September 1994, branch management submitted an organization chart that showed

Iguchi to be responsible only for custodial services, with another officer responsible for securities,

investments, and trading.

        Following Iguchi’s confession and an investigation designed to size his trading losses,

Daiwa decided to delay disclosure to U.S. regulators, but “the suggestion by some senior Daiwa

management to conceal the losses completely, ... was however ultimately rejected” (Board

Report, 7). In the two months before U.S. authorities were notified, Daiwa’s management

persisted in the scheme to avoid detection of the losses. General Manager Masahiro Tsuda and

Iguchi sold securities and falsified bank records to meet interest payments on missing securities.

“These actions were known to and acquiesced in by Mr. Tsuda’s superiors at Daiwa” (Board

Report, 10). In addition, on July 31, 1995, Daiwa filed its Call Report for June 30 and its parent

foreign bank financial report, without reflecting the misappropriation of securities from Daiwa’s

custodial accounts. Even on September 21, after having notified U.S. supervisors, Daiwa filed a

revised Call Report for June 30 which was also misleading.

        The facts indicate that Daiwa’s deceptive handling of the $1.1 billion in losses incurred by

Iguchi was not exceptional. Daiwa’s actions exhibit a dangerous cycle of failing to control its

traders followed by accounting trickery and outright falsification and forgery to hide the losses

and keep regulators in the dark. While top management may not have known of Iguchi’s losses


                                                                                                     23
prior to his confession, Daiwa’s leadership violated their duties of diligence to shareholders and

regulators. It bears responsibility for initiating and maintaining a supervisory structure that

virtually invited traders to try to recoup embarrassing losses. The startling lack of checks and

verification in Daiwa’s information and monitoring system allowed Iguchi’s scheme to continue

for 12 years.

       On November 2, 1995, one month after issuing the Cease and Desist orders, the Federal

Reserve, NY Banking Dept. and the FDIC announced Consent Orders terminating Daiwa’s U.S.

operations. Daiwa was given until February 2, 1996 to end its operations and leave the country.

Also on that day, a 24-count indictment against Daiwa was issued by the U.S. Attorney. Charges

included “conspiracy, mail and wire fraud, obstructing the examination of a financial institution,

falsification of bank records, failure to report felonies, and the affirmative concealment of felonies

(Board Report, 4). Masahiro Tsuda was also indicted. He was arrested and charged with

“conspiracy to deceive the Federal Reserve by concealing the bank’s $1.1 billion trading loss,

making false statements to the Federal Reserve, making false entries in the books and records of

Daiwa, and the misprison of a felony” (ibid., 9).

       For its criminal role in concealing Iguchi’s trading losses, Daiwa pled guilty on February

28, 1996 and was ordered to pay a $340 million fine. Tsuda pled guilty to one count of

conspiracy on April 4, 1996 and was sentenced in October to two months in prison and fined

$100,000.

       Judge Kaplan underscored Daiwa’s negligence at Iguchi’s sentencing; “Daiwa has

manifested extraordinary culpability both with respect to [Iguchi’s] scheme, ... and otherwise.

...Daiwa bank has acted with exceptional contempt of U.S. law and U.S. regulatory authority. It

has refused to cooperate with U.S. authorities to this date. It has little claim on the sympathies of

an American court” (Court transcript, 36).




                                                                                                     24
Ministry of Finance

           The MoF violated its duties as well. The ministry admits to being informed of Daiwa’s

losses in August 1995, a fact it temporarily denied when U.S. authorities were notified in

September. Far from sharing the information with U.S. supervisors, or encouraging Daiwa to do

so, it instructed Daiwa to conduct an internal investigation. During Daiwa’s prosecution in U.S.

courts, bank officials stated that their failure to make full and prompt disclosure of Iguchi's losses

was due in part to the "grave concerns regarding the impact of reporting of the losses at the time

would have on the Japanese economy, as expressed to Daiwa on August 8, 1995 by the Japanese

Ministry of Finance..." and that "MoF’s comments reinforced Daiwa's own business decision to

delay disclosure" (Board Report, 7,8).

           High-ranking MoF officials initially defended the ministry's handling of the Daiwa case,

but on October 12, Finance Minister Masayoshi Takemura telephoned U.S. Treasury Secretary

Robert Rubin to apologize and acknowledged that the ministry's reporting was insufficient

(Reuters).

           At an October 16 hearing, James Leach, Chairman of the House Committee on Banking

and Financial Services, expressed “Congressional dismay” about the lack of timely notification

about Iguchi’s substantial losses from both Daiwa and the MoF. He stated that “… it is

impossible not to register deep concern over this brief, but significant financial cover-up” (House

(1), 2).

           The seriousness of the Daiwa scandal and the indignation expressed by U.S. authorities

underscored the MoF’s double-dealing. In a November 22 letter to Neil Levin, Vice Minister of

Finance Kato conceded that the MoF should have encouraged Daiwa to “expedite its investigation

so that the MoF would have been in a position to report earlier to regulators in this country...”

and that their delay in reporting “might not be consistent with the spirit of the [Basle] Concordat”

(Senate Hearing, 51).

           The MoF’s advice to Daiwa to conduct its own investigation prior to informing U.S.

regulators was attributed to cultural and supervisory differences that exist between the two


                                                                                                      25
nations. U.S. regulators were sympathetic to such differences, and often deferred to Japanese

procedures. Neil Levin confirmed that the Banking Department relied heavily on Japanese banks’

home offices, the MoF, and the Bank of Japan, in the belief that Japanese authorities closely

supervised all branches in the U.S. He stated that the Department routinely deferred to “Japanese

sensibilities regarding internal control and audit matters generally and the Japanese use of self-

inspection in particular” (Senate Hearing, 52). He expressed the Banking Department’s naive

opinion that “the Japanese did not understand the American system of tight internal controls and

the need for audit coverage” (ibid.). Japanese citizens’ subsequent disillusion with the corrupt

behavior of MoF officials shows that it was a mistake not to pursue and correct the audit

weaknesses that the Department uncovered in its examinations. The Banking Department and

other U.S. regulatory agencies were indefensibly complacent in their examination of Japanese

banks.

         Iguchi’s cover-up depended on an extremely simple ploy. Daiwa management should

have seen through the deception quickly. It is hard to suppose that management could remain

unaware of Iguchi’s activities until his confession, given that Iguchi’s activities spanned twelve

years and entailed the falsification of at least 30,000 trade documents. Much like the Barings

case, a credible capacity to profess ignorance may be read as proof of laxity in the execution of

supervisory duties to pursue safety and soundness. These duties are owed to shareholders and to

home-country and host-country regulators alike. Daiwa management perpetuated an atmosphere

of secrecy and concealment that facilitated looting and gambling and justified the institution’s

ultimate expulsion from the United States.




                                                                                                     26
Regulatory Response

U.S. Supervisors

      “It is extraordinary that the Daiwa problem was missed for more than a decade in standard
      Federal Reserve exams. It would appear that more comprehensive examinations may be
      needed of foreign institutions, particularly those from countries lacking U.S. standards of
      transparency and regulatory discipline”
                 Chairman James Leach, in hearings held by the Committee on Banking and
      Financial Services of the U.S. House of Representatives, October 16, 1995



       U.S. regulators dismissed red flags that called for thorough investigation. This directly

questions whether regulators fulfilled their duty to maintain the safety and soundness of the

financial system in the U.S., and public confidence therein. In congressional testimony,

Greenspan, Helfer, and Levin identified numerous areas where their agencies could improve

examination procedures and offered the same explanation for past shortfalls. They acknowledged

that examiners failed to pursue suspicious incidents but rationalize this on the basis of: a

purported supervisory framework of trust between regulators and financial institutions,

impairments in the capacity of examiners to detect outright fraud, parallel failures of external

auditors to detect the cover-ups, and transitional costs of adjusting to the Foreign Bank

Supervision Enhancement Act of 1991 (FBSEA) which mandated a significant increase in

examinations.

       Greenspan stated, “With the benefit of hindsight, there were some clues that were missed

in the examination of Daiwa. With a more robust follow-up, the problem might have been found

sooner. …Nonetheless, the bottom line is that we did not succeed in unearthing Daiwa’s

transgressions where we might have” (Senate, 30, 31; italics supplied). Directly addressing

concerns about internal controls and risk-management systems raised by the Barings and Daiwa

incidents, Greenspan continued, “Both cases demonstrate the need, once serious deficiencies in

internal controls are identified, to ensure that relevant books and records are reconciled and

verified in an expeditious and thorough manner” (ibid., 31).



                                                                                                   27
        Levin echoed, “With the advantage of perfect hindsight, one must conclude that there are

areas where all regulators, including the Banking Department, can and must do a better job”

(ibid., 49; italics supplied). Specifically addressing Iguchi’s trading activities, Levin stated, “In

retrospect, however, the Banking Department’s scrutiny of the matter once it was apprised of the

true nature of his activities was inadequate” (ibid., 53; italics supplied).

        Finally, discussing Daiwa Trust, which was examined ten times between October 1984 and

January 1994, Helfer stated, “In hindsight, there were sizable increase in holdings of U.S.

Treasury bonds between March and June 1987, … , when bank management booked the

securities that covered previously unbooked positions stemming from undisclosed trading losses”

(ibid., 8; italics supplied). She also noted that such an increase could be noted under current pre-

examination planning techniques, initiating closer scrutiny.

        Each of these regulators allege that Daiwa’s transgressions were only visible in hindsight.

But disturbing incidents occurred that should have served as the catalyst for further investigation,

most notably Daiwa’s 1993 admission that it lied to the Fed during its examination. When

questioned by D’Amato about the Fed’s lax response to this criminal act, Greenspan asserted that

the transgression did not appear to undermine the quality of the initial examination. He did admit,

that “In retrospect, I think that whenever you realize that an institution says one thing that is

clearly untruthful, the probability is that there are more untruths, which should have been a signal

to us to examine further. At the end of the day, we did not, and in retrospect, that was a mistake”

(ibid., 15).

        If we delete the words “in retrospect,” Greenspan’s statement acknowledges that U.S.

authorities were remiss in not following up troubling signals. Given the 12-year duration of

Iguchi’s scheme, U.S. regulators ought to have importantly restructured their information,

monitoring, and incentive systems to minimize the chance that a similar experience might recur.




                                                                                                        28
Officials in Japan

       To their credit, Japanese authorities have proved far less accepting of the culture of

regulatory cover-up than their counterparts in the U.S. Tokyo prosecutors have identified

potentially corrupt links between financial institutions and regulators at the MoF and Japanese

central bank. They have seized MoF and central-bank records without warning. Their

investigation has resulted in arrests and resignations that challenge longstanding codes of

corporate ethics. Prosecutors have charged (or, in a case terminated by suicide, prepared to

charge) regulatory officials and even a parliamentarian with accepting bribes from institutions that

taxpayers expected them to regulate.



                           III. Asian Values vs. Anglo-American Ethics

       In both scandals, the Asian responses have put the governmental inquiries in the

corresponding Western country to shame. The Bank of England Report on the Barings debacle

assigns far too little blame to British managers and regulators for accepting defective data at face

value. Similarly, in the Daiwa scandal, U.S. regulators made light of their nationals’ own

mistakes. They targeted no new reporting or administrative controls and took no disciplinary

action against lax government officials. In view of the appointment of independent prosecutors

for transactions whose financial consequences were small, it is striking that no independent

prosecutor was asked to investigate influence peddling in either the S&L insurance mess or the

Daiwa scandal.




                                                                                                   29
                             Figure One




Manipulating a Bank’s Incremental Income Statement to Conceal a Loss


                 Mislabeled Trading Loss:         -x



                 Specious Credit:                 +x



        Incremental Net Accounting Income:         0




                                                                       30
                             Figure Two




                  Leeson’s Accounting Schemes


Trading Losses Posted to Account 88888                                       -x

Margin Calls on Trading Position at α percent                               -αx

Funding From:                                                   +(1 + α)x
       Leeson’s Commission Income (Feb. to Dec 1992)
       Premiums From Selling in-the-money Options (Dec. 1992 - Oct. 1994)
       Transfers requested from London (From 1993 on)

Incremental Net Accounting Income Posted in Singapore                       0




                                                                                  31
                           Figure Three




                   Daiwa’s Accounting Scheme


Trading Revenue on Selected Securities (Posted as Other Revenue)   +x

Custody Account for the Same Securities (Not Debited)

Surplus Available for Funding Other Losses                         +x




                                                                        32
                                          References



Bank of England, Board of Banking Supervision (1995) Report of the Board of Banking
      Supervision Inquiry into the Circumstances of the Collapse of Barings, London: Ordered
      by the House of Commons.


Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1996) Board Staff Report: Assessment and
       Recommendations Regarding the Federal Reserve’s Supervision of The Daiwa Bank,
       Limited April 12, 1995, Washington: Board of Governors.


Hogan, W.P. (1996) The Barings Collapse: Explanations and Implications, Economic Papers,
      Economic Society of Australia; Vol. 15, No. 3, pp. 1 – 27.


Leeson, Nick with Edward Whitley (1996) Rogue Trader: How I Brought Down Barings Bank
       and Shook the Financial World, Boston: Little, Brown and Company.


Lim, Michael Choo San and Nicky Tan Ng Kuang (1995) Baring Futures (Singapore) Pte Ltd:
      The Report of the Inspectors appointed by the Minister for Finance, Singapore: Ministry
      of Finance.


Moore, Louella (1995) Secrecy Versus Disclosure: Institutional Roles of Accounting in Society,
      Proceedings of the American Accounting Association, Southwest Region, 190-197.


Rawnsley, Judith H. (1995) Total Risk, New York: HarperCollins Publishers.


Reuters (1995) October 12: Japanese Minister Apologizes over Daiwa Case, Tokyo.


United States District Court Southern District of New York (1996) United States of America v.
       Toshihide Iguchi; Hon. Lewis A. Kaplan, District Judge, December 16. 95 Cr. 914.


United States Government (1996) The Japanese Financial System; Hearing Before the
       Committee on Banking and Financial Services; House of Representatives October 16,
       1995, Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office.



                                                                                                33
United States Government (1996) Investigation and Oversight of Daiwa Bank and Daiwa Trust
       Company; Hearing Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs;
       United States Senate November 27, 1995, Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office.


United States Government (1996) Foreign Bank Supervision and The Daiwa Bank; Hearing
       Before the Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Consumer Credit of the
       Committee on Banking and Financial Services; House of Representatives December 5,
       1995, Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office.




                                                                                           34
