-2protection. Taussig (1915, p. 151) himself suggested that “the same sort of growth [in iron and
steel] would doubtless have taken place eventually, tariff or no tariff; but not so soon or on so
great a scale.”2
Such assertions require substantiation, and if true the question then becomes one of
whether it proved worthwhile to impose protective tariffs in order to establish domestic
production of a product in advance of when it otherwise would have arisen. This paper
investigates such issues by focusing on a segment of the iron and steel industry that has been
heralded as possibly the best example of infant industry protection. The experience of the tinplate
industry, which produces thin sheets of iron or steel that have been coated with tin, is unique on
several dimensions:
! Unlike most manufacturing industries, tinplates did not receive significant tariff
protection after the Civil War, apparently due to a mistaken interpretation of the tariff code. Left
without adequate protection, there was virtually no domestic production prior to 1890.
! The McKinley tariff of 1890 substantially raised the duty on imported tinplate to
encourage the entry and growth of domestic producers. The act also contained an unusual
provision in which the tariff would be completely eliminated in six years if, by that time, domestic
production did not amount to at least one-third of imports.
! The tariff succeeded in promoting domestic production and output rapidly expanded,
2

Others have endorsed Taussig’s judgment. Berglund and Wright (1929, p. 134)
maintain that “whatever had been our policy with respect to the tariff, the United States would
have developed a great iron and steel industry.” Hogan (1971, p. 357) argues that “it seems
inevitable that with our resources of ore and coal that the United States would naturally have been
an iron and steel producer,” although “it also seems probable that British competition might have
hindered the proper growth of the industry in the early years.” Wright (1990) discusses the
importance of raw materials abundance for U.S. manufacturing during this period.

-3despite a tariff reduction during 1894-97. By about 1910, the price of U.S. tinplates fell below
those produced in the United Kingdom and the United States became a net exporter.
The tinplate example has all the elements of an apparently successful application of infant
industry protection. The industry failed to receive protection initially, and it clearly did not
develop until protection was applied. The industry improved rapidly and domestic prices fell to
the world price level within two decades. But the counterfactual question remains: would the
industry have developed anyway, and were the tariffs worthwhile?
This paper seeks to determine whether the tinplate industry would have developed at some
point without the benefit of protection, and what the welfare consequences of that protection
were. Section II discusses the search for infant industries in the late nineteenth century United
States and why the tinplate industry is of special interest. Section III analyzes the barriers to
establishing domestic tinplate production by focusing on the industry’s cost structure, particularly
raw materials expenses and dynamic scale economies resulting from learning by doing. Section
IV develops an empirical model in which the decision of domestic firms to produce tinplate is
treated as endogenous. The estimated model is then subjected to various counterfactual
scenarios, such as the removal of the McKinley tariff, to determine the timing of entry in different
circumstances. Section V estimates the welfare impact of the McKinley tariff, and Section VI
summarizes the paper’s conclusions.
To anticipate the paper’s main conclusions, the analysis here suggests that, in the absence
of the McKinley tariff, the U.S. tinplate industry would have established itself about a decade
later, and that over this time horizon the McKinley duty fails to pass a cost-benefit test.

-4II. Searching for Late Nineteenth Century Infant Industries: The Case of Tinplate
Perhaps the most famous statement of the infant industry case for protection came from
John Stuart Mill, who wrote that tariffs may be beneficial “when they are imposed temporarily
(especially in a young and rising nation) in hopes of naturalizing a foreign industry, in itself
perfectly suitable to the circumstances of the country.” Mill argued that one country’s advantage
in a certain industry may be due only to its having begun production sooner: “There may be no
inherent advantage on one part, or disadvantage on the other, but only a present superiority of
acquired skill and experience.” Temporary protection could be applied by a country in which the
industry could be fertile because “it cannot be expected that individuals should, at their own risk,
or rather to their certain loss, introduce a new manufacture, and bear the burthen of carrying it on
until the producers have been educated up to the level of those with whom the processes are
traditional” (quoted in Irwin 1996, p. 128).
Import tariffs were frequently justified on infant industry grounds in the nineteenth century
United States. Yet surprisingly, as Anne Krueger and Baran Tuncer (1982, p. 1142) note, “there
has been virtually no systematic examination of the empirical relevance of the infant industry
argument” — during this or any other period.3 Krueger and Tuncer propose to evaluate such
protection by examining the relationship between various measures of trade protection and total
factor productivity growth across industries.4 Applying their approach to the turn-of-the-century

3

Paul David (1970) and Jeffrey Williamson (1972), however, have debated the evidence
on infant industry protection for the antebellum U.S. cotton textile industry.
4

Using data from Turkey, Krueger and Tuncer (1982) concluded that there was no
tendency for productivity to advance more rapidly in protected industries, although they presented
no statistical test of this claim. Ann Harrison (1994) later showed that some of their measures of
protection and productivity growth were positively correlated. Krueger and Tuncer (1994)

-5United States, Table 1 presents Spearman rank correlations between three measures of trade
protection (the nominal tariff and two calculations of the effective rate of protection) in 1899 and
several measures of sectoral economic performance between 1899-1909.5 The Spearman rank
correlation between ERP (B) — the conceptually correct measure of effective protection when
the underlying data are drawn from a tariff-inclusive equilibrium — and total factor productivity
for 14 sectors is found to be 0.27, but not statistically significant at standard confidence levels.
Any interpretation of these broad sectoral correlations, however, is plagued by numerous
difficulties. First, the measures of policy intervention are poor because input substitution can
render calculations of the effective rates of protection meaningless in general equilibrium.
Second, the specific timing of productivity changes in relation to protection can always be
questioned, particularly in this period when the tariff is roughly constant over time. Third, the
sectoral definitions are so broad as to possibly encompass both leading and lagging industries,
masking the role of the tariff in particular cases. Finally, and perhaps most importantly, no
attempt is made to control for other factors determining productivity at the same time.
Furthermore, any specific result is uninformative: how does one assess whether, as in this case,
0.27 is a high or a low correlation? Is this sufficient to prove anything about infant industries
when there is no well-specified benchmark or alternative?
These problems force us to take up Taussig’s (1915, p. 29) suggestion that the best

argued in reply that the difference in productivity growth between protected and non-protected
sectors was insufficient to make protection economically worthwhile.
5

Data limitations preclude consideration of different time periods in the late nineteenth
century. The correlation between the nominal tariff and the effective tariff is similar to that
reported in Hawke (1975).

-6approach to analyzing infant industry protection is “by direct investigation of the particular cases.”
But despite the breadth of the late nineteenth century U.S. industrial expansion, surprisingly few
candidates have been proposed as successful instances of such protection.6 Cotton and woollen
manufactures were, by this time, old industries that had been protected for decades. Taussig and
others favorably mention the silk industry as one that successfully matured under protection, but
this industry apparently required substantial, ongoing protection. Protection surely succeeded in
increasing domestic output in these cases, but advantageous infant industry protection requires
that the domestic industry’s prices soon fall to the world level (or perhaps that the industry can
profitably export at world prices) so that the present discounted value of social benefits exceeds
that of the costs.
Two better cases appear in the iron and steel industry, specifically steel rails and tinplate.
The steel rail industry grew rapidly under the protection it received after the Civil War, survived
the phased reduction and eventual removal of import duties, saw their prices fall below those in
the United Kingdom, and eventually began to export its products. In a paper discussed further
below, Keith Head (1994) performs a counterfactual simulation of steel rail tariff policies in which
country-specific learning by doing proves so important that, under free trade, the U.S. industry
never begins production until almost 1913.
The tinplate industry differs from steel rails and nearly every other industries in that it did
not receive significant protection initially, but only after decades had past with virtually no
6

Tedesco (1985, p. 190) writes that James Swank, the “ultra-protectionist” secretary of
the American Iron and Steel Association, “had largely jettisoned whatever systematic theory
protection had ever had” and “de-emphasized the basic ‘infant industries’ argument. Only in silk
and tinplate was he ever able to claim vindication of protection for that purpose. Even then, he
could not prove that these two manufactures would not have developed without protection.”

-7domestic production.7 The industry initially failed to receive protection because of a mistaken
interpretation of the tariff code in 1864 by the Secretary of the Treasury, who erroneously moved
a comma in the tariff act by just two words.8 As a result, instead of receiving a more than 50
percent ad valorem tariff implied by the 1864 act, imported tinplates were construed as falling
under a different section of the tariff code in which they received a 15 percent duty. This mistake
provides us with the rare opportunity to observe what would happen to a manufacturing industry
that did not receive protection during this period.
As a result of the Treasury decision, there was no domestic production in the late 1860s
and virtually all of U.S. consumption was served by imports from the United Kingdom, where
production was highly concentrated in South Wales. (Wales exported roughly three-quarters of
its output to the United States.) U.S. demand for tinplate grew steadily through the late
nineteenth century as it proved useful in making cans to preserve food, drums to store and ship
petroleum, sheets for roofing, and various household utensils. Despite the low level of tariff

7

For general discussions of the tinplate industry, see Ayers (1897), Gray (1902), Dunbar
(1915), and Minchinton (1957).
8

The Tariff Act of 1864 provided for the following duty on imported tinplate: “On
tinplates, and iron galvanized or coated with any metal by electric batteries or otherwise, two
cents and a half per pound” (U.S. House of Representatives 1909, p. 233). At the time, a 2-1/2
cent specific duty on tinplate would have translated into an ad valorem tariff of over 50 percent.
A month after Congress enacted this tariff, Secretary of the Treasury William Fessenden informed
the customs collector in New York that there was an “error of punctuation” in the provision,
“probably by the clerk who engrossed that part of the act,” he speculated. If the comma after the
word “tinplates” was moved to after the word “iron,” Fessenden suggested, then “the true sense”
of the provision would be clear, namely that “the tin plates as well as the iron must be galvanized
or coated with any metal . . . in order to bring them within the provision” (quoted in Tariff
Commission 1883, p. 2082). Fessenden apparently did not realize exactly what tinplates are: not
plates of tin coated with another metal, but plates of iron or steel that have been dipped in molten
tin. The interpretation is clearly erroneous because no one has ever sought to coat tin or tinplates
with another metal.

-8protection, high prices for tinplate prompted three U.S. firms, begun at the initiative or with the
assistance of Welsh immigrants, to begin producing tinplate in western Pennsylvania and eastern
Ohio during 1872-74 (see Minchinton 1957, p. 63, and Clark 1929, p. 373).
Unfortunately for the U.S. producers, tinplate prices peaked in 1872 and then collapsed,
as illustrated in Figure 1. The three fledgling firms claimed that Welsh exporters were deliberately
“dumping” their products in order to drive them out of business. Indeed, the firms shut down
production sequentially, one in 1874, another in 1875, and the last in 1877. The price collapse,
however, probably did not reflect “dumping” but rather what Minchinton (1957, p. 48) called the
“recurrent problem of overproduction.” The high margins for U.K. tinplate producers during the
early 1870s, shown in Figure 2, had induced the entry of many other Welsh producers; there were
roughly a third more mills operating in Wales in 1878 (a total of 229) than there had been a
decade earlier. A Welsh producer association attempted to limit output and raise prices, but the
result was “wholly ineffective” (ibid., pp. 49-50). Prices stabilized by the late 1870s, but too late
to help the U.S. firms. The timing of the price decline and subsequent modest rise, however, gave
credence to the charges that Welsh producers deliberately raised their prices after having
successfully eliminated their American rivals through dumping.
Tinplate interests agitated throughout the 1870s and 1880s for a higher tariff, but to no
avail. The defunct tinplate producers appeared before the House Ways and Means Committee in
1877 to complain about the lack of adequate tariff protection, but achieved no remedy.9
9

The committee reported a bill to the House in which, in the words of William C.
Cronemeyer (1931, p. 33), president of the U.S. Iron and Tin Plate Company, “the clause on
tinplate was so worded that it could not have been misconstrued again and the proposed rate of
duty was in harmony with the rates on other iron products.” The bill, however, was never
enacted.

-9Domestic tinplate interests then appealed, unsuccessfully, to the Secretary of the Treasury for a
reconsideration of the 1864 tariff interpretation.10 Tinplate interests then explained their plight to
a sympathetic Tariff Commission, set up by Congress to recommend tariff reforms, but Congress
ignored their advice and even reduced the duty to 1 cent per pound in 1883.11
Finally, in 1890, William McKinley, the chairman of the House Ways and Means
Committee who represented the Ohio region where tinplate producers had originally sought to
establish production, embraced the tinplate cause and proposed a higher tariff. Despite the fact
that protectionist Republicans controlled Congress, serious political obstacles stood in the way of
establishing high duties on tinplate. While there was a domestic tinplate interest, there was no
domestic tinplate production. Past efforts to establish production had demonstrably failed, and
there was no assurance that new firms would enter the business or that they would be successful.
Tinplate consumers — particularly the Standard Oil Company, the food canning industry, and the
roofing industry, all of which used tinplate extensively — were well organized (the Tinplate
Consumers’s Association of the United States) and actively opposed the tariff hike. In light of
these considerations, even the Republicans found it difficult to muster political support for higher
tinplate duties. At the Ways and Means Committee’s recommendation, the House passed by a
single vote, 150-149, an amendment to raise the tinplate duty to 2.2 cents per pound (see

10

Treasury Secretary John Sherman stated that “I do not feel at liberty to place any other
construction upon the law, especially in view of the fact that the changes in the tariff subsequent
to 1864 as to this article have undoubtedly been made with a full knowledge, by Congress, of the
action taken by this Department in the premises” (quoted in Tariff Commission 1883, p. 2081).
11

The Commission’s report (1883, p. 20) suggested “that a moderate rate of duty will
develop this important industry, and that wise public policy dictates that at least a part of the
amount consumed in this country of so essential an article as tin plate should be produced here.”

-10Stanwood 1903, pp. 272ff).
Opponents of the duty fought aggressively in the Senate. To counter the fear that the duty
would merely cost tinplate-consuming industries without ensuring domestic production, Senator
William Spooner (R-WI) introduced an amendment in which the 2.2 cents per pound duty would
be effective only from 1 July 1891 (not 1 October 1890, when the McKinley tariff went into
effect) and included the following unusual provision: “after October 1, 1897, tin and terne plates .
. . should be admitted free of duty, unless it shall be made to appear to the satisfaction of the
President that the aggregate quantity of such plates . . . produced in the United States during any
of the six years next preceding June 30, 1897, has equaled one third of the amount of such plates
imported and entered for consumption during any fiscal year after the passage of this act and prior
to said October 1, 1897” (U.S. House of Representatives 1909, p. 379). Thus, protection was to
be conditional or probationary to see if domestic tinplate production was viable. (Of course,
Congress could not commit itself to enforcing this particular provision.) Tinplate interests
disliked this condition, but accepted it, given their precarious political position, and the provision
was enacted.
The McKinley duty sharply increased protection to the industry. Figure 3, depicting the
specific duty levied on tinplate and its ad valorem equivalent, indicates that the McKinley act
pushed the tariff from about 30 percent to over 70 percent.12 Tinplate imports from Wales surged
12

Democrats took a dim view of the tinplate tariff, saying that it “involved a new and
distinct perversion of the Federal taxing power by making present, tangible, and profitable
industries the sport and prey of prospective, conjectural, and speculative adventures” (U.S. House
of Representatives 1892, p. 2). In 1894 they cut the tinplate duty to 1.2 cents per pound,
equivalent to about 50 percent ad valorem (see Figure 3). The Republicans raised the duty to 1.5
cents per pound in 1897, but by this time the industry was firmly established. Subsequent tariff
changes appear to have had little effect on the industry.

-11in to beat the imposition of the duty, but shrank thereafter. Many firms entered the industry and
domestic production, closely monitored by government agents, increased sharply (see Ayer 1897
and Gray 1902). Figure 4 illustrates how domestic production soared after 1891, matching the
quantity of imports by 1896 and capturing nearly 90 percent of the market by 1899. By 1899,
there were 57 U.S. tinplate firms in operation, 35 of which rolled their own iron and steel plates
while the others purchased those plates from U.S. and U.K. producers and just engaged in the tin
dipping operation (Gray 1902, pp. 99-100).
The success of the tinplate industry was greeted with tremendous enthusiasm by its
proponents. “The growth of this industry was heralded in the protectionist press as a dramatic
illustration of the benefits of a high tariff,” Clark (1929, p. 374) reports, “and consequently new
entrepreneurs received an unusual amount of publicity . . . . though contemporary records of [the
industry’s] progress bear abundant evidence of juvenile exaggeration and evidence.” In its annual
report for 1892, for example, the American Iron and Steel Institute proudly proclaimed that “The
McKinley tariff is entitled to the whole credit of establishing this new industry” (quoted in Hogan
1971, p. 353).
Later commentators also singled out the tinplate industry for distinction. “The most
spectacular event in American metallurgical history” during the last two decades of the nineteenth
century, Clark (1929, p. 372) declares, was “the final establishment of the tin plate industry under
the stimulus of the McKinley tariff.” While generally skeptical of iron and steel tariffs, Berglund
and Wright (1929, p. 130) state that the “efficacy of the tariff in fostering a new industry is
especially manifest in the case of tin and terneplate,” an example “so striking that it calls for
special mention.” Temin (1964, p. 212) also suggests that tinplates provide an example of tariffs

-12working out in the best possible way.
At the same time, the counterfactual question must be confronted. Taussig (1915, p. 178)
believed that “the unexpected growth of the tin plate industry after 1890 was due chiefly to the
cheapening of the fundamental raw material,” namely, iron and steel bars. Knox (n.d., p. 12)
argues that “it is a misconception for anyone to attribute the beginning of the tin plate industry in
this country to the McKinley Tariff Act” because “this protective tariff hastened its start, but it
was inevitable that American ingenuity and steel-making resources would have eventually
accomplished the same results at some later date.” Clark (1929, p. 375) also notes that “the
United States afforded the largest market in the world for tin cans for preserving food stuffs and
shipping petroleum, and for other tin containers,” the implication being that some domestic
tinplate production probably would have been established at some point anyway.13

III. Barriers to Establishing Domestic Tinplate Production
What factors prevented the establishment of domestic tinplate production prior to the
McKinley tariff? Two potentially important determinants of an entrant’s production costs were
the prices of raw material inputs and the lack of previous production experience, i.e., dynamic
scale economies resulting from learning by doing. The section seeks to ascertain the relative and
absolute importance of these two factors.
Raw materials costs, particularly of the iron and steel sheets which were to be coated with
tin, were critical for the tinplate industry. Iron and steel inputs accounted for nearly three13

The number of domestic canning firms grew from 97 in 1871 to 411 in 1880 to 886 in
1890, all in a period in which there was no significant domestic tinplate production. See
Minchinton (1957), p. 63.

-13quarters of the cost of producing tinplate and about two-thirds of the value of tinplate. In 1899,
the U.S. tin and terne plate industry used $20.7 million worth of iron and steel to make tinplate
that cost $28.6 million (in materials and labor) to produce and which sold at a value of $31.9
million, according to Census of Manufactures data (Gray 1902, pp. 100, 103). On this score,
Welsh producers had a significant cost advantage over potential American rivals: due in part to
high import tariffs, U.S. prices of iron and steel greatly exceeded U.K. prices for most of the late
nineteenth century. As a result, iron and steel-using industries in the United States paid a
significant premium for their inputs compared with their foreign counterparts.
Figure 5 plots the price premium on iron bar paid by U.S. tinplate producers vis-a-vis their
Welsh rivals.14 In 1869, the price of basic bar iron in the United States was double that in the
United Kingdom, but the price differential rapidly fell to about 20 percent above that in the United
Kingdom in the early 1870s. Through most of the 1880s, however, U.S. iron bar prices stood
roughly 70 percent above those in the United Kingdom, but the premium declined again in the
early 1890s until the prices were virtually equivalent by the turn of the century. Variation in the
domestic price of iron bars appears closely related to the entry of U.S. tinplate producers: when
the premium is high (1860s and 1880s), the effective protection given to domestic producers is
significantly negative; when the premium is low (mid-1870s, mid-1890s), domestic tinplate

14

The price of steel billets would best represent the direct input costs to the tinplate
industry, but I have been unable to find a long, consistent price series for both the United States
and United Kingdom. However, the correlation between the U.S. prices of iron bars and steel
billets is 0.94 for the shorter period of 1886-1913. Both data series can be found in the
Statistical Abstract of the United States, various years 1895-1916.

-14production is profitable.15 This is the basis for the belief that the declining input price premium
would have enabled domestic tinplate producers to enter the industry eventually even without the
aid of the McKinley tariff.
Another potential barrier to the establishment of domestic tinplate production, and one
particularly relevant to the infant industry argument for protection, is the lack of previous
production experience. If cumulative production experience significantly reduced production
costs due to learning by doing, then late entrants in the industry could face a significant cost
disadvantage compared to incumbents. In examining the steel rail industry, for example, Head
(1994) finds significant learning effects, but assumes in his empirical analysis that there are perfect
spillovers of learning-based knowledge between domestic firms but no spillovers between
domestic and foreign firms. The assumption of no international spillovers, implying that
subsequent entrants cannot adapt or build upon the production experience of the British leaders,
essentially ensures that initial producers have an entrenched and virtually insurmountable
advantage over subsequent rivals. This assumption may be responsible for Head’s finding that,
without a steel rail tariff, there would have been no U.S. production of steel rails until after
1910.16

15

For example, using the basic formula for effective protection — (ti - ajitj)/(1-aji) — if
iron and steel account for two-thirds of the cost of producing tinplate (i.e., aij = 0.67) and the
tariff on iron and steel is 75 percent (i.e., tj = 0.75), then a nominal tariff on tinplate of 25 percent
delivers an effective rate of protection of -72 percent!
16

Head (1994, p. 149) writes that “these assumptions, which appear frequently in the
theoretical literature, seem appropriate if we think of accumulated knowledge as residing within
entrepreneurs, engineers, and workers who either communicate with each other or move from one
domestic firm to another but never move overseas.” The assumption of no international spillovers
was a “necessary simplification” and thought plausible, given the distances involved. Yet this
period was also one of tremendous international labor mobility and the United States was the

-15The tinplate industry appears to be characterized by both domestic and international
technological and learning-based knowledge spillovers. Tinplate interests argued for tariff
protection on the basis that domestic learning spillovers would enable the industry to reduce
prices rapidly. As the president of the American Tin Plate Association maintained during the
consideration of the McKinley tariff, “after we get 50 mills in this country and exchange our ideas
we can reduce the price by the use of improved machinery and methods which they never thought
of in the other countries” (U.S. House of Representatives 1890, p. 99). The domestic spillovers
received specific impetus from a gentleman’s agreement to facilitate the passage of the tinplate
provision in the McKinley tariff. In order to obtain Senator Spooner’s vote, the U.S. Iron and
Tinplate Company, the first domestic entrant at this time, gave “consent to keep its mills open for
inspection by and demonstration to any prospective Tinplate manufacturers and their engineers,”
according to the company’s president, William Cronemeyer (1931, p. 45).
The international spillovers arose from the migration of skilled tinplate workers from
Wales to the United States. The U.S. plants initiating production in the 1870s were partly-owned
or managed by Welshmen. These immigrants carried with them technical knowledge of tinplate
production and essentially transplanted current Welsh production methods into the United States.
After the imposition of the McKinley tariff, “Welsh manufacturers moved all or parts of their
plants to America, though, since the tariff protected only the final dipping process, many still
imported all the materials from Wales.” Berthoff (1953, pp. 68-69) also states that “whether

principal destination for skilled European migrants. The assumption is hard to sustain in view of a
1901 report by a visiting party of British iron officials which noted that “a considerably number of
the heads of the American iron industry of today acquired their training, their knowledge, and
their experience in British works” (quoted in Berthoff 1953, p. 67). See also Hyde (1991).

-16owned by Welshmen or Americans, the early works relied on the skill of Welsh tinners using
Welsh machinery and Welsh techniques. Within a few years, however, as equipment and methods
were improved, Welsh workmen no longer were necessary nor, over-fond of time-honored ways,
even desirable.”17 U.S. firms successfully recruited skilled Welsh labor and attracted them to the
United States. That U.S. tinplate entrants could draw upon Welsh production techniques by
hiring the skill and expertise of Welsh tinners suggests that they did not face insurmountable
hurdles to entering the industry.
To provide some empirical evidence on the economic importance of raw materials costs
and experience effects, a variant of the empirical strategy used by Head (1994) and Irwin and
Klenow (1994) is employed. In lieu of cost data, prices are used to estimate the following cost
markup equation which seeks to explain the components of the decline in tinplate prices observed
in Figure 1. Suppressing time subscripts, the following specification is employed:
pUS = " mcUS = "(pbUS)$(qUS)((EUS+2EUK)8(t)µ ,,

(1)

where pUS is the U.S. price of tinplate, mcUS is the U.S. marginal cost of production, pbUS is the
U.S. price of iron bars, qUS is current domestic output, the experience variables EUS and EUK
represent the lagged cumulative production of U.S. and U.K. producers, respectively, t is a time
trend, and , is an error term. Taking logs, this equation becomes:
ln (pUS) = " + $ ln (pbUS) + ( ln (qUS) + 8 ln (EUS+2EUK) + µ ln (t) + ,,

(2)

The estimated parameters can be interpreted as follows: " is the fixed and µ is the time-

17

As Taussig (1915, p. 185) also notes, “When the McKinley Act was passed in 1890, the
tin plate mills first established in the United States were copied from the Welsh. Sometimes the
whole equipment, — rolls, shears, pots, — was imported, and then was operated by Welshmen
also brought over.”

-17varying markup over marginal cost, $ is the share of iron bar costs in production, ( indicates the
returns to scale, 8 is the effect of production experience (learning by doing) on costs, and 2 is the
weight placed on U.K. production experience.18 This formulation assumes that there is one
common learning curve that depends upon production experience in both countries, thereby
enabling an explicit test for international learning spillovers. This specification also assumes
competitive pricing, not an unreasonable assumption given that there were over 200 mills in
Wales and over 30 U.S. mills operating within just five years of the McKinley tariff (Gray 1902, p.
100).
Table 2 provides several different estimates of these equations. The first two columns
present non-linear least squares estimates of equation (1) using annual data from 1869-1913.
Though domestic firms chose an output level of zero for much of this period (in which case
output is set to one in the equation), this regression examines the factors behind the decline in
“potential” U.S. production costs because firms had the opportunity of selling at the U.S. price
throughout this period. The results are presented with and without instruments for current
output, an endogenous variable, using the instruments employed by Head (1994) including the ad
valorem tariff equivalent, the dollar-sterling exchange rate, total domestic expenditures on
tinplates, and the other independent variables for the United States and the United Kingdom. The
estimated coefficients are largely unaffected when instruments are used, although this likely
reflects their low power.
The coefficient on the price of iron bars indicates that a $1 increase in the price of iron

18

I have been unable to locate a wage index for iron and steel workers, although wages
accounted for just 7 percent of the cost of producing tinplate in 1899 (Gray 1902, p. 100).

-18bars would increase the price of tinplate by about $0.6, consistent with the cost data discussed
above. The coefficient on current output is 0.05, which indicates slightly decreasing but
essentially constant returns to scale in production. Cumulative production experience also
appears to reduce costs, but the learning coefficient of -0.03 implies that a doubling of cumulative
output would reduce costs by only 2 percent (calculated as 1-28). Thus, the effect of production
experience on costs is trivial compared with the benefit of obtaining cheaper iron bars: a three
percent decline in the price of iron bars would have the same effect on costs as a doubling of
cumulative output. In view of the limited scope for cutting costs beyond the price of the
necessary material inputs, as suggested by the flattening of U.K. margins after 1890 in Figure 2,
this finding is perhaps not too surprising.
The regressions also confirm the importance of international learning-by-doing spillovers.
The weight on U.K. production experience is 8 times that on domestic experience in the noninstrumented regression (with a p-value of 0.08), and 11 times that on domestic experience in the
instrumented regression (with a p-value of 0.06). These parameter values indicates that Welsh
production experience is extremely valuable for reducing U.S. production costs. Partly because
they could adopt current Welsh production practices and technology and not start from scratch,
U.S. producers were willing to enter the industry in 1891 at much lower tinplate prices than had
prevailed in the past (as shown by Figure 1), despite their own lack of production experience.
Columns (3) and (4) present log linear (non-linear in parameters) estimates of equation (2)
in which, as in Irwin and Klenow (1994), the parameter 2 is estimated much less precisely, and
appears to be smaller (but not insubstantial) in magnitude. Columns (5) and (6) consider the years
1891-1913 when U.S. firms were fully engaged in tinplate production. There appears to be no

-19learning-by-doing during this period because both the price declines and the price-cost margin
flatten out after about 1890. Column (7) presents results using only U.K. data and essentially
confirms the findings from the U.S. regressions, i.e.., that the price of iron bars is the key
component of production costs with production experience playing a smaller role (but larger here
than in the U.S. case).
While these econometric results are not entirely conclusive, whether due to data
limitations or the lack of instruments, several findings are consistent with other industry evidence.
It is hard to describe the tinplate industry as one in which static or dynamic scale economies
served as a barrier to new entrants. The large number of firms (and apparently easy entry of those
firms) suggests that there were no great economies of scale. Learning by doing has only a modest
impact on costs, and what effect there is appears to be easily transferable internationally. The
price of iron inputs looms large in the cost structure of tinplate, however, and will be examined in
greater detail in the next section.

IV. Modeling the Domestic Production Decision
This section develops an empirical model of the decision to produce tinplate in the United
States. In the apparent absence of important industry scale economies, this decision depends
simply upon the configuration of output prices and input costs necessary to make domestic
production profitable. The parameters of this decision are estimated using annual data from 18691913 and exploit the fact that we observe domestic production in the period 1872-75, the
subsequent exit of those producers from the market, and the re-entry of domestic producers from
1891. Once the parameters of the production decision have been estimated, the decision to

-20produce can be reexamined based on counterfactual paths of the tariff and other variables of
interest.
The decision to produce tinplate in the United States is modeled as follows:
(3)

prob (qUS > 0) = F(pUK(1 + J) - * cUK),

which states that the probability of domestic tinplate production (qUS > 0) is some increasing
function of the profitability of domestic production, the elements of which are the U.K. price of
tinplate (pUK), the ad valorem equivalent of the U.S. import tariff on tinplate (J), the U.K. price of
rolled iron bars (cUK), and the U.S. price premium on iron bars (*, usually > 1). In essence, the
probability of domestic production in a given year is a function of three components: (i) pUK cUK, the price-iron input cost margin in the United Kingdom, (ii) J, the ad valorem tariff on
tinplate, and (iii) *, the U.S. price premium on iron bar inputs. The probability of domestic
production is increasing with respect to the price-cost margin and the tariff, and decreasing with
respect to the premium on iron inputs.
This model estimated as a probit in which the dependent variable indicates whether or not
there is domestic production (i.e., taking the value 1 for the years 1872-75 and 1891-1913, and 0
otherwise). Table 3 presents the marginal effects from the probit regression, which indicate the
slope of the probability function (i.e., the change in the probability that qUS > 0) for an
infinitesimal change from the mean of the independent variables. If the errors from the regression
are serially correlated, the probit estimates are still consistent and asymptotically normal, but
inefficient (Poirier and Rudd 1988). Probit regressions are more sensitive to omitted variable bias
and therefore various several specifications will be examined.
The first column regression includes variables for the import tariff and the iron price

-21premium, which alone explain much of the decision of domestic producers. The marginal effects
are nearly equal in magnitude and of the opposite sign. The second column adds a variable for the
profitability of U.K. tinplate producers (the price-materials cost margin), which is both
economically and statistically significant, and does not detract from the importance of the other
variables.
The final column (3) adds the log of the value of U.S. tinplate consumption to see if entry
is dependent upon market size effects, i.e., whether the domestic market must pass some critical
threshold in order to induce the entry of domestic producers. This variable has a coefficient
comparable in size to those on the other variables, is statistically significant, and does not detract
from the economic or statistical significance of the other variables. The variable also adds to the
overall explanatory power of the probit model, and therefore column (3) is the preferred
specification.
In this specification, the marginal effect on the iron bar price variable is about two-thirds
that on the tariff variable. This is remarkably consistent with both the Census of Manufactures
data, which indicated that iron inputs comprised about two-thirds of the value of tinplate output,
and the estimated cost coefficients from columns (1) and (2) of Table 2. The marginal effects
here indicate that a 10 percent reduction in the iron price premium is economically as valuable to
domestic producers as a 6-7 percent increase in the ad valorem tariff; in other words, a given
percentage increase in the tariff is about 1.5 times more valuable to domestic producers than the
same percentage decrease in the iron price premium.
Figure 6 plots the predicted probability of domestic production from the Table 3, column
(3) regression with the shaded areas indicating periods of domestic production (1872-74, 1891-

-221913). While this equation accurately predicts these periods of domestic production, of greater
interest is using the underlying coefficients to solve for the implied probability of domestic
production under various counterfactual scenarios. Such an exercise assumes, of course, that the
actual paths of the iron price premium, the U.K. price-cost margin, and the domestic market size
(in terms of total expenditures) are unchanged and are independent of the tariff. While the iron
price premium can be safely assumed to be exogenous, the U.K. price-cost margin and domestic
market size could depend upon the tariff.19 The effect of this bias will be discussed below,
although the results do not appear to be significantly affected because virtually identical results
were obtained by using the estimated probit coefficients from the Table 3, column (1) regression,
which includes only exogenous variables.
Four possible counterfactual scenarios are considered.
A. No Erroneous Treasury Decision —
Figure 7 (a) depicts the implied probability of domestic production under the supposition
that the Treasury Department had imposed the 2-1/2 cent tariff on import tinplate from 1864
onward. The results suggest that this high initial tariff would not have been sufficient to bring
about domestic production until 1872, when we observe entry even in the absence of this tariff.
The iron bar price premium is apparently so great in the late 1860s that even the higher tariff
would not have been sufficient to make domestic production profitable. The higher tariff also

19

The great virtue of Head’s (1994) counterfactual simulation of policies toward the steel
rail industry is that the parameters of supply and demand are estimated jointly, treating prices and
outputs as endogenous. The problem with his approach is that the counterfactual can be
simulated only with great computational difficulty because there is no analytical solution to his
supply and demand system. In addition, in the case of tinplate, the parameters of demand were
poorly estimated.

-23does not prevent the subsequent exit of domestic producers when tinplate prices collapsed in the
mid-1870s, but postpones this exit for three years until 1878. However, the high tariff enables
domestic production to commence again in 1883, eight years prior to the McKinley tariff. In sum,
the higher tariff would have accelerated the entry of the domestic producers in the 1880s, but it
neither would have assured the entry of domestic producers in the late 1860s-early 1870s nor
would it have prevented their exit in the mid- to late-1870s.
B. No McKinley Tariff —
If the House had failed to pass the tinplate provision of the McKinley tariff, the 1 cent per
pound tariff could have persisted for some time. This scenario allows us to examine the
hypothesis that domestic entry would have occurred anyway as a result of the convergence in the
price of iron bars. Figure 7 (b) shows the predicted probability of domestic production in this
case. The probability repeatedly crosses the 50 percent line between 1898-1902. After 1903, the
United States is virtually assured of having ongoing domestic production of tinplate. According
to this result, if the McKinley tariff had not been enacted, a tinplate industry would have
established itself in the United States about a decade later. The declining iron bar price premium,
which was about 40 percent around 1890 but fell to 0-20 percent around 1900, largely accounts
for this finding. This convergence in the prices of basic iron inputs is apparently sufficient to
ensure that domestic production would eventually take place.
As previously noted, a possible problem with this counterfactual calculation is that the
U.K. markup may be endogenously affected by the imposition of the McKinley duties. This
possibility is not a certainty: with over 200 firms operating in Wales, declining sales could have
been accommodated by the exit and consolidation of firms rather than falling markups. Indeed,

-24Figure 2 suggests that the declining trend in the U.K. markup does not significantly accelerate
after 1891, and Figure 1 depicts just a modest dip in the U.K. price around this time. To the
extent that the markup actually did fall as a result of the McKinley duties, however, it biases the
results against early entry by U.S. producers. In fact, performing this counterfactual with the
Table 3, column (1) coefficients on the exogenous variables alone (the tariff and input price
premium) suggests that U.S. firms would enter the market around 1895-97, slightly sooner than
the above counterfactual predicted.
This simulation also might not capture the tariff’s role in inducing the migration of labor
and technology from Wales to the United States. As the early 1870s experience demonstrates,
however, a steep tariff hike was not required to attract Welsh skilled labor to America. U.S.
entrepreneuers could freely recruit such labor and purchase specialized Welsh capital at any time.
C. Zero Tinplate Tariff —
If tinplate imports had been placed on the duty-free list from 1869 onward, a brief period
of domestic production would still have been observed in the early 1870s, according to Figure 7
(c). However, the industry would not have established itself until about 1908, almost 20 years
after the imposition of the McKinley duties.
D. No Iron Price Premium —
Had the United States allowed the free importation of iron bars at the U.K. price, Figure 7
(d) indicates that a domestic tinplate industry would have existed for most of the late nineteenth
century. The possible lack of domestic iron production that this scenario might have entailed
would not have posed a serious problem for tinplate producers. Vertical integration or domestic
iron production was not a necessary condition for tinplate production. After the imposition of the

-25McKinley tariff, for example, many U.S. producers imported “blackplate” — iron and steel sheets
ready for dipping in tin — from the United Kingdom and performed the final production stage in
America.
To summarize, the McKinley tariff clearly accelerated the development of the tinplate
industry, according to these results, but the industry would have been established shortly
thereafter anyway as the price of iron in the United States converged to that in the United
Kingdom. The simulations illustrate the critical importance of material prices and the tariff
compensated tinplate producers for the premium paid on iron inputs. Had there been no such
premium, the United States might well have had a tinplate industry for most of the late nineteenth
century.
The findings thus far suggest that the tinplate industry was not really an infant industry in
the sense that new entrants faced particular hardships in overcoming a lack of production
experience or in facing capital market imperfections (Andrew Carnegie was not liquidity
constrained and could easily vertically integrate). Rather, the tinplate industry was laboring under
extreme conditions of negative effective protection due to the high price of basic iron and steel
products in the United States.

V. Welfare Effects of Tinplate Protection
Having found that the McKinley tariff enabled the United States to acquire a tinplate
industry about a decade sooner that it otherwise would have arisen, the remaining question is
whether this tariff policy was economically worthwhile.
The theory of optimal policy intervention provides a framework for assessing the welfare

-26effects of the McKinley duties (Bhagwati 1971). The first-best policy toward the tinplate industry
would be to remove the tariffs and other trade barriers that accounted for the high U.S. price of
basic iron and steel products. This policy would have enabled the tinplate industry to function
profitably throughout the late nineteenth century, as indicated by Figure 7 (d), and improved
economic welfare. If the duties on basic iron and steel were considered immutable, the secondbest policy for the tinplate industry would have been to offset the distorted domestic price of iron
and steel by subsidizing its use (perhaps through a rebate) by tinplate producers. The third-best
policy would be a production subsidy to tinplate producers, which would also offset the distorted
price of iron and steel, but less directly and therefore less efficiently. The fourth-best policy
toward the tinplate industry would be a tariff on imported tinplate. A tariff would be akin to a
production subsidy but even less efficient due to the by-product distortion to consumption.
Though fourth-best, an optimally-set tinplate tariff would still be welfare improving vis-a-vis a
policy of inaction.
To determine whether the McKinley tariff was near the optimal rate and was therefore
beneficial, the initial costs to tinplate consumers as a result of the tariff must be more than
compensated by the stream of profits received by domestic producers and tariff revenue received
by the government (in a net present value sense).20 More formally, we can calculate the net
welfare effects of infant industry protection as follows:
) Wt = ) At + ) CSt + ) JMt,
where the change in welfare W is decomposed into the change in producer profits A, the change
20

We can treat the tinplate industry in partial equilibrium since it had a negligible effect on
the output of the iron and steel industry overall; in 1899, the tinplate industry consumed 36,855
tons of iron and steel when 29,507,860 tons were produced (Gray 1902, pp. 101, 4).

-27in consumers’s surplus CS, and the change in tariff revenue JM. The stream of profits received
by domestic producers, however, should be calculated using the world price of iron and steel (the
true opportunity cost, and therefore the true shadow price), as suggested in the project evaluation
literature (Corden 1974, pp. 389ff). The tariff is economically beneficial if the present discounted
value of the change in welfare is positive:
PV(r) = E )Wt/(1+r)t > 0,
where r is the real interest rate.
In performing this calculation, the actual McKinley and subsequent tariffs imposed on
imported tinplate will be evaluated against the counterfactual benchmark of maintaining the
preexisting 1 cent per pound tariff on imported tinplate. The path of output and prices under the
McKinley and subsequent tariffs is observed, and therefore we are required to speculate as to
what would have happened to each of the components of welfare had the existing duty continued
in force up to a specified time horizon. That horizon will be taken as the year 1900: If the object
of the tariff policy was merely to establish some domestic tinplate production, without specifying
the precise amount, then the Section IV simulations suggest that production would have
commenced sometime around 1895-1902, in the absence of the McKinley tariff.
For ) A, the actual profits received by domestic producers can be compared with zero
profits (presuming there being no domestic production) over this horizon. Census of
Manufacturing data indicate that the ratio of average costs to price (AC/PUS) was 0.90 in 1899
(Gray 1902, p. 100), but this measures profits using the domestic price of iron inputs rather than
the (shadow) import price. This measure needs to be adjusted a factor N that represents by the
degree to which costs would have been lower had the import price been used. Rather than 0.90,

-28the term NAC/PUS is about 0.7 in the early 1890s, about 0.8 in the mid-1890s, and about 0.9 by
the turn of the century, tracking the declining iron price premium shown on Figure 5. Thus, ) A
= (1-[NAC/PUS])PUSQUS - 0, where PUSQUS is the actual value of domestic tinplate sold.
The consumers’s surplus calculation is simply the price wedge over all purchases under the
McKinley tariff regime (note that the second-order deadweight loss will not be included in this
calculation). Thus, ) CS = (PUS QUS + [PUK + J]M) - ([PUKN + 1][QUS + M]), where the first term
in parenthesis is the cost to consumers of their actual observed purchases and the second term is
the cost of that same quantity of tinplate had they been able to purchase it from the United
Kingdom under the 1 cent duty. The latter cost depends upon PUKN, the (counterfactual) price of
U.K. tinplate in the absence of the McKinley duties. Two counterfactual prices are considered:
the actual price, which may have been lower due to the McKinley tariff, and the out-of-sample
forecasted price based on estimating the equivalent of the markup equation from Table 2 using
U.K. data. This forecasted U.K. tinplate price is, on average, slightly higher than the actual price:
The average actual price is $2.65 per hundred pounds over 1891-1900, whereas the forecasted
price is $2.95 per hundred pounds. Because U.S. tinplate prices quickly fall to almost those
prevailing in the United Kingdom, there is the possibility that the consumer surplus calculation
will be positive, particularly in comparison with the higher forecasted U.K. price.
The final component is tariff revenue, calculated as ) JM = JM - 1*(MN). The amount of
tariff revenue raised under a 1 cent per pound tariff regime depends upon the counterfactual
volume of imports, MN. This counterfactual import volume was projected by a logarithmic
autoregressive trend extrapolation estimated over 1869-1890. This projection implies an average
annual import growth of 6.6 percent and yields a trend very similar to that of total consumption

-29after 1890 in Figure 4 but at a slightly higher level.
These welfare calculations should be viewed as a simple back-of-the-envelope calculation
as to the possible impact of the tariff over the 1891-1900 period because they are not based on a
fully specified counterfactual simulation (see note 20). Table 4 presents the results for two real
interest rates and for two calculations of the counterfactual U.K. price. The findings are
uniformly negative for the McKinley tariff: the initial large loss of consumer surplus (and
eventually tariff revenue) is not offset by the stream of profits received by domestic producers
evaluated using the import price of iron bar. Tinplate production does not generate large profits
because it is a relatively easy entry, low margin business, and the import price of iron bars does
not remain significantly below the U.S. price for long (when the import price of iron is
significantly below the U.S. price, domestic output and profits are small; by the end of the century
when output and profits are higher, the shadow price is about equivalent to the U.S. price). The
change in tariff revenue starts highly positive, as import volume does not decline much initially
when the higher duty is imposed, but imports rapidly shrink with time and thereby generate large
revenue losses for the government.
The change in consumer surplus actually becomes positive by the late 1890s when U.S.
prices fall below the higher forecasted U.K. prices, which explains why the welfare losses diminish
over the longer horizon. But this later gain does not compensate for the initial consumer losses.
If actual prices are taken as the relevant counterfactual, then the McKinley tariff has a harder time
paying off because these U.K. prices remain low through the 1890s.
To conclude, U.S. economic welfare could have been enhanced by an optimally-set fourthbest tariff to offset the distorted price of iron bars faced by domestic tinplate producers.

-30However, in a period when the domestic price of iron bars was rapidly converging to the import
price, the McKinley tariff appears to have been set too high and thus more than compensated for
the input price distortion. A tariff of the McKinley tariff’s height may have been more suitable for
the 1870s and 1880s when the domestic price premium on iron and steel was substantially higher
than it was in the 1890s.21

VI. Concluding Comments
This paper posed two questions regarding infant industry protection for the tinplate
industry: When (if ever) would the industry have developed in the absence of protection? Were
tariffs economically worthwhile in establishing domestic production sooner than it otherwise
would have occurred? At first glance, the tinplate industry appears to be a successful instance of
infant industry protection. Upon further examination, the industry is revealed to be one in which
material input costs are paramount, static and dynamic scale economies are not substantial, and
production technology and experience is readily transferable internationally. The analysis here
suggests that the tinplate industry would have developed in the United States within a decade of
the McKinley tariff, as the domestic price of iron and steel inputs converged to international
levels. While a optimally-set tariff would have been a fourth-best but welfare-improving method
of correcting the distorted domestic price of iron faced by tinplate producers, the McKinley tariff
was set too high, more than offset that distortion, and thus failed to improve welfare.

21

For example, using the simple formula for the effective rate of protection and data in
footnote 15, a 50 percent tariff on tinplate would have yielded an effective rate of zero,
completely offsetting the iron bar tariff. If the iron bar tariff fell to 10 percent, then only a 7
percent tinplate tariff would have been necessary to yield an effective rate of zero.

-31Table 1: Spearman Rank Correlations of U.S. Tariffs and Industry Performance, c.1899.
Nominal and effective tariff data are from 1899. Industry performance variables are their growth between 18991909. ERP-A is the calculated effective rate when the underlying data are assumed to reflect the no-tariff
equilibrium, ERP-B to reflect the tariff-inclusive equilibrium; calculated according to the formula in Corden
(1971), pp. 35-37. Number of industry observations in parenthesis.
Effective Rate of
Protection (A)

Effective Rate of
Protection (B)

1.00
(20)

0.45
(15)
p = 0.10

0.80
(15)
p = 0.00

Effective Rate
of Protection (A)

--

1.00
(15)

0.79
(15)
p = 0.00

Effective Rate
of Protection (B)

--

--

1.00
(15)

) Total Factor Productivity

0.17
(20)
p = 0.47

0.50
(15)
p = 0.06

0.27
(15)
p = 0.33

) Output

-0.31
(15)
p = 0.27

0.35
(14)
p = 0.22

-0.01
(14)
p = 0.97

) Labor Productivity

-0.11
(15)
p = 0.68

0.47
(14)
p = 0.09

0.22
(14)
p = 0.45

) Capital Accumulation

-0.18
(15)
p = 0.52

-0.14
(14)
p = 0.63

-0.01
(14)
p = 0.96

Nominal Tariff

Nominal Tariff

Data Sources: total factor productivity, output growth, labor productivity, capital accumulation, all from Kendrick
(1960), Table D-IV. Nominal tariff data: author’s calculations based on U.S. Foreign Trade and Navigation
(1900). Effective rates of protection: author’s calculation based on U.S. input-output table for 1899 in Whitney
(1968). Sectors include: food and kindred products, beverages, textile mill products, apparel and related products,
lumber and products, furniture and fixtures, paper and allied products, chemicals and allied products, rubber
products, leather and products, stone, clay, and glass products, primary metals industry, fabricated metal
industries, nonelectrical machinery, electrical machinery, transportation equipment, and miscellaneous and
instruments.

-32Table 2: Estimates of Tinplate Production Costs.
The dependent variable is the U.S. price of tinplate. Estimation methods: nonlinear least squares (NLS), log-linear least squares (LLS). Standard errors,
corrected for heteroskedasticity, in parenthesis. For the period 1869-1913, zero values of current output have been set equal to one. Instruments include the ad
valorem U.S. tariff, the sterling-dollar exchange rate, domestic expenditures on tinplate, and include all U.S. and U.K. independent variables.

(1)
NLS

(2)
NLS

(3)
LLS

(4)
LLS

(5)
LLS

(6)
LLS

(7)
U.K. Data
NLS

186.63
(291.81)

5724.55
(9113.29)

11.86
(44.36)

94.87
(45.15)

2.09
(1.61)

3.03
(1.70)

4.44
(1.96)

$
(price of iron bars)

0.62
(0.12)

0.58
(0.10)

0.38
(0.10)

0.33
(0.12)

0.51
(0.12)

0.51
(0.11)

0.51
(0.10)

(
(current output)

0.04
(0.01)

0.06
(0.02)

-0.41
(0.12)

-0.15
(0.20)

0.03
(0.01)

0.05
(0.02)

-0.10
(0.06)

8
(experience)

-0.03
(0.01)

-0.04
(0.02)

0.12
(0.02)

0.08
(0.05)

-0.02
(0.01)

-0.04
(0.02)

-0.09
(0.15)

2
(weight on UK experience)

8.22
(4.23)

11.26
(6.14)

-2.90
(20.69)

-67.87
(73.87)

1.88
(4.07)

2.50
(2.22)

--

µ
(time trend)

0.09
(0.09)

0.22
(0.76)

0.01
(0.10)

0.20
(0.10)

-0.02
(0.01)

-0.01
(0.01)

-0.01
(0.01)

Adj. R2

0.91

0.91

0.84

0.85

0.90

0.90

0.89

Instruments

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Time Period

1869-1913

1869-1913

1891-1913

1891-1913

1869-1913

1869-1913

1869-1913

"
(constant)

Data Sources: U.S. prices: from 1869-1890, New York prices in U.S. House of Representatives (1892), Appendix E, p. 7. From 1891-1913, Dunbar (1915), p.
75. U.S. production: Statistical Abstract of the United States, various issues (1900-1916). U.K. prices: the U.S. import price, Statistical Abstract of the United
States, various issues (1900-1916). U.K. exports to U.S.: Statistical Abstract of the United States, various issues (1900-1916). U.K. production: Brooke
(1944), Appendix pp. 1-3. Iron: U.S. price: refined rolled bar iron (Philadelphia) from the Statistical Abstract of the United States (1916), p. 520. U.K. price:
common iron bars, from Mitchell (1988), p. 763. Exchange Rate: Mitchell (1988), p. 702. Import Duty: U.S. House of Representatives (1909).

-33Table 3: Determinants of the Decision to Produce Tinplate in the United States: Marginal Effects
from Probit Regression, 1869-1913.
The dependent variable takes the value of 1 for the years 1872-1875 and 1891-1913, and is zero otherwise.
Number of observations is 45. Robust standard errors are in parenthesis. Pseudo-R2 is defined as (1 L1/L0), where L1 is the value of the log-likelihood function including the independent variables and L0 is its
value including just a constant term.

Independent Variable

(1)

(2)

(3)

Ad Valorem Tariff
Equivalent

0.76
(0.61)

2.67
(1.70)

1.97
(0.94)

Iron Bar Price Differential

-0.83
(0.40)

-1.30
(0.37)

-1.34
(0.37)

U.K. Price-Bar Cost Margin

--

0.48
(0.19)

1.15
(0.21)

Log of Domestic Market
Size

--

--

1.11
(0.21)

0.41

0.55

0.71

84.4%

91.1%

95.6%

Pseudo R2
Percent Correctly Predicted

-34Table 4: Welfare Effects of the McKinley Tinplate Tariff.
Basis of Comparison: Imposing the McKinley tariff vis-a-vis the existing 1 cent per pound tariff. Figures
are calculation of PV(r) = E )Wt/(1+r)t, where ) Wt = ) At + ) CSt + ) JMt as described in the text. All
figures are in millions of 1891 dollars, having been deflated by the consumer price index in David and
Solar (1977), p. 16.

A. Using Forecasted (Counterfactual) U.K. Prices

Time Horizon\Discount Rate

r = 0.06

r= 0.03

1891 - 1895

-$12.4 m

-$13.2 m

1891 - 1897

-$14.5 m

-$15.5 m

1891 - 1900

-$11.3 m

-$9.9 m

Time Horizon\Discount Rate

r = 0.06

r= 0.03

1891 - 1895

-$8.2 m

-$9.5 m

1891 - 1897

-$15.1 m

-$17.1 m

1891 - 1900

-$25.6 m

-$30.4 m

B. Using Actual U.K. Prices

-35References

Ayers, Ian. “The Tin Plate Industry in the United States.” Journal of the Franklin
Institute 143 (June 1897): 424-446.
Berglund, Abraham, and Philip G. Wright. The Tariff on Iron and Steel. Washington,
D.C.: The Brookings Institution, 1929.
Berthoff, Rowland T. British Immigrants to Industrial America, 1750-1950. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press, 1953.
Bhagwati, Jagdish. “The Generalized Theory of Distortions and Welfare.” In J.
Bhagwati, R. Mundell, R. Jones, and J. Vanek (eds.), Trade, Balance of Payments and Growth.
Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1971.
Clark, Victor S. History of Manufactures in the United States. 3 vols. New York:
McGraw-Hill for the Carnegie Institute, 1929.
Corden, W. M. The Theory of Protection. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1971.
Corden, W. M. Trade Policy and Economic Welfare. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1974.
Cronemeyer, W. C. “The Development of the Tin-Plate Industry.” Western Pennsylvania
Historical Magazine 13 (1931): 23-54, 123-135.
David, Paul. “Learning by Doing and Tariff Protection: A Reconsideration of the Case of
the Ante-Bellum United States Cotton Textile Industry.” Journal of Economic History 30
(September 1970): 521-601.
David, Paul, and Peter Solar. “A Bicentenary Contribution to the History of the Cost of
Living in America,” in Research in Economic History. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, 1977.
Dunbar, D. E. The Tin-Plate Industry. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co., 1915.
Gray, William G. “Tin and Terne Plate.” Census Reports, Vol. X. Manufactures. Pt. IV.
Special Reports on Selected Industries. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Census Office, 1902.
Harrison, Ann E. “An Empirical Test of the Infant Industry Argument: Comment.”
American Economic Review 84 (September 1994): 1090-1095.
Hawke, G. R. “The United States Tariff and Industrial Protection in the Late Nineteenth
Century.” Economic History Review 28 (February 1975): 84-99.

-36Head, Keith. “Infant Industry Protection in the Steel Rail Industry.” Journal of
International Economics 37 (November 1994): 141-165.
Hogan, William T. Economic History of the Iron and Steel Industry in the United States.
2 vols., Lexington, MA: D.C. Heath & Co., 1971.
Hyde, Charles K. “Iron and Steel Technologies Moving Between Europe and the United
States Before 1914.” In David J. Jeremy (ed.), International Technology Transfer: Europe,
Japan, USA, 1700-1914. Aldershot: Edward Elgar, 1991.
Irwin, Douglas A. Against the Tide: An Intellectual History of Free Trade. Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1996.
Irwin, Douglas A., and Peter J. Klenow. “Learning-by-Doing Spillovers in the
Semiconductor Industry.” Journal of Political Economy 102 (December 1994): 1200-1227.
Kendrick, John. Productivity Trends in the United States. Princeton: Princeton
University Press for the NBER, 1960.
Knox, Howard A. Development of the American Tin Plate Industry. Pittsburgh:
Carnegie-Illinois Steel Corp., n.d.
Krueger, Anne O., and Baran Tuncer. “An Empirical Test of the Infant Industry
Argument.” American Economic Review 72 (December 1982): 1142-1152.
Krueger, Anne O., and Baran Tuncer. “An Empirical Test of the Infant Industry
Argument: Reply.” American Economic Review 84 (September 1994): 1096.
Minchinton, W. E. The British Tinplate Industry. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1957.
Mitchell, B. R. British Historical Statistics. New York: Cambridge University Press,
1988.
Poirier, Dale J., and Paul A. Ruud. “Probit with Dependent Observations.” Review of
Economic Studies 55 (October 1955): 593-614.
Stanwood, Edward. American Tariff Controversies in the Nineteenth Century. Boston:
Houghton, Mifflin & Co., 1903.
Tariff Commission. Report of the Tariff Commission. 2 vols. Washington, D.C.:
Government Printing Office, 1883.
Taussig, Frank W. Some Aspects of the Tariff Question. Cambridge: Harvard University
Press, 1915.

-37Tedesco, Paul H. Patriotism, Protection, and Prosperity: James Moore Swank, the
American Iron and Steel Association, and the Tariff: 1873-1913. New York: Garland
Publishing, 1985.
Temin, Peter. Iron and Steel in Nineteenth Century America: An Economic Inquiry.
Cambridge: MIT Press, 1964.
U.S. Department of Treasury, Bureau of Statistics. Foreign Commerce and Navigation of
the United States, 1899. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1900.
U.S. Department of Treasury, Bureau of Statistics. Statistical Abstract of the United
States. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, various years, 1900-16.
U.S. House of Representatives. Revision of the Tariff. House Miscellaneous Document
No. 176, 51st Congress, 1st Session. Washington: Government Printing Office, 1890.
U.S. House of Representatives. Revision of the Tariff. House Report No. 1040, 52st
Congress, 1st Session. Washington: Government Printing Office, 1892.
U.S. House of Representatives. Tariff Acts Passed by the Congress of the United States
from 1789 to 1909. House Document 671, 61st Congress, 2d Session. Washington: Government
Printing Office, 1909.
Whitney, William G. “The Structure of the American Economy in the Late Nineteenth
Century.” Department of Economics Discussion Paper No. 80, University of Pennsylvania, 1968.
Williamson, Jeffrey G. “Embodiment, Disembodiment, Learning by Doing, and Returns to
Scale in Nineteenth Century Cotton Textiles.” Journal of Economic History 31 (September 1972):
691-705.
Wright, Gavin. “The Origins of American Industrial Success, 1879-1940.” American
Economic Review 80 (September 1990): 651-668.

