I. Introduction

       Discrimination occurs whenever the terms of a transaction are affected by personal

characteristics of the participants that are not relevant to the transaction. By far, the most

commonly considered characteristics are those of race and gender. In labor markets this might

translate into equally productive workers in similar jobs being paid different salaries based on their

race or gender. In credit markets – the subject of study in this paper -- it might translate into loan

approvals differing across racial groups with otherwise similar financial backgrounds.

       In this paper we use data from the Federal Reserve Board and the U.S. Small Business

Administration to examine the existence or otherwise of discrimination in the small business credit

market. Discrimination in the credit market against minority-owned small businesses can have an

important effect on the likelihood that that business will succeed. Moreover, discrimination in the

credit market might even prevent the business from opening in the first place. We provide

qualitative and quantitative evidence supporting the view that blacks are discriminated against in

this market. For example, we find that black-owned firms are much more likely to report being

seriously concerned with credit market problems and report being less likely to apply for credit

because they fear the loan would be denied. Moreover, we find, after controlling for a large

number of characteristics of the firms, that black-owned firms are substantially more likely to be

denied credit than other groups. We find little or no evidence that women are discriminated

against in this market.

       The structure of the paper is as follows. We begin by briefly reviewing the theory of

economic discrimination and provide some background to our analyses by reviewing prior

research relevant to discrimination in credit markets. We then discuss the empirical framework

employed in our analyses and describe the data used in the remainder of the paper. We then
analyze the qualitative data available to us regarding the beliefs reported by small business

owners. The following sections present econometric evidence of loan denial differences by race

along with an analysis of possible sample selection biases. We then provide a series of caveats to

these analyses. Finally, we present our conclusions.



II. Theoretical Framework and Review of the Literature

       Most recent economic studies of discrimination draw on the analyses contained in Gary

Becker's The Economics of Discrimination (1957). Becker’s main contribution was to translate

the notion of discrimination into financial terms. Discrimination, in this view, results from the

desire of owners, workers, or customers to avoid contact with certain groups. This being the

case, transactions with the undesired groups would require more favorable terms than those that

occur with a desired group. Assume that the primary objective of a financial institution is to

maximize their expected profits. The expected return on a loan will depend on the interest rate

charged and the likelihood that a borrower defaults. The financial institution would approve any

loan for which the expected return on the loan exceeded the cost of the funds to the institution.

Discrimination would then result either in a) higher interest rates being charged to undesired

groups having otherwise similar characteristics to the desired group, or b) requiring better

characteristics (i.e. a lower expected default rate) for the undesired group at any given interest

rate. In other words, the disadvantaged group might either be appraised more rigorously or, they

would be given less favorable terms on the loan.

       A similar connection between the likelihood of loan approval and the race of the applicant

might also be found if firms employ statistical discrimination. In this case, firms use personal

characteristics - such as race or gender - to infer the likelihood of default on the loan. If


                                                   2
experience has suggested that certain groups of individuals -- defined by race or gender - are, on

average, more or less likely to default, then the firm may use this information to economize on the

costs of gathering more directly relevant information. Hence discrimination would not reflect the

preferences of the owner but would rather reflect an attempt to minimize costs. Empirically, the

racial characteristics of the applicant could proxy for unobserved characteristics of their credit

worthiness.

          There has been an active debate on the question of whether banks discriminate against

minority applicants for mortgages. In particular, banks were often accused of "redlining" - that is,

not granting loans for properties located in certain areas. To analyze that issue, the Home

Mortgage Disclosure Act was passed which required lenders to disclose information on the

geographic location of their home mortgage loans. These data, while interesting, were not

sufficient to assess whether or not there was discrimination in the market for mortgage loans.

          In 1992 researchers at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston collected additional

information from the lenders (Munnell et al., 1996). In particular, they tried to collect any

information that might be deemed economically relevant to whether a loan would be approved. In

the raw data whites had 10 percent of their loans rejected versus rejection rates of 28 percent for

blacks and Hispanics. After controlling for the large number of variables collected to establish the

credit worthiness of the borrowers (including, the amount of the debt, debt/income ratio, credit

history, loan characteristics, etc.) blacks were still 7 percent less likely to be granted the loan. A

variety of criticisms have been launched at this study (see, for example, Horne 1994; Day and

Liebowitz, 1998; Harrison, 1998). Responses to these criticisms are found in Browne and Tootell

(1996).




                                                  3
       In addition to the type of statistical analysis done in the Munnell et al. (1996) study, two

other approaches have been used to measure discrimination in mortgage markets. First, Federal

Reserve regulators can examine a lending institution's files to try to identify any cases where a

loan rejection looks suspicious. Second, audit studies have been used with paired "identical"

applicants. Such studies have also found evidence of discrimination (c.f. Cloud and Galster,

1993) although the audit approach is not without its critics (Heckman, 1998).

       Another relevant literature concerns the severity of liquidity constraints affecting

consumers in non-mortgage credit markets. A consumer is said to be liquidity constrained when

lenders refuse to make the household a loan or offer the household less than they wished to

borrow. (Ferri and Simon, 1997). A variety of studies have suggested that roughly twenty

percent of U.S families are liquidity constrained. (cf. Hall and Mishkin, 1982; and Jappelli, 1990).

As might be expected, constrained households are typically younger with less wealth and

accumulated savings. (Hayashi, 1985; and Jappelli, 1990). Significantly, after including detailed

control variables for the households financial characteristics, the research shows nonwhite

households to be substantially more likely to be liquidity constrained (Jappelli, 1990; and Ferri and

Simon, 1997).

       We now turn to the more directly relevant evidence on liquidity constraints facing small

businesses. Discrimination in the credit market against minority-owned small businesses can have

a devastating effect on the success of that business. Further, discrimination in the credit market

might even prevent them from opening in the first place. Evidence to that effect is provided in the

significant literature on self-employment. Evans and Leighton (1989) and Evans and Jovanovic

(1989) have argued formally that entrepreneurs face difficulties borrowing money. As in the

discussion above, such individuals are labeled liquidity constrained by economists. Using data


                                                 4
from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth from 1966-1981 and the Current Population

Surveys from 1968-1987, these authors find that, all else equal, people with greater family assets

are more likely to switch to self-employment from employment. Blanchflower and Oswald (1998)

studied the probability that an individual reports him or herself as self-employed. Consistent with

the existence of capital-constraints on potential entrepreneurs, their econometric estimates imply

that the probability of being self-employed depends positively upon whether the individual ever

received an inheritance or gift. Second, when directly questioned in interview surveys, potential

entrepreneurs say that raising capital is their principal problem. Holtz-Eakin et al. (1994a, 1994b),

examine flows in and out of self-employment and finds that inheritances both raise entry and slow

exit. Black, de Meza and Jeffreys (1996) find that housing equity plays an important role in

shaping the supply of entrepreneurs. Lindh and Ohlsson (1996) suggest that the probability of

being self-employed increases when people receive windfall gains in the form of lottery winnings

and inheritances.

       Additional evidence indicates that capital constraints for black-owned businesses are

particularly large. For instance, Bates (1989) finds that racial differences in levels of financial

capital do have a significant effect upon racial patterns in business failure rates. Fairlie and Meyer

(1996) find that racial groups with higher levels of unearned income have higher levels of self-

employment. In an important new paper Fairlie (1998) uses data from the 1968-1989 Panel Study

of Income Dynamics (PSID) to examine why African-American men are one-third as likely to be

self-employed as white men. The author finds that the large discrepancy is due to a black

transition rate into self-employment that is approximately one half the white rate and a black

transition rate out twice the white rate. He finds that capital constraints -- measured by interest

income and lump-sum cash payments -- significantly reduce the flow into self-employment from


                                                  5
wage/salary work, with this effect being nearly seven times larger for black self-employed than for

white self-employed in the case of black-owned firms. This paper then attempts to decompose the

racial gap in the transition rate into self-employment into a part due to differences in the

distributions of individual characteristics and a part due to differences in the processes generating

the transitions. He finds that differences in the distributions of characteristics between blacks and

whites explain only a part of the racial gap in the transition rate into self-employment. In addition,

racial differences in specific variables, such as levels of assets and the likelihood of having a self-

employed father provide important contributions to the gap. He concludes, however, that “the

remaining part of the gap is large and is due to racial differences in the coefficients. Unfortunately,

we know much less about the causes of these differences. They may be partly caused by lending

or consumer discrimination against blacks” (1998, p.14).

       Finally, we know of only one paper that has investigated the specific topic of racial

differentials in access to credit among small businesses. Cavalluzzo and Cavalluzzo (1998) use

data from the 1988-1989 National Survey of Small Business Finances (NSSBF), conducted by the

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, to analyze differences in application rates,

denial rates, and other outcomes by race and gender in a manner similar to the econometric

models reported in this study. This paper documents that a large discrepancy does exist in credit

access between whites and minority-owned firms that cannot be explained by a handful of

characteristics of firms. Unfortunately, the earlier NSSBF data that they used did not over-sample

minority-owned firms and focuses only on loan requests made in the preceding 12 months. This

limits the size of the sample and restricts the power of the econometric tests conducted compared

to the 1993 NSSBF data that we use, as described below. Moreover, those data include limited

information on a firm’s credit history and that of its owner, reducing the ability to identify the


                                                  6
cause of the racial disparity. In fact, the authors conclude that “although our ability to draw

strong conclusions from the denial analysis is limited by sample size, at this point, we have no

evidence that points unambiguously to prejudicial discrimination as a cause of the black

disadvantage” (p. 790). Our study provides an increased sample size of minority-owned firms,

better statistical controls for credit-worthiness, an extensive set of specification checks designed

to examine alternative interpretations of our results, along with qualitative evidence all designed

to distinguish whether racial disparities in credit access can be attributed to discrimination.


III. Empirical Framework and Description of the Data

       Disputes about discrimination typically originate in differences in the average outcomes for

two groups. For example, suppose black-owned firms are less likely to be approved for a loan

than white-owned firms. Is such a difference due to discrimination? To answer this question it is

appropriate to compare black and white firms that have similar risks of default. In effect, we want

to know what fraction of the black firms’ loans would have been approved if they had the same

credit worthiness as the white firms. A standard approach to this problem is to statistically

control for characteristics of the firms that are deemed to be relevant to the loan decision. If we

compare firms that have the same likelihood of default and yet find the black firms to be less likely

to be approved then it would be appropriate to attribute such a difference to discrimination.

       Following in the spirit of the Munnell et al. (1996) study we estimate the following loan

denial equations:

                           Prob(Di = 1) = β0 + β1*CWi + β2Xi + β3Ri + εi

where Di represents an indicator variable for loan denial for firm i, CW represents measures of

credit worthiness, X represents other firm characteristics, and R represents the race of the firm’s




                                                   7
ownership. Within the framework of this model, evidence of discrimination would appear if β3 is

less than zero. It is important to recognize at this point that a finding that β3 is less than zero does

not identify whether the source of the discrimination is prejudice on the part of banks or statistical

discrimination. We apply a more legalistic definition of discrimination here that would encompass

any disparity in loan denial rates between applicants of different races that is not attributable to

differences in other characteristics besides race.

        To examine whether such a disparity exists, we use national data available from the 1993

National Survey of Small Business Finances (NSSBF). These data contain substantial information

regarding credit availability on a nationally representative sample of small businesses. The survey

was conducted during 1994-95 for the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and

the U.S. Small Business Administration; the data relate to the years 1992 and 1993. The data file

used here contains 4,637 firms with less than 500 employees.1 In the NSSBF file minority-owned

firms were over-sampled, but sampling weights are provided to generate nationally representative

estimates. Of the firms surveyed, 12 percent are owned by blacks, 6 percent are owned by

Hispanics, and individuals of other races (mostly Asian/Pacific Islander, but some American

Indian/Eskimo and mixed race) own 7 percent.

        Table 1 presents weighted sample means from these data for these four racial groups. The

estimates indicate that black-owned firms are more than twice as likely to have a loan application

rejected relative to white-owned firms (65.9 percent versus 26.9 percent).2 Other minority groups


1
   The median size was 5.5 and mean size was 31.6 full-time equivalent employees; 440 firms out of 4,637 had
100 full-time equivalent employees or more. For further details of the NSSBF survey see Appendix A.
2
    The 1987 NSSBF also conducted by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and used by
Cavalluzzo and Cavalluzzo (1998) also contained information on loan applications and denial rates. Unlike the
1993 survey, minorities were not oversampled. Also the survey only inquires about loans made over the preceding
twelve months compared to three years in the 1993 survey so sample sizes are smaller (n=686). Denial rates


                                                      8
are denied at rates higher than whites as well, but the magnitude of the black-white differential is

especially striking. Minority-owned firms, however, do have characteristics that are different than

those of white-owned firms that may contribute to these differences. For instance, minority-

owned firms were younger, smaller (whether measured in terms of sales or employment), and

more likely to be located in urban areas, a sole-proprietorship and with an owner with fewer years

of experience than their white counterparts.              Black-owned firms, in particular, were also

generally less credit-worthy than firms owned by other racial groups measured by whether the

owner had: a) been bankrupt over the preceding 7 years b) over the prior three years had been

delinquent for more than 60 days on personal obligations c) had legal judgments against him or

her over the previous three years and d) whether, over the preceding three years, the firm had

been delinquent for more than 60 days on business obligations.



IV.     Qualitative Evidence

        Before moving on to the results of our multivariate analysis, we first report on what

business owners themselves say are the main problems confronting them. Table 2 reports the

results of asking specific questions about problems confronted over the 12-month period before

the date of interview. In the top panel respondents were asked to what extent credit market

conditions had been a problem. Blacks were much more likely to say that it had been a “serious”

problem (31 percent) than Hispanics (23 percent) or whites (13 percent) or those from other

racial groups (13 percent). The bottom panel of the table reports the results for eight other

designated problem areas -- i) training costs; ii) worker's compensation costs; iii) health insurance


(weighted) are considerably lower for minorities: white-owned firms had a denial rate for loans of 22% compared
with 56% for blacks, 36% for Hispanics and 24% for other races, which are broadly similar to the differences
reported here.


                                                      9
costs; iv) IRS regulation or penalties; v) environmental regulations; vi) The American with

Disabilities Act; vii) the Occupational Safety and Health Act; viii) The Family and Medical Leave

Act. Differences by race are much less pronounced in these eight areas than they were in relation

to credit market conditions. We also estimated a series of ordered logit equations (available on

request from the authors) to control for differences across firms in their credit-worthiness,

location, industry size, and the like. It is apparent from these regressions that blacks were more

likely to report that credit market conditions were especially serious. Only in the case of the

Family and Medical Leave Act were blacks significantly more likely to report this problem. The

finding that black firms are largely indistinguishable from white firms in reporting a variety of

problems, except for the case of credit, suggests that credit really is a problem for minority-owned

firms.

         Table 3A provides supporting evidence for these results with the NSSBF with data from

another entirely different survey -- the 1992 Characteristics of Business Owners Survey, 1992

which was conducted by the Bureau of the Census.3                 Firms were asked to report the impact of

various kinds of costs upon their profitability. Blacks and Hispanic-owned firms report stronger

negative impacts of credit market conditions, a lack of financial capital and crime. There are no

strong differences by race or gender for the other reasons. Table 3B presents results from the

same data source on the reasons why a discontinued business was unsuccessful.                            Multiple

responses are possible. Black-owned, and to a lesser degree, Hispanic-owned firms were much

more likely to report that the reason was due to the lack of access to business or personal loans or

credit than was true for other races.



3
    For further details of the survey see the Data Appendix at the end of this report. The full Census Bureau report
is available from the following Census Bureau website -- http://www.census.gov/agfs/www/cbo.html.


                                                        10
        Table 4 reports the views of NSSBF respondents on the most important issue they

reported they were likely to have to confront over the 12-month period from the date of

interview. Credit availability again appears to be an issue for minority firms. For blacks it was the

most important reason - one in five gave this response. In contrast only 6 percent of white

owners and 5 percent of Hispanics gave this answer. Whites were especially worried about health

care costs. In summary, black owners report that they had problems with the availability of credit

in the past and expected that such difficulties would continue into the future.4



V. Estimates of Differences in Loan Denial Rates by Race/Ethnicity

        Evidence presented to this point indicates that minority-owned firms are more likely to be

denied loans and report that their lack of access to credit significantly impairs their business. Can

these differences be explained by such things as differences in size, credit-worthiness, location etc.

as some have suggested in relation to the parallel work on discrimination in mortgage lending (see

Horne, 1994; Bauer and Cromwell, 1994, and Yezer, Phillips and Trost, 1994)? To address this

question we now turn to an econometric examination of whether the loan requests made by

minority-owned firms are more likely to be denied, holding constant differences across firms. As

we show below, we find strong statistical evidence of discrimination in the market for small

business credit.

        In Table 5 the results of estimating a series of loan denial probit regressions using data

from the 1993 NSSBF are reported. As indicated earlier, this survey has the particular advantage



4
   We spoke with a representative of the Massachusetts Commission Against Discrimination to determine the
extent to which minority-business owners pursue legal recourse in cases in which they have had small business
loan applications denied. Apparently, few such cases are ever filed, but the Commission does not conduct any
outreach activities to increase awareness of the law and the possibility of legal action.


                                                     11
that it includes a number of variables that can be used to proxy an applicant’s credit-worthiness.

All estimates are obtained from probit models of loan denials. We report estimated derivatives

from these models that can be interpreted as the effect on the probability of loan denial of an

infinitesimal change in each independent continuous variable and the discrete change in the

probability for dummy variables. In Column 1 which contains only race and gender indicators, for

instance, the coefficient of 0.426 can be interpreted as indicating that the denial rate for black-

owned businesses is 42.6 percentage points higher than that for those firms in the excluded

category of white-owned firms. This estimate simply replicates the raw difference in denial rates

between black- and white-owned businesses reported earlier.

        The remainder of Table 5 includes additional explanatory variables to hold constant

differences in the characteristics of firms that may vary by race.5 In Column 2 a number of

controls are included that distinguish the credit-worthiness of the firm and the owner. Virtually all

are statistically significant on a two-tailed test at conventional levels of significance with the

expected signs. Having been bankrupt or had legal judgments against the firm or owner raises the

probability of denial; stronger sales lowers this probability. Even after controlling for these

differences in credit-worthiness, black-owned firms remain 28 percentage points more likely to

have their loan request denied compared to white-owned firms. The models reported in Columns

3 and 4 control for a vast array of additional characteristics of firms, including its size and age, its

organizational type, the educational qualifications of the owner, whether or not it had any


5
  We have also estimated these models separately, focusing specifically on the differences in coefficient estimates
between whites and blacks. The F-Test we conducted to determine whether parameter estimates were the same for
blacks and whites rejected this null hypothesis. Then we used the estimates obtained by estimating the model
separately by race and conducted an Oaxaca (1973) decomposition. The results from this analysis were similar to
those obtained by restricting the coefficients to be the same between blacks and whites and using the coefficient on
a black indicator variable to measure the gap between groups. We have chosen to report all the results in this
simpler format for ease of exposition and interpretation.



                                                        12
business lines of credit or revolving credit agreements in 1993, and its location and industry. The

estimated disadvantage that black-owned firms face in obtaining credit is virtually unchanged even

after including this extensive list of control variables. These firms are still about 25 percentage

points more likely to have their applications denied compared with white-owned firms. We also

experimented with a number of other controls including profitability, equity (assets less liabilities),

values of inventory, wages and salaries paid to workers and officers’ cash holdings, the value of

any land owned by the firm and the type of financial institution used but they never achieved

significance and were omitted.6 The results also indicate that Asians/Pacific Islanders also had

significantly higher denial rates than whites. There is no evidence that denial rates for firms

owned by women or other racial groups were significantly different from the denial rates of firms

owned by whites.

        An important consideration in interpreting the results reported so far is whether or not we

have adequately controlled for differences in credit-worthiness of firms.7 If black-owned firms are

less creditworthy and we have failed to adequately capture those differences, even with our

extensive set of control variables, then we would be inappropriately attributing the racial




6
   Approximately four out of five (80.5%) of the firms who required a loan applied to a commercial bank. Overall
seventeen different types of financial institution were used, although only the following accounted for more than
1% of the total (weighted) -- Credit Unions (2.0%); Savings Banks (2.5%); Savings & Loans (2.3%); Finance
Companies(4.9%); Lease Companies (2.1%) and other business firms (1.7%).
7
  Another potential problem involves the type of loans for which black- and white-owned firms are applying.
Black firms are more apt to apply for working capital rather than for capital expansion, equipment purchases or
other reasons. These latter types of loan requests are more secure since they provide at least some of their own
collateral. If blacks are less likely to apply for funds for these purposes their overall loan denial rate would be
higher for reasons unrelated to discrimination. Yet we found that blacks remain at a similar disadvantage
regardless of the type of credit for which they are applying. We find that blacks are 29 percent and 18 percent
more likely to have their loans denied for working capital and other types of loans, respectively. These estimates
are both significantly different from zero, but not significantly different from each other.


                                                        13
difference in loan denial rates to discrimination. The next several specifications are designed to

determine the sensitivity of our results to this concern.

       The first problem we address pertains to the specific functional form with which we

control for differences in credit history across firms. As shown in Table 1, black-owned firms are

considerably more likely to have had troubles in the past in the form of judgments against them,

late payments by the firm or its owner, or past bankruptcies. The model specifications reported in

Table 5 implicitly assumes that these past problems are additive in their effect on loan denials and

one might suspect the marginal impact would rise as past problems rise. Therefore, in the first

three rows of Table 6 we separate firms by the number of types of past problems experienced. In

Row 1, we restrict the sample to those firms that have never had any past credit problems. The

second row restricts the sample to firms that reported only one of these problems and the third

row includes firms that have experienced more than one of them. The results suggest that even

black-owned firms with clean credit histories are at a significant disadvantage in getting their

loans approved, holding constant their other characteristics. In fact, the estimated differential in

loan approval rates between black- and white-owned firms is virtually identical in all three groups.

       Next, we considered whether black-owned firms are treated differently from white-owned

firms when requesting credit from other sources, including suppliers and credit card companies. If

minority-owned firms really are less credit-worthy, then other types of creditors also may be

reluctant to provide them with credit. On the other hand, if they approve credit requests at

roughly the same rate regardless of the owner’s race, then perhaps the disadvantage that black-

owned firms face when they apply for loans from financial institutions is more likely attributable to

discrimination. Suppliers, in particular, are likely to have had a long-standing relationship with

the firm and its owner(s) and are better able to make judgments regarding credit-worthiness based


                                                  14
on this knowledge. Therefore, their credit decisions are far less likely to be driven by group

characteristics than may be true for financial institutions with less information that may be

practicing statistical discrimination. An examination of credit cards provides a different advantage.

Because credit card applications are more likely to be filled out and mailed in, it is quite likely that

the race of the applicant is unknown to the financial institution.8

         To address this we use data from the NSSBF, which also asked respondents whether they

had been denied trade credit from a supplier and whether they use business or personal credit

cards to finance business expenses. Regarding trade credit, one shortcoming of this analysis is that

firms who are denied trade credit can be distinguished from all other firms, but we do not know

which firms sought such credit. 9 If black-owned firms were less likely to apply for such credit,

the share of them that were denied would be downward biased relative to white-owned firms. 10

Subject to this limitation the results still provide useful information. Overall 6.2 percent of

applicants responded that they were denied trade credit. Once more there are considerable

differences by racial groups: 5.7 percent of whites answered positively compared with 13.5

percent of blacks, 6.4 percent for other races and 10.2 percent of Hispanics.

         In Row 4 of Table 6 we modeled the probability of a request for a trade credit application

being denied on the full sample of 4,480 observations (only firms with missing values are deleted)


8
  In fact, it is our understanding that it is illegal for creditors to ask an applicant about his/her race on a credit
application. Lenders to small businesses appear to be exempt from this restriction, from what we can determine, so
long as they are asking whether the entity is a certified minority-owned small business for the purpose of
determining eligibility for Small Business Administration loan guarantees. In either case, it is illegal to use race as
a factor in determining whether or not to grant a loan.
9
  The exact wording of the question was “has any supplier that offers trade credit to business customers denied a
request by your firm for trade credit -- yes or no?”
10
   Interestingly the current use of trade credit varied only a little by race. Respondents were asked if the firm
purchased any goods or services on account during 1993 rather than pay for them before or at the time of delivery:
64.8% of white-owned firms answered in the affirmative compared with 60.7% for blacks; 55.1% for Hispanics



                                                         15
controlling for measures of credit-worthiness and other firm characteristics.                  Results of this

analysis suggest that black-owned firms are only 3 percent more likely to be denied trade credit

compared to white-owned firms, ceteris paribus, which is very small compared to the 25 percent

difference observed in financial loan applications. This finding can be interpreted in one of two

ways. Firms’ trading partners may also discriminate against minority-owned firms, but to a far

lesser extent. Alternatively, if trade credit is granted without any discrimination, then this 3

percent estimate indicates the extent to which our measures of credit-worthiness fail to capture

differences between white and minority-owned firms. Either way, the gap between this estimate

and that obtained regarding the loan decisions of financial institutions’ strengthens our conclusion

that these institutions treat minority-owned firms unfairly.

        In Rows 5 and 6 of Table 6 we examine the probability that a firm uses either a business

credit card (Row 5) or a personal credit card (Row 6) to finance business expenses in 1993.11 In

neither case could we find any evidence that black-owned firms were less likely to have access to

such cards. We also had information available on the maximum amount that could be billed to

these accounts and could find no significant differences by race in a regression that modeled the

amount that could be charged. No racial differences were observed when we modeled the typical

balance remaining on these cards at the end of a typical month.

        The final approach we undertook to determine whether our model adequately controls for

differences in credit worthiness was to compare our measures to the information requested when

a small business applies for a loan. To do this, we went to some local banks and obtained small


and 55.7% for other races.
11
   On average, 29 percent of all firms use business credit cards and 41 percent use personal credit cards for
business use; these levels vary only modestly by race/ethnicity. Blanchflower, Evans and Oswald (1998a) use these
same data to examine the role of credit cards and find that the presence of business credit cards enhances
employment growth. Blanchflower, Evans and Oswald (1998b) used data from various Surveys of Consumer



                                                       16
business loan applications.        To supplement this small sample, we searched the internet and

examined web sites that provide general business advice to small firms, including a description of

the loan application process and the information typically requested of applicants. An example of

a typical application form is presented as Appendix B. We found that detailed information is

requested of both the firm and its owner. Regarding the firm, banks typically request information

like the following: (a) type of business, (b) years in business, (c) number of full-time employees,

(d) annual sales, (e) organization type (corporation or proprietorship), (f) owner’s share, (g)

assets and liabilities, (h) whether the business is a party to any lawsuit, and (i) whether any back

taxes are owed. Regarding the owner’s personal finances, banks typically ask for: (a) assets and

liabilities, (b) sources and levels of income, and (c) whether the owner has any contingent

liabilities. Some applications ask explicitly if the firm qualifies as a minority-owned enterprise for

the purposes of certain government loan guarantee programs. The race of the applicant, however,

would be readily identifiable even in the absence of such a question since most of these loans

would be originated through face-to-face contact with a representative of the financial institution.

        These criteria seem to match reasonably closely the information available to us in the

NSSBF. The particular strength of the survey is the detail available on the firm, which covers

much of the information typically requested on loan application forms. Less detail is available for

the owner of the firm. On the other hand, we have no direct information regarding the owner’s

assets, liabilities, and income, which would be necessary to determine the personal collateral

available should the firm default on its obligation. However, we do have information regarding

the characteristics of the owner that are frequently used as correlates of these factors, like their

education and experience. In addition, we have data on the owner’s financial history, including


Finances to show that credit cards reduced households’ transactions balances.


                                                       17
whether or not they have been delinquent on previous loan payments or have gone bankrupt in the

past seven years.       Nevertheless, our potentially incomplete characterization of the business

owner’s financial condition may introduce a bias into our analysis if black business owners have

fewer personal resources than white business owners to cover the loan should the firm default.

        We conducted several additional analyses to assess the potential impact of this problem on

our results by separately examining groups of firms who differ in the degree to which personal

finances should influence the loan decision. For instance, in Table 6, Rows 7 and 8 we consider

proprietorships/partnerships separately from corporations and estimate the disadvantage

experienced by black-owned firms in obtaining credit. Since owners of an incorporated business

are significantly shielded from incurring the costs of a failed business, differences in personal

finances should be far less important in evaluating the loan applications they file. But our

estimates indicate that black-owned firms are still almost 25 percent less likely to have their loan

application approved regardless of whether the business is organized as a corporation or

proprietorship/partnership.

        We also considered differences in loan approval rates by race for larger firms versus

smaller and for older firms versus younger.12 In both cases one might expect the owner’s personal

finances would be less important. Our results, reported in Rows 9 through 12 of Table 6 indicate

that black-owned firms face similarly lower rates of loan denials regardless of their size or age.

        One additional factor that suppliers of credit may consider in determining loan approvals is

the specific location of the firm. If a firm is located in the center city, for example, banks may


12
   The mean and median age of firms in the survey is 15 and 12 years, respectively. Only 14.5 percent are less
than five years old and only 4.1 percent are less than three years old. As reported in footnote 1, the mean and
median size of firms is 5.5 and 31.6 full-time equivalent workers, respectively. Fourteen percent of firms have one
or fewer employees and 27 percent have two or fewer employees.



                                                        18
judge the future profit prospects of these firms as more uncertain and may be less likely to

approve the loan. Although such behavior may be consistent with profit maximization, if black-

owned firms were more likely to be located in these areas it would still qualify as statistical

discrimination and would be illegal.

        Although we do not know the specific location of the firms in the NSSBF data, we

conducted two additional specification checks to see if lenders’ behavior was consistent with this

hypothesis. First, we separated firms by whether the were located in an SMSA, since those not in

an SMSA cannot be located in the central city. Second, we separated firms by their industry

classification into those in retail trade, repair services, and personal services and firms in all other

industries. We chose these categories in order to distinguish those firms whose market is more

likely to be local (like a neighborhood grocer, hair stylist, or auto mechanic) compared to those

who sell their products/services to the broader community.13 If locating in the central city has any

impact on future profit expectations, it should be greater for those firms whose market is more

local in nature. Therefore, if minority-owned firms are more likely to locate in these areas, racial

differences in loan approval rates should be smaller in the other industries.

        The results of these tests, reported in Rows 13 through 16 of Table 6, reject the

hypothesis that differences in loan denial rates are attributable to different propensities to locate in

the center of a city. We find no difference in loan denial rates between white- and black-owned

firms in the retail trade, personal services, and repair services industries, but a substantial

difference in other industries. This pattern is the opposite of what we would have predicted if

lenders discriminated against central city locations, assuming black-owned businesses are more


13
  We examined the sensitivity of the results to this definition by looking at retail trade only, then including just
repair services, including construction businesses, etc. and found the results to be robust to these alternatives.



                                                        19
likely to locate there. In addition, although we do find that black-owned firms located in an

SMSA face a larger disadvantage in obtaining credit, those in other locations still experience

about a 25 percent greater likelihood of having a loan application denied.

         Although most of our analysis has addressed whether minority and white-owned firms are

treated equally in terms of their probability of loan denial, another way that differential treatment

may emerge is through the interest rate charged for approved loans. Discrimination may be

apparent if banks approve loans to equally credit-worthy minority and white-owned firms, but

charge the minority-owned firms a higher rate of interest.14 Therefore, we estimated model

specifications analogous to those reported previously for loan denials, but now the dependent

variable represents the interest rate charged for firms whose loans were approved. In these

models, we also control for whether the loan carried a fixed or variable interest rate since fixed

rate loans charge a premium to cover their additional risk.

         The results of this analysis for all approved loans, reported in Row 1 of Table 7, indicate

that black-owned firms pay rates of interest that are approximately one percentage point higher

than white-owned firms after controlling for differences in credit-worthiness. Even black-owned

firms with good credit histories are charged higher interest rates (Row 2).15 The remainder of the

Table presents similar specification checks to those reported in Table 6. Recall that most of these

models identify firms for which the firm’s own history is likely to be a more important contributor

to its creditworthiness. The specifications by SMSA and industry are designed to distinguish

those firms located in center cities or whose products/services are more likely to be sold in the


14
    The size of the loans requested by, or granted to, white and minority-owned firms are not statistically
significantly different.

15
  We do not report results for firms that have had past credit problems because their higher likelihood of being
denied credit significantly restricts our ability to provide a powerful test of the interest rates they are charged if



                                                         20
local marketplace. Although sample sizes are smaller for approved loans and reduce the power of

this analysis, we find little evidence that interest rate differentials charged to black-owned firms

differ between proprietorships/partnerships and corporations, older and younger firms, bigger and

smaller firms, and industry. The limited power of the analysis makes it difficult to draw

conclusions regarding differences by a firm’s location in an SMSA. Overall the evidence presented

indicates that blacks face a significant disadvantage in the market for small business credit that

does not appear to be due to differences in credit-worthiness or even their geography.



VI. Loan Approval Rates versus Access to Credit

        In fact, these results may be biased toward finding too small a disparity between white and

black-owned firms because those minority-owned firms that actually apply for credit may

represent a selected sample of the most credit-worthy. More marginal minority-owned firms

whose loans may have been accepted had they been owned by whites may not even be among the

pool of loan applicants. First, these firms may have gone out of business or may not have had the

opportunity to commence operations because of their inability to obtain capital. Second, some

existing firms may have chosen not to apply for credit because they were afraid their application

would be rejected due to prejudice.




approved.


                                                21
        Although we have no evidence supporting the first proposition, data from the NSSBF

provides some support for the second: black- and Hispanic-owned firms are much more likely to

report that they did not apply for a loan, even though they needed credit, because they thought

they would be rejected. Table 8 reports estimates from Probit models in which the dependent

variable is an indicator variable representing failure to apply for a loan fearing denial for all firms.

The first row presents racial differences without controlling for any other characteristics of firms

and the results indicate that black- and Hispanic-owned firms are 40 and 22 percentage points

more likely to withhold an application fearing denial than are white-owned firms.16

        Of course, some of this difference may be attributable to differences in credit-worthiness

across firms since firms that are bad credit risks should be afraid that their loan would be denied.

To adjust for this, the second row of Table 8 reports comparable models that control for

differences in credit-worthiness and other characteristics of firms.               The results from this

specification does show that the higher degree of fear of rejection among black-and Hispanic-

owned firms can partially be explained by these differences. Nevertheless, a gap of 26 and 15

percentage points still exists between black-and Hispanic-owned firms, respectively compared to

white-owned firms.       In fact, when asked directly why they were afraid to apply for loans,

minority-owned firms were far more likely to report prejudice as the reason (18 percent for black-

owned firms, five percent for Hispanic-owned firms, and two percent for white-owned firms).17

        If these minority-owned firms had applied for credit and were rejected because of

discrimination, estimates of racial disparities only based upon loan applicants would be


16
  The actual percentages for each group are: 22.5 percent for white-owned businesses, 41.7 percent for firms
owned by Hispanics, and 60.8 percent for black-owned businesses.

17 The other reasons given, including too little collateral, poor credit history, and poor balance sheet, are
comparable across groups (firms could report more than one reason).



                                                     22
understated. The perception of prejudice, however, among these firms does not necessarily imply

that selection bias is present. Those firms that failed to apply because they feared rejection may

have had similar loan denial rates as other minority-owned firms with comparable levels of credit-

worthiness that did apply. If those firms chose to apply for a loan, differences by race in the

combined denial rate of the actual and potential applicants would be the same as we have

estimated for the observed sample of applicants.

       More formally, suppose that loan denial rates for equally credit-worthy white- and

minority-owned firms that applied for credit are θw and θm, respectively; the measure of

discrimination employed in the previous analysis is θm - θw. Now suppose that firms that are

equally credit-worthy, but chose not to apply for a loan because they feared rejection, would have

been denied at the rates θw and ψm for white- and minority-owned firms, respectively. Among

the white-owned firms, the denial rate is identical regardless of whether the firm chose to apply or

not, conditional upon credit-worthiness. Among minority-owned firms, however, those who were

afraid to apply may have been denied at a higher rate (perhaps because of their greater propensity

to locate in the central city or other factors that are related to their race, but unrelated to credit-

worthiness) compared to other minority-owned firms. Then the correct representation of the

disadvantage faced by minority-owned firms is [ηθm + (1-η) ψm] - θw, where η represents the

share of minority-owned firms desiring credit that submitted an application. Our earlier findings

are biased if θm is not equal to ψm.

       One approach that is frequently employed to address such a problem is to estimate a

"Heckman-correction" that would formally model the application process in conjunction with the

loan outcome for those who applied. The difficulty with this methodology in the present context



                                                  23
is that it is only correctly implemented when some variable is present that is correlated with a

firm's decision to apply for a loan, but is independent of the financial institution's decision to

approve or deny the request. Unfortunately, the NSSBF data does not appear to contain any

variables that would satisfy these conditions, so we are unable to implement this methodology.18

        As an alternative that answers a different, but related question, we consider the ability of

firms to get credit among those who desired it, regardless of whether or not they applied. This

amounts to analyzing access to credit rather than loan approval and includes in the denominator

those firms that needed credit but did not apply because they feared rejection. If differences by

race in this rate among all firms who needed credit are greater than differences by race in the rate

of denial among loan applicants, then this would indicate that black- and Hispanic-owned firms

have even less access to credit than an analysis of loan applicants would indicate.

        To test this proposition, we estimate a regression model comparable to the one reported in

Table 5 for the sample of firms that applied for a loan, except that this analysis considers all firms

seeking credit and treats those who did not apply for fear of rejection as denials. The sample

excludes firms that did not need additional credit in the preceding three years.                    The results,

reported in Table 9, are consistent with the previous analysis; we find that selection is not much of

an issue for black-owned firms. Regardless of whether we consider denial rates among applicants

or denial rates among firms that desired additional credit, black-owned firms are roughly 25

percent less likely to obtain credit. For Hispanic-owned firms, however, selection bias is evident.


18 The only variable that we felt potentially could meet these conditions in the NSSBF data is the distance between
a firm and the nearest financial institution. If greater distance reduced a firm's information regarding the
availability of funds, it might be related to the decision to apply for a loan. On the other hand, the credit-
worthiness of the firm should be independent of its location and should be unlikely to enter into the approval
process. Unfortunately, we did not find a direct relationship between distance to the nearest financial institution
and the probability of applying for a loan. This may be due to the fact that few firms are located more than a very
short distance from the nearest financial institution.



                                                        24
Among the pool of loan applicants, Hispanic-owned firms are not statistically significantly more

likely to be denied than other firms with the same characteristics. The previously statistically

insignificant result for Hispanics in Table 5 now becomes significant in Table 9. Among the pool

of firms seeking additional credit, Hispanic-owned firms are 12 percent more likely to be denied

access to credit, and this difference is statistically significant.



VII. Caveats

        The results presented indicate that black-owned firms particularly face obstacles in

obtaining credit that are unrelated to their credit worthiness. Although one explanation for these

findings is that these firms are discriminated against, we raise a few factors worth considering

before one can draw definitive conclusions.

        First, as in any regression-based study, our analysis hinges upon the proposition that all

the factors that are related to loan denial rates by race have been included in our statistical model.

If, for example, blacks possess some unobservable characteristic that makes them less

creditworthy, then our statistical finding would overstate the extent of discrimination. Although

such an omitted variable bias is always a possibility, we have included an extensive array of

information on firm characteristics and it is not clear what additional information would be

pertinent in examining loan decisions. In addition, we have estimated alternative specifications

that address other forms of credit that firms receive and different subgroups of banks and in each

case the results are consistent with our interpretation that discrimination exists in this market.

Finally, we have also supplemented the regression estimates with alternative, more qualitative

approaches, which all suggest the possibility of discrimination in lending.




                                                     25
         It is conceivable that the reason why blacks are more likely to have their loans denied is

that the firms that they own are inherently less profitable than the ones owned by whites. There

are two counters to this argument. First, modeling a firm's profitability normalized either by

equity or employment shows no evidence of racial differences.19 Second, controlling for a firm's

profitability does not change the race coefficients significantly in the loan denial equations

reported earlier.

         Another potential criticism is that this study has examined loan denial rates rather than

loan default rates; some have claimed that the latter provides a more appropriate strategy for

identifying discrimination. For example, if banks only approve loans for relatively good black

firms then black firms should exhibit relatively low default rates. Such an approach has several

significant shortcomings that are detailed in Browne and Tootell (1995) and Ladd (1998). For

instance, one problem is that it relies on the distribution of default probabilities being similar for

black and white applicants meeting the acceptance standard used for white firms. A further

problem is that it assumes that the loan originators know with a high degree of precision what

determines defaults, but little hard information exists on what causes default. Additionally, it

would be hard to disentangle the factors associated with differences in default rates between white

and black-owned firms given the fact that black-owned firms that obtain credit are charged higher

interest rates, as we have shown.

         In addition, many of the criticisms levied against Munnell et al. (1996) may be relevant

here as well.       That work has been attacked because of the fragility of the results. Yet these

criticisms appear to have been effectively countered by the authors (see Browne and Tootell,


19
   Results not reported. This is true with or without controls for industry, location, creditworthiness and all of the
other controls used in the various denial equations. There is some evidence of a negative race effect in an equation
where profits are normalized by sales but this is an inappropriate and certainly unusual normalization.


                                                         26
1995; Tootell, 1996). It is also not obvious that the criticisms directed towards that research are

applicable to the results presented here. Importantly, our reported estimates appear to be highly

stable to changes in econometric specification. Moreover, the absolute size of the raw racial

differences found in the mortgage study are considerably smaller than those observed in this study

regarding business credit.20 Some of the difference in denial rates between the races in both

studies appears to be due to differences in the characteristics of the applicants. Even after

controlling for these differences, however, the gap in denial rates in the small business credit

market is considerably larger than that found in the mortgage market.21 The larger size and

significance of the effects found in this report reduce the possibility that the observed differences

can be explained away by some quirk of the econometric estimation procedure.



VIII. Conclusions

         Our analysis finds significant evidence that black-owned businesses face impediments to

obtaining credit that go beyond observable differences in their credit worthiness. These firms are

more likely to report that credit availability was a problem in the past and expect it to be a

problem in the future. In fact, these concerns prevent more black-owned firms from applying for

loans because they feared being turned down due to prejudice or discrimination. We also found

that loan denial rates are significantly higher for black-owned firms than for white-owned firms

even after taking into account differences in an extensive array of measures of credit-worthiness

and other characteristics. This result appears to be largely insensitive to changes in econometric


20
    In the Boston Fed study 10% of white’s mortgage applications were rejected compared with 28% for blacks;
loan denial rates for business credit in this study were 26.9 percent and 65.9 percent for white- and black-owned
firms respectively.
21
     The ceteris paribus gap between blacks and whites is 25 percentage points in denial rates between the races in



                                                        27
specification. Overall, the evidence is consistent that black-owned firms are disadvantaged in the

market for small business credit, which would traditionally be attributed to discrimination. We

found little or no evidence that female-owned firms are discriminated against in this market.

        The magnitude of the racial difference in small business loan approval rates is substantial,

even after controlling for observed differences in credit-worthiness, and considerably larger than

that found in the analysis of discrimination in mortgage markets.             Why do the results for small

business loans differ so markedly from those obtained from mortgage loans?                    First, many

mortgages are sold in the secondary market and a substantial fraction of mortgage lenders have

little intention of keeping the loans they make. This added "distance" in the transaction might

reduce the likelihood of discrimination. As Day and Liebowitz, (1998) point out, "economic self-

interest, therefore, should reduce racial discrimination in this market more completely than in

many others" (p.6). A highly sophisticated secondary market for loans to small firms does not

exist. Second, the presence of special programs and regulatory incentives to encourage banks and

others to increase their mortgage lending to minorities gives these groups some advantages in

obtaining a mortgage. Additional research might seek to provide alternative explanations.




the small business credit market compared with 7 percentage points in the mortgage market.


                                                      28
                                         References

Bates, T., (1989). "The Changing Nature of Minority Business: A Comparative Analysis of
Asian, Non-minority, and Black-Owned Businesses," The Review of Black Political Economy, pp.
25-42.

Bauer, P.W. and B.A. Cromwell (1994). “A Monte Carlo examination of bias tests in mortgage
lending”, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Economic Review, 30(3), pp. 27-40.

Becker, G. S. (1957). The Economics of Discrimination. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Black, J., D. de Meza, and D. Jeffreys (1996). “House Price, the Supply of Collateral and the
Enterprise Economy. Economic Journal, January, 106(434), pp. 60-75.

Blanchflower, D.G., Evans, D.S. and A.J. Oswald (1998a). “Credit cards and entrepreneurs”,
working paper, National Economic Research Associates, Cambridge, MA.

Blanchflower, D.G., Evans, D.S. and A.J. Oswald (1998b). “Credit cards and consumers”,
working paper, National Economic Research Associates, Cambridge, MA.

Blanchflower, D.G. and A.J. Oswald. “What makes an entrepreneur?”,          Journal of Labor
Economics, January, 16(1), pp. 26-60 1998.

Browne, L. E. and G. M.B. Tootell, (1995). "Mortgage Lending in Boston-A Response to the
Critics", New England Economic Review, pp. 53-78, September-October.

Cavalluzzo, K.S. and L.C. Cavalluzzo, (1998). “Market Structure and Discrimination: The Case
of Small Businesses.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking. November, 30(4), pp. 771-792.

Cloud C. and G. Galster, (1993). "What Do We Know about Racial Discrimination in Mortgage
Markets", Review of Black Political Economy, Summer, 22(1), pp. 101-120.

Cole, R.A. and J. D. Wolken, (1995). “Financial Services Used by Small Businesses: Evidence
from the 1993 National Survey of Small Business Finances”, Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol. 81,
July, pp. 630-67.

Cole, R.A., R. L. Woodburn, and J. D. Wolken, (1996). “Bank and Nonbank Competition for
Small Business Credit: Evidence from the 1987 and 1993 National Surveys of Small Business
Finances”, Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol. 82, November, pp. 938-95.

Day, T.S. and S.J. Liebowitz (1998). “Mortgage lending to minorities: where’s the bias?”
Economic Inquiry, XXXVI, January, pp. 3-28.

Evans, D. and Leighton, Linda (1989). “Some empirical aspects of entrepreneurship”, American
Economic Review, 79, pp. 519-535.


                                             29
Evans, D. and B. Jovanovic, (1989). “An estimated model of entrepreneurial choice under
liquidity constraints”, Journal of Political Economy, 97, pp. 808-827.

Fairlie, R.W. (1998). “The absence of the African-American owned business: an analysis of the
dynamics of self-employment”, Journal of Labor Economics, forthcoming.

Fairlie, R. W., and B. D. Meyer (1996). "Ethnic and Racial Self-Employment Differences and
Possible Explanations," Journal of Human Resources, 31(4), pp. 757-793.

Ferri, G. and P. Simon (1997). “Constrained consumer lending: exploring business cycle patterns
using the Survey of Consumer Finances”, working paper, Princeton University.

Harrison, G.W. (1998). “Mortgage lending in Boston: a reconsideration of the evidence”,
Economic Inquiry, XXXVI, January, pp. 29-38.

Hayashi, F. (1985). “The effect of liquidity constraints on consumption: a cross-sectional
analysis”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, February, 100(1), pp. 183-206.

Heckman, J.J. (1998). “Detecting discrimination”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, Spring,
12(2), pp. 101-116.

Holtz-Eakin, D., Joulfaian, D., and R.S., Harvey (1994a). “Entrepreneurial decisions and liquidity
constraints”, Journal of Political Economy, 102, pp. 53-75.

Holtz-Eakin, D., Joulfaian, D., and R.S., Harvey (1994b). “Sticking it out: entrepreneurial
survival and liquidity constraints”, Rand Journal of Economics, 25(2), pp. 334-347, Summer.

Horne, D. (1994). “Evaluating the role of race in mortgage lending”, FDIC Banking Review,
7(1), Spring/Summer, pp. 1-15.

Jappelli, T. (1990). “Who is credit constrained in the U.S. economy?”, Quarterly Journal of
Economics, February, 105(1), pp. 219-234.

Ladd, H.F. (1998). “Evidence on discrimination in mortgage lending”, Journal of Economic
Perspectives, Spring, 12(2), pp. 41-62.

Lindh T., and H.Ohlsson (1996). “Self-employment and windfall gains: Evidence from the
Swedish lottery”, Economic Journal, November, 106: (439), pp. 1515-1526.

Munnell, A.G., M.B Tootell, L.E. Browne and J. McEneaney (1996). “Mortgage lending in
Boston: interpreting HMDA data”, American Economic Review, March, 86(1), pp. 25-53.

Oaxaca, R.L. (1973) “Male-Female Wage Differences in Urban Labor Markets. International
Economic Review. October, 14(3), pp. 693-709.


                                               30
Tootell, G.M.B. (1996). “Turning a critical eye on the critics”, in Mortgage lending, racial
discrimination and federal policy, edited by J. Goering and R. Wienk, Urban Institute Press,
Washington, D.C..

Yezer, M.J., R.F. Phillips and R.P. Trost (1994). “Bias in estimates of discrimination and default
in mortgage lending; the effects of simultaneity and self-selection”, Journal of Real Estate Finance
and Economics, 9(3), pp. 196-215.




                                                31
                                Table 1: Selected Sample Means from 1993 NSSBF Data


                                                   All            White     Black        Hispanic Other Races

Loan denial rates                                0.288            0.269     0.659           0.359         0.400

                                                 Credit History

Judgments against owner                          0.051            0.043     0.150           0.093         0.092
Firm delinquent                                   0.19            0.185     0.328           0.249         0.144
Personally delinquent                            0.134             0.12     0.366           0.223         0.179
Bankrupt past 7yrs                               0.027            0.025     0.051           0.036         0.038

                                          Other Firm Characteristics

Female-owned                                     0.261            0.257     0.235           0.277         0.330
Total employment                                  8.49             8.75      6.18            6.73          6.71
Firm age                                         14.28            16.42     11.99           12.92         10.22
$1992 Sales (in 1,000s)                          1,001            1,057       421             685           599
$1992 Assets (in 1,000s)                           489              516       169             321           321
$1992 Liabilities (in 1,000s)                      285              304        87             136           181
Sole Proprietorship                              0.432            0.417     0.621           0.571         0.476
Partnership                                      0.083            0.081     0.042           0.081         0.078
S Corporation                                    0.203            0.213     0.097           0.091         0.185
C Corporation                                    0.284            0.289     0.241           0.256         0.260
Line of credit                                   0.257            0.264     0.213           0.275         0.149
Owner years experience                            18.9             19.4      15.8            15.4          14.7
<=8th grade education                            0.018            0.015      0.01           0.075         0.035
9-11th grade education                           0.028            0.028     0.026           0.033         0.033
High school graduate                             0.234            0.238     0.155           0.301         0.166
Some college                                     0.253            0.254     0.356           0.208         0.214
College graduate                                 0.263            0.261     0.254           0.269         0.306
Postgraduate education                           0.203            0.205     0.203           0.114         0.245
East North Central Region                        0.159            0.168     0.156           0.084         0.056
East South Central Region                        0.045            0.045     0.115           0.028         0.013
Middle Atlantic Region                           0.153            0.159     0.111           0.099         0.132
Mountain Region                                  0.058            0.060     0.020           0.032         0.052
New England                                      0.069            0.074     0.025           0.026         0.050
Pacific Region                                   0.182            0.164     0.181           0.413         0.307
South Atlantic Region                            0.148            0.148     0.229           0.127         0.118
West North Central Region                        0.081            0.088     0.051           0.020         0.023
West South Central Region                        0.100            0.090     0.108           0.164         0.245


Sample Size (unweighted)                          4637            3559        442             290           344

Notes: Sample weights are used to provide statistics that are nationally representative of all small businesses.
Some variable means are computed from slightly smaller samples because of missing values.

Source: Authors’ calculations from 1993 NSSBF.



                                                      32
                         Table 2: Problems Firms Experienced During Preceding 12 Months


                                                   All      White        Black     Hispanic    Other
Credit Market Conditions
% reporting not a problem                           66         67          43             59     66
% reporting somewhat of a problem                   20         20          26             18     21
% reporting serious problem                         14         13          31             23     13



Other Potential Problems
(% reporting problem is serious)

Training costs                                       7          7           7              6      4
Worker's compensation costs                         22         21          19             30     29
Health insurance costs                              33         32          38             45     35
IRS regulation or penalties                         12         12          17             17     14
Environmental regulations                            8          8           6              7     11
Americans with Disabilities Act                      3          3           4              3      4
Occupational Safety and Health Act                   5          5           4              4      6
Family and Medical Leave Act                         3          3           5              3      5


Source: Authors’ calculations from 1993 NSSBF




                                                  33
                         Table 3A: Reported Factors Affecting Business Profitability

                                                            White                             Other
Factors                                          All         Men     Black    Hispanic        Races     Women

1) Lack of Financial Capital
   % reporting minor negative impact            25.2         25.6      19.5       22.1         20.0           25.5
   % reporting strong negative impact           30.7         29.0      46.4       38.1         33.3           32.9

2) Health Insurance Costs
   % reporting minor negative impact            22.2         22.9      14.0       17.2         20.5           21.4
   % reporting strong negative impact           25.0         25.4      22.6       24.4         16.9           24.9

3) IRS Regulations or Penalties
    % reporting minor negative impact           23.2         24.2      17.3       21.8         20.8           21.8
    % reporting strong negative impact          19.6         21.0      21.0       20.3         14.5           16.1

4) Environmental Regulations
   % reporting minor negative impact            20.4         21.6      15.2       20.1         18.6           16.5
   % reporting strong negative impact           12.3         13.2       8.1       11.7         13.8           10.2

5) The Americans with Disabilities Act
   % reporting minor negative impact             9.6          9.7       7.7       10.1         11.2            9.0
   % reporting strong negative impact            4.4          4.5       3.6        3.5          7.6            3.7

6) The Occupational Safety and Health
Act
   % reporting minor negative impact            17.3         18.7      13.9       14.3         17.1           13.1
   % reporting strong negative impact            9.0          9.5       6.3        9.7          7.6            8.1

7) Credit Market Conditions
   % reporting minor negative impact            16.2         16.2      15.0       16.0         16.4           15.9
   % reporting strong negative impact           15.0         13.4      19.6       16.7         15.0           17.8

8) Crime
   % reporting minor negative impact            26.5         26.6      29.4       27.6         29.8           25.8
   % reporting strong negative impact            9.2          7.9      20.6       16.5         19.9            9.3




            Table 3B: Reported Factors Contributing to Failure among Discontinued Businesses
                        from the 1992 Characteristics of Business Owners Survey

                                                            White                             Other
Factors (% reporting)                            All         Men     Black    Hispanic        Races     Women
Lack of Access to Business Credit                8.2          7.3     15.5         8.8          6.1        9.3
Lack of Access to Personal Credit                3.3          2.7      8.4         5.8          6.4        3.3
Inadequate Cash Flow                            71.7         73.7     63.4        67.1         67.6       70.2
Other                                           71.7         69.3     69.3        68.3         75.9       75.8

Notes: The source for Tables 3A and 3B is, Characteristics of Business Owners Survey: 1992. Table 1, p. 21.


                                                       34
                      Table 4: Percentage of Firms Reporting Most Important Issues Affecting Them
                                                Over the Next 12 Months

                                                           All    White       Black     Hispanic    Other
Credit availability                                         6         6          21            5        4

Health care, health insurance                              21        22          12          14       15
Taxes, tax policy                                           6         6           3           8        4
General U.S. business conditions                           12        11           9          14       17
High interest rates                                         5         6           2           3        4
Costs of conducting business                                3         3           4           4        4
Labor force problems                                        3         3           4           6        4
Profits, cash flow, expansion, sales                       10        10          20          10       12

Number of observations (unweighted)                    4,388       3,383        424         323      258

Source: Authors’ calculations from 1993 NSSBF.




                                                      35
                                       Table 5: Determinants of Loan Denial Rates
                    (Reported Estimates are Derivatives from Probit Models, t-Statistics are in Parentheses)

                                                (1)                (2)               (3)                 (4)
Black                                          0.426             0.277             0.249               0.258
                                              (10.87)            (6.69)            (5.99)              (5.85)

Asian/Pacific Islanders                        0.207             0.161             0.128               0.104
                                               (3.90)            (3.02)            (2.42)              (1.92)

American Indian/Alaskan Eskimo                 -0.051            -0.152            -0.143              -0.101
                                               (0.35)            (1.17)            (1.07)              (0.70)

Hispanic                                       0.113             0.061             0.055               0.034
                                               (2.33)            (1.27)            (1.15)              (0.69)

Female-Owned                                   0.073             0.039             0.029               0.018
                                               (2.54)            (1.36)            (1.00)              (0.62)

Owner years experience                                           -0.003            -0.001              -0.002
                                                                 (2.58)            (1.14)              (1.51)

Owners’ share of business                                        0.001             0.000                0.00
                                                                 (1.96)            (0.73)              (0.12)

Judgments                                                        0.142             0.131               0.129
                                                                 (2.83)            (2.61)              (2.50)

Firm delinquent                                                  0.177             0.182               0.201
                                                                 (6.54)            (6.63)              (7.04)

Personally delinquent                                            0.160             0.145               0.143
                                                                 (4.41)            (3.97)              (3.86)

Bankrupt past 7yrs                                               0.208             0.169               0.154
                                                                 (3.10)            (2.57)              (2.30)

$1992 Sales*(108)                                                -0.439            -0.332              -0.382
                                                                 (3.62)            (2.52)              (2.63)

$1992 Assets (*108)                                              -0.168            0.109               0.195
                                                                 (0.65)            (0.42)              (0.69)

$1992 liabilities (*108)                                         0.716             0.217               0.139
                                                                 (1.80)            (0.54)              (0.33)

Line of credit                                                                     -0.109              -0.104
                                                                                   (4.90)              (4.50)

Total employment                                                                   0.0002              0.0002
                                                                                   (1.14)              (1.05)




                                                          36
Firm age                                                           -0.001   -0.000
                                                                   (1.11)   (0.38)

In an MSA                                                          0.094    0.087
                                                                   (3.71)   (3.25)

New firm since 1990                                                0.108    0.128
                                                                   (2.56)   (2.93)

Partnership                                                        -0.077   -0.085
                                                                   (1.64)   (1.81)

S-Corporation                                                      -0.018   -0.028
                                                                   (0.54)   (0.84)

C-Corporation                                                      -0.041   -0.048
                                                                   (1.26)   (1.44)



Owner education dummies                                              5       5
Area dummies                                                                 8
Industry dummies                                                             60

N                                        2,007           2,007     2,007    1,986
Pseudo R2                                0.061           0.141     0.163    0.194
Chi2                                     143.0           332.5     385.8    454.7
Log likelihood                          -1,109.0        -1,014.3   -987.6   -945.4

Source: Authors’ calculations from 1993 NSSBF.




                                                   37
                                Table 6: Alternative Models of Loan Denials
                                 (Probit Derivatives, t-statistics in Parentheses)
                                     Black        Asian/Pacific          Native       Hispanic       Sample Size
Specification                                       Islanders          Americans
Creditworthiness
  1) No past problems                  .236            .150               -             -.007            1329
                                      (4.12)          (2.62)                            (0.16)
  2) One or more problem               .283            .020            -.115             .217             591
                                      (4.15)          (0.18)           (0.47)           (2.06)
  3) More than one problem             .252            .134            -.319             .074             200
                                      (2.28)          (0.68)           (0.83)           (0.39)
Source of Loan
   4) Suppliers: Trade Credit         0.032           0.010            -0.032          0.029             4,480
                                      (2.88)          (0.73)           (1.06)          (2.08)
   5) Credit Card: Business           0.035           -0.102           0.050           0.032             4,628
                                      (1.33)          (3.42)           (0.60)          (1.02)
   6) Credit Card: Personal           0.002           -0.009           -0.008          -0.036            4,635
                                      (0.07)          (0.07)           (0.09)          (1.17)
Organization Type
   7) Proprietorships and             0.240            .074             .670             .058             522
      Partnerships                    (2.87)          (0.71)           (1.86)           (0.66)
   8) Corporations                    0.243            .123              ---             .025            1,438
                                      (4.46)          (1.83)                            (0.40)
Age of Firm
   9) 12 Years or Under               0.310           0.169            -0.059           0.043            1,062
                                      (5.15)          (2.32)           (0.31)           (0.61)
  10) Over 12 Years                   0.218           0.021              ---             0.65             883
                                      (3.16)          (0.23)                            (0.94)
1990 Firm Size
   11) Fewer than 10                  0.258            .064            -.030             .016             947
       Employees                      (4.45)          (0.83)           (0.15)           (0.24)
   12) 10 or More Employees           0.293            .145              __              .072            1,004
                                      (3.62)          (1.66)                            (0.88)
Industry
   13) Retail Trade, Repair           0.008            .259              ---             .053             542
       and Personal Services          (0.10)          (2.33)                            (0.63)
   14) All Other Industries           0.329            .083            -.107             .095            1,443
                                      (6.40)          (1.27)           (0.73)           (1.50)
Urban/rural
   15) MSA                              .241            .100            -.203            -.034            1558
                                       (5.08)          (1.71)          (1.27)           (0.64)
    16) Non-MSA                         .485           -.047             .261            .403              387
                                       (2.99)          (0.51)          (1.03)           (3.00)
Notes: Each line of this table represents a separate regression with the same control variables as Column 4 of
Table 5. The dependent variable in all specifications except those for credit cards represents an indicator for
whether or not a loan application was denied. For credit cards, the dependent variable indicates whether the firm
used business or personal credit cards to finance business expenses. In the source of loan specifications, the sample
size is all firms. In models separated by industry, firm size, and firm age, the sample size reflects the number of
loan applications in each category. Native Americans include American Indians and Alaskan Eskimo.

Source: Authors’ calculations from 1993 NSSBF.



                                                        38
                                 Table 7: Models of Interest Rate Charged
                                 (OLS coefficients, t-statistics in Parentheses)

                                Black     Asian/Pacific      Native        Hispanic   Fixed Interest   Sample
Specification                              Islanders        Americans                      Loan         Size
  1) All Loans                  1.029         .450            -.480          .471          .496         1455
                                (3.72)       (1.47)          (0.68)         (1.78)        (4.22)
  2) No credit problems         1.494         .381            .981           .414          .511        1138
                                (4.24)       (1.08)          (1.15)         (1.46)        (3.98)

Organization Type
  3) Proprietorships and         1.679         .671           1.498          .387         .608          365
     Partnerships               (2.77)        (0.97)          (0.55)        (0.70)       (2.11)
  4) Corporations                 .721         .399           -.646          .635         .414         1090
                                (2.32)        (1.16)          (0.93)        (2.04)       (3.24)

Age of Firm
  5) 12 years or under           1.336         .377           -.520          .386         .646          721
                                (3.38)        (0.86)          (0.58)        (1.01)       (3.59)
   6) Older than 12 years         .676         .696           -.011          .680         .351          734
                                (1.65)        (1.50)          (0.01)        (1.76)       (2.18)

1990 Firm Size
   7) Fewer than 10             1.151          .302           -1.040         .590         .728          644
       Employees                (2.85)        (0.62)          (0.85)        (1.49)       (3.46)
   8) 10 or More                 .493          .628            -.058         .676         .399          811
       Employees                (1.12)        (1.52)          (0.07)        (1.61)       (2.86)

Industry
   9) Retail Trade, Repair       .653         -.164           4.157          .383         .500          392
      and Personal Services     (1.06)        (0.21)          (1.72)        (0.75)       (1.84)
   10) All Other Industries      .653          .667           -.979          .552         .452          1063
                                (1.06)        (2.05)          (1.40)        (1.72)       (3.48)

Urban/rural
  11) MSA                       1.164          .533           -.554          .505         .458         1103
                                (3.94)        (1.62)          (0.66)        (1.75)       (3.25)
  12) Non-MSA                   -.640         -.419            .724         -.029         .477          352
                                (0.57)        (0.39)          (0.56)        (0.04)       (2.16)



Notes: Each line of this table represents a separate regression with the same control variables as Column 4 of
Table 5 except for an indicator variable for whether the loan request was for a fixed interest rate loan. Sample
consists of firms who had applied for a loan and had their application approved. Native Americans include
American Indians and Alaskan Eskimo. ‘No credit problems’ means that neither the firm nor the owner had been
delinquent on payments over 60 days , no judgements against the owner for the preceding 3 years and the owner
had not been bankrupt in the preceding 7 years..

Source: Authors’ calculations from 1993 NSSBF.




                                                       39
                  Table 8: Racial Differences in Failing to Apply for Loans Fearing Denial
                                (Probit Derivatives, t-statistics in Parentheses)

                                           Black           Asian/Pacific        Native Americans         Hispanic
Specification                                               Islanders
No Other Control Variables                 0.398              0.094                   -0.135               0.223
(n=4,635)                                 (16.57)             (3.49)                  (1.76)               (7.89)

Full Set of Control Variables              0.262               0.041                  0.036                0.149
(same as Table 5, Column 4)               (10.13)              (1.48)                 (0.50)               (5.17)
(n=4,627)


Notes: Sample consists of all firms. Native Americans include American Indians and Alaskan Eskimo.
Dependent variable is 1 if the firm said they did not apply for a loan fearing denial, zero otherwise.

Source: Authors’ calculations from 1993 NSSBF.




         Table 9: Models of Failure to Obtain Credit Among Firms that Desired Additional Credit
                                (Probit Derivatives, t-statistics in Parentheses)

                                           Black           Asian/Pacific        Native Americans         Hispanic
Specification                                               Islanders
No Other Control Variables                 0.437              0.283                   0.163                0.268
(n=2,647)                                 (14.17)             (6.47)                  (1.37)               (6.93)

Full Set of Control Variables             0.282                0.152                  0.009                0.127
(same as Table 5, Column 4)               (7.22)               (2.92)                 (0.06)               (2.78)
(n=2,638)


Notes: The sample consists of all firms that applied for loans along with those who needed credit, but didn’t apply
for fear of refusal. Failure to obtain credit includes those firms that were denied and those that did not apply for
fear of refusal. Dependent variable = 1 if the firm failed to obtain credit and zero if the firm applied for credit and
had their loan application approved. Native Americans include American Indians and Alaskan Eskimo.

Source: Authors’ calculations from 1993 NSSBF.




                                                         40
                                   Appendix A. Data Appendix

1. The 1993 National Survey of Small Business Finances

The 1993 National Survey of Small Business Finances provides information about a nationally
representative sample of small businesses in the United States. The survey was conducted during
1994-95 for the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and the U.S. Small Business
Administration. The target population is the population of all for-profit, non-financial, non-farm
business enterprises that had fewer than 500 employees and were in operation as of year-end
1992. The sample was drawn from firms listed on the Dun's Market Identifier file as of November,
1993. The DMI list, containing nearly 10 million businesses, is broadly representative of all
businesses but does not include many of the newest start-up firms or the self-employed individuals
filing business tax returns. In contrast, the Internal Revenue Service reports that for 1991 about
20 million individuals filed business tax returns, including about 13 million sole proprietorships, of
which about 3 million reported less than $2,500 in annual receipts. The public use dataset
contains 4,637 firms. These firms represent 4.99 million small businesses.

The sample was a stratified random design with over sampling to ensure the ability to estimate
separately the reporting domains by employment size groups, urban or rural location, and in
census regions. The specific sampling strata were five employment-size groups (0-19, 20-49, 50-
99, 100-499, unknown), nine Census regions (East North Central, East South Central, Middle
Atlantic Mountain, New England, Pacific, South Atlantic, West North Central and West South
Central), and urban or rural location. In addition, three minority partitions of firms likely to be
owned by Asians, Blacks, and Hispanics were extracted from the Dun's frames prior to sampling
to create samples of minority-owned businesses (see [2] for details). Each of the minority
partitions was proportionately stratified by urban or rural location. Because the larger and
minority-owned firms are small percentages of the population of small businesses but are of
special interest to researchers, the survey over sampled larger firms (20 to 499 employees), as
well as Black-owned, Asian-owned, and Hispanic-owned firms to ensure sufficient numbers for
analyses of these groups.

Businesses were contacted in advance of the survey to determine eligibility, verify addresses, and
identify a contact person. Not all businesses were eligible (i.e., met the target-population
definition). Some businesses could not be contacted, some failed at least one of the eligibility
criteria (e.g., not in business, for profit, etc.), and some had erroneous frame data. The eligibility
rate of sampled businesses averaged about 60 percent.

The average duration of the telephone interviews was fifty minutes. assisted telephone interviews,
which were conducted by Price Waterhouse. The survey was voluntary. The response rate was
about 50 percent.

The survey collected the following types of information from each business:

-Demographic information on the owners and characteristics of the firm, such as the industry to
which it belongs, age, and type of organization (sections A, B, C, and D of the questionnaire).


                                                 41
-An inventory of the firm's deposit and savings accounts, capital leases, credit lines, mortgages,
motor vehicle loans, equipment loans, other loans, and selected other financial products. For each
of these services, the supplier of the service was also identified (sections E, F, and G of the
questionnaire).

-Information about the characteristics of the financial service suppliers: type (e.g., bank,
individual), location vis-a-vis the firm, method of conducting business, number of years the firm
has done business with the supplier, and reasons for choosing the source (sections H and J of the
questionnaire and section I of the codebook).

-Experience in the past three years in applying for credit (section J of the questionnaire).

-Data from each firm's income statement and balance sheet (sections P, R, and S of the
questionnaire).

-Information on the recent credit history of the firm and its owners (section U of the
questionnaire).

Generally, the reference period for the survey data is 1993. However, the income statement and
balance sheet data were collected for fiscal year 1992 because that date was the time of the last
complete set of financial statements for most firms. Sales and employment data were collected for
1992 and for 1990.

The NSSBF does not use an equal-probability sample design, so that the weights play a critical
role in interpreting the survey data. The weights included with this data set are based on the
original weights computed by Price Waterhouse. As is true of all surveys, there is some amount
of missing data for nearly every NSSBF question. An attempt has been made to impute most
missing values. The general model used to perform imputations in the NSSBF is a randomized
regression model. The methodology employed is similar to that used in the first-stage procedures
of the Survey of Consumer Finances. Multiple-categorical response questions (e.g., check all
responses that apply) were converted to a series of yes-no responses, and then each of these yes-
no responses was estimated using a randomized linear-probability model (i.e., randomized
regression where the dependent variable takes on one of two values). Not all variables lend
themselves to estimation by regression. In particular, questions that evoked single discrete
categorical responses (e.g., type of source) are typically imputed using a randomized hot-deck
procedure.

Further details of the survey may be found in Cole, R.A. and J. D. Wolken, (1995) and Cole,
R.A., R. L. Woodburn, and J. D. Wolken, (1996). Additional documentation, codebooks and
data are available for download on the web page of the Federal Reserve Board of Governors at
the following address -- http://www.bog.frb.fed.us/pubs/oss/oss3/nssbftoc.htm.




                                                 42
2. Characteristics of Business Owners Survey, 1992

The Characteristics of Business Owners (CBO) Survey provides basic economic, demographic,
and sociological data on the characteristics of minority, women, and non-minority male business
owners and their business activities. The data were collected by the Bureau of the Census through
a statistically chosen mail sample survey and were combined with administrative records data,
which were originally obtained for use in the 1992 Economic Census. Any business which filed an
IRS form 1040, Schedule C (individual proprietor-ship or self-employed person); form 1065
(partnership); or form 1120S (subchapter S corporation) in 1992 is included in the survey
universe. A subchapter S corporation is a special IRS designation for legally incorporated
businesses with 35 or fewer shareholders who, because of tax advantages, elect to be taxed as
individual shareholders rather than as corporations. The 1992 CBO survey used five sampling
frames: 1) Hispanic; 2) Black; 3) Other minority (Asians and Pacific Islanders, American Indians,
and Alaska Natives); 4) Women; and 5) Non-minority male. Each business was eligible for
sampling from exactly one CBO frame, to which they were assigned in the following order of
precedence: Hispanic, other minority, Black, women, and non-minority male. For tabulation
purposes, women-owned businesses sampled in the Hispanic, other minority, or Black frames
were used to produce the estimates for women-owned businesses. The five frames were stratified
by state, industry division, and receipts size class before sample selection. The total sample size
was 116,557 owners, approximately evenly distributed among the five sampling frames.

Additional documentation, codebooks and results are available for download on the web page of
the Bureau of the Census at the following address:- http://www.census.gov/agfs/www/cbo.html.




                                                43
                     Appendix B: Typical Application Form Used for Small Business Loan
1. About your Financing Request. Indicate the type and term of your loan request, as well as your plan for repayment.
           What type of loan are you requesting?
                       Fixed Rate Term Loan                 Loan Requested $:                Number of Months (1 - 60)
                       Variable Rate Term Loan                         Loan Requested $:               Number of Months (1 - 60)
                       Variable Rate Line of Credit                    Credit Line Requested $:
                       Business Equity Loan                            Loan Requested $:               Number of Months (1 - 60)
                       Business Equity Line of Credit       Credit Line Requested $:
           What is the purpose of the loan? (Attach other pages if necessary)
           What is the primary source of business income to be used for repayment of the loan requested?
2. About the Business
           Business Name (d/b/a if any))
           Street
           City                  State                      Zip
           Telephone
           Fax
           Type of Business:
           Years in Business:
           Number of full-time employees:
           Annual revenues:$
           How long has the business been under its current ownership?
           Under what legal form does the business operate?
                       Corporation
                       General Partnership
                       Sole Proprietorship
                       Other
           Bank Reference:
           Bank Name
           Account Number
           Is this your primary business bank?
                        Yes       No
3. About the Owner(s) and Guarantor(s). Provide background information about owners and guarantors.
           Name                                                        Name
           Title                                                       Title
           % Ownership                                                 % Ownership
           Social Security Number                                      Social Security Number
           Does your business qualify as a minority-owned (more than 51 %) enterprise?         Yes        No
4. Existing Assets and Liabilities of the Business
           Provide basic balance sheet information about the business
                                               Original Value          Current Value           Loan Balance      Lender/Lessor
           Machinery & Equipment
           Furniture & Fixtures
           Land & Buildings
           Leasehold Improvements
           Accounts Receivable
           For any ‘yes” reply in this section, please attach a separate summary of relevant circumstances
           Is the business responsible for any debts not listed on the business financial statements?            Yes        No
           Is the business a party of any lawsuit or claim?                                                      Yes        No
           Does the business owe any taxes for years prior to the current year?                           Yes    No
           Is the business controlled by a person who is an executive officer of, director of, or owner
           of more than 10% of any banking institution?                                                   Yes    No
           If yes, name of bank:


5. Primary Business Relationships. List the business’ two largest suppliers, along with other background information about the business.
           Two Largest Suppliers
           Name                                City/State              Phone                   Contact Person
           Name                                City/State              Phone                   Contact person



                                                                           44
           Attorney
           Name                                                                        Phone                    Since (Date)
           Accountant
           Name                                                                        Phone                    Since (Date)
6. Personal Information. Provide background information about yourself and your business or employer:
           Name                                                                      Business Employers Name
           Residential Address                                                       Business Address
           City                  State                        Zip                    City                   State                       Zip
           Residential Telephone                                          Business Telephone
                                                                                     Position or Occupation
7. Personal Financial Condition
            Assets                             In Dollars                          Liabilities                                         In Dollars
Cash on hand and in banks                      $                                   Notes payable to banks                              $
Securities, marketable and closely held        $                                   Unpaid income tax
Real estate owned                                                                  Real estate mortgages payable
Autos and other personal property                                                  Other debts
Cash value - life insurance                                                        Total Liabilities
Total Assets                                   $                                   Net Worth (total assets - total liabilities)
                                                                                   Total Liabilities plus Net Worth


8. Your financial Status. List your personal income sources and bank account along with any contingent liabilities.
           Income                                                                                  In Dollars
           Salary, bonuses and commissions
           Dividends
           Other income
           Total Income
           Do you have any contingent liabilities?                        Yes          No
                      If yes, please describe:
           As endorser, co-maker, or guarantor                            $
           On leases or contracts                                         $
           Legal claims                                                   $
           Other special debt                                             $
           Contested income tax liens                                     $
           Are you a partner or officer in any other venture?                          Yes         No
                      If so, describe:
           At what bank is your personal bank account?
                      Bank Name                                                        Account Number
 9. Schedules. Provide detailed information about your personal assets and any personal debts.
A Securities, marketable       Number of Shares, face                Description         In name of          Are these pledged?        Market value
and closely held               value, or ownership share



B Personal residence       Address and type        Title in         Percent of     Date         Cost         Market         Mortgage          Mortgage
& other real estate        of property             name of          ownership      acquire                   value          maturity          amount



C Personal installment loans        Creditor       Date issued        Secured/Unsecured         Line amount or original balance         Current balance

                Credit card debt    Total Available Credit:                                     Total Outstanding Balance:




                                                                                 45
