1. Introduction

         Governments around the globe have been eager to duplicate the success of the fast-

growing U.S. venture capital industry.1 These efforts share a common rationale: that

venture capital has spurred innovation in the United States, and can do so elsewhere (see,

for instance, the European Commission’s Green Paper on Innovation [1995]).



         Some anecdotal evidence appears to support the claim that venture capital spurs

innovation.    To cite one example, the Israeli government initiated two programs to

encourage the formation of venture capital funds in 1991. Many analysts argue that the

Yozma and Inbal initiatives led to not only an increase in venture capital under

management (from $29 million in 1991 to over $550 million in 1997), but to a burst of

investment by foreign high-technology companies in Israeli R&D and manufacturing

facilities.



         The purported relationship between venture capital and innovation, however, has

not been systematically scrutinized. We address this omission by exploring the experience

of twenty industries covering the U.S. manufacturing sector over a three-decade period.

We first examine in reduced-form regressions whether, controlling for R&D spending, the

amount of venture capital funding has an impact on the number of patented innovations.

We find that venture disbursements are associated with a significant increase in patenting.




1. Venture capital can be defined as equity or equity-linked investments in young,
privately held companies, where the investor is a financial intermediary who is typically
actively as a director, an advisor, or even a manager of the firm.
The results are robust to a variety of functional representations of how venture capital and

R&D affect patenting and to different definitions of venture capital.



       We then consider the limitations of this approach. We present a stylized model of

the relationship between venture capital, R&D, and innovation. This model suggests that,

while venture capital may indeed spur innovation, simple reduced-form regressions may

overstate the effect. The model suggests that both venture capital investment and patenting

could be correlated with a third unobserved variable, representing the arrival of

entrepreneurial opportunities. Thus, the magnitude of the reduced-form results may be

overstated.



       We address this concern in two ways. First, we exploit the major discontinuity

associated with the recent history of the venture capital industry. In 1979, the U.S.

Department of Labor clarified the Employee Retirement Income Security Act, a policy shift

that freed pensions to invest in venture capital. This shift led to a sharp increase in the

funds committed to the venture capital industry. This type of exogenous change should

identify the role of venture capital, because it is unlikely to be related to the arrival of

entrepreneurial opportunities. We exploit this shift in instrumental variable regressions.

Second, we transform our basic equation. Using our model, we show that many of the

causality problems should disappear if we estimate the impact of venture capital on the

patent-R&D ratio, rather than on patenting itself.




                                              2
       Even after addressing these causality concerns, the results suggest that venture

funding does have a strong positive impact on innovation. The estimated coefficients using

different techniques suggest that a dollar of venture capital could be up to ten times more

effective in stimulating patenting than a dollar of traditional corporate R&D. Our estimates

suggest that venture capital, even though it has been less than 3% of corporate R&D in

recent years, is responsible for a much greater share—perhaps 15%—of U.S. industrial

innovations.



       The final section of the paper addresses concerns about the relationship between the

dependent variable in our analyses (patents) and what we really wish to measure

(innovations). Venture capital may spur patenting while having no impact on innovation.

Venture-backed firms may simply patent more of their innovations because they either seek

to impress potential investors or fear expropriation of their ideas by these investors.



       To investigate this possibility, we construct a sample of 530 venture-backed and

non-venture-backed companies based in Middlesex County, Massachusetts. We find that

the venture-backed firms do patent more, but not so much as to dilute the economic

importance of their patents: their patents are more frequently cited in other patent

applications and more aggressively litigated. Finally, the venture-backed firms are also

more frequent litigators of trade secrets, which suggests that they are not simply patenting

more in lieu of relying on trade secret protection. The firm-level results suggest that the

association of more patent filings with venture capital activity is not simply a consequence

of venture-backed firms having a greater propensity to patent discoveries.




                                               3
        It is important to acknowledge that our analysis is limited in scope. In particular,

we have estimated a simple stylized model of the relationship between venture capitalists,

corporate researchers, and innovations. Due to the paucity of data and the lack of previous

research in this arena, our paper can be seen as a first step in addressing the impact of

venture capital on innovation. We hope that it will stimulate additional investigations of

the relationship between the institutions through which innovative activities are financed

and the rate and direction of innovative activities.2



        The plan of this paper is as follows. In Section 2, we provide an overview of the

U.S. venture capital industry and its role in financing young, technology-intensive firms.

Section 3 takes a first look at the data and estimates a set of reduced-form regressions.

We illustrate the limitations of this approach through a simple model and explore

alternative approaches in Section 4.       We address the concerns about patenting as a

measure of innovation in Section 5. The final section concludes the paper.


2. Our work is, however, related to two bodies of empirical literature. First, an extensive
body of research [reviewed in Cohen and Levin, 1989, and Cohen, 1995] has examined
the determinants of R&D spending and innovative outputs. Frequently examined issues
include the impact on innovation of industry structure, product market demand, scientific
advance, and intellectual property protection. The relationship between cash flow and
R&D expenditures has been studied at the firm level [e.g., Bernstein and Naidri, 1986;
Himmelberg and Petersen, 1994]. But as far as we are aware there is only one other
study examining the relationship between innovation and the presence of particular
financial institutions: Hellmann and Puri [1998] compare the survey responses of 170
venture-backed and non-venture-backed firms. A second area of related research is the
examination of the impact of the financial system on economic growth [reviewed in
Levine, 1997]. The focus of this literature, however, has typically been at a more
aggregate level. Studies relate, for instance, the overall level of equity market
capitalization and bank lending activity to the growth in gross domestic product and
productivity. This study looks in depth at a particular financial institution that is
potentially important in promoting technological change.


                                               4
2. Venture Capital and the Financing of Young Firms3

        The formal venture capital industry in the United States dates back to the formation

of the first fund, American Research and Development, in 1946. A handful of other venture

funds were established in the decade after that pioneering fund’s formation. The flow of

money into new venture funds between 1946 and 1977 never exceeded a few hundred

million dollars annually and usually was much less.



        As Figure 1 demonstrates, funds flowing into the venture capital industry increased

dramatically during the late 1970s and early 1980s. An important factor accounting for the

increase in money flowing into the venture capital sector was the 1979 amendment to the

"prudent man" rule governing pension fund investments. Prior to 1979, the Employee

Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) limited pension funds from investing substantial

amounts of money into venture capital or other high-risk asset classes. The Department of

Labor's clarification of the rule explicitly allowed pension managers to invest in high-risk

assets, including venture capital. In 1978, when $424 million was invested in new venture

capital funds, individuals accounted for the largest share (32 percent). Pension funds

supplied just 15 percent. Eight years later, when more than $4 billion was invested, pension

funds accounted for more than half of all contributions. In the years 1996 and 1997, there

was another leap in venture capital activity.




3. This section is based in part on Gompers and Lerner [1996, 1998]. The second paper
provides a detailed examination of inflows into venture capital funds, and emphasizes the
importance of exogenous events such as the 1979 policy shift discussed below in
determining the magnitude of these inflows.


                                                5
        The fundraising patterns are mirrored in the investments by venture capitalists

into young firms, also depicted in Figure 1. The mixture of projects financed by venture

capitalists differs significantly from those undertaken by corporate research laboratories.

Using a variety of mechanisms, venture capitalists are able to finance many risky early-

stage projects with no tangible assets. First, business plans are intensively scrutinized:

historically only 1% of those firms that submit business plans to venture organizations

have been funded. The venture capitalist’s decision to invest in a project is frequently

made conditional on the identification of a syndication partner who agrees that the

investment is attractive.   Once the decision to invest is made, venture capitalists

frequently disburse funds in stages.     To ensure that the money is not squandered,

managers of venture-backed firms are forced to return repeatedly to their financiers for

additional capital. In addition, venture capitalists intensively monitor managers. These

investors demand representation on the board of directors and preferred stock with

numerous restrictive covenants.    (The venture investment process is documented in

Gompers and Lerner [1999].) Thus, it is not surprising that venture capital has emerged

as the dominant form of equity financing in the U.S. for privately held high-technology

businesses. 4



3. Reduced-Form Regressions

        Before turning to a detailed discussion of what drives venture capital and




4. While evidence regarding the financing of private firms is imprecise, Freear and
Wetzel’s [1990] survey suggests that venture capital accounts for about two-thirds of the
external equity financing raised by privately held technology-intensive businesses from
private-sector sources.


                                            6
corporate R&D, we provide an initial look at how they influence patenting.5 Reduced-

form regressions of patenting on R&D expenditures and on venture disbursements must

be interpreted with caution due to concerns about causality. Nonetheless, it is natural to

begin by investigating whether venture capital has a place in the patent production

function.



       The analyses in Sections 3 and 4 focus on twenty industries between 1965 and

1992. The level of industry detail is determined by the patents, whose industry must be

inferred from their technological classification. These industries also correspond well

with the industry scheme used by the U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF) in

tabulating its survey of industrial R&D.6        The time period is determined by the

availability of data on venture capital investment (Venture Economics’ records date back

to the mid-1960s) and our inability to observe the detailed technological classifications of

U.S. patent applications before they are issued (awards are held confidential until issue).

The data sources are described in detail in the Appendix.




5. Conceptually, we will distinguish between R&D financed by corporations and R&D
financed by venture capital organizations. In actuality, the industrial R&D data that we
use undoubtedly includes some research financed by venture capital organizations. We
think that it would be unwise to subtract venture capital funding from measured R&D
since some venture funding goes to non-R&D activities and because the R&D survey
overlooks the activities of many smaller firms. By leaving some venture funding in our
measure of corporate R&D, it is less likely that we will find an impact of venture capital
on patenting conditional on R&D.

6. We focus on the manufacturing industries, since survey evidence [summarized in
Cohen, 1995] suggests that the reliance on patenting as a means of appropriating new
technological discoveries is much higher in these industries (as opposed to, for instance,
trade secrecy or first-mover advantages). Patenting is thus likely to be a better indicator



                                             7
        Tables 1 through 3 summarize three of the data series that we analyze—patent

applications by U.S.-resident inventors that eventually result in a U.S. patent, venture

capital disbursements, and industrial R&D spending—for all manufacturing firms and at

the industry level. The tables highlight the rapid growth of the venture capital industry

and the concentration of disbursements in certain industries. The top three industries

represent 54% of the venture disbursements; the comparable figure for R&D

expenditures is 39%. The ratio of venture capital to R&D jumped sharply in the late

1970s and early 1980s, and fell a bit thereafter. Patenting declined from the early 1970s

to the mid 1980s, but then rose sharply.



3.A. The Patent Production Function

        We estimate a constant elasticity of substitution (CES) patent production function.

                                         ρ        ρ
In particular, we assume that Pit = ( Rit + bVit )α / ρ u it , where patenting (P) is a function of

privately funded industrial R&D (R) and venture disbursements (V), as well as an error term

(u) capturing shifts in the propensity to patent or technological opportunities. Each variable

is indexed by industry (i) and year (t). The parameter α captures the returns to scale in R

and V, i.e., the percentage change in patenting brought about by a 1% increase in both R and

V. The parameter b captures the role of venture capital in the patent production function. If

b is greater than one, then venture capital is more effective than corporate R&D in spurring

innovation.   ρ measures the degree of substitutability between R and V as means of

financing innovative effort. As ρ goes to zero, the patent production function approaches



of the rate of technological innovation here. A more detailed industry breakdown would
lead to greater errors in assigning patents to industries.


                                                8
                                                            α /(1+ b )     αb /(1+ b )
the traditional Cobb-Douglas functional form, Pit = Rit              Vit                 u it . When ρ equals

one, the function reduces to Pit = ( Rit + bVit )α u it .



        We will begin by considering the case when ρ→0. Similar patent production

functions (but with b=0) have been estimated at the industry level by Kortum [1992, 1993]

and at the firm level by many others (see Griliches [1990] for an overview), with the

consistent finding that a positive relationship between R&D and patenting exists. We will

then highlight some problems with this functional form, and consider alternative

specifications.



3.B. Estimating the Cobb-Douglas Specification

        The first two columns of Panel A of Table 4 provide an initial look at the patent

production function using the Cobb-Douglas specification. We regress the logarithm of the

number of (ultimately successful) patent applications filed by U.S. inventors in each

industry and year on the logarithm of privately financed R&D in that industry and either the

logarithm of the number of firms receiving venture backing or the dollar volume of venture

disbursements in the industry.7 We use as a control the logarithm of the federally funded


7. One question is whether to use the number of companies funded each year by venture
investors, or the dollar amount that these funds invested. The amount invested might be
thought a more natural choice: after all, some firms receive only a seed financing of a few
hundred thousand dollars, while others receive tens of millions of dollars. One of the
crucial sources of value provided by venture investors, however, is their ability to certify
companies to other investors: for instance, venture-backed firms are much more likely to
be able to attract the interest of a reputable investment banker and complete an initial
public offering. Similarly, corporate business development groups are much more likely
to invest in new firms backed by venture investors. Thus, the financing contributed by
the venture investor is often relatively modest compared to the total amount that the
venture-backed firm raises. (To cite one example, Kleiner, Perkins, Caufield, and Byers


                                                    9
R&D in that industry, as well as dummy variables for each industry and year.8 The venture

capital measures are statistically significant and economically meaningful.9 A doubling of

venture capital activity is associated with between a 6% and 9% increase in patenting.



       We explore the robustness of the results in Panel B of Table 4. One concern relates

to the definition of venture capital activity. It might be thought that a measure of the venture

capital activity more relevant to innovation would include only seed and early-stage

financings. The financings of start-ups and very young companies are likely to pose the

greatest information problems, and the contributions of the venture capital investors might

be most valuable here. In the first two columns of Panel B, we repeat the regressions

reported in columns three and four of Panel A, but use the logarithm of the count and dollar


initiated a major effort in late 1980s to fund mobile communications firms. Between
1988 and 1993, the venture capital organization invested $39 million in these firms, a
modest amount when compared to the approximately $250 million that these firms raised
simultaneously from corporate partners.) Thus, we use both measures. Because some
industries received no venture financing in given years, we take the logarithm of the
number of venture capital financings (or the volume of venture disbursements, in millions
of 1992 dollars) plus a nominal amount.

8. We include year dummy variables because the pattern of patenting has changed over
time, at least partially due to policy changes. Kortum and Lerner [1998] describe how the
creation of the Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit apparently coincided with a shift to a
more “pro-patent” legal environment. We include industry dummy variables because the
propensity for firms in particular industries to file for patents on innovations may vary. This
may reflect the nature of the competition in the industry and the degree of disclosure
entailed by patent awards [e.g., Horstmann, MacDonald, and Slivinski, 1985] or the
persistence of organizational norms within particular firms and industries [an argument
advanced in Levin, et al., 1987]. Even without these two sets of control variables, the
regressions reported in the first two columns of Panel A of Table 4 show that both measures
of venture financing are statistically and economically significant.

9. We present two measures of the goodness of fit: the overall R2 and the R2 when
compared against a regression with just year and industry dummies. This is computed as
(SSR dummy only – SSR new regression)/SSR dummy only, where SSR refer to the sum of squared
residuals of the various regressions.


                                              10
volume of seed and early-stage financings only. The venture activity measures are slightly

larger and more precisely estimated using this alternative definition. Another concern is that

our analysis may be distorted by the inclusion of numerous industries with very little

innovative activity, as measured by R&D spending. We repeat the analysis, only employing

those industries whose R&D-to-sales ratio was above the median in 1964 (the year before

the beginning of the analysis). Once again, there is a slight increase in the magnitude and

significance of the venture activity measures.10



3.C. Alternative Functional Forms

       One unappealing aspect of the Cobb-Douglas production function (i.e., our initial

assumption that ρ is close to zero) is that it assumes that a given percentage increase in

venture capital disbursements has the same percentage impact on patenting across

industries, whatever the initial level of venture activity. We might suspect that the impact

of a doubling of venture capital on overall patenting would be much smaller in an industry

where it initially was miniscule compared to corporate R&D (e.g., transportation

equipment).    In industries where it was significant relative to R&D (e.g., office and

computing equipment), it might be thought that the impact of such an increase on patenting

would be more dramatic.



       This uneasiness is borne out by Figure 2, which graphically presents the results of a

regression similar to that in the third column of Table 4, but in which the coefficient on the



10. The results are little changed when we use those firms with above the median R&D-
to-sales ratio in the year immediately before the observation, as well as when we omit the
year and industry dummy variables.


                                              11
venture capital measure is allowed to vary. In particular, the observations are divided into

four equal-sized groups, based on the ratio of the number of venture-funded companies to

R&D. A separate venture capital coefficient is calculated for each group. The figure

depicts the level of and the 95% confidence interval around the coefficient for each quartile.

For those observations where the ratio of venture capital to R&D is below the median, the

coefficient is not significantly different from zero. (For the group with the least venture

capital activity, the coefficient is even negative.) As the ratio increases, however, the

coefficient becomes increasingly positive. This suggests that the functional representation

of the relationship between patenting, R&D, and venture capital used in Table 4 is

problematic.



       A more formal way to illustrate this problem is to undertake a non-linear regression

                                               ρ       ρ
analysis. We estimate the equation Pit = ( Rit + bVit )α / ρ u it , and seek to determine which

value of ρ provides the best fit. The estimation is performed using non-linear least squares

after taking logarithms of both sides of the equation. We use the same set of regressors as in

the third and fourth regressions reported in Panel A of Table 4 (i.e., we include industry and

year dummies, as well as the logarithm of federally funded R&D). Both regressions,

reported in the first and fifth columns of Table 5, produce estimates of ρ very close to one.



       Table 5 also presents three sets of formal hypothesis tests. First, we examine the

hypothesis that the coefficient on venture capital is zero. In the second and sixth columns,

we repeat the non-linear estimation in columns one and five, now constraining b to be zero.

A likelihood ratio test soundly rejects this null hypothesis. Second, we constrain ρ to be



                                              12
equal to zero. As the third and seventh columns report, we once again reject the null

hypothesis that the function is Cobb-Douglas. Finally, we estimate the equations under the

null hypothesis that ρ=1. Only in this case, reported in the fourth and eighth columns, can

the null hypothesis not be rejected. The non-linear analysis thus suggests that the case of

ρ=1 is an appropriate simplification: i.e., where R and V are perfect substitutes, but with V

allowed to be more or less potent (as determined by b). In this case, the elasticity of

patenting with respect to venture capital will increase with the ratio of venture capital to

R&D, as Figure 2 indicates is the case.



         The non-linear equation, however, makes our subsequent instrumental variable

estimation much more complicated. To avoid the technically difficult issues associated with

the choice of instruments in a non-linear setting, we approximate our expression by a linear

equation in the analyses below. We employ an approximation suggested by Griliches

[1986] in his analysis of the impact of basic research on productivity growth. The basic

research expenditures whose impact Griliches wishes to assess represent, like venture

capital, only a small fraction of total R&D expenditures. Griliches argues that in this

context, it is reasonable to approximate the production function through a Taylor

expansion of the logarithm of the function. This approximation will be accurate when

basic research is relatively small. Employing a similar strategy here, we linearize the

logarithm of the patent production function equation (with ρ=1) around V / R =0 , and

obtain ln( Pit ) = α ln( Rit ) + αb(Vit / Rit ) + ln(u it ).




                                                       13
       Table 6 presents four regressions employing this linearized specification. These

are akin to those in third and fourth regressions in Panel A of Table 4 and the first and

second columns in that table’s Panel B. While the coefficients must be interpreted with a

degree of caution, the regressions suggest that the increase in venture capital is substantially

more effective than private R&D in stimulating patenting. Consider the second regression,

which estimates the coefficient on venture capital as 1.73. Because this is an estimate for

the product of α and b, we must divide by our estimate of α, 0.24, to obtain the implied

value of b. The regression suggests that a dollar of venture capital is over seven times more

powerful in stimulating patenting than a dollar of corporate R&D.11



3.D. Difference Analyses

       A concern with the above analyses is autocorrelation in the residuals. Our error term

is affected by shocks to the propensity to patent and technological opportunities, which are

likely to persist for some time, if not forever. Our standard errors may be consequently

artificially low and our t-statistics inflated. In correcting this problem, however, we want to

avoid accentuating any downward bias in our coefficients that may be caused by an errors-

in-variables problem. In particular, the venture disbursement series fluctuates dramatically

from year to year. This variability partially reflects the fact that venture funds are provided

to companies in periodic staged financings, rather than as a steady stream. A single

financing round might provide funds that will be spent by the firm over a two-to-three year


11. Note that in this linearized regression the units of venture financing matter. If we use
the number of firms receiving venture capital backing, then the coefficient rises to 6.49,
since the average financing is well over a million dollars in size (see Table 3). This issue
has no implications, however, for the consistency of our estimates.




                                              14
period [Gompers, 1995]. Thus, the venture funding measure is prone to an errors-in-

variables problem that might lead to a downwardly biased coefficient.



        To address the issue of persistent residuals, we employ a first-difference approach,

which is appropriate if the original errors were random walks. In order to reduce the errors-

in-variables problem, which tends to be magnified in a first-difference approach [Griliches

and Hausman, 1986], we compute averages of the logarithm of each variable over a four-

year period. We then compute the change in the industry measures at eight-year intervals.

For example, our dependent variable is the average of the logarithm of patent applications

filed in the years between 1973 and 1976 less the average of the logarithms over the 1965-

1968 period, etc.



        Table 7 presents four first-difference regressions. Two are for the case where ρ→0,

while two employ the linear approximation to the ρ=1 case. In addition to the differences in

privately and federally funded research and development and venture capital activity, we

employ as independent variables (but do not report) dummies denoting the time period of

the observation. The coefficients are very close to those in the Tables 4 and 6, helping

address our concerns about accentuating the errors-in-variables problem. The standard

errors rise by a factor of two to four, but the impact of venture capital remains significantly

positive.



        Another approach is to recalculate the standard errors in Tables 4 and 6 using the

autocorrelation-consistent covariance estimator of Newey and West [1987].             Using a



                                              15
maximum lag of three years, we find that the standard errors on the R&D and venture

capital coefficients each roughly double. In Table 8 and Panel A of Table 9 below, we

report only the autocorrelation-consistent standard errors.



4. Addressing the Causality Problem

       Section 3 suggests that there is a strong association between venture capital and

patenting. The mechanisms behind this relationship and the extent to which our estimates

may be inflated by unobserved factors, however, are not addressed by the reduced-form

regressions that we employ. This section builds a model of venture capital, corporate

research, and innovation. In the Section 4.B, we use the model to illustrate under what

conditions the approach of Section 3 is appropriate and when it may be problematic. The

final two sections present some refinements of our empirical approach.



4.A. Modeling the Relationship

       We consider an industry in which inventions can be pursued through either

corporate R&D funding or venture capital. We make four major assumptions.



       First, we assume that innovations are generated according to a production function

similar to that we have settled upon empirically (i.e., with ρ=1). In particular, we envision

the innovation production function for each industry i and time period t as

                                      (1−α )     γ        α        (1−α )         γ
        I it = ( Rit + bVit )α N it            λ it = H it N it             λit       (1)

where Rit represents corporate R&D expenditures, b≥0 represents the effectiveness of

venture capital funding relative to corporate R&D in creating innovations, and Vit is



                                                              16
venture capital disbursements. The final two terms represent shocks to the invention

production function: Nit represents the exogenous arrival of innovative opportunities, while

λit represents how major the technological opportunities are (this term will also figure

below in determining the extent of venture capital financing). For expositional ease, the

total innovative effort is defined as Hit ≡ Rit+bVit. It is worthwhile dwelling on the

interpretation of each of these parameters.       N has to do with the quantity of new

opportunities that arrive.12 Only some subset of these, however, will be financed. The

term α, where 0<α<1, parameterizes the distribution of the quality of these opportunities.

A low value of α signifies more heterogeneity, so that a project at the margin is of much

lower quality (in terms of the number of innovations that it yields) than the average project

undertaken. We assume that periods with more substantial (radical) technological change

(a higher λit) are associated with greater innovative output (Iit), with γ calibrating of the

extent to which such changes stimulate overall inventiveness.



          Second, we assume that innovations are translated into patents in a proportional

manner. The relationship may vary, however, across industries and time periods. We

hypothesize a relationship of the form Pit = I it ε it , where Pit is the number of patented

innovations generated in a particular industry and year, and εit is a stochastic term

representing the propensity to patent. Combining this expression with Equation (1), we

obtain:



12. By taking Nit to be exogenous, we take a middle ground between Romer [1990],
where past research exerts a positive influence on the arrival of subsequent technological
opportunities because of knowledge spillovers, and Kortum [1997], where past research
exerts a negative influence (due to the “fishing out” of opportunities).


                                             17
                                     (1−α )       γ
        Pit = ( Rit + bVit )α N it            λ it ε it                                   (2)

                                                               (1−α )     γ
The unobserved factor driving patenting is thus N it                    λ it ε it : the product of

technological opportunities in general, the nature of these opportunities, and the

propensity to patent.



        Third, we assume that the expected value of a new innovation for a given time

period and industry is Πit. (Built into this value is the assumption that some, but not all,

innovations will be worth patenting.) We take a simple partial equilibrium approach and

do not model the determinants of Πit, although we have in mind that it evolves with the size

of the market, as in Schmookler [1966].



        Finally, we make assumptions regarding the marginal costs of innovating that

deserve discussion at greater length. In addition to the direct expenditures on R&D and

venture disbursements, we assume that there are associated indirect expenses. These might

include the cost of screening opportunities, recruiting managers and researchers, and

undertaking the crucial regulatory approvals to sell the new product. We argue that at each

point of time, there is likely to be a spectrum: some projects will be very appropriate for a

corporate research laboratory, while others will be more suited to be funded by a venture

capitalist in an entrepreneurial setting.13



13. For instance, in the face of the biotechnology revolution, pharmaceutical companies—
whose research departments almost entirely consisted of chemists who had spent their
careers in industrial research—found it difficult to recruit or retain academic molecular
biologists. Many of these leading researchers were, nonetheless, willing to work for
venture-backed start-ups. A number of years later, however, when biotechnology drugs
were being submitted for clinical approval, the few venture-backed firms that sought to do


                                                          18
        In order to capture this concept, we assume that the marginal cost of both venture

capital and corporate R&D is increasing in the share of the activity that is taking place in

that sector. The most promising opportunities will differ according to the relative ease

with which they are managed either in the corporate setting or by venture capitalists.

Corporate research expenditures are aimed at the opportunities most conducive to that

setting and venture capital disbursements finance the more entrepreneurial ones. The

initial projects that venture capitalists fund are likely to be well suited for that setting. As

they fund a progressively larger share of the projects, however, they begin to back

projects that might be better suited for a corporate setting. The same is true for projects

funded by corporations. For instance, as venture activity rises as a fraction of total

innovative effort, venture capitalists are pushed into areas farther from their comparative

advantage and their costs rise, while corporate researchers are able to specialize in areas

they have the greatest advantage in exploiting.



        More specifically, we assume that given a total research effort H, and venture

financing V, the venture capitalist’s costs of managing the last venture-backed project is

ν t f V (Vit / λit H it ), while the corporation’s costs of managing the last corporate-backed

project is f R (Vit / λ it H it ). We assume that the venture capitalists’ function is increasing

(fV′ > 0), and the corporations’ is decreasing (fR′ < 0). As the technological opportunities


so found it exceedingly expensive. Venture capitalists soon concluded that this was a
process that could be more efficiently pursued within pharmaceutical companies, who had
many decades of experience with such filings. The number of new biotechnology firms
funded by venture capitalists consequently fell dramatically.



                                               19
available to an industry become more radical in nature (as λit increases), the management

cost of pursuing the projects through venture capital falls and the cost to the corporation

rises. The νt term represents the venture capitalist’s cost of funds, which we enter

explicitly to enable us to consider the impact of the 1979 clarification of the prudent man

rule, which we will model as a fall in νt . Note that a shock to λit affects the relative costs

of venture capital and corporate R&D, while an increase in Nit stimulates both forms of

finance.



        From this set of assumptions, we can derive several equilibrium conditions. The

equilibrium level of venture capital and corporate R&D will equate the marginal cost of

additional spending to the marginal benefits (the product of the added probability of an

invention and the value of an innovation). Assuming that we are not at a corner solution

where V or R is equal to zero,14 the conditions are:

                                        α −1
            ∂I            H                     γ           V 
        Π it it = αΠ it b it               λit = ν t fV  it                                                (3)
            ∂Vit           N it                             λit H it 

                                        α −1
            ∂I           H                      γ        V          
        Π it it = αΠ it  it                λit = f R  it                                                   (4)
            ∂Rit          N it                           λit H it    

Through a series of mathematical manipulations,15 we obtain the expressions


14. An attractive feature of the model is that it can also address the empirically relevant
                                                      α −1                                                         1 /(1−α )
                                   R                                                        αΠ it λ it γ   
case of V=0. In that case, αΠ it b it                     γ
                                                             λ ≤ ν t fV (0), where Rit = N it                                .
                                    N it                                                     f R (0)      
                                                                                     α −1
                                                    H                          
15. Specific steps included (i) defining x ≡ αΠ it  it                                  λγ , (ii) combining the two
                                                     N it                       
equilibrium conditions (Equations (3) and (4)) to get
                                                       b
                                                      νt
                                                                                  1        −1
                                                                                                (       )
                                                                                =   f V f R ( x ) ≡ h( x), where
                                                                                   x


                                                                  20
          Vit            g 2 (ν t ) 
              = λ it                                                                              (5)
          Rit        1 − bλ it g 2 (ν t ) 

                                         1
                     αΠ λ      γ      1−α
          Rit = N it  it it                 (1 − bλ it g 2 (ν t )),                               (6)
                      g 1 (ν t ) 

where g1 is an increasing function and g2 a decreasing one. An important implication of

Equation (5) is that Vit/Rit, the ratio of venture capital to corporate R&D, will be increasing

in the degree to which the technological innovations are radical in nature (λit) and

decreasing in the cost of venture funds, νt. Corporate research is increasing in overall

opportunities, Nit, and in the value of inventions, Πit.



4.B. Addressing Causality by Using an Instrument for Venture Capital

         This set of equations allows us to illustrate the estimation challenge that we face.

Equation (2) implies that the linear approximation to patent production function is

ln( Pit ) ≈ α ln( Rit ) + αb(Vit / Rit ) + (1 − α ) ln( N it ) + γ ln( λit ) + ln(ε it ).   In Table 6, we

estimated a similar equation, relying on industry and year dummy variables to proxy for the

final three terms.



         To understand why that approach may be problematic, consider the impact of a

temporary increase to the nature of technological change in an industry (a transitory

positive shock to our metric for radical innovation, λit). This will affect innovation in two


h’(x)<0, (iii) solving for x = h −1 (b / ν t ) ≡ g 1 (ν t ), (iv) plugging into Equation (4) to get
 Vit        −1
      = λf R ( g1 (ν t )) ≡ λg 2 (ν t ), (v) using x ≡ g1 (ν t ) to solve for Hit, and (vi), recalling
 H it
that Hit=Rit+bVit, solving for Vit/Rit and Rit.


                                                                 21
ways. First, there will be a direct impact, as the increased λit leads to a higher Iit. Second,

the increase in λit will stimulate an increase in venture disbursements, which will also lead

to more innovations.     If we simply regress Pit on Vit/Rit without controlling for the

(unobservable) shock to λit, we will overstate the impact of venture capital on innovation.

In order to address this problem, we need to identify some variable that is correlated with

the level of venture capital, but uncorrelated with shocks to λit. We can then employ this

measure in an instrumental variable regression to determine the impact of venture capital

on innovation.



       Our model also allows us to specify the conditions when our earlier estimates are

valid: those situations when we can obtain consistent estimates of the patent production

function without employing instrumental variables. Two conditions must be satisfied: (i)

γ = 0, so that shocks to the mix of opportunities have no direct effect on the rate of

innovation, and (ii) the measure of the arrival of new ideas, N, has no variation that

cannot be explained by aggregate time or industry effects. The second condition will be

satisfied, if, for instance, the variation in innovative effort is driven only by demand-side

factors such as changes in the value of inventions rather than by shifts in the supply of

technological opportunities. (This is akin to Schmookler’s [1966] view of demand-driven

technological innovation.)



       If these conditions are not satisfied, we will need an instrument for venture capital,

i.e., a variable that is correlated with the level of venture financing in each industry, but




                                              22
uncorrelated with the arrival of entrepreneurial opportunities.16 In this section, we discuss

how the changes associated with the 1979 Department of Labor policy shift provide an

instrumental variable.17



       As discussed in Section 2, the Department of Labor’s clarification of the “prudent

man” rule appears to have led to a surge in venture capital fundraising in the early 1980s.

One might initially think of capturing this shift through a dummy variable, which could

take on the value of zero prior to 1979 and one thereafter. The problem with this simple

approach is that patenting rates across all industries may change over time for a variety of

reasons, including swings in the judicial enforcement of patent-holder rights and antitrust

policy. We are unlikely to be able to disentangle the shift in venture fundraising from that

in the propensity to patent. As Table 1 makes clear, the filing of successful patent


16. The attentive reader will note that the level of private R&D in Equation (6) is also
affected by shifts in λit. In Section 4.B, we are essentially assuming that the parameter α,
the impact of R&D on patenting, is known. In Section 4.C, we will relax this
assumption.

17. We also undertake an unreported analysis in the spirit of Rajan and Zingales [1998],
who examine the impact of various nations’ stage of financial market development on
industries that have greater and lesser needs for external financing. They show that sectors
with a greater need for external financing develop disproportionately quickly in countries
with well-developed capital markets. If, as discussed in Section 2, a key contribution of
venture investors is to address informational asymmetries that surround young firms, then
we may similarly find stronger effects in particular sectors. As a proxy for the degree of
information problems, we employ the book-to-market ratio of large public companies in the
industry. The gap between the book and market value will be greatest in those industries
where intangible assets are important, growth prospects substantial, and traditional
financial measures less reliable. These should be associated with settings in which both
uncertainty and informational asymmetries are greater. The interaction between the
number of venture-funded companies and the book-to-market ratio is significantly
negative. These effects are not only statistically significant, but economically meaningful.
For instance, a one standard deviation decrease in the industry book-to-market ratio leads to
a 40% increase in the impact of venture financing. The results are robust to various
definitions of the book-to-market ratio.


                                             23
applications actually fell in the years after 1979. But this was also a period during which

firms’ ability to enforce intellectual property rights were under attack [Kortum and

Lerner, 1998].



       In the remainder of this section, we discuss why the 1979 policy shift should have

had a predictably greater impact on patenting in some industries than others. Industries

with a high level of venture capital prior to the policy change should have experienced a

greater increase in funding, and thus a greater burst in patenting. This relationship

suggests that we can use the level of venture financing prior to the shift as an

instrumental variable.



       Our approach is based on the observation that the increase in the ratio of venture

capital activity to R&D in the years after the shift was positively correlated with this ratio

prior to the shift.      Figure 3 depicts for each industry the ratio of venture capital

disbursements to R&D spending for the period 1965 through 1975, as well as the

difference of the average ratio between 1985 and 1990 and that between 1965 and 1975.

There is a strong positive relationship between the two variables. An ordinary least

squares regression produces an adjusted R2 of 0.42 and a t-statistic on the venture capital

ratio between 1965 and 1975 of 3.85. The relationship continues to be statistically

significant at the five-percent confidence level when we delete various extreme

observations.18


18. The observation in the upper right-hand corner is lumber and furniture. While the
volume of venture disbursements is not large here, the amount of R&D is also very
modest. When we delete this industry from the instrumental variable regressions below,
the goodness-of-fit slightly improves. Other interesting outliers include office and


                                             24
       This empirical pattern is not surprising given two features of the venture industry.

First, the supply of venture capitalists appears to be quite inelastic, at least in the short

run. Gompers and Lerner [1996] document that during periods with increasing inflows

into venture capital, both the amount raised in the average new venture fund and the

dollars managed per partner increase. They point to practitioner discussions suggesting

that the highly specialized skills of venture capitalists can only be developed through

years of experience undertaking these investments. Second, individual venture capitalists

tend to specialize in particular industries. Venture capitalists often have educational

backgrounds that match the areas in which they invest: e.g., a Ph.D. in biochemistry or a

master’s degree in electrical engineering.        Moreover, as they develop experience

investing in a particular industry, they tend to receive more business plans from

entrepreneurs specializing in that area.



       These two factors suggest that during periods when the supply of venture capital

increases sharply, much of the investment will be concentrated in industries with a high

level of venture investment already, independent of the new opportunities facing the

industry. Because of these structural reasons, we expect that the impact of the 1979

shock will vary across industries. We will exploit the predicted increase in venture

capital disbursements to each industry associated with this policy shift as an instrumental

variable.


computing machines. Traditionally one of the mainstays of venture investing, this sector
lost much of its luster after many computer hardware and peripheral manufacturers
encountered difficulties in the mid-1980s. By way of contrast, drugs had very modest
venture capital activity until the biotechnology revolution in the early 1980s.


                                             25
       We can motivate this suggestion more formally by returning to our model. If we

examine Equation (5), we see that Vit/Rit in each industry is increasing in λit. The impact

on Vit/Rit of a change in νt (which we argue underwent a single large decline in 1979) is

also increasing in λit. Suppose that the arrival of entrepreneurial opportunities in each

industry, λit, is somewhat predictable, depending on an industry-specific component λi, as

well as a transitory shock ωit. If we average the observations of Vit/Rit before 1979, we

should get a number that is highly correlated with the level of λi in each industry, as long

as the shocks are not too large relative to the variation across industries in λi. Thus,

according to Equation (5), the average level of Vit/Rit before 1979 should be positively

related to the industry-specific jump in venture financing associated with the 1979 policy

shift (the fall in νt). In order to exploit this result, we define a variable that takes on the

value of zero prior to 1979 (before the policy shift). In the years thereafter, it takes on

the average level of Vit/Rit in the industry in the years before the policy shift. This

variable should be a desirable instrument because it is correlated with the level of venture

financing after 1978, but not correlated with transitory shocks that increased both venture

disbursements and overall innovation in those years.19




19. Our instrumental variable approach is similar to the literature that uses policy
changes as “natural experiments” to identify a key parameter [reviewed in Meyer, 1995].
In our context, the policy shift is the change in the prudent man rule, and we expect the
impact of this change on patenting to be greatest in industries with a high V/R before the
change. Consider an extreme example where V/R was zero in some industries and some
positive number in the others. Then we would simply calculate the change in patenting
before and after 1979 for each group of industries, and then compute the difference in the
change between the two groups.


                                              26
       The results of this estimation are shown in the first two columns of Table 8. The

table employs specifications identical to those in the leftmost regressions in Table 6. The

instrumental variable, as discussed above, is the average ratio for each industry of either the

number of companies receiving venture financing or the dollars of venture disbursements to

private R&D expenditures during the period 1965 to 1978. In both cases, the measure of

venture capital activity remains significantly positive at conventional confidence intervals.

The implied value of b continues to be economically significant as well: the second

regression, for instance, suggests that a dollar of venture capital is 14 times more effective

than a dollar of corporate R&D spending in stimulating patenting.20



4.C. Refining the Instrumental Variable Approach

       There remain, however, two lingering concerns about our approach. In Sections 4.C

and 4.D, we attempt to address these concerns in two ways. We will refine our instrumental

variable estimations, and examine the ratio of patenting to R&D.



       The first of these concerns is that the shock in entrepreneurial opportunities, ωit, may

be serially correlated. If so, our instrumental variable estimates may also be biased. The

reader will recall that our original concern about the reduced-form approach was that shocks

to λit would affect both venture disbursements and innovation.          Because of this, our

estimates of the impact of venture capital on patenting in Tables 4 through 7 might be


20. We expected the magnitude of the coefficient on V/R to fall when we employed an
instrumental variable approach, since in principle we are addressing an upward bias
generated by endogeneity. In fact, the coefficient estimates rise, suggesting there may
have been an even more serious downward bias due to errors-in-variables which our
instrument also mitigates.


                                              27
biased. If the transitory component of λit is serially correlated, we face a similar problem

with our instrumental variable approach. Consider a case where there was a positive shock

(an increase in the ωit term) in the mid-1970s that persisted into the 1980s. In this case,

the average of Vit/Rit in the industry prior to 1979 would be correlated with ωit in the

years after 1979. The instrumental variable would be correlated with the disturbance in

patenting, and we would confront a problem very similar to that we faced in the reduced-

form analysis. We address this concern by only using the period between 1965 and 1975 to

compute the average of Vit/Rit. This approach limits this danger, as long as the serial

correlation in the error terms does not persist for five years or more.



        The second concern is that in our eagerness to develop an appropriate instrument

for venture disbursements, we have ignored the fact that our model implies that the level

of corporate R&D in each industry, Rit, will be correlated with shifts in entrepreneurial

opportunities. If the coefficient of Rit is biased, it will distort the coefficient of venture

capital as well.



        We address the second concern in this section by employing an instrument for

R&D in addition to our instrument for Vit/Rit. An ideal instrument will be one that is

correlated with R&D but not correlated with the shift in technological opportunities. One

candidate is the value of the gross industry product, Yit. This is an attractive candidate

for two reasons. First, it is hard not to believe that the amount of R&D in an industry will

increase as the size of the industry does. Second, several models suggest that the value of

industry output may not be correlated with technological opportunities. For instance,



                                               28
Shleifer [1986] and Grossman and Helpman [1991] derive general equilibrium models in

which the price elasticity of demand is equal to one. In this case, a fall in prices

associated with a process innovation will be just offset by the increase in demand, leaving

the value of industry output unchanged.



       The regressions reported in the third and fourth columns of Table 8 thus differ in

two respects from those in the first two columns: the average levels of Vit/Rit are

calculated over a more distant time period (1965 through 1975) and a second

instrumental variable, gross industry product, is used.       In both the reported and

unreported regressions, the results are weaker, particularly when the ratio of venture

disbursements to private R&D is used. This may reflect the fact that gross industry

product is a very blunt instrument for corporate R&D. In Section 4.D, we address these

problems in an alternative manner.



4.D. The Patent-R&D Ratio

       The approach taken above is not entirely satisfying, since it depends on the

assumption that the value of industry output is not correlated with technological

opportunities. While this assumption may be valid in some cases, it is not likely to be a

universal rule. Revisiting our model, however, suggests a second approach. If instead of

estimating a patent production function, we instead consider the determinants of the

patent-R&D ratio, we can eliminate some of our endogeneity problems.




                                            29
          Combining equations (2), (5), and (6), we get an expression for patenting,

                            −1
            αΠ it 
                                 [λ ]
                                          1
                                       γ 1−α
Pit = N it                                   ε it . Dividing by the expression for R&D in Equation (6), we
            g 1 (ν t ) 
                                  it




get

                                       −1
            Pit  αΠ it                          V     
               =                          1 + b it   ε it .                                        (7)
            Rit  g1 (ν t )                      Rit    

The left-hand side of Equation (7) is the patent-R&D ratio.                           Note that changes in

technological opportunities do not influence the patent-R&D ratio exception through

changing either Vit/Rit or the value of an invention (Πit). If changes in technological

opportunities do not effect Πit in a systematic way or if we can find a proxy for the value

of an invention, then we will have gotten around our endogeneity problem. The potency

of venture capital can thus be inferred from the coefficient b on the venture capital-R&D

ratio.



          In order to estimate this equation, we take logarithms of both sides. We ignore

terms which would be absorbed by a constant term or time dummies and linearize around

Vit/Rit=0, obtaining ln( Pit ) − ln( Rit ) = − ln(Π it ) + b(Vit / Rit ) + ln(ε it ). We then take the

two approaches suggested above. First, we assume that the determinants of Vit/Rit (i.e.,

λit and νt) have nothing to do with the value of inventions. We therefore subsume ln(Πit)

in the error term and estimate ln( Pit ) − ln( Rit ) = b(Vit / Rit ) + controls + ln(ε it ).



          Second, we employ a proxy for ln(Πit). In the models of Shleifer [1986] and

Grossman and Helpman [1991], the flow of profits to an invention is a fixed fraction of



                                                                    30
the value of market output. Contemporaneous industry output may thus be a reasonable

proxy for the present value of an invention, or more formally, ln(Π it ) ≈ a + ln(Yit ).

Adopting this simplification, we add the logarithm of industry output to both sides of the

equation.                                            We                       thus                    estimate

ln( Pit ) − ln( Rit ) + ln(Yit ) = − ln(Π it ) + b(Vit / Rit ) + controls + ln(ε it ) + ln(Yit ),   the   right-

hand side of which reduces to − a + b(Vit / Rit ) + controls + ln(ε it ).



         The results from this estimation are presented in Table 9. In Panel A, we present

four regressions (using respectively ln( Pit ) − ln( Rit ) and ln( Pit ) − ln( Rit ) + ln(Yit ) as the

dependent variables). Independent variables include the ratios of venture capital activity

to private R&D and industry and time dummy variables (not reported). In Panel B we

address concerns about persistent residuals by differencing the equation, following the

procedure in Table 7.                With the exception of first-difference equation using

ln( Pit ) − ln( Rit ) as the dependent variable, the Vit/Rit term is strongly positive and

significant throughout. It should be noted, however, that the estimates if b are more

modest using this approach, suggesting that a dollar of venture capital is at most five

times more effective than a dollar of corporate R&D.



5.   Patenting or Innovation?

         While the analyses above suggest a strong relationship between venture capital and

patenting on an industry level, one major concern remains. In particular, it might be thought

that the relationship between venture capital disbursements and patent applications is not

indicative of a relationship between venture disbursements and innovative output. It may be


                                                        31
that the increase in patenting is a consequence of a shift in the propensity to patent

innovations stimulated by the venture financing process itself. In the terms of Equation (2),

there may be correlation between the εit and Vit/Rit terms.



        Two reasons might lead venture-backed firms—or companies seeking venture

financing—to seek to patent inventions that otherwise they would not. First, they may fear

that the venture investors will exploit their ideas. Firms seeking external financing must

make extensive disclosures of their technology. While potential investors may sign non-

disclosure agreements (and may be restrained by reputational concerns), there is still a real

possibility that entrepreneurs’ ideas will be directly or indirectly transferred to other

companies. Alternatively, venture or other investors may find it difficult to discern the

quality of firms’ patent holdings. In order to enhance their attractiveness (and consequently

increase the probability of obtaining financing or the valuation assigned in that financing),

firms may apply for patents on technologies of marginal worth.



        The industry-level data does not provide us much guidance here, but we can explore

these possibilities by examining a broader array of behavior by venture-backed and non-

venture-backed firms. Using a sample of 530 Middlesex County firms, we examine three

alternative measures of the importance of the companies’ intellectual property: the citations

to their earlier patents, the extent of patent renewals, and the involvement of the firm in

intellectual property litigation. The construction of this data set is described in detail in the

Appendix.




                                               32
        We examine four measures of the innovative production by these firms. The first is

very similar to the dependent variable in the industry-level analyses, and is simply intended

as corroboration of the earlier analyses: the number of U.S. patent awards to the firm, its

subsidiaries, and R&D limited partnerships between January 1990 and June 1994.21 The

other measures, however, deserve greater discussion:

•   Trajtenberg [1990] has demonstrated a strong relationship between the number of
    patent citations received and the economic importance of a patent. Using only those
    firms that received any patent awards prior to 1990, we compute the ratio of the
    number of U.S. patent citations during the period between 1990 and June 1994 to
    U.S. patents awarded between 1969 and 1989. This provides a largely external
    measure of the importance of patent awards.

•   The next measure is the percentage of U.S. patents awarded to these firms between
    1981 and 1989 that had expired by their fourth, eighth, and twelfth year
    anniversaries. The U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) has required
    owners of patents awarded since December 1980 to pay renewal fees prior to these
    anniversaries or else the patents expire at these points. Firms may let less important
    patents expire more often. But the interpretation of this variable is problematic: the
    same motivation that leads firms to file for awards on less important technologies
    may lead them to renew these patents.

•   Our final measure of the intellectual property activity of firms is a less frequently
    encountered one: the frequency and extent of intellectual property litigation in which
    the firm has engaged. Models in the law-and-economics literature suggest parties
    are more likely to file suits and pursue these cases to trial when (i) the stakes of the
    dispute are high relative to the costs of the litigation, or (ii) the outcome of the case
    is unclear [Cooter and Rubinfeld, 1989]. Thus, litigation may serve as a rough
    proxy for economic importance. We present these tabulations not only for
    intellectual property litigation as a whole, but separately for patent and trade secret
    suits. These may provide rough measures of the importance of both patents and
    trade secrets to the firm.




21. Two differences with the above analysis should be noted. Because we are here
examining a cross-section of firms rather than a panel data set, our concerns about using
patent awards (instead of applications) are considerably less. For expositional ease, we
report t-statistics rather than standard errors in Tables 11 and 12.




                                               33
        Table 10 presents univariate comparisons. There are substantial differences between

the 122 venture-backed and 408 non-venture-backed firms: the venture firms are more likely

to patent, have previous patents cited, and engage in frequent and protracted litigation of

both patents and trade secrets.       (No differences are significant with respect to patent

renewals.) All the tests of differences in means and medians in these three categories are

significant at least at the five-percent confidence level. In unreported tabulations, we show

that these differences are more pronounced among the privately held firms.



        While these univariate comparisons are suggestive, these differences could be an

artifact of the greater scale of the venture-backed firms, or else their differing industry

composition. We consequently examine these patterns in a regression framework, which

allows us to control (at least partially) for these differences.



        Once again, we use each of the 530 firms as observations. Reflecting the ordinal,

non-negative nature of the dependent variables in most regressions (counts of patent awards,

patent citations, litigation, or docket filings), we employ a Poisson regression specification.22

In the analysis of patent renewals, we employ a double-censored Tobit regression (as the

probability of renewal cannot be less than zero or greater than one). As independent

variables, we employ firm sales and employment in 1990, the year that the firm was

founded, and dummy variables denoting whether the firm was publicly traded and venture

backed in 1990 (and, in some regressions, interactions between these dummy variables).



22. While in the industry-level analysis, each industry had a sufficient number of patents
that the discreteness of the patent counts was largely irrelevant, the same is not true for
the firm-level patenting.


                                                34
We also employ dummy variables for each two-digit Standard Industrial Classification

(SIC) code, which are not reported in the tables.



         The regression results are reported in Tables 11 and 12. In all cases except for the

patent renewals,23 the dummy variable indicating that the firm was venture-backed in 1990

is significantly positive. These results are economically significant in magnitude as well. In

the left-most regression in Panel A of Table 11, the coefficient of 0.77 implies that,

controlling for sales, status as a publicly traded firm, year of formation, and industry, a

venture-backed firm was awarded an additional 2.2 patent awards between January 1990

and June 1994. This is significant relative to the sample mean of 4.8. 24



        Perhaps most striking is the finding in Tables 10 and 12 that venture-backed firms

are not just more frequent litigators of patents, but also of trade secrets. The results in

Sections 3 and 4 do not seem to be driven simply by a greater propensity to patent

discoveries. Rather, the results suggest that there is a real difference in the extent of

innovation in venture-backed and non-venture-backed firms.


23. We only report the regressions employing patent expirations at the fourth
anniversary. The other results are similar.

24. When we interact the dummy variables denoting whether the firm was publicly traded
and venture-backed at the end of 1989, we note that the differential impact in terms of patent
filings and citations is the greatest for private venture-backed firms. It is the public venture-
backed firms, however, that are the most active litigators of patent awards. In unreported
regressions, we examine the sensitivity of the results to a variety of alternative
specifications. These include using the number of intellectual property suits (rather than
docket filings) as the dependent variable, and employing ratings of the importance of patent
and trade secret protection in each industry and industry R&D-to-sales ratios instead of the
industry dummy variables. These alterations have only a modest impact on the results.



                                               35
6.   Conclusions

       This paper examines the impact of venture capital on technological innovation

using both industry- and firm-level data. Patenting patterns across industries over a

three-decade period suggest that there is a significant effect. The results are robust to

different measures of venture activity, sub-samples of industries, and representations of

the relationship between patenting, R&D, and venture capital.



       Our estimates of b (the impact of a dollar of venture capital relative to a dollar of

R&D) are almost always positive and significant, but do vary depending on the equation

estimated. Averaging across the different regressions, we come up with an estimate for b

of 6.2. In the last decade in our sample, the mean ratio of venture capital disbursements

to R&D was 2.92%. Using these two averages, we calculate that venture capital accounts

for 15% of industrial innovations in the past decade.25 Thus, the results suggest that the

venture capital has had a substantial impact on innovation in the U.S. economy. Taken at

face value, the results also suggest that the jump in venture disbursements since 1995

may trigger an additional wave of innovative activity.



       This paper leaves some critical questions unanswered. One set relates to the



25. We average the values of b implied by the coefficients from the five linearized
regressions with ρ=1 and with venture capital measured by disbursements (Table 6,
Regressions 2 and 4; Table 7, Regression 4; Table 8, Regressions 2 and 4) as well as
from the four regressions with venture capital measured by disbursements in Table 9.
The ratio of venture capital disbursements to R&D (V/R) is an average over the years
1983 to 1992 (see Table 1). Our calculation of the share of innovations due to venture
capital is b(V / R) /(1 + b(V / R)).


                                            36
effectiveness of public efforts to transfer the venture capital model to other regions. Even

if venture capital organizations spur technological innovation in the United States, it is

not evident that the model can be seamlessly transferred abroad. Different employment

practices, regulatory policies, or public market conditions might limit the formation of

these funds (see Black and Gilson [1998] for a discussion). Even if it were feasible to

transfer this model, public economic development programs can be subject to political

manipulation: e.g., pressures to award funds to politically connected businesses.        In

contrast to many forms of government intervention to boost economic growth, the

implementation of such programs has received little scrutiny by economists.



       A second broad issue relates to the governance of industrial R&D in the United

States. The apparently greater efficiency of venture funding in spurring innovation raises

questions about whether industrial R&D spending has been optimally directed or exploited.

Jensen [1993], for one, has argued that agency problems have hampered the effective

management of major corporate industrial research facilities. Indeed, it appears that many

major corporate research facilities are today in the process of being restructured. One

striking change is an emphasis by many corporations on adopting programs, such as joint

ventures with smaller firms and strategic investment programs, whose structures resemble

that of venture capital investment [for an overview, see Rosenbloom and Spencer, 1996].

A deeper exploration of the implications of organizing R&D in these alternative manners is

an important area for future research.




                                            37
                                                  References

Bernstein, J., and M.I. Nadiri, 1986, Financing and investment in plant and equipment and
research and development, in M.H. Peston and R.E. Quandt, editors, Prices, competition
and equilibrium (Philip Allan, Oxford), 233-248.

Black, B.S., and R.J. Gilson, 1998, Venture capital and the structure of capital markets:
Banks versus stock markets, Journal of Financial Economics 47, 243-277.

Chan, L.K.C., N. Jegadeesh, and J. Lakonishok, 1995, Evaluating the performance of value
versus glamour stocks: The impact of selection bias, Journal of Financial Economics 38,
269-296.

Cohen, W.M., 1995, Empirical studies of innovative activity, in P. Stoneman, editor,
Handbook of the economics of innovation and technical change (Basil Blackwell, Oxford),
Chapter 6, 182-264.

__________, and R.C. Levin, 1989, Empirical studies of innovation and market structure,
in R. Schmalensee and R.D. Willig, editors, Handbook of industrial organization (Elsevier
Science Publishers, New York), Volume II, Chapter 18, 1059-1107.

Cooter, R.D., and D.L. Rubinfeld, 1989, Economic analysis of legal disputes and their
resolution, Journal of Economic Literature 27, 1067-97.

European          Commission,           1995,         Green    Paper   on     Innovation,
http://europa.eu.int/en/record/green/gp9512/ind_inn.htm.

Freear, J., and W.E. Wetzel, Jr., 1990, Who bankrolls high-tech entrepreneurs?, Journal of
Business Venturing 5, 77-89.

Gompers, P.A., 1995, Optimal investment, monitoring, and the staging of venture capital,
Journal of Finance 50, 1461-1489.

__________, and J. Lerner, 1996, The use of covenants: An empirical analysis of venture
partnership agreements, Journal of Law and Economics 39, 463-498.

__________, and __________, 1998, What drives venture capital fundraising?,
Unpublished working paper, Harvard University.

__________, and __________, 1999, The venture cycle (MIT Press, Cambridge,
forthcoming).

Griliches, Z., 1986, Productivity, R&D, and basic research at the firm level in the 1970s,
American Economic Review 76, 141-154.




                                                   38
__________, 1989, Patents: Recent trends and puzzles, Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity: Microeconomics 291-319.

__________, 1990, Patent statistics as economic indicators: A survey, Journal of Economic
Literature 28, 1661-1707.

__________, and J.A. Hausman, 1986, Errors in variables in panel data, Journal of
Econometrics 31, 93-118.

Grossman, G.M., and E. Helpman, 1991, Quality ladders in the theory of growth, Review of
Economic Studies 58, 43-61.

Hellmann, T., and M. Puri, 1998, The interaction between product market and financing
strategy: The role of venture capital, Unpublished working paper, Stanford University.

Himmelberg, C.P., and B.C. Petersen, 1994, R&D and internal finance: A panel study of
small firms in high-tech industries, Review of Economics and Statistics 76, 38-51.

Horstmann, I., G.M. MacDonald, and A. Slivinski, 1985, Patents as information transfer
mechanisms: To patent or (maybe) not to patent, Journal of Political Economy 93, 837-58.

Jensen, M.C., 1993, Presidential address: The modern industrial revolution, exit, and the
failure of internal control systems, Journal of Finance 48, 831-880.

Kortum, S., 1992, Inventions, R&D, and industry growth, Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation,
Yale University.

__________, 1993, Equilibrium R&D and the patent-R&D ratio, American Economic
Review Papers and Proceedings 83, 450-457.

__________, 1997, Research, patenting, and technological change, Econometrica 65,
1389-1419.

__________, and J. Lerner, 1998, Stronger protection or technological revolution: What is
behind the recent surge in patenting?, Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public
Policy, forthcoming.

Lerner, J., 1995, Venture capitalists and the oversight of private firms, Journal of
Finance 50, 301-318.

Levin, R.C., A.K. Klevorick, R.R. Nelson, and S.G. Winter, 1987, Appropriating the
returns from industrial research and development, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity:
Microeconomics 783-820.

Levine, R., 1997, Financial development and economic growth: An agenda, Journal of
Economic Literature 35, 688-726.



                                           39
Meyer, B.D., 1995, Natural and quasi-experiments in economics, Journal of Business and
Economics Statistics 13, 151-161.

Newey, W., and K. West, 1987, A simple, positive semi-definite, heteroskedasticity and
autocorrelation consistent covariance matrix, Econometrica 55: 703-708.

Rajan, R., and L. Zingales, 1998, Financial dependence and growth, American Economic
Review 88, 559-586.

Romer, P.M., 1990, Endogenous technological change, Journal of Political Economy 98,
S71-S102.

Rosenbloom, R.S., and W.J. Spencer, editors, 1996, Engines of innovation: U.S. industrial
research at the end of an era (Harvard Business School Press, Boston).

Schmookler, J., 1966, Invention and economic growth (Harvard University Press,
Cambridge).

Shleifer, A., 1986, Implementation cycles, Journal of Political Economy 94, 1163-1190.

Trajtenberg, M., 1990, A penny for your quotes: Patent citations and the value of
inventions, Rand Journal of Economics 21, 172-87.

White, L.J., editor, 1988, Private antitrust litigation: New evidence, new learning (MIT
Press, Cambridge).




                                           40
                                                    Figure 1: Venture Capital Fundraising and Disbursements, 1965-1997


                           $10.0




                            $8.0
Billions of 1992 Dollars




                            $6.0
                                                                                                     Fundraising




                            $4.0




                                                                                                                   Disbursements
                            $2.0




                            $0.0
                                65




                                                     70




                                                                          75




                                                                                                80




                                                                                                                     85




                                                                                                                                     90




                                                                                                                                            95
                              19




                                                   19




                                                                        19




                                                                                              19




                                                                                                                   19




                                                                                                                                   19




                                                                                                                                          19
                            Note: Data on venture capital fundraising is not available prior to 1969.
                                                                             Figure 2: Coefficient on the Venture Capital Independent Variable for Sub-Samples with
                                                                                                Different Ratios of Venture Capital to Private R&D


                                                                    0.15
                                                                            Note: The figure reports on a regression identical to that in the third column of Panel A of Table 4,
Coefficient on Venture Capital Variable [95% confidence interval]




                                                                            except that the venture capital coefficient is allowed to differ for each quatile of firm.


                                                                    0.10




                                                                    0.05




                                                                    0.00




                                                                    -0.05




                                                                    -0.10
                                                                                    Lowest V/R                          2nd Quartile                        3rd Quartile            Highest V/R
                                               Figure 3: Change in Ratio of Venture Capital to Private R&D Around 1979 Policy Shift


                                    20.0%


                                    18.0%


                                    16.0%
Change in V/R, 1965-75 to 1985-90




                                    14.0%


                                    12.0%


                                    10.0%


                                    8.0%


                                    6.0%


                                    4.0%


                                    2.0%


                                    0.0%
                                        0.0%      0.2%        0.4%       0.6%        0.8%         1.0%     1.2%        1.4%       1.6%   1.8%
                                                                                    Average V/R, 1965-75
                                                                                Table 1

Patenting activity of, R&D expenditures by, and venture capital disbursements for U.S. manufacturing industries, by year. All tabulations refer to Standard
Industrial Classification codes 13 and 20 through 39. Patent applications refer to the number of ultimately successful patent applications filed in each year. All dollar
figures are in millions of 1992 dollars. The ratios of venture capital disbursements to R&D expenditures are computed using all venture capital disbursements and
early-stage venture disbursements only.

                     # of Patent             R&D           Venture Capital Disbursements                    Ratio of Venture Capital to R&D
Year                 Applications       Expenditures ($M)    # of Firms    Amount ($Ms)                         All VC      Early-Stage Only
1965                        50,278                  25,313               8            13                              0.05%             0.02%
1966                        48,740                  27,573               3             2                              0.01%             0.00%
1967                        48,900                  29,515               9            24                              0.08%             0.07%
1968                        49,980                  31,387              25            37                              0.12%             0.08%
1969                        51,614                  33,244              66           149                              0.45%             0.38%
1970                        53,950                  32,883              63           126                              0.38%             0.24%
1971                        54,776                  32,360              57           224                              0.69%             0.41%
1972                        49,777                  33,593              52           209                              0.62%             0.44%
1973                        45,807                  36,169              74           235                              0.65%             0.30%
1974                        44,465                  37,323              42            81                              0.22%             0.13%
1975                        44,082                  35,935              41           118                              0.33%             0.24%
1976                        44,026                  38,056              47            83                              0.22%             0.10%
1977                        41,550                  39,605              57           138                              0.35%             0.21%
1978                        42,648                  42,373            116            255                              0.60%             0.37%
1979                        44,941                  45,318            152            301                              0.66%             0.28%
1980                        41,726                  48,700            231            635                              1.30%             0.80%
1981                        39,137                  52,012            408          1,146                              2.20%             1.39%
1982                        38,039                  55,033            466          1,388                              2.52%             1.29%
1983                        34,712                  58,066            656          2,391                              4.12%             1.97%
1984                        33,905                  63,441            709          2,347                              3.70%             1.95%
1985                        36,732                  66,860            646          1,951                              2.92%             1.42%
1986                        41,644                  68,476            639          2,211                              3.23%             1.62%
1987                        46,434                  67,700            713          2,191                              3.24%             1.57%
1988                        51,355                  69,008            660          2,076                              3.01%             1.54%
1989                        55,103                  70,456            669          1,995                              2.83%             1.56%
1990                        58,358                  69,714            557          1,675                              2.40%             1.11%
1991                        58,924                  69,516            422          1,026                              1.48%             0.71%
1992                        60,771                  70,825            469          1,571                              2.22%             1.05%
                                                                           Table 2

Patenting activity of U.S. manufacturing industries, by industry and five-year period. Patent applications refer to the number of ultimately successful patent
applications filed in each year.

#    Industry                                             SIC Codes         1965-69       1970-74       1975-79       1980-84       1985-89       1990-92
1    Food and kindred                                             20          1,790         1,957         1,365         1,201         1,555         1,138
2    Textile and apparel                                       22,23          3,246         3,004         2,639         2,339         3,787         2,923
3    Lumber and furniture                                      24,25          3,028         3,052         2,877         2,160         3,149         2,539
4    Paper                                                        26          2,738         2,312         1,924         1,626         2,493         1,859
5    Industrial chemicals                               281,282,286          22,124        22,353        18,507        15,612        15,882        11,673
6    Drugs                                                       283          2,099         2,873         3,561         4,399         8,262         6,281
7    Other chemicals                                284,285,287-289          14,559        14,403        11,760        10,461        11,283         8,405
8    Petroleum refining and extraction                         13,29            892           794           850           827           744           450
9    Rubber products                                              30          8,504         8,169         6,726         5,823         9,028         6,641
10   Stone, clay and glass products                               32          2,677         2,671         2,366         2,062         2,790         2,147
11   Primary metals                                               33          2,245         2,183         1,689         1,340         1,710         1,156
12   Fabricated metal products                                    34         19,805        19,484        18,479        14,894        18,359        13,211
13   Office and computing machines                               357          5,487         5,752         4,931         4,922         6,638         5,905
14   Other non-electrical machinery                 351-356,358-359          60,790        61,139        52,426        42,634        48,135        35,534
15   Communication and electronic                            366,367         30,838        28,380        24,679        24,302        30,417        25,793
16   Other electrical equipment                         361-365,369          23,768        22,403        19,213        16,995        19,736        14,197
17   Transportation equipment                       371,373-375,379          10,829        12,119         9,715         7,096         8,579         6,610
18   Aircraft and missiles                                   372,376          1,634         1,434         1,200           905         1,113           835
19   Professional and scientific instruments                      38         18,690        19,244        17,287        15,683        21,026        17,235
20   Other machinery                                     21,27,31,39         13,769        15,050        15,054        12,237        16,582        13,521
     Total                                                                  249,512       248,775       217,247       187,518       231,268       178,053
                                                      Table 3

Number and dollar amount of venture capital disbursements for U.S. manufacturing industries, by industry and
five-year period. The count of venture capital investments in each five-year period is the sum of the number of firms
receiving investments in each year. All dollar figures are in millions of 1992 dollars.

                              Panel A: Venture Capital Investments (#s)
#    Industry                                1965-69 1970-74 1975-79 1980-84 1985-89 1990-92
1    Food and kindred                              1         9        6     23     80     41
2    Textile and apparel                           4        12        9     19     27     33
3    Lumber and furniture                          2         8        6     24     62     16
4    Paper                                         2         2        2      2     12      4
5    Industrial chemicals                          1         1        1      6     18     10
6    Drugs                                         1        12       34    245    554    337
7    Other chemicals                               1         7        8     10     52     25
8    Petroleum refining and extraction             3         3       26     92     27      8
9    Rubber products                               1         5        6     19     11      3
10   Stone, clay and glass products                0         1        3     14     48     23
11   Primary metals                                0         3        5     20     44     15
12   Fabricated metal products                     0         0        0      2      1      1
13   Office and computing machines                39        84     108     744    641    205
14   Other non-electrical machinery               12        12       32    254    280     98
15   Communication and electronic                 23        65       60    497    736    298
16   Other electrical equipment                    0         6       16     36     52     28
17   Transportation equipment                      1         7        5      6     24     10
18   Aircraft and missiles                         0         0        0     12     20      2
19   Professional and scientific instruments      13        37       70    383    549    252
20   Other machinery                               7        14       16     62     89     39
     Total                                       111       288     413   2,470  3,327  1,448
                   Panel B: Venture Capital Disbursements (millions of 1992 $s)
#    Industry                                1965-69 1970-74 1975-79 1980-84 1985-89 1990-92
1    Food and kindred                              4        19        7     25    212    128
2    Textile and apparel                           6        15       14     27     45     83
3    Lumber and furniture                          4        17        9     26    200     30
4    Paper                                         1         8        3      3     22      1
5    Industrial chemicals                          0         1        1     41     34     16
6    Drugs                                         0        15     136     623  1,869  1,317
7    Other chemicals                               1        40        4      9    155     27
8    Petroleum refining and extraction            12         6       92    359    110     12
9    Rubber products                               1         3       15     28      8      8
10   Stone, clay and glass products                0         1        5     34     99     40
11   Primary metals                                0         8       11     25     67     19
12   Fabricated metal products                     0         0        0      1      0      1
13   Office and computing machines                67       404     288   3,253  2,491    613
14   Other non-electrical machinery               64        17       37    677    669    140
15   Communication and electronic                 44       189       82  1,746  2,646  1,042
16   Other electrical equipment                    0         8       53     78    107     41
17   Transportation equipment                      0        10        4      9     47     42
18   Aircraft and missiles                         0         0        0     19     19      7
19   Professional and scientific instruments      13        86     114     811  1,449    606
20   Other machinery                               7        28       22    113    176    102
     Total                                      $225      $874    $895 $7,907 $10,423 $4,273
                                                       Table 4

Ordinary least squares regression analysis of the patent production function (ρ      ρ→ 0 case). The sample consists of
annual observations between 1965 and 1992 of 20 National Science Foundation industries. The dependent variable is
the logarithm of the number of (ultimately successful) U.S. patent applications filed by U.S. inventors in that year and
industry. The independent variables are in each case the logarithms of federally and privately funded industrial R&D
expenditures (in millions of 1992 dollars) and the logarithm of either the number of companies receiving venture
capital financing in that year or the dollar volume of such financings (in millions of 1992 dollars). In the third and
fourth regressions of Panel A and all regressions in Panel B, we employ dummy variables for each year and industry
(the dummy coefficients are not reported). In the first and second regressions in Panel B, we employ the amount of seed
and early-stage venture financings rather than the total amount of venture financings. In the third and fourth
regressions in Panel B, we employ annual observations only of those ten industries with a R&D-to-sales ratio above the
median in 1964. Standard errors are in brackets.

                                 Panel A: Basic Regressions
                                                    No Dummy                        Year and Industry
                                                     Variables                          Dummies
Privately funded industrial R&D (α/(1+b))            0.01        0.05                   0.16       0.18
                                                   [0.07]      [0.07]                 [0.03]     [0.03]
Venture capital (αb/(1+b)):

  Firms receiving funding                                    0.18                        0.09
                                                           [0.04]                      [0.01]
  Venture disbursements                                                   0.11                        0.06
                                                                        [0.03]                      [0.01]
Federally funded industrial R&D                              0.11         0.10           0.01         0.01
                                                           [0.03]       [0.03]         [0.01]       [0.01]
Constant                                                     6.34         6.15
                                                           [0.41]       [0.41]
Sum of squared residuals                                  675.16       685.49
                                                                        10.78       10.94
R2                                                           0.12         0.11
                                                                          0.99        0.99
R2 relative to dummy variable only case                                   0.24        0.23
Number of observations                               560        560       560         560
    Panel B: Sensitivity of Results to Venture Capital Measures and Sample Definition
                                                Using Early-Stage      Using High R&D
                                                    Financings         Industries Only
Privately funded industrial R&D (α/(1+b))            0.15       0.18      0.31        0.37
                                                   [0.03]     [0.03]    [0.05]      [0.05]
Venture capital (αb/(1+b)):

  Firms receiving funding                                    0.10                        0.15
                                                           [0.01]                      [0.02]
  Venture disbursements                                                   0.06                        0.09
                                                                        [0.01]                      [0.01]
Federally funded industrial R&D                              0.01         0.01          -0.09        -0.08
                                                           [0.01]       [0.01]         [0.02]       [0.02]
Sum of squared residuals                                   10.62        10.90            5.84         6.20
 2
R                                                            0.99         0.99           0.99         0.99
R2 relative to dummy variable only case                      0.25         0.23           0.48         0.45
Number of observations                                       560          560            280          280
                                                                                   Table 5

Non-linear least squares regression analysis of the patent production function. The sample consists of annual observations between 1965 and 1992 of 20
National Science Foundation industries. The dependent variable is the logarithm of the number of (ultimately successful) U.S. patent applications filed by U.S.
inventors    in   that   year    and    industry.      The      specification   that    we   estimate     in   the    first   and     fifth    regressions   is
                          ρ        ρ
ln( Pit ) = (α / ρ ) ln( Rit + bVit ) + control variables + ε it , where Rit denotes privately funded industrial R&D expenditures (in millions of 1992 dollars) and
Vit the number of companies receiving venture capital financing in that year (in the first through fourth regressions) or the dollar volume of such financings (in
millions of 1992 dollars) (in the fifth through eighth regressions). The control variables in each case are the logarithm of federally funded industrial R&D
expenditures (in millions of 1992 dollars) and dummy variables for each year and industry (the dummy coefficients are not reported). In the second and sixth
regressions, we use the same specification, but constrain the venture capital parameter to be zero. In the third and seventh regressions, ρ is constrained to be zero, so
the specification is ln( Pit ) = (α /(1 + b)) ln( Rit ) + (αb /(1 + b)) ln(Vit ) + control variables + ε it . In the fourth and eighth regressions, ρ is constrained to
be equal to one. For the second through fourth and sixth through eighth regressions, the table also reports the test statistic and p-value from a likelihood ratio test of
the null hypothesis that the restricted model is valid, versus the unconstrained model. Standard errors are in brackets.

                                                     Using Firms Receiving Venture Backing                       Using Venture Disbursements
                                                    Unconstrained         Constrained                      Unconstrained          Constrained
                                                                    b=0      ρ=0      ρ=1                                  b=0       ρ=0      ρ=1
Returns to scale parameter (α)                                0.25    0.25      0.26     0.25                        0.22     0.25     0.24     0.22
                                                            [0.02]  [0.03]    [0.02]   [0.02]                      [0.02]   [0.03]   [0.03]   [0.02]
Venture capital parameter (b):

  Firms receiving funding                                    87.59         0.00         0.57    156.30
                                                           [121.01]         ----      [0.13]    [43.06]
  Venture disbursements                                                                                             29.44         0.00       0.32     51.74
                                                                                                                   [34.46]         ----    [0.03]    [14.84]
Substitution parameter (ρ)                                      0.90        ----        0.00       1.00               0.89         ----      0.00       1.00
                                                              [0.24]        ----         ----       ----            [0.24]         ----       ----       ----
Federally funded industrial R&D                                 0.01       0.02         0.01       0.01               0.01        0.02       0.01       0.01
                                                              [0.01]     [0.01]       [0.01]     [0.01]             [0.01]      [0.01]     [0.01]     [0.01]
Sum of squared residuals                                      10.17      12.23        10.78      10.18              10.21       12.23      10.94      10.21
R2                                                              0.99       0.98         0.98       0.99               0.99        0.98       0.98       0.99
R2 relative to dummy variable only case                         0.28       0.14         0.24       0.28               0.28        0.14       0.23       0.28
Likelihood ratio statistic                                               103.3          32.6        0.6                         101.1        36.7        0.2
p-Value, Likelihood ratio test                                           0.000        0.000      0.439                          0.000      0.000      0.655
Number of observations                                          560        560          560        560                 560        560        560        560
                                                        Table 6

Ordinary least squares regression analysis of the patent production function (linear approximation to ρ=1 case).
The sample consists of annual observations of 20 National Science Foundation industries. The dependent variable is
the logarithm of the number of (ultimately successful) U.S. patent applications filed by U.S. inventors in that year and
industry. The independent variables are in each case the logarithms of federally and privately funded industrial R&D
expenditures (in millions of 1992 dollars) and the logarithm of the ratio of either the number of companies receiving
venture capital financing in that year or the dollar volume of such financings (in millions of 1992 dollars) to privately
funded R&D. In the third and fourth regressions, we employ annual observations only of those ten industries with a
R&D-to-sales ratio above the median in 1964. Standard errors are in brackets.

                                                       Year and Industry            Using High R&D
                                                           Dummies                  Industries Only
Privately funded industrial R&D (α)                        0.25       0.24             0.38       0.37
                                                         [0.03]     [0.03]           [0.04]     [0.05]
Venture capital / Privately funded R&D (αb):

  Firms receiving funding                                   6.49                      21.30
                                                          [0.94]                      [2.80]
  Venture disbursements                                                  1.73                        5.14
                                                                       [0.26]                      [0.75]
Federally funded industrial R&D                             0.01         0.01          -0.07        -0.07
                                                          [0.01]       [0.01]         [0.02]       [0.02]
Sum of squared residuals                                  11.18        11.26            6.21         6.45
R2                                                          0.99         0.99           0.99         0.99
R2 relative to dummy variable only case                     0.21         0.20           0.45         0.43
Number of observations                                      560          560            280          280
                                                         Table 7

Difference regression analysis of the patent production function (ρ     ρ→ 0 and linear approximation to ρ=1 cases).
The sample consists of differenced observations of 20 National Science Foundation industries at four intervals covering
1965 to 1992. The dependent variable is the difference between the four-year average (e.g., between 1973 and 1976) of
the logarithm of the number of (ultimately successful) U.S. patent applications filed by U.S. inventors in that year and
industry and the four-year average eight years earlier (e.g., that in the 1965 to 1968 period). In the first and second
regressions, we employ the specification used in Table 4 (the ρ→0 case); in the third and fourth regressions, we
employ the linear approximation to the non-linear regression estimated in Table 6 (the ρ=1 approximation). The
independent variables are in each case the differences between the four-year averages of the logarithms of federally and
privately funded industrial R&D expenditures (in millions of 1992 dollars) and either the number of companies
receiving venture capital financing in that year or the dollar volume of such financings (in the first two regressions, the
logarithm of the venture capital measures is used; in the third and fourth, the ratio of the venture measures to privately
funded R&D) and the values eight years earlier, as well as dummy variables for the time periods (the dummy
coefficients are not reported). Standard errors are in brackets.

                                                                                             Approximation to
                                                                     ρ→0 case                   ρ=1 case
Difference in Privately funded industrial R&D                        0.17       0.17            0.24       0.22
                                                                   [0.08]     [0.08]          [0.07]     [0.07]
Difference in Venture capital:

  Firms receiving funding                                            0.08
                                                                   [0.03]
  Venture disbursements                                                           0.06
                                                                                [0.02]
Difference in Venture capital / Privately funded R&D:

  Firms receiving funding                                                                        7.40
                                                                                               [3.70]
  Venture disbursements                                                                                        2.29
                                                                                                             [1.04]
Difference in Federally funded industrial R&D                        0.02         0.02           0.03          0.02
                                                                   [0.02]       [0.02]         [0.02]        [0.02]
Sum of squared residuals                                             1.31         1.29           1.38          1.36
R2                                                                   0.82         0.83           0.81          0.82
R2 relative to dummy variable only case                              0.28         0.29           0.24          0.25
Number of observations                                                 60           60             60            60
                                                        Table 8

Instrumental variable (IV) regression analysis of the patent production function (linear approximation to ρ=1
case). The sample consists of annual observations between 1965 and 1992 of 20 National Science Foundation
industries. The dependent variable is the logarithm of the number of (ultimately successful) U.S. patent applications
filed by U.S. inventors in that year and industry. The specification that we estimate is the linear approximation to non-
linear estimation employed in Table 6, with privately funded industrial R&D expenditures (in millions of 1992 dollars)
and the ratio of the number of companies receiving venture capital financing in that year or the dollar volume of such
financings (in millions of 1992 dollars) to privately funded R&D as independent variables. The control variables in
each case are the logarithm of federally funded industrial R&D expenditures (in millions of 1992 dollars) and dummy
variables for each year and industry (the dummy coefficients are not reported). In the first and second regressions, we
employ as an instrument a variable that equals zero if the observation is from before 1979, and otherwise equals the
average value between 1965 and 1978 of the ratio of either the number of companies receiving venture capital
financing or the dollar volume of such financings (in millions of 1992 dollars) divided by the privately funded R&D
spending. In the third and fourth regressions, we employ a similar dummy variable, but only use observations between
1965 and 1975 to compute the ratio. We also use the gross industry product (in millions of 1992 dollars) as an
instrumental variable for privately funded R&D. Standard errors (in brackets) are based on the Newey-West
autocorrelation-consistent covariance estimator (with a maximum of three lags).

                                                        IV Computed Using              1965-1975 IV;
                                                        1965 to 1978 Period           Also GDP as IV
Privately funded industrial R&D (α)                          0.25       0.23              0.52      0.55
                                                           [0.06]     [0.06]            [0.10]    [0.14]
Venture capital / Privately funded R&D (αb):

  Firms receiving funding                                     8.69                        5.74
                                                            [2.89]                      [3.77]
  Venture disbursements                                                    3.19                       -0.36
                                                                         [1.19]                      [2.04]
Federally funded industrial R&D                               0.01         0.01           0.02         0.02
                                                            [0.01]       [0.01]         [0.01]       [0.02]
Sum of squared residuals                                    11.30        11.96          13.47        14.59
R2                                                            0.99         0.98           0.98         0.98
R2 relative to dummy variable only OLS case                   0.20         0.16           0.05        -0.03
Number of observations                                        560          560            560          560
                                                        Table 9

Ordinary least squares levels and difference regression analyses of the patent-R&D ratio. The sample in Panel
A consists of annual observations between 1965 and 1992 of 20 National Science Foundation industries; in Panel B, the
sample consists of differenced observations of the 20 industries at four intervals. The dependent variable in the first
two regressions of Panel A is the logarithm of the number of (ultimately successful) U.S. patent applications filed by
U.S. inventors in that year and industry minus the logarithm of privately funded industrial R&D spending (in millions
of 1992 dollars). The dependent variable in the third and fourth regressions of Panel A is the logarithm of the number
of (ultimately successful) U.S. patent applications filed by U.S. inventors in that year and industry minus the logarithm
of privately funded industrial R&D spending plus the logarithm of gross industry product (both in millions of 1992
dollars). In Panel B, the dependent variables are the differences between the four-year average (e.g., between 1973 and
1976) of the dependent variables in Panel A and the four-year average eight years earlier (e.g., that in the 1965 to 1968
period). The independent variable in Panel A is the ratio of number of companies receiving venture capital financing in
that year or the dollar volume of such financings (in millions of 1992 dollars) to privately funded R&D. In Panel B,
this variable is differenced in the same manner as the dependent variable. In Panel A, we employ dummy variables for
each year and industry; in Panel B, dummy variables for the time periods. (The dummy coefficients are not reported.)
Standard errors are in brackets. In Panel A, they are based on the Newey-West autocorrelation-consistent covariance
estimator (with a maximum of three lags).

                                         Panel A: Levels Regressions
                                                                                 Dependent Variable
                                                                      ln(Pit)-ln(Rit)       ln(Pit)-ln(Rit)+ln(Yit)
Venture capital / Privately funded R&D (b):

  Firms receiving funding                                              7.31                        9.03
                                                                     [2.50]                      [2.67]
  Venture disbursements                                                             1.45                        2.70
                                                                                  [0.55]                      [0.85]
Sum of squared residuals                                    28.91                 29.56          34.32        33.97
R2                                                           0.97                   0.97          0.97          0.97
R2 relative to dummy variable only case                      0.04                   0.02          0.06          0.07
Number of observations                                       560                    560           560           560
                                   Panel B: Difference Regressions
                                                                                Dependent Variable
                                                                     Difference in            Difference in
                                                                     ln(Pit)-ln(Rit)       ln(Pit)-ln(Rit)+ln(Yit)
Difference in Venture capital / Privately funded R&D (b):

  Firms receiving funding                                              7.76                      15.15
                                                                     [6.21]                      [6.96]
  Venture disbursements                                                             0.89                        5.08
                                                                                  [1.77]                      [1.92]
Sum of squared residuals                                               4.04         4.14           5.07         4.89
 2
R                                                                      0.71         0.70           0.65         0.64
R2 relative to dummy variable only case                                0.03         0.01           0.08         0.11
Number of observations                                                   60           60             60           60
                                                       Table 10

Comparisons of intellectual property activities of venture-backed and non-venture-backed firms. The sample
consists of 530 firms based in Middlesex County, Massachusetts. The second and third columns present the means
for 122 venture-backed and 408 non-venture-backed firms on several measures of intellectual property activities.
“Patents” is the number of patent filings by the firm and its subsidiaries between January 1990 and June 1994.
“Citations/patent” is the ratio of citations in patents awarded between January 1990 and June 1994 to patents
awarded to the firm and its subsidiaries between 1969 and 1989, divided by the number of patents awarded to the
firm and its subsidiaries between 1969 and 1989. (This ratio is only calculated for firms that were awarded patents
during the 1969-1989 period.) “Patent expiration” indicates the fraction of patents awarded each firm between 1981
and 1989 that had expired by their fourth, eighth and twelfth anniversaries. (This ratio is only calculated for firms
that were awarded patents during the 1981-1989 period.) The final rows indicate the number of intellectual
property suits (both in aggregate and for patents and trade secrets only) that were open in Middlesex County
Superior Court or the Federal District for Massachusetts between January 1990 and June 1994, and the number of
docket filings in these cases in this period. The fourth and fifth columns present p-values from t-tests of the equality
of means and Wilcoxon tests of the equality of medians.

                                    Mean for Firms that are…                 p-Value, Comparison of …
                                 Venture-Backed Non-Venture                       Means        Medians
Patents, 1990 to mid-1994                   12.74            2.40                  0.029          0.000
Citations/patent                             6.44            4.06                  0.016          0.004
Patent expiration:
  At 4 years                                    0.15               0.18              0.619             0.660
  At 8 years                                    0.42               0.29              0.141             0.165
  At 12 years                                   0.39               0.30              0.320             0.281
Intellectual property suits:
  Number of suits                               0.79               0.18              0.000             0.000
  Number of docket filings                     30.29               4.21              0.000             0.000
Patent suits only:
  Number of suits                               0.36               0.08              0.000             0.000
  Number of docket filings                     15.35               2.04              0.000             0.000
Trade secret suits only:
  Number of suits                               0.34               0.08              0.000             0.000
  Number of docket filings                      6.43               1.86              0.007             0.000
                                                      Table 11

Regression analyses of patenting, patent citation, and patent expiration patterns of venture-backed and non-
venture-backed firms. The sample consists of 530 firms based in Middlesex County, Massachusetts. (The analysis
in Panel B only includes firms that were awarded patents during the 1969-1989 period; in Panel C, those awarded
patents between 1981 and 1989.) In the first panel, the dependent variable is the number of patent filings by the firm
and its subsidiaries between January 1990 and June 1994. In the second panel, the dependent variable is the number
of citations in patents awarded between January 1990 and June 1994 to patents awarded to the firm and its
subsidiaries between 1969 and 1989. In the third panel, the dependent variable is fraction of patents awarded the
firm between 1981 and 1989 that had expired by the fourth anniversary. The independent variables include the
employment and sales of the firm in January 1990, the year the firm was founded, dummy variables denoting
whether the firm was publicly traded and venture backed in January 1990 (as well as interactions between these
terms), (in all regressions other than the renewal analysis) dummy variables for the two-digit Standard Industrial
Classification code of the firm (not reported), and (in the citation and renewal analyses only) the number of patents
awarded to the firm and its subsidiaries between 1969 and 1989. In each case, the dummies are coded as 1.0 if the
answer to the posed question is in the affirmative. The patent award and renewal analyses employ a Poisson
regression specification; the expiration analysis, a double-censored Tobit regression. Absolute t-statistics in
brackets.

             Panel A: Dependent Variable is Patent Awards Between 1990 and 1994
                                  With No Interaction Terms         With Interaction Terms
Firm Sales in 1990 ($ billions)    0.33 [64.26]                    0.33 [64.04]
Firm Employment in 1990 (000s)                      0.18 [29.65]                   0.18 [30.22]
Year Firm was Founded               -0.01 [5.78]   -0.003 [1.64]   -0.01 [4.71] -0.001 [0.89]
Publicly Traded at End of 1989?    1.91 [29.23]     1.60 [22.14]   2.23 [25.12]    2.13 [22.43]
Venture Backed at End of 1989?     0.77 [11.56]      0.49 [6.74]
Venture Backed and Public?                                          0.56 [7.46]     0.05 [0.53]
Venture Backed and Private?                                        1.24 [11.68]    1.29 [11.83]
Log likelihood                          -1572.3         -1286.9        -1556.7         -1242.1
χ2-Statistic                            13589.0          3204.9        13620.2          3294.4
p-Value                                   0.000            0.000          0.000           0.000
Number of observations                       428             419            428             419
 Panel B: Dependent Variable is Citations to Earlier Patent Awards Between 1990 and 1994
                                  With No Interaction Terms         With Interaction Terms
Firm Sales in 1990 ($ billions)    0.15 [77.91]                    0.15 [77.68]
Firm Employment in 1990 (000s)                      0.12 [55.07]                   0.13 [55.31]
Year Firm was Founded             -0.01 [24.27]    -0.01 [22.84]  -0.01 [24.03] -0.01 [22.26]
Publicly Traded at End of 1989?    1.82 [60.09]     1.53 [48.12]   1.85 [45.70]    1.78 [43.79]
Venture Backed at End of 1989?     0.47 [17.81]      0.18 [6.07]
Venture Backed and Public?                                         0.46 [16.05]     0.02 [0.71]
Venture Backed and Private?                                        0.52 [10.00]    0.66 [12.45]
Patent Awards, 1969-89 (000s)      1.03 [85.46]     0.62 [41.25]   1.03 [83.98]    0.57 [36.53]
Log likelihood                          -4746.2         -3701.3        -4745.5         -3644.8
χ2-Statistic                            48942.6         30509.2        48943.8         30622.1
p-Value                                   0.000            0.000          0.000           0.000
Number of observations                       142             140            142             140
   Panel C: Dependent Variable is Probability of Patent Expiration by Fourth Anniversary
                                  With No Interaction Terms         With Interaction Terms
Firm Sales in 1990 ($ billions)     -0.08 [1.00]                   -0.09 [1.07]
Firm Employment in 1990 (000s)                      -0.08 [1.19]                   -0.07 [1.23]
Year Firm was Founded               -0.01 [2.63]    -0.01 [2.69]   -0.01 [2.66]    -0.01 [2.72]
Publicly Traded at End of 1989?     -0.05 [0.29]     0.01 [0.06]   -0.19 [0.86]    -0.14 [0.62]
Venture Backed at End of 1989?       0.07 [0.38]     0.09 [0.48]
Venture Backed and Public?                                          0.25 [0.98]     0.29 [1.11]
Venture Backed and Private?                                        -0.09 [0.37]    -0.08 [0.33]
Patent Awards, 1969-89 (000s)        0.29 [0.31]     0.87 [0.74]    0.41 [0.44]     0.96 [0.83]
Log likelihood                          -100.86           -99.33       -100.34           -98.74
χ2-Statistic                                9.03            9.63          10.06           10.81
p-Value                                   0.108            0.086          0.122           0.094
Number of observations                       124             122            124             122
                                                      Table 12

Poisson regression analyses of intellectual property litigation patterns of venture-backed and non-venture-
backed firms. The sample consists of 530 firms based in Middlesex County, Massachusetts. In the first panel, the
dependent variable is the number of docket filings in all intellectual property suits involving the firm and its
subsidiaries that were open in Middlesex County Superior Court or the Federal District for Massachusetts between
January 1990 and June 1994. In the second panel, the dependent variable is the number of docket filings in patent
cases only; in the third, the number in trade secret cases. The independent variables include the employment and
sales of the firm in January 1990, the year the firm was founded, dummy variables denoting whether the firm was
publicly traded and venture backed in January 1990 (as well as interactions between these terms), and dummy
variables for the two-digit Standard Industrial Classification code of the firm (not reported). In each case, the
dummies are coded as 1.0 if the answer to the posed question is in the affirmative. Absolute t-statistics in brackets.

Panel A: Dependent Variable is Filings in Intellectual Property Suits Between 1990 and 1994
                                  With No Interaction Terms          With Interaction Terms
Firm Sales in 1990 ($ billions)    0.14 [34.47]                    0.14 [34.50]
Firm Employment in 1990 (000s)                     0.14 [44.47]                     0.14 [44.06]
Year Firm was Founded            -0.002 [2.30]      0.01 [4.65]   -0.003 [3.32]     0.005 [4.19]
Publicly Traded at End of 1989?    2.50 [68.10]    2.31 [60.11]    2.09 [39.23]     2.08 [38.76]
Venture Backed at End of 1989?     1.15 [32.14]    0.89 [24.39]
Venture Backed and Public?                                         1.36 [32.14]     1.02 [23.67]
Venture Backed and Private?                                          0.59 [9.13]     0.58 [8.86]
Log likelihood                         -7391.3         -6501.7          -7336.3         -6484.6
χ2-Statistic                           14825.8         14080.5          14935.9         14114.7
p-Value                                   0.000           0.000           0.000            0.000
Number of observations                      428             419             428              419
        Panel B: Dependent Variable is Filings in Patent Suits Between 1990 and 1994
                                  With No Interaction Terms          With Interaction Terms
Firm Sales in 1990 ($ billions)    0.12 [19.88]                    0.13 [20.33]
Firm Employment in 1990 (000s)                     0.21 [40.75]                     0.21 [40.28]
Year Firm was Founded              -0.01 [7.94]     0.01 [3.66]     -0.01 [8.58]     0.01 [3.38]
Publicly Traded at End of 1989?    2.36 [46.26]    1.95 [35.15]    1.89 [25.08]     1.63 [20.28]
Venture Backed at End of 1989?     1.52 [29.80]    1.24 [23.34]
Venture Backed and Public?                                         1.75 [28.98]     1.40 [22.53]
Venture Backed and Private?                                        0.92 [10.04]      0.82 [8.83]
Log likelihood                         -4324.8         -3253.1          -4291.8         -3237.9
χ -Statistic
 2
                                        9237.7         10610.4           9303.8         10640.6
p-Value                                   0.000           0.000           0.000            0.000
Number of observations                      428             419             428              419
    Panel C: Dependent Variable is Filings in Trade Secret Suits Between 1990 and 1994
                                  With No Interaction Terms          With Interaction Terms
Firm Sales in 1990 ($ billions)     0.01 [0.89]                      0.01 [0.89]
Firm Employment in 1990 (000s)                      0.04 [4.70]                      0.04 [4.70]
Year Firm was Founded               0.01 [8.32]     0.02 [8.49]      0.01 [8.32]     0.02 [8.49]
Publicly Traded at End of 1989?    2.30 [38.08]    2.23 [36.61]    2.29 [29.02]     2.24 [28.36]
Venture Backed at End of 1989?      0.43 [7.21]     0.38 [6.31]
Venture Backed and Public?                                           0.44 [6.19]     0.37 [5.24]
Venture Backed and Private?                                          0.42 [4.12]     0.39 [3.88]
Log likelihood                         -2970.6         -2925.5          -2970.6         -2925.5
χ -Statistic
 2
                                        3154.4          3119.7           3154.4          3119.8
p-Value                                   0.000           0.000           0.000            0.000
Number of observations                      428             419             428              419
                                    Appendix: Data Sources


1. The Industry Data Set

       Patent applications. The patent data by industry are from Kortum [1992], updated using
information on U.S. patent awards by technology class in a variety of databases prepared by the
U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO). We compile from these databases the number of
successful patents applied for by U.S. inventors in each year. Because of variations in the speed
with which the USPTO handles patent applications (in particular, the periodic slow-downs
associated with budget crises [Griliches, 1989]), it is preferable to compile the number of
successful applications filed each year, rather than the awards granted annually. This
information is not known until all patents filed in a given year are issued. Thus, while we can be
confident about essentially how many successful patent applications were filed in 1980, the
number of successful applications filed in 1995 is still quite uncertain.

       Concerns about data incompleteness determined the last year of the analysis. While we
can project from preliminary data (e.g., the number of patent applications filed in 1992 that were
awarded through 1996) how many applications filed in each year will ultimately be granted, we
do not wish to have to make large imputations. Consequently, we only extend the analysis
through 1992.

         In addition to defining the time frame of the analysis, we have to consider which patents
to include in the analysis. USPTO databases compile not only awards to U.S. inventors, but also
those to foreign firms and individuals seeking protection in the U.S. market. Because we seek a
proxy for the innovative output of the United States, we drop patents that were not originally
filed in the United States.

        The USPTO does not compile total patent applicants by industry. Even though we know
the names of the applicants, many of these firms have multiple lines-of-business. Thus, we rely
instead on a concordance that relates the primary classification to the most likely industry of the
inventing firm in which the patent is classified. This concordance, based on a study of Canadian
patenting behavior, employs the International Patent Classification to which the patent is
assigned to determine the industry where it is likely to be used.

        One challenge with both compilations of patent awards is the need to adjust the number
of recent patent awards. While we exclude from the sample (as discussed above) patent
applications from recent years, a few patents applied for in the early 1990s will not be awarded
until the first decade of the 21st century. We adjust the observed counts of patent awards
between 1987 and 1992 upward to reflect the number of patents that can expected to be awarded
based on historical patterns.

        Venture capital disbursements. The consulting firm Venture Economics compiles
investments by venture capital funds (also known as disbursements). Venture capital
organizations and major institutional investors provide quarterly reports to Venture Economics
on their portfolio holdings, in exchange for summary data on investments and returns. This data
have been collected since the formation of Venture Economics’ predecessor entity, S.M. Rubel
and Co., in 1961. While Venture Economics does not obtain reports on all funds, because
multiple venture groups invest in a typical venture-backed firm, the database identifies at least
85% of all venture capital transactions [Lerner, 1995].

        We obtain Venture Economics tabulations that list total disbursements by the industry of
the firm receiving the financing. The industry codes are classified according to a proprietary
scheme developed by Venture Economics. We map these into our industry classification
scheme, with the help of a concordance between the Venture Economics and the Standard
Industrial Classification (SIC) codes.

        One complex question is what constitutes a venture capital investment. Until the late
1970s, there were not distinct funds set up to make investments in leveraged buyout transactions.
Rather, venture capital groups would invest into a wide variety of transactions: seed and early-
stage financings, expansion rounds of rapidly-growing entrepreneurial firms, and buyouts and
other special situations (e.g., purchases of blocks of publicly traded securities). Since the 1970s,
most buyout investing by private equity funds has been done through specialized funds dedicated
to these transactions (e.g., Kohlberg, Kravis, and Roberts). Some venture capital funds,
however, have continued to invest in buyouts (this was a particularly common phenomenon in
the mid-1980s) and other special situations. Meanwhile, some groups frequently classified as
buyout specialists (such as Welch, Carson, Anderson, and Stowe) also make a considerable
number of venture capital investments.

         We wish to focus our analysis on the relationship between innovation and investments in
growing firms where the types of information problems that venture capitalists address are most
critical. While many buyouts create value by eliminating inefficiencies and improving cash
flows, these types of transactions are outside the focus of this paper. The standard tabulation of
venture capital investments prepared by Venture Economics includes investments by venture
capital funds into both venture transactions and buyouts, as well as venture investments by
groups classified as buyout funds. We undertake a special tabulation of the venture capital
investments only, whether made by groups classified as venture capital or buyout funds. To
insure compatibility with the other data series, we include only investments into firms based in
the United States (whether the venture fund was based domestically or not). In order to test the
robustness of our results, we also compile the seed and early-stage investments by these funds
using a similar approach. We collect both the dollar amount invested and the number of
companies funded in each year.

       R&D expenditures. We compile information on privately and federally funded R&D
performed by industry from the U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF). Both data series have
been compiled since 1957 as part of the “Survey of Research and Development in Industry,”
using an industry scheme unique to NSF. Occasionally, data series for smaller industries are
suppressed in particular years. In these cases, it is necessary to extrapolate based on the relative
level of R&D spending in previous years.26 We slightly collapse this scheme to insure

26. The NSF will not report data when one or two firms account for the majority of the R&D in
an industry or when firms representing more than one-half the R&D spending do not respond to
the survey. Ideally, we would also have compiled expenditures by universities relevant to each
comparability with the patent classification discussed above, for a total of twenty industries. The
R&D data are summarized in Tables A-1 and A-2.

        Gross industry product. The Department of Commerce’s Bureau of Economic Analysis
has estimated gross product by industry for the two-digit SIC classes, as well as some important
three-digit classes, using the current definitions of these industries. Not all three-digit SIC codes
necessary for this analysis are compiled in their database. For the missing industries, we collect
this information from the printed volumes of the Annual Survey of Manufacturers. While this
does not report gross product by industry, it does compile a related measure, value added. In
each case, we examine the distribution of value added across the three-digit industry classes, and
then assign the two-digit industry’s gross product in a proportionate manner. Where necessary,
we adjust the categories reported in these volumes to reflect today’s classification structures.
(For instance, prior to 1972, guided missiles were included in SIC 19, “ordnance and
accessories.” When that category was disbanded, they were moved to SIC 37, “transportation
equipment”).

         Book and market equity values. A frequently employed proxy for the extent of information
problems is the ratio of a firm’s market and book values of equity. In an ideal setting, we might
have calculated such ratios for the privately held firms in the industry, or those contemporaneously
receiving venture financing, but accounting and valuation data are difficult to obtain for privately
held firms. Thus, following the lead of Gompers [1995], we compute the ratio of these measures
for the firms in the industry that are publicly traded.

        Because of concerns about back-filling in the Compustat data [discussed in Chan,
Jegadeesh, and Lakonishok, 1995], we compute these ratios only using firms traded on the New
York and American Stock Exchanges. We compute the ratio of the book-to-market equity
(rather market-to-book) values because for some firms, the book value can be zero or negative.
We calculate three measures at the beginning of the year of the observation: the average ratio
across all firms in the industry, the average when weighted by the market value of each firm, and
the median ratio.27 We examine all quarterly observations of publicly traded firms in the same
industry. Using data from Compustat and the Center for Research into Security Prices (CRSP),
we compute the book value of common equity as well as the market value of the common stock.
We define the book value as the par value of the common shares, plus retained earnings and
paid-in capital, less the par value of any common stock held as treasury stock.

2. The Firms Data Set


industry. Associating the classes of academic research with particular industries, however,
proved problematic.

27. Because the average ratio can be affected by extreme outliers (some distressed firms may
have substantial liabilities and negative book values; some inactive firms have very low market
capitalizations while retaining substantial assets), it has a much greater variance than the other
measures. All three measures, however, are highly correlated. When no quarterly observations
are available, we use annual data.
       In order to assess the behavior of firms at a more disaggregated level, we examine firms
whose headquarters are in a single county, Middlesex County, Massachusetts. We include in the
sample all 130 manufacturing firms based here that were publicly traded between January 1990 and
June 1994, as well as a random sample of 400 such firms that were privately held. By using a
sample of firms in one region, rather than a diverse array of locations, we can examine their
innovative activities in more depth.28

        Middlesex County includes much of the "Route 128" high-technology complex, as well as
concentrations of more traditional manufacturers. The first four columns of Table A-3 contrast the
mix of industrial establishments and employment in the U.S. and Middlesex County in 1990. The
comparison indicates that the mixture of traditional industry in the county is fairly representative of
the nation as a whole. Technology-intensive sectors, however, are disproportionately represented.

        We include all firms in Compustat with headquarters in Middlesex County that file financial
data with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission for any quarter between the first quarter of
1990 and the second quarter of 1994. Following the analysis above, we confine our analysis to
manufacturing firms (Standard Industrial Codes 20-39), but also include firms in SIC codes 7372
and 7373, who make packaged software and operating systems for mainframe computers.29 We
exclude shell companies that are established merely to make an acquisition and "SWORDs,"
publicly traded subsidiaries that finance R&D. After these deletions, the sample consists of 130
firms.

         Publicly traded firms are likely to have different characteristics than other companies. Thus,
we seek to include a representative sample of private firms as well. There is no single directory that
lists all the firms in the county. Conversations with economic development officials, however,
indicate that two directories taken together provide quite comprehensive coverage of manufacturing
firms. George D. Hall's Directory of Massachusetts Manufacturers, which is prepared with the
cooperation of the Associated Industries of Massachusetts, provides the most detailed listing of
traditional manufacturers, while the Corporate Technology Directory specializes in high-technology
firms. We draw 200 firms based in Middlesex County each from these directories. In both cases,
the information is collected via a survey (and, in the case of Hall's, through consultation with the
records of the Associated Industries of Massachusetts). All firms were required to have been in


28. In particular, we can examine not only patent filings but also intellectual property litigation. In
both the federal and state court systems, intellectual property cases are often not identified as such
by the courts' internal tracking systems. They are often recorded simply as "miscellaneous tort" or
"contract" disputes, depending upon the circumstances of the case. We do not use the firms' 10-K
filings with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission to identify litigation for two reasons.
First, we wish to include in our sample privately held firms, which need not make such filings.
Second, while firms are required to report any material litigation in these filings, they are often
highly selective in the suits that they actually disclose.

29. Our rationale is that while software manufacturers are classified as service providers, their
relationship with customers is more akin to that of manufacturers. The analyses below are robust to
the deletion of these observations.
business by the end of 1989, though some exit (e.g., through bankruptcy or liquidation) during the
sample period.

        The fifth and sixth columns of Table A-3 compare the firms in the sample with those in the
nation and county. We classify the public firms in our sample into industries using the primary SIC
provided by Compustat; for the other firms, we employ the SIC code of the first-listed line-of-
business in the Hall's and Corporate Technology directories. (Both directories list lines-of-business
in order of importance, as reported by the firm.)30

        We obtain a variety of information about these firms. From Compustat or the two
business directories, we determine the sales and employment in 1990, as well as the year in
which the firm was founded. From CRSP, we determine if and when the firm went public. We
determine whether the firm was venture-backed from Venture Economics. We also use the
number of patents that the firm has been awarded in the period 1969 through 1994 (as well as
citations to these awards), which we identify using Mead's LEXIS/PATENT/ALL file and the
USPTO's CASSIS CD-ROM database. (We include awards to subsidiaries, R&D limited
partnerships, and earlier names, which we identify through the data sources cited below.) We
determine whether patents have been renewed using a database of all patent expirations between the
inception of the patent renewal system in December 1980 and December 1997.

         We finally identify all litigation involving these firms in the federal and state judicial
districts that include their headquarters: the Federal District for Massachusetts and the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts' Middlesex Superior Court. Both systems include every lawsuit
that was open during the sample period, even if the suit was settled almost immediately after the
initial complaint was filed. We identify 1144 cases that were open on January 1, 1990 or were filed
between January 1, 1990 and June 30, 1994. After eliminating those cases that are very unlikely to
involve intellectual property issues, we examined the remaining case files.31 The docket records
also allow us to compute the total number of docket filings by the plaintiffs, defendants, and other
parties in the dispute between January 1, 1990 and June 30, 1994. (This approach to characterizing

30. The comparison of the sample with the federal and county data is not precise for three reasons.
First, the tabulation of the sample firms shows the distribution of firms; the U.S. and county
columns present the pattern of establishments. (Many firms will have multiple establishments.)
Second, firms with less than twenty employees are only sampled in County Business Patterns, and
thus are underrepresented. The two directories appear to have quite comprehensive coverage of
smaller firms, who generally welcome the visibility that a listing provides. Consequently, industries
with many small firms may have greater representation in the sample. Finally, the tabulation of
employment in the sample firms includes employees that work in Middlesex County and elsewhere.
The county tabulation presents the distribution of employees working in Middlesex County,
regardless of where the parent firm has its headquarters.

31. In addition, we could not examine nine dockets that may or may not have involved
intellectual property issues. These cases had been either lost or sealed. (While most of the case
files were accessible at the clerk of the court's offices at the two courthouses, we found many
case files in off-site storage archives, in courthouses elsewhere in the county or state, or in the
possession of judges' docket clerks.)
disputes was also used in the Georgetown antitrust study [White, 1988].) The records do not
provide information on the extent of activity at the appellate level. Thus, they may tend to
understate the magnitude of litigation in cases that are appealed.

         Table A-4 characterizes the venture-backed and non-venture-backed firms in the sample.
The 122 venture-backed firms are significantly larger in sales and employment than the 408 non-
venture-backed firms, and are more likely to be publicly traded. They tend to have been founded
later, and (as a result) have accumulated a smaller stock of patents. The venture-backed firms are
concentrated in high-technology industries, as the final three lines of each panel in Table A-4
illustrate. First, the average ratio of R&D-to-sales of all public firms that reported R&D data in
1990 with a primary assignment in Compustat to the same four-digit SIC code as the venture-
backed firms is higher than the ratios of the companies matched to the non-venture-backed firms.
Similar patterns emerge from two responses to the Yale survey on intellectual property [described in
Levin, et al., 1987]. The “Yale Rating” refers to the average rating of the importance of patents
and trade secrecy (on a 1 to 6 scale, with larger numbers indicating greater importance) of firms in
the same three-digit SIC code. Respondents in the same industry as the venture-backed firms
tended to give higher ratings to the importance of both forms of protection.

3. Data Sources

Patent Applications:

Case-Western Reserve University, Center for Regional Economic Issues, 1997, Unpublished
patent database (Cleveland).

U.S. Patent and Trademark Office, Office of Electronic Information Products, Technology
Assessment and Forecast Program, 1996, Unpublished tabulation of patenting trends in the
United States (Washington).

U.S. Patent and Trademark Office, Office of Electronic Information Products, Technology
Assessment      and    Forecast       Program,       1997,    All technologies   report,
http://www.uspto.gov/web/offices/ac/ido/oeip/taf/all_tech.pdf

Venture Capital Disbursements:

Securities Data Company, Venture Economics, Inc., 1997, Venture intelligence database
(Boston).

R&D Expenditures:

U.S. National Science Foundation, Division of Science Resource Studies, 1980, Research and
development in industry—1979 (U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington).

U.S. National Science Foundation, Division of Science Resource Studies, 1997, Survey of
research and development in industry, http://www.nsf.gov/sbe/srs/sird/start.htm.
Gross Industry Product:

Friedenberg, H.L., and R.M. Beemiller, 1997, Comprehensive revision of gross state product by
industry, 1977-94, Survey of Current Business 77 (June) 15-41.

U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, 1996 and earlier years, Annual survey of
manufacturers (U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington).

U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis, 1997, Unpublished data file:
Gross state product by industry—Original experimental estimates, 1963-1986, (Washington).

Yuskavage, R.E., 1996, Improved estimates of gross product by industry, 1959-94, Survey of
Current Business 76 (August) 133-155.

Book and Market Equity Values:

Standard and Poors’ Compustat Services, Compustat database (New York).

University of Chicago, Graduate School of Business, Center for Research in Securities Prices,
1997, CRSP database (Chicago).

Identifying Sample of Middlesex Country Firms:

Corporate Technology Information Services, 1994 and earlier, Corporate technology directory
(Corporate Technology Information Services, Woburn, Mass.).

G.D. Hall Company, 1995 and earlier, George D. Hall's directory of Massachusetts manufacturers
(G.D. Hall Company, Boston).

Standard and Poors’ Compustat Services, 1997, Compustat database (New York).

Supplemental Data on Middlesex County Firms:

Commerce Register, 1995 and earlier, Massachusetts directory of manufacturers (Commerce
Register, Hokokus, NJ).

Dun's Marketing Services, 1995 and earlier, Million dollar directory (Dun's Marketing Services,
Parsippany, NJ).

Files of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts’ Middlesex Superior Court (Cambridge) and the
Federal District for Massachusetts.

Gale Research, 1995 and earlier, Ward's business directory of U.S. private and public companies
(Gale Research, Detroit).

Mead Data Central, LEXIS/NEXIS, Inc., 1994, PATENTS/ALL database (Dayton).
Moody's Investor Service, 1995 and earlier, Moody's OTC industrial manual (Moody's Investor
Service, New York).

National Register Publishing Company, 1995 and earlier, Directory of leading private companies,
including corporate affiliations (National Register Publishing Company, Wilmette, Illinois).

Predicasts, Inc., 1995 and earlier, Predicasts F&S index of corporate change (Predicasts, Inc.,
Cleveland).

Securities Data Company, Venture Economics, Inc., 1997, Venture intelligence database
(Boston).

U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, 1991, Country business patterns, 1990
(U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington).

U.S. Patent and Trademark Office, Office of Electronic Information Products, 1995, Cassis
patents BIB CD-ROM database (Washington).

U.S.      Patents    and    Trademark    Office,    1998,     Patent    expiration    database,
http://ftp.uspto.gov/expired_patents.
                                                                         Table A-1

R&D expenditures by U.S. manufacturing industries, by industry and five-year period. All figures are in millions of 1992 dollars.

#    Industry                                        1965-69       1970-74       1975-79       1980-84       1985-89       1990-92
1    Food and kindred                                  3,271         3,741         4,333         5,643         7,231         4,032
2    Textile and apparel                                 962           909           869         1,002         1,376           781
3    Lumber and furniture                                269           945         1,204         1,111           936           670
4    Paper                                             2,419         2,871         3,554         4,019         3,980         3,520
5    Industrial chemicals                             14,780        13,582        14,376        18,587        22,023        15,518
6    Drugs                                             6,384         9,033        12,365        17,870        25,730        21,395
7    Other chemicals                                   3,191         4,105         4,504         6,776        10,826         7,086
8    Petroleum refining and extraction                 7,135         7,423         8,784        13,657        12,207         7,270
9    Rubber products                                   3,089         3,738         3,559         4,330         4,054         3,572
10   Stone, clay and glass products                    2,430         2,535         2,734         3,625         4,898         1,521
11   Primary metals                                    4,293         4,231         5,070         4,916         4,222         2,006
12   Fabricated metal products                         2,812         3,664         3,578         4,343         4,390         2,278
13   Office and computing machines                    10,802        17,045        23,398        35,485        53,779        33,061
14   Other non-electrical machinery                    8,455        10,226        12,543        15,849        14,596         9,445
15   Communication and electronic                     16,902        20,262        22,106        37,661        50,187        20,711
16   Other electrical equipment                       12,483        13,903        13,764        13,597         8,560         7,722
17   Transportation equipment                         19,713        25,133        30,340        34,324        46,152        28,489
18   Aircraft and missiles                            19,104        16,631        17,043        27,177        34,692        18,113
19   Professional and scientific instruments           6,958        10,259        14,748        24,186        30,321        21,101
20   Other machinery                                   1,580         2,094         2,417         3,094         2,342         1,763
     Total                                          $147,032      $172,328      $201,288      $277,251      $342,501      $210,055
                                                          Table A-2

Ratio of venture capital disbursements to R&D expenditures for U.S. manufacturing industries, by industry and five-year
period. All dollar figures are in millions of 1992 dollars. The ratios of venture capital disbursements to R&D expenditures are
computed using all venture capital disbursements and early-stage venture disbursements only.

                       Panel A: All Venture Capital Disbursements/R&D Spending
#    Industry                                  1965-69 1970-74 1975-79 1980-84 1985-89 1990-92
1    Food and kindred                             0.14% 0.50% 0.16% 0.44% 2.93% 3.18%
2    Textile and apparel                          0.57% 1.68% 1.59% 2.72% 3.24% 10.59%
3    Lumber and furniture                         1.44% 1.77% 0.72% 2.32% 21.39% 4.40%
4    Paper                                        0.06% 0.28% 0.10% 0.08% 0.56% 0.03%
5    Industrial chemicals                         0.00% 0.00% 0.01% 0.22% 0.15% 0.10%
6    Drugs                                        0.01% 0.17% 1.10% 3.49% 7.26% 6.16%
7    Other chemicals                              0.03% 0.98% 0.09% 0.13% 1.43% 0.38%
8    Petroleum refining and extraction            0.16% 0.08% 1.04% 2.63% 0.90% 0.17%
9    Rubber products                              0.04% 0.07% 0.42% 0.64% 0.20% 0.21%
10   Stone, clay and glass products               0.00% 0.02% 0.19% 0.93% 2.01% 2.62%
11   Primary metals                               0.00% 0.19% 0.21% 0.51% 1.59% 0.94%
12   Fabricated metal products                    0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.03% 0.01% 0.03%
13   Office and computing machines                0.62% 2.37% 1.23% 9.17% 4.63% 1.85%
14   Other non-electrical machinery               0.75% 0.16% 0.30% 4.27% 4.58% 1.48%
15   Communication and electronic                 0.26% 0.93% 0.37% 4.64% 5.27% 5.03%
16   Other electrical equipment                   0.00% 0.06% 0.38% 0.57% 1.25% 0.53%
17   Transportation equipment                     0.00% 0.04% 0.01% 0.03% 0.10% 0.15%
18   Aircraft and missiles                        0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.07% 0.05% 0.04%
19   Professional and scientific instruments      0.19% 0.84% 0.77% 3.35% 4.78% 2.87%
20   Other machinery                              0.46% 1.34% 0.90% 3.65% 7.51% 5.81%
                  Panel B: Early-Stage Venture Capital Disbursements/R&D Spending
#    Industry                                  1965-69 1970-74 1975-79 1980-84 1985-89 1990-92
1    Food and kindred                             0.14% 0.22% 0.05% 0.14% 1.69% 2.17%
2    Textile and apparel                          0.36% 0.90% 0.79% 0.67% 1.46% 3.05%
3    Lumber and furniture                         0.00% 0.74% 0.51% 1.19% 11.23% 2.07%
4    Paper                                        0.00% 0.28% 0.00% 0.08% 0.21% 0.01%
5    Industrial chemicals                         0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.21% 0.04% 0.07%
6    Drugs                                        0.01% 0.14% 0.92% 2.53% 4.40% 3.39%
7    Other chemicals                              0.00% 0.62% 0.03% 0.10% 0.55% 0.21%
8    Petroleum refining and extraction            0.13% 0.08% 0.56% 1.40% 0.59% 0.11%
9    Rubber products                              0.00% 0.05% 0.32% 0.41% 0.17% 0.00%
10   Stone, clay and glass products               0.00% 0.02% 0.00% 0.50% 1.37% 1.46%
11   Primary metals                               0.00% 0.15% 0.12% 0.46% 1.35% 0.17%
12   Fabricated metal products                    0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.01% 0.00%
13   Office and computing machines                0.55% 1.32% 0.73% 4.21% 1.74% 0.87%
14   Other non-electrical machinery               0.68% 0.08% 0.12% 2.08% 2.11% 0.49%
15   Communication and electronic                 0.19% 0.46% 0.16% 2.68% 2.69% 1.97%
16   Other electrical equipment                   0.00% 0.04% 0.20% 0.33% 0.69% 0.27%
17   Transportation equipment                     0.00% 0.03% 0.00% 0.00% 0.04% 0.01%
18   Aircraft and missiles                        0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.02% 0.01% 0.04%
19   Professional and scientific instruments      0.10% 0.65% 0.26% 1.95% 2.86% 1.39%
20   Other machinery                              0.31% 1.12% 0.36% 2.34% 3.54% 1.84%
                                                                            Table A-3

The distribution of firms in the analysis of venture-backed and non-venture-backed firms. We compare the number of firms and employees across
manufacturing industries (two-digit Standard Industrial Code classes). We compare all firms in the United States, all those in Middlesex County, Massachusetts, and
the 530 in the sample. The U.S. and Middlesex County figures are based on U.S. Department of Commerce [1991]. These present the number of establishments
(one firm may have multiple establishments). Not all firms with fewer than twenty employees are included. The county figures are only for those employees
actually working in the county. The sample columns present the number of firms, and include all employees of these firms, whether or not they work in Middlesex
County.


                                                 United States                             Middlesex County                                 Sample
                                             Percent of        Percent of                Percent of        Percent of                Percent of       Percent of
 SIC Class                               Establishments       Employees              Establishments       Employees                      Firms       Employees
 20: Food & kindred products                       5.5%            8.0%                        3.7%            4.3%                      2.6%             8.3%
 21: Tobacco products                                0.0             0.2                         0.0             0.0                        0.0             0.0
 22: Textile mill products                           1.7             3.6                         1.1             1.7                        0.6             0.1
 23: Apparel & other textiles                        6.4             5.7                         2.9             1.6                        1.5             0.3
 24: Lumber & wood products                          9.3             3.9                         2.2             0.7                        1.3             0.1
 25: Furniture & fixtures                            3.2             2.8                         1.7             0.5                        0.8             0.0
 26: Paper & allied products                         1.7             3.5                         1.9             3.7                        0.6             0.1
 27: Printing & publishing                          16.8             8.6                        17.7             9.4                        3.2             2.8
 28: Chemicals & allied products                     3.3             4.8                         3.8             3.3                        9.1             3.2
 29: Petroleum & coal products                       0.6             0.6                         0.5             0.1                        0.2             0.0
 30: Rubber & misc. plastics                         4.1             4.9                         3.5             3.5                        2.5             0.7
 31: Leather & leather products                      0.5             0.7                         0.4             0.1                        0.2             2.7
 32: Stone, clay & glass                             4.3             2.9                         2.1             1.0                        0.8             0.1
 33: Primary metal industries                        1.8             4.0                         1.0             1.4                        1.3             0.5
 34: Fabricated metal products                      10.1             8.2                         9.3             4.8                        5.1             1.3
 35: Industrial machinery                           13.8            10.6                        14.8            14.5                      19.1             24.8
 36: Electronic equipment                            4.6             8.6                        11.1            16.8                      14.7             12.3
 37: Transportation equipment                        2.9             9.9                         1.4             5.1                        0.8             0.3
 38: Instruments                                     2.7             5.3                         9.7            19.4                      16.4             24.9
 39: Miscellaneous                                   4.8             2.2                         4.3             1.8                        2.3             1.9
 7372 & 7373: Software                               1.9             0.9                         7.0             6.4                      17.2             15.4
                                                  Table A-4

Characteristics of venture-backed and non-venture-backed firms. The sample consists of 530 firms
based in Middlesex County, Massachusetts. The tabulation presents the summary statistics for the 122 firms
that had received venture capital financing prior to January 1990, and the 408 that did not. The “Publicly
Traded at End of 1989?” variable is a dummy that takes on the value 1.0 if the firm was publicly traded. The
final three items in each panel describe the industry of the respondents. The first is the average ratio of R&D-
to-sales of all publicly traded firms that reported R&D data in 1990 with a primary assignment in Compustat
to the same four-digit SIC code as the firm. The “Yale Rating” refers to the average rating of the importance
of patents and trade secrecy (on a 1 to 6 scale, with larger numbers indicating greater importance) of firms in
that three-digit Standard Industrial Classification code industry [from the survey described in Levin, et al.,
1987].

                                Panel A: 122 Venture-Backed Firms
                                         Mean      Median Stan. Dev.                   Minimum       Maximum
Firm Sales in 1990 ($ millions)            173          11      1199                          0        12942
Firm Employment in 1990                    526        106       2103                          8        20184
Year Firm was Founded                     1977       1981          15                      1880          1989
Publicly Traded at End of 1989?            0.30                                               0             1
Patent Awards, 1969-1989                     10          0         41                         0           375
Characteristics of Industry:
  R&D/Sales Ratio in 1990                  0.11       0.10       0.08                       0.00           0.38
  Yale Rating of Patents                    4.1        3.7        1.0                        2.5            6.0
  Yale Rating of Trade Secrecy              4.4        4.4        0.5                        3.0            6.0
                             Panel B: 408 Non-venture-backed Firms
                                         Mean      Median Stan. Dev.                   Minimum       Maximum
Firm Sales in 1990 ($ millions)              44          2        477                         0          9268
Firm Employment in 1990                    184          19        940                         2        11768
Year Firm was Founded                     1967       1974          25                      1842          1989
Publicly Traded at End of 1989?            0.11                                               0             1
Patent Awards, 1969-1989                     13          0        149                         0          2644
Characteristics of Industry:
  R&D/Sales Ratio in 1990                  0.06       0.04       0.06                       0.00           0.38
  Yale Rating of Patents                    3.6        3.7        0.7                        2.0            5.8
  Yale Rating of Trade Secrecy              4.2        4.2        0.6                        2.0            6.0
