Unemployment Insurance Savings Accounts
Martin Feldstein and Daniel Altman*
Unemployment insurance exists to provide protection against the hardship that would
otherwise be caused by unemployment. Unfortunately, it also distorts incentives in ways that cause
inefficient increases in total unemployment. In this paper we analyze empirically a modification of
the traditional unemployment insurance system. We show that this alternative, based on individual
savings accounts, can substantially reduce the adverse incentive effects of the existing unemployment
insurance system without any decrease in the protection of those who become unemployed.
Our analysis is therefore fundamentally different from previous studies investigating how the
adverse incentive effects of the current tax-financed unemployment insurance system could be
reduced by changes in basic program parameters such as the level and duration of benefits, the
experience rating rules, and the provision of bonuses for hiring the unemployed (Baily, 1978; Meyer,
1995; Mortenson, 1994). Many others have no doubt considered the possibility of substituting
individual saving accounts for the current tax-financed UI system (see, for example, Coloma, 1996;
Orszag and Snower, 1997) but we know of no empirical research on its feasibility.
The basic system that we examine requires each individual to save a fraction of his or her
wage income in a special Unemployment Insurance Saving Account (UISA). If the individual loses
his job and would be eligible for unemployment benefits under the current UI rules, he withdraws an
*

Martin Feldstein is Professor Economics at Harvard University and President of the National
Bureau of Economic Research. Daniel Altman is a graduate student at Harvard University and a
NBER-National Institutes on Aging Pre-Doctoral Fellow. The authors are grateful for useful
discussions and comments to Richard Freeman, Ed Glaeser, John Gruber, Caroline Hoxby, Larry
Katz, Bruce Meyer, Jim Poterba, and members of the Harvard Seminar on Labor Economics.
Uisa.120598

1

amount equal to the regular UI benefits from his personal UISA. If the funds in the account are not
sufficient to pay the benefit, the government lends the necessary amount to the account. Accounts
earn a market rate of return on existing balances and pay the government the same return on
borrowed amounts. At retirement age the funds in the UISA are merged into the individual’s IRA or
other investment-based retirement saving plans. An individual who dies with a positive account
balance bequeaths that amount to his spouse or other heirs. The government cancels the debt of those
who reach retirement age (or die before then) with negative account balances. More details of the
plan are described in section 2 below.
All unemployed individuals would therefore receive the same cash amounts during spells of
unemployment from their UISAs as they would under the existing unemployment insurance rules.
Their full current protection is thus maintained. Any individual whose UISA always has a positive
balance (and who expects that it would remain positive) would completely internalize the cost of
unemployment benefits and therefore would not have any incentive to increase in an inefficient way
the frequency or duration of his unemployment spells because of the availability of those benefits.
The adverse incentive problem would arise only for individuals who expect that they will retire or die
with negative balances in their UISAs. For such individuals, the benefits received because of
additional unemployment have no personal cost.

They face the same incentives to excess

unemployment that they would under the existing unemployment system, but without the discipline
that comes from employer experience rating.1
1

Experience rating can affect firms’ decisions to lay off employees and the duration of
unemployment among those on temporary layoff. Although the U.S. unemployment insurance
rules provide for experience rating, many firms do not face effective experience rating. We return
Uisa.120598

2

The feasibility of this savings account approach to unemployment insurance depends on the
extent to which insured unemployment is concentrated in a subgroup of the population. Some
individuals experience a disproportionate share of the total unemployment days and this concentration
applies to insured unemployment as well as to unemployment in general (see, e.g., Meyer and
Rosenbaum, 1996). If the insured unemployment is sufficiently concentrated, individuals may not be
able to finance their own unemployment benefits by saving moderate shares of their earnings in the
UISAs.2 The use of individual savings accounts to finance unemployment benefits would be irrelevant
if those who collect benefits would typically have negative balance accounts and therefore be drawing
on the government guarantee.
Before carrying out the current research, we regarded this as a potentially serious problem
that could make the savings account approach unworkable. It is important therefore to assess the
proportion of individuals who develop negative account balances and the extent to which UI benefits
are now paid to individuals who would have negative accounts. To do so we examine the extensive
experience represented by individuals in the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID). Our analysis
of these data implies that approximately five percent of employees would retire or die with negative
account balances and that only about half of all benefits from the UISAs would be paid to such
individuals. The cost to the government of the unrecovered loans in the negative accounts is

to these issues below, including an option that provides some of the incentive effects of
experience rating.
2

To the extent that the identities of those who will experience large amounts of lifetime
unemployment are unknown at the start of their working lives, the social provision and subsidy of
unemployment benefits would therefore be a kind of optimal catastrophic insurance.
Uisa.120598

3

substantially less than the cost of the current unemployment insurance system, permitting a reduction
in the current distortionary payroll tax as well as in the distortionary effects of the existing benefit
system. These findings tell us that the savings account approach to unemployment insurance,
combined with a government guarantee, can be an economically viable policy option.
The first section of this paper summarizes the existing unemployment insurance system and
discusses the various ways in which it causes a rise in the frequency and duration of unemployment.
In section 2 we describe the operation of the Unemployment Insurance Savings Accounts and the
several alternative funding options that we will analyze in the remainder of the paper. Section 3 then
uses the Panel Study of Income Dynamics to show how a large group of individuals would have been
affected by these alternatives to the existing unemployment insurance system over periods of up to
25 years. Section 4 analyzes the distributional effects of the UISA system and of the associated
reduction in the UI payroll tax. Section 5 briefly discusses the potential mutually reinforcing effect
of a behavioral response of unemployment to the improved incentives implied by the UISA system.
There is a brief concluding section.
1.

The Current Unemployment Insurance System and Its Problems
To discuss the distorting effects of the current UI system on the frequency and duration of

unemployment, it is useful to begin by reviewing the current system’s basic rules. Although
unemployment insurance rules differ among the individual states, the basic structure is quite similar
throughout the country. An individual who has worked a sufficient amount or earned a sufficient

Uisa.120598

4

amount of wage income during the past year is eligible to receive benefits if he or she is laid off.3
Benefits are approximately 50 percent of the unemployed individual’s previous gross wage, subject
to a minimum weekly benefit floor that raises the percentage for low wage workers and a maximum
weekly benefit ceiling that lowers the percentage for high wage works. Some states also provide
supplementary benefits if the unemployed individual has a dependent spouse or children. The average
weekly benefit in 1997 was $193. Benefits are generally payable for a maximum of 26 weeks.
Benefits are subject to federal personal income tax but not to the Social Security payroll tax
(or the equivalent tax for self-employed individuals). Some states include unemployment benefits in
taxable income for assessing the state income tax.
Unemployment benefits are financed by taxes levied on firms by the state governments. Each
firm pays a percentage of the earnings of each employee up to a relatively low maximum level that
varies among the states; the maximum taxable wage for the UI tax was only $7,000 in most states in
1997. The percentage that each firm pays depends on the past experience of that firm as a UI taxpayer
and of its employees as UI benefit recipients. This “experience rating” system is intended to cause the
firms to internalize the cost of the unemployment benefits of its employees. However, because there
are both lower and upper limits on these state UI tax rates, many firms are not effectively experience
rated, i.e., an additional layoff or an additional week of unemployment by a former employee would

3

Individuals who quit a job may be eligible for benefits if their quitting is found to be “for just
cause.” In some states quitters are eligible after an extensive waiting period. Unemployed
individuals who are new entrants to the labor force or reentrants without recent work experience
are not eligible for unemployment insurance benefits.
Uisa.120598

5

have no effect on the firm’s UI tax bill.4
The most obvious and most thoroughly researched effect of the existing UI system on
unemployment is the increase in the duration of the unemployment spells. By reducing the cost of
remaining unemployed, UI benefits induce individuals to have longer spells in order to search for a
better job or simply to enjoy some leisure or the opportunity to work at home. There is substantial
evidence that the level and maximum duration of UI benefits affects the level of reservation wages
and the duration of unemployment spells (Feldstein and Poterba, 1984; Katz and Meyer, 1990;
Moffitt, 1985).
This evidence and the underlying search theory (e.g., Baily, 1977) would seem to provide a
clear case that UI induces excessive search. Calculations for a typical employee imply that the
combination of UI benefits and personal taxes reduces the net cost of search to about one-fourth of
the unemployed individual’s potential marginal product5. However, against this presumption that UI
benefits cause excessive search it is sometimes argued that in the absence of unemployment benefits
individuals would not search long enough because they lack access to the capital market and therefore
could not finance the optimal amount of search. The Unemployment Insurance Savings Accounts
4

On experience rating and its potential effects, see Feldstein (1976).

5

Consider an individual who can earn $100 a day and faces a federal marginal income tax rate
of 28 percent, a state marginal income tax rate of 5 percent and a payroll tax rate of 7.65 percent.
Taxes reduce the net take-home pay of that individual from the $100 gross pay to $59.35. If the
individual is unemployed, he or she receives gross unemployment benefits of $50, subject to a 28
percent federal income tax; the resulting net benefit is therefore $36. The net cost to the
individual of remaining unemployed for the day is the difference between these two net amounts
or $23.35. By contrast the individual’s marginal product of labor is the sum of the $100 gross
pay and the additional $7.65 employer payroll tax. The net cost of remaining unemployed is thus
only 22 percent of the marginal product of labor.
Uisa.120598

6

provide the access to funds to finance the optimal search with a reinsurance mechanism provided by
the government in case the individual’s fund is exhausted. Individuals with positive UISA balances
are motivated to take the costs and benefits of search into account correctly6 while those with
permanently negative account balances are in the same situation as today’s UI recipients. T h e
current system of UI benefits not only increases the duration of unemployment of those who are
unemployed but also increases the frequency of temporary layoffs. Because of the subsidy inherent
in the current system of benefits, individuals will prefer to be unemployed rather than to work at a
time when the marginal revenue product of their labor is depressed (Feldstein, 1976). Empirical
research (Card and Levine, 1994; Feldstein, 1978) shows that this is true for seasonal unemployment
and other forms of temporary layoffs. If individuals were instead to finance such spells of
unemployment by drawing from their own UISAs they would have no incentive to choose excessive
spells of temporary unemployment.
The current payment of benefits to workers who become unemployed reduces the wage
premium required to compensate employees for the risk of being laid off. The unemployment
insurance system thus lowers the cost of production in firms that have above-average layoff rates,
whether for cyclical, seasonal or other reasons.

The reduced cost of production in such

unemployment-intensive firms lowers the price of the associated product and therefore raises its share
in GDP relative to what it would be without the UI subsidy. This shift in the mix of products raises

6

The opportunity cost of search is still substantially less than the marginal product of labor but
the gain from search is also reduced by the same set of marginal tax rates. With the capital
market problem solved, the amount of search done by a rational and risk-neutral individual will be
optimal.
Uisa.120598

7

the overall unemployment rate. Once again, the UISAs would eliminate the subsidy for those with
positive balances, leading to an adjustment in wages that raises the cost of those products and of
those firms that contribute most to overall unemployment.
2.

Unemployment Insurance Savings Accounts: Five Alternative Options
In a UISA plan each individual (or that individual’s employer7) would be required to

contribute a fraction of wage income to a UISA. The magnitude of this mandatory saving is limited
in different ways in the alterative options described in this section. The options specify different limits
on the maximum annual income to which the saving fraction applies. Some options permit deposits
to stop when the accumulated balance reaches a specified fraction of the individual’s annual earnings.
The funds deposited to the UISA would come from pretax income, just as current UI tax
payments do. They would accumulate tax-free. If the funds are withdrawn in lieu of UI benefits, they
would be considered taxable income just as UI benefits are today. It would be natural to apply the
tax to the funds withdrawn in retirement or by heirs, just as 401k and traditional IRA funds are taxed.
Alternatively, the funds deposited in UISAs could come from after-tax income and subsequent
withdrawals would be untaxed (as they are in Roth IRAs).
The funds in the UISAs might be invested by the individuals in a variety of ways similar to
IRA or 401k investments. Since the government augments the funds in those accounts that have
insufficient funds to meet benefits during spells of unemployment, the nature of the investments might

7

The current UI taxes are paid by employers but the incidence of the tax would presumably be
the same if the tax were paid by employees. Similarly, gross wages would adjust down if UISA
deposits were made by employers rather than employees, since these deposits are the property of
the individual workers and are similar to a form of tax-preferred cash compensation.
Uisa.120598

8

be more tightly regulated than the funds in IRAs or 401k accounts. We shall not explore this issue
here but will discuss calculations based on two alternative investment strategies.

In the more conservative strategy, the UISAs are invested in money market mutual funds that
earn the six-month commercial paper rate of interest. In an alternative investment strategy, the
accounts are invested in a continuously rebalanced mixture consisting of 60 percent corporate stock
(represented by the Standard and Poors 500 index) and 40 percent corporate bonds (based on the
Salomon Brothers bond index). This portfolio produced a real rate of return of 5.9 percent for the
period from 1946 to 1992 (Feldstein and Ranguelova, 1998). We reduce this yield by 0.4 percentage
points (to 5.5 percent) to allow for administrative costs of the portfolio management.
We assume that individuals must choose permanently between the commercial paper strategy
and the 5.5 percent strategy and may not change their rates of return at any time in the analysis. The
individuals whose account balances are insufficient to pay the benefits to which they are entitled can
borrow from the government at the same rate as they earn in their account. The results that we
present below show that our conclusions are not sensitive to the choice between these two rates of
return.
The amounts that individuals would withdraw from their UISAs when they are eligible for
benefits under current UI rules are the same as the benefits that they would receive under the current
UI system. Each of the five options that we study requires individuals to contribute 4 percent of their
wages up to the maximum amount specified by that particular option. We assume a five year start-up
period during which individuals contribute to their UISAs but during which the unemployed continue
Uisa.120598

9

to receive government UI benefits under the current system.
After describing these five alternatives, we use the Panel Study of Income Dynamics data to
assess how the choice among these options affects the performance of the system.
Option 1

High Saving Base

Individuals contribute 4 percent of earnings up to a maximum of about three times the average
weekly wage. For the first year of the PSID data (1967) , the annual wage ceiling for our UISA
contributions is $15,000. This ceiling then grows in proportion to the growth of the average weekly
wage, reaching about $52,000 in 1991.
Option 2

Low Saving Base

The saving base in option 1 permits a rapid accumulation of UISA balances by high wage
earners but is arguably unnecessarily high for two reasons. First, the dollar limit on the level of
weekly benefits is equivalent to providing a 50 percent replacement rate only up to a level that is
approximately equal to the average weekly wage. Second, the frequency of unemployment declines
as wages rise and is substantially less among individuals with above average wages.
Option 2 requires individuals to contribute 4 percent of all earnings up to a level only slightly
above the median wage, a level that is also roughly equal to the level of wages on which UI benefits
are currently based. For the first year of the PSID data (1967), the wage ceiling is taken to be
$6,000. This ceiling then grows in proportion to the growth of the average weekly wage, reaching
$21,000 in 1991.
Option 3

Target Account Fund

In the first two options, individuals are required to continue contributing to their UISAs
Uisa.120598

10

regardless of their unemployment experience and of the amounts accumulated in their accounts. Since
benefits are 50 percent of wages (up to the ceiling) and last for no more than six months in a spell,
the maximum benefit that can be drawn in a single spell is only one-fourth of a year’s earnings. Most
spells of unemployment are substantially shorter than six months, the median spell being less than ten
weeks in almost all years. Spells would be even shorter with the change in incentives provided by the
savings account approach.
Option 3 therefore provides that the individual stops contributing to the UISA when the
accumulated balance reaches 50 percent of the individual’s wage income in the previous year or 50
percent of the ceiling amount in option 2 if that is smaller.
Option 4

Experience-Based Target Account Fund

Individuals with substantial risk of unemployment should have larger account balances than
those who are less likely to be unemployed. Option 3 can be modified to reduce the target level of
the account fund for those with low unemployment experience and to increase it for those with
substantial unemployment experience. Option 4 provides one such modification. Individuals save
until the fund reaches the sum of (1) 30 percent of the individual’s annual wage (or of the wage
ceiling specified in options 2 and 3 if that is lower) plus (2) twice the individual’s total UI withdrawals
during the past two years.
Consider, for example, an individual with $30,000 of base period annual wage income who
has had two eight-week spells of compensated unemployment during the past two years. The UISA

Uisa.120598

11

withdrawals during those 16 weeks would be $3,200.8 Option 3 would require that individual to save
4 percent of wages until the fund balance reached $10,500. In contrast, option four would change this
to the sum of $6,300 (30 percent of the specified earnings “ceiling”) plus $6,400 (twice the benefits
withdrawn in the past two years), a total of $12,700. The accumulation would still be at a rate of 4
percent of the first $20,000 of wages.
Accumulating more in this way should not be seen as a penalty since individuals own the funds
in their UISAs and can eventually consume or bequeath them. The funds are there as a buffer to
reduce the government’s risk in guaranteeing that benefits will be paid even if the UISAs have
insufficient funds.
Option 5

An Experience Rating Component

Although a system of UISAs can substantially reduce many individuals’ incentives for longer
or more frequent spells of unemployment, it does eliminate the effect of experience rating.9 While
experience rating is not needed to correct incentives when individuals have positive UISA balances,
it would improve incentives when individuals have negative balances and are therefore motivated to
act as if the government provides their unemployment benefits. Option 5 combines the basic
contribution requirement of Option 2 with a requirement that employers pay the first five weeks of
benefits in each spell.10 This has two potentially favorable effects on incentives. First, by reducing

8

The maximum weekly benefits are assumed here to be based on income up to $20,000 or a
maximum benefit of $200 per week.
9

On the nature and limits of experience rating, see above, page 5.

10

This idea was previously suggested in Feldstein (1975).

Uisa.120598

12

the amount that individuals withdraw from their accounts during any given spell, they are more likely
to have a positive balance and therefore to be sensitive to the cost of providing benefits. Second,
even for those individuals with negative accounts, the employer has an incentive not to create excess
unemployment, the traditional role of experience rating.11
3.

Analyzing the Options with the PSID Data
The Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) provides longitudinal data on individuals that

are well-suited to analyzing the feasibility of substituting UISAs for the existing unemployment
insurance system.12 The PSID contains linked interview data on a national probability sample of
households and subsequent split-offs for the period from 1967 through 1991. The data for each year
and each head of household include the total UI benefits received as well as demographic and labor
market information.
We focus our analysis on the individuals who were heads of households in 1967. The head
of household can be either a single individual or the individual in a household who is designated as
the head of the unit. We include only those individuals who were still in the sample and under age
65 in 1972, i.e., in the first year after the five-year period in which individuals make deposits to the
savings accounts but draw benefits only from the regular state UI program. We then follow these
2,773 individuals until the end of the data sample in 1991 or until the year in which they die, retire
or otherwise leave the sample. Separate tabulations are presented in the appendix for the subsample
11

The experience rating could be strengthened under any of the options by using employers’
experience with unemployment as the basis for the tax used to finance the cost of benefits paid to
individuals with negative UISA balances.
12

See Katz (1986) for an earlier use of the PSID data to study unemployment insurance.

Uisa.120598

13

of 1,990 individuals who by 1991 are no longer employed or in the PSID sample. We impute
retirements at age 65 for all workers.
Our procedure is very straightforward. For each of the options, we accumulate funds
according to the rules of that option. The accounts earn the commercial paper rate in one simulation
and a 5.5 percent real return in the alternative simulation. Those are also the rates charged on
negative balances. In each year, starting with the sixth year of the simulation, we subtract from each
account the UI benefits that the individual received in that year.
The key results for the full sample based on the commercial paper rate of return are shown
in Table 1 and for the 5.5 percent rate of return in Appendix Table A1. The corresponding results
for the subsample of individuals who had died, retired or otherwise left the sample are presented in
Appendix Tables A2 and A3.
All of the results in these tables assume no behavioral response to the change in
unemployment incentives. We return to this issue in section 5 and present some results that suggest
the sensitivity of our calculations to possible behavioral responses.
Consider first the results in Table 1 for Option 1. Row one shows that only 5.2 percent of
all the individuals in the PSID sample of household heads had negative balances at the end of their
time in the PSID. If employees correctly anticipated their final condition, almost 95 percent of
employees would be fully sensitive to the cost of unemployment benefits. The figure is essentially
the same (5.3 percent, from Table A1) if we look only at “finishers,” i.e., those who had died, retired
or left the sample by 1991.
A stricter measure of sensitivity is the fraction of individuals whose accounts were ever
Uisa.120598

14

negative. Row 2 shows that only 6.8 percent of individuals ever had negative accounts. For the
remaining 93 percent, receiving unemployment benefits would mean drawing from their own funds.
Although many of these did not have any spells of unemployment, their positive UISA balance gave
them a stronger inventive to avoid unemployment than they had in the existing UI system.
Most individuals who become unemployed have positive accounts at the beginning and at the
end of their spell. Row 3 shows that in only one-quarter of the unemployment spells in which

Uisa.120598

15

Table 1
Analysis of Alternative Options with PSID Data
Option 1

Option 2

Option 3

Option 4

Option 5

-----------------------------------------Percentages ----------------------------------------All Employees
(1)

Negative Terminal Balance

5.2

6.6

6.7

7.0

5.6

(2)

Negative Balance Ever

6.8

8.8

8.9

9.4

7.1

Eligible Unemployment Spells
(3)

Negative Balance at end of spell

24.3

30.5

30.9

33.1

27.3

(4)

Negative Balance & Negative Terminal Balance

19.9

25.2

25.5

26.8

21.6

23.4

24.5

24.3

25.3

21.0

Employees with Negative Balances Ever
(5)

Return to Positive Terminal Balance

Unemployment Compensation Dollars
(6)

Negative Balance & Negative Terminal Balance

31.1

38.7

39.3

42.2

34.5

(7)

Negative Terminal Balance

44.1

54.8

55.5

58.3

48.9

27.4

36.1

36.7

39.3

28.7

Net Government Payments
(8)

Percent of Total UISA Payments

The analysis is based on the full sample of 2,773 original heads of households in the PSID sample from 1967 to 1991, including those still working in 1991. The
calculations use the commercial paper rate of return on UISA balances, both positive and negative. See text for definitions.
Option 1: High Wage Base
Option 2: Low Wage Base
Option 3: Target Account Fund
Option 4: Experience-Based Target Account Fund
Option 5: Experience Rating: Employer Pays 5 Weeks

Uisa.120598

16

benefits are received is the account negative at the end of the spell. This reflects the fact that most
spells are short and come when the individuals have accumulated enough in their UISAs to finance
the spell.
The result is similar when we look at the terminal UISA balances at the end of the PSID
experience, taking into account future deposits to the UISA and future spells of unemployment; 20
percent of accounts in which individuals receive UI benefits are negative at the end of the spell and
at the end of the PSID sample (shown in row 4 of the table).
Even individuals whose accounts are negative at some point in time (those shown in row 2)
need not assume that they will remain negative. About one-quarter of those individuals (23.4 percent,
shown in row 5) have positive terminal balances when they retire or leave the sample, or in 1991
when the sample ends.
When we turn from the numbers of individuals to the amount of UISA payments, we find that
only 31.1 percent of UISA benefits are paid in spells that end with negative balances for individuals
that also have negative terminal balances (row 6). This is the group most likely to assume that the
costs of the UISA benefits will be borne by the government. A somewhat higher percentage of UISA
payments go to individuals in spells that are not necessarily negative but that lead to a negative
terminal balance (44.1 percent, shown in row 7). Members of this group may be sensitive to the cost
of UISA payments during those spells (and years) when their balances are positive and they have not
yet concluded that the terminal balance will be negative.
Row 8 shows the dollars paid by the government and not subsequently repaid by the
individuals as a percentage of the total UISA payments received by all individuals. Because the
Uisa.120598

17

benefits in the UISA system are the same as the UI benefits in the current UI system, this ratio is also
the ratio of the tax-financed UISA benefits to the total tax-financed benefits under the existing UI
system. The estimate of 27.4 percent shown in row 8 means that the cost of the UISA to taxpayers
with option 1 and no behavioral response would be only 27.4 percent of the cost to taxpayers of the
existing UI system.13 The distorting effects of the existing UI payroll tax are separate from the
distorting effects of the benefits conditioned on unemployment.
In thinking about the incentive effects implied by these results it is important to consider the
effects on both the duration and the frequency of unemployment. Individuals who have positive
balances or who believe that they will end their careers with positive balances will not want to become
unemployed and, if they do became unemployed, will have no incentive to remain unemployed. The
evidence that most individuals have positive balance accounts and that they end their careers with
positive balance accounts shows that (assuming they understand this likelihood) they generally face
the cost of unemployment and, in contrast to the situation with the existing UI rules, would have little
incentive for behavior that would increase either the frequency or duration of unemployment.

13

This ratio is calculated as follows. The denominator is the total UISA payments to all
participants over the period from 1972 to 1991. To calculate the numerator, we focus on those
individuals who had negative terminal balances (at death, retirement, departure from the sample,
or upon reaching 1991). We then identify the last year in which the balance of each of these
“negative terminal balance” individuals was positive and ignore government payments in all prior
years. We then calculate the sum of (1) the negative balance in that year (the difference between
benefits in that year and the sum of the prior positive balance and the savings deposited that year
in the account) and (2) any UISA benefits taken in subsequent years by the individual. We
subtract from this cumulative total (3) the amounts that the individual paid to the account
(actually directly to the government as repayment for past credit) in all subsequent years. The
combination of these three terms is the net amount that the government pays to negative accounts
in excess of the amounts repaid.
Uisa.120598

18

The percentage of funds withdrawn by individuals who end their working life (or are working
when the PSID ends) with accounts that have negative balances appears to suggest that in about 44
percent of the unemployed weeks the individuals that currently receive unemployment insurance
benefits would face the same adverse incentives under the UISA system as they do under the current
UI system. While eliminating the distortion for the other 56 percent of the weeks would be a
substantial achievement of the UISA approach, this 56 percent figure understates for several reasons
the extent of the improvement in incentives that would occur. First, some of the spells of
unemployment that now end with permanently negative balances would never occur if the individuals’
incentives were different. Second, since the duration of the spells would be shortened by the change
in incentives, fewer of the spells would actually lead to negative balance accounts. While we do not
have an estimate of the effect of these behavioral responses, we believe that the evidence here
indicates that the incentives would be improved for substantially more than half of the spells and
weeks of current insured unemployment. We return below (in section 5) to consider the implications
of a behavioral response to the improved incentives.
The results with the other options are generally similar to the results with option 1,
although options 2, 3 and 4 involve a smaller saving base and therefore more frequent negative
balances. More specifically, shifting to a lower wage base for the saving requirement (option 2
requires a 4 percent saving rate on wage income up to about the median wage) raises the percentages
that become negative or end negative by about two percentage points. With the lower amount of
saving, the percentage of spells that end with negative account balances becomes 30.5 percent instead
of the 24.3 percent with option 1 (row 3). The number of spells that end with negative balances and
Uisa.120598

19

that also go on to negative terminal balances rises from 20 percent with option 1 to 25 percent (row
4). Capping the saving requirement for workers with above average incomes thus reduces the
sensitivity but still leaves most individuals who experience unemployment with a positive account
balance.
Option 3 allows workers to stop contributing to their accounts when the balance reaches 50
percent of their savings wage base under option 2. This has essentially no effect on any of the
performance measures. For those who experience no unemployment, it reduces substantially the
amount of lifetime saving that is required in the UISAs without changing the likely sensitivity of this
group or others.
Option 4 makes the target level of accumulation for the UISA depend on the recent
unemployment experience, lowering the basic target to only 30 percent of the savings wage base
under option 2 but then adding the benefits drawn in the past two years to this amount. The positive
and negative effects are reasonably balanced, causing little affect on the various performance
measures shown in Table 1. For those with little or no unemployment, this option permits a
substantially lower rate of saving.
Option 5 requires the employer to pay the first five weeks of unemployment benefits in every
spell and is otherwise similar to option 2. Only after the five weeks does the individual draw benefits
from the UISA. This makes the employer directly sensitive to the cost of unemployment for all
employees, including those with negative balances. It also reduces substantially the probability that
employees who experience unemployment will develop a negative balance or end their career with
a negative balance. Thus row 4 shows that among unemployment spells resulting in negative
Uisa.120598

20

balances, the percentage of spells from individuals who end their careers (or the time in the PSID
sample) with a negative balance falls from 25 percent with option 2 to 22 percent with option 5.
4.

Distributional Effects of Switching to UISA System
The effect on each individual’s disposable income of shifting from the current UI rules to a

UISA system depends on the individual’s unemployment experience and the level of the individual’s
income. There are three components of the effect: (1) the required saving contribution to the
individual’s UISA account; (2) the net balance in the UISA account at retirement age; and (3) the
change in the payroll tax payment. The benefits paid during unemployment can be ignored because
they are always the same in the two systems.
Any analysis of the distributional effect of shifting from one system to another involves the
usual incidence issues about the effect of induced behavioral changes on wages and other pretax
factor incomes. These incidence issues are particularly difficult in the current case because the
program change involves not only taxes but also transfers conditioned on unemployment experience.
We limit our analysis therefore to the nominal analysis, i.e., to the estimated distribution of individual
payments with no changes in gross wages or other factor incomes. We assume moreover that all
payments are born by the individuals, regardless of whether they are made by the individual or the
firm.
A second caveat is necessary about interpreting the distributional effects by income class
tabulated in this section. This analysis refers only to heads of households and makes no attempt to
incorporate the distributional effects of a shift to a UISA system on others in the same household. The
sample is further restricted to those individuals who were less than 45 years old in 1967 in order to
Uisa.120598

21

study a relatively long working period.
Before looking at the calculations, it is useful to note the way that the shift from the existing
UI rules to a UISA system affects individuals at two extremes: those with no unemployment during
their working life and those whose unemployment is so substantial that they end their working life
with a negative UISA balance. For individuals who experience no unemployment, the net present
value of UISA saving deposits and the balances withdrawn at retirement is zero (discounting at
whatever rate is used to accumulate those balances). Such individuals are net gainers from the switch
to the UISA system since the taxes required to fund the benefits of those who have negative final
balances are less than the taxes required by the current system to fund all UI benefits. Because the
tax is levied on earnings up to a relatively low level ($7,000 in many states in 1997), the favorable
tax reduction effect is the same for all individuals above that low level and declines with income
below that level.
For individuals who experience substantial unemployment and retire with negative accounts,
the net discounted present value of the required UISA savings represents a net tax. Against this must
be balanced the reduction in the regular UI payroll tax (which is the same reduction as that enjoyed
by those with no unemployment). Since the current payroll tax is less than the UISA saving
requirement, the reduction in the payroll tax is clearly less than the UISA saving requirement,
implying that individuals who have negative balances incur a net reduction in the present value of their
disposable income.
These are of course the two extreme cases. To assess the overall distributional effect of the
switch, we divide our sample into lifetime income quintiles based on real mean annual income during
Uisa.120598

22

the individual’s working years between 1967 and 1991. For each quintile, we calculate the discounted
present values as of 1967 of (1) the required savings deposited to UI saving accounts; (2) the funds
available at retirement age; and (3) the reduced payroll tax in each year. We estimate the payroll tax
reduction of individual I in year t as TAXCUTI t = ( 1 - reltax) θ t TI I t where: reltax is the ratio
of the payroll tax with the UISA system to the payroll tax with the existing UI system, as shown in
row 8 of Table 1 for each UISA option; TI I t is the taxable wage income for individual I in year t (up
to the payroll tax ceiling in that year); and θ t is the national average UI payroll tax rate in year t
under the current UI rules.
To estimate these values, we assume that the maximum taxable earnings for the UI payroll
tax (Tmax t ) is $7,000 in 1997 and scale it down in earlier years in proportion to the average weekly
earnings in the total private U.S. economy. For each individual, the value of TI I t is the lesser of
(Tmax t ) and that individual’s wage in year t. The national average UI payroll tax rate in year t is
estimated as θ t = BENt / [ 0.9 Tmax t N t ] where BENt is the aggregate national UI benefits paid in
year t, 0.9 Tmax t is the estimated average taxable earnings for the UI tax (we scale by 0.9 since not
all workers will earn $7,000 in 1997 dollars), and N t is the number of individuals in covered
employment.14
The present values, calculated using the six-month commercial paper interest rate, are shown
in Table 2; a separate calculation based on the 5.5 percent real rate of return is presented in Appendix
Table A4. We present estimates for options 1, 2, and 3.

14

The annual values of BENt and N t are presented in the statistical appendix of each year’s
Economic Report of the President.
Uisa.120598

23

Table 2
Distributional Effects of Shifting from Current UI Rules to a UISA System

Income Quintile

1st

2nd

3rd

Lifetime Mean Annual Income (1991$)

12293 23976 31948 40977 71561

PDV of Positive UISA Terminal Balances minus
UISA Saving Deposits
Option 1
Option 2
Option 3

- 591 - 653 - 768 - 539 -314
- 573 - 622 - 666 - 492 -244
- 565 - 615 - 663 - 488 -243

PDV of Payroll Tax Reductions
Option 1
Option 2
Option 3

496
438
433

675
595
588

701
617
611

733
645
639

782
688
681

PDV of Positive UISA Terminal Balances plus
Payroll Tax Reductions minus
Saving Deposits
Option 1
Option 2
Option 3

-95
-135
-132

22
-27
-27

-67
-49
-52

94
153
151

468
444
438

Option 1: High Wage Base
Option 2: Low Wage Base
Option 3: Target Account Fund
See text for other definitions.
Present discounted values are calculated using the commercial paper rate.

Uisa.120598

24

4th

5th

The lowest quintile of households corresponds to those in which the head earned an average
lifetime income of only $12,293 a year in 1991 dollars during the years that the individual worked
between 1967 and 1991. The second and third quintiles had average lifetime earnings in 1991 dollars
of $23,976 and $31,948 while the top group had average earnings of $71,561.
The first three rows of Table 2 show the present discounted value in 1967 of the positive
terminal UISA balances (the refunded amounts) minus the UISA saving deposits, discounting at the
commercial paper discount rate in each year. Thus individuals in the lowest lifetime income quintile
paid on average $591 more in UISA saving deposits (discounted to 1967) than the amount that they
had in their UISA accounts (treating negative accounts as zero, since such debts are forgiven) at the
time of retirement or death (also discounted to 1967). The $591 amount excludes the value of the
benefits received since that does not change as we go from current UI rules to the UISA system. In
the aggregate, this bottom quintile receives a disproportionately large share of the benefits relative
to the amount that it provides in UISA deposits, causing it to receive a substantial transfer from the
UISA system just as it does from the current UI system.

But because we are interested in the

distributional effects of shifting from the current UI rules to a UISA system, rather than the
distributional effects of the UISA system itself, and since the benefits are exactly the same in the two
systems, we ignore the benefits and focus on the difference between the amount that the individuals
get in refunds at the time of retirement or death (i.e., the positive UISA balances at those times) and
the amounts contributed as saving deposits, all discounted to the beginning of the sample.
This negative effect is balanced by the positive effect of lower payroll taxes. With option 1,
the tax saving associated with replacing the current UI system with a UISA system (as noted in row
Uisa.120598

25

8 of Table 1) is 73 percent of the UI payroll taxes that would otherwise be paid under the current
rules. For individuals in quintile 1, the present value of these payroll tax reductions (shown in the first
row of the second part of Table 2) is $496. These tax savings offset most of the PDV excess of UISA
savings over balance refunds for this group, leaving a net negative present value cost of $95 for the
shift from current UI rules to UISA rules.
Since this is the present value of the net effects over the 25 year period, it is essentially too
small to be of significant concern. This “loss” is of course before considering any of the potential
gains – both financially and in terms of economic efficiency – that would result from the behavioral
effects of the shift to the UISA system.
The second quintile has a net positive gain of $22, again essentially close to zero when
compared to the 25 year present value of the earnings of individuals with average annual earnings of
nearly $24,000. The largest effect is the positive gain of the top quintile, a lifetime present value gain
of $468, which is also quite small relative to the average annual earnings of more than $70,000 in this
group.
The results for the other two options are similar, with relatively small lifetime present value
losses in the bottom half of the distribution of lifetime income and relatively small lifetime gains in the
top half of the distribution.
5.

Effects of Unemployment Responses to the Unemployment Compensation System
Section 1 of this paper discussed the various ways in which the existing unemployment

insurance system increases the frequency and duration of unemployment. We have also considered
how shifting to the UISA system would change these incentives in ways that reduce unemployment.
Uisa.120598

26

Table 3
Effects of 10% and 30% Reductions in Unemployment Days on the Implications of UISA Option 1
10 % Reduction

No Change

30 % Reduction

---------------------------------- Percentages --------------------------------------------All Employees
(1)

Negative Terminal Balance

5.2

4.8

3.7

(2)

Negative Balance Ever

6.8

5.8

5.1

Eligible Unemployment Spells
(3)

Negative Balance at end of spell

24.3

21.6

16.7

(4)

Negative Balance & Negative Terminal Balance

19.9

18.3

13.6

23.4

17.4

27.6

Employees with Negative Balances Ever
(5)

Return to Positive Terminal Balance

Unemployment Compensation Dollars
(6)

Negative Balance & Negative Terminal Balance

31.1

28.5

20.5

(7)

Negative Terminal Balance

44.1

42.3

32.5

27.4

22.0

13.7

Net Government Payments
(8)

Percent of Total UISA Payments

The analysis is based on the full sample of 2,773 original heads of households in the PSID sample from 1967 to 1991, including those still working in 1991. The
calculations use the commercial paper rate of return on UISA balances, both positive and negative. See text for definitions.

Uisa.120598

27

An explicit model of the effect of shifting to a UISA system on the frequency and duration of
unemployment would have to deal with individuals’ expectations about the probability that they will
shift from an existing positive account balance to a negative account balance at the time of retirement
(and therefore should not currently be sensitive to the effect of unemployment on their UI account)
or from an exiting negative UISA account balance to a positive terminal balance (implying that they
should be concerned about the cost of their current unemployment benefits.)
Although such an analysis lies beyond the scope of this paper, it is clear that the shift to the
UISA system would initiate a mutually reinforcing process in which reduced subsidies to
unemployment would reduce the frequency and duration of unemployment which would in turn imply
that the a larger fraction of UISA payments were from individual account balances rather than from
the government. This virtuous spiral would converge to lower probabilities of unemployment and
lower durations of unemployment spells than are observed in the historic data.
To indicate how such a virtuous spiral might improve the performance and reduce the
taxpayer cost of the UISA system, we present simulations of the UISA option 1 on the assumption
that all UI spells are reduced by either 10 percent or 30 percent in duration. These simulations are
shown in Table 3. Although a reduction in the frequency of unemployment is not specifically
included, the analysis can be regarded as a way of observing the effect of 10 percent or 30 percent
fewer unemployed days, regardless of whether this is from changes in frequency or duration. As a
rough generalization, the results show that a 30 percent reduction in the amount of eligible
unemployment reduces the proportion of individuals who have negative balances or who end with
a negative account balance by at least one-quarter. The percentage of spells that end with negative
Uisa.120598

28

balances and the percentage of spells by individuals who eventually have negative balances at the end
of their careers also fall, this time by about one-third. The same is also true of the aggregate dollar
value of benefits. This does not show that a 30 percent reduction in aggregate unemployment days
is likely but only that, if does occur, it will cause a large reinforcing decline in the number who face
or can expect to face negative balances.
The 30 percent reduction in the amount of insured unemployment also has the effect of cutting
the tax-financed benefits in half, from 27.5 percent of the current UI benefits with no behavioral
response to 13.7 percent with a 30 percent reduction in days with compensated unemployment.
6.

Summary and Conclusion
In this paper we have examined a system of Unemployment Insurance Saving Accounts as an

alternative to the traditional unemployment insurance system. The system requires individuals to save
a modest share of wages in special accounts and to draw unemployment compensation from these
accounts instead of taking state unemployment insurance benefits. If the accounts are exhausted, the
government lends money to the account. Negative account balances are forgiven at retirement age.
Positive UISA balances are converted into retirement income or bequeathed if the individual
dies before retirement age. Any dollar taken from a UISA with a positive balance reduces the
individual’s personal wealth by a dollar. As such, the UISAs cause individuals to internalize the cost
of unemployment compensation. The UISAs can therefore in principle provide the same level of
protection to the unemployed with less of the adverse incentives that now increase the frequency and
duration of unemployment.
The key operational question about the feasibility of UISAs is whether accounts based on a
Uisa.120598

29

moderate saving rate can finance a significant share of unemployment payments or whether the
concentration of unemployment among a relatively small number of individuals implies that the UISA
balances would typically be exhausted, forcing individuals to rely on government benefits with the
same adverse effects that characterize the current UI system..
To resolve this issue we use the Panel Study on Income Dynamics to simulate the UISA
system over a 25-year historic period. Our analysis indicates that almost all individuals have positive
UISA balances and therefore remain sensitive to the cost of unemployment compensation. Even
among individuals who experience unemployment, most would still have positive account balances
at the end of their unemployment spell. Although about half of the benefit dollars would go to
individuals whose accounts are negative at the end of their working life, less than one-third of the
benefits go to individuals who currently have negative account balances or who will have negative
account balances at the end of their current unemployment spell. All of this suggests a substantial
improvement in the incentives of the unemployed.
The reduction in the cost to taxpayers of more than 60 percent of the current taxpayer burden
represents a substantial further potential improvement in the efficiency of the labor market. Our
analysis of the distribution of lifetime UISA payments and taxes shows that the household heads in
the top quintile gain a small cumulative amount while those in the bottom quintile lose a very small
amount. Other quintiles are small net gainers.
Cambridge, MA
December 1998

Uisa.120598

30

References
Baily, M. "Unemployment Insurance as Insurance for Workers," Econometrics, 1977.
Baily, M. "Some Aspects of Optimal Unemployment Insurance," Journal of Public Economics,
1978.
Card, D. and P.B. Levine. "Unemployment Insurance Taxes and the Cyclical and Seasonal
Properties of Unemployment," Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 53, No. 1, January 1994,
pp 1-29.
Coloma, C.F.

"Seguro do Desempleo: Teoria, Evidencia y Una Propuesta (Unemployment

Insurance: Theory, Evidence and a Proposal)," Cuadernos de Economia, Year 33, No. 99,
August 1996, pp 256-320.
Feldstein, M.

"Unemployment Insurance: Time for Reform," Harvard Business Review,

March-April, 1975.
Feldstein, M. "Temporary Layoffs in the Theory of Unemployment," Journal of Political Economy,
1976.
Feldstein, M. "The Effect of Unemployment Insurance on Temporary Layoff

Unemployment,"

American Economic Review, December 1978.
Feldstein, M. and J. Poterba. "Unemployment Insurance and Reservation Wages," Journal of Public
Economics, 1984.
Feldstein, M. and E. Ranguelova. "Individual Risk and Intergenerational Risk Sharing in an
Investment-Based Social Security System," National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper November 1998.
Uisa.120598

31

Katz, L. "Layoffs, Recall and the Duration of Unemployment," National Bureau of Economic
Research, Working Paper No. 1825, January 1986.
Katz, L. and B.D. Meyer. "The Impact of the Potential Duration of Unemployment Benefits

on

the Duration of Unemployment," Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 41, No. 1, February
1990, pp 45-72.
Meyer, B. "Lessons from U.S. Unemployment Insurance Experiments," Journal of Economics
Literature, 1995, pp 91-131.
Meyer, B.D. and D.T. Rosenbaum. "Repeat Use of Unemployment Insurance," National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper No. 5423, January 1996.
Moffit, R. "Unemployment Insurance and the Distribution of Unemployment Spells," Journal of
Econometrics, Vol. 28, No. 1, April 1985, pp 85-101.
Mortenson, D. "Reducing Supply-Side Disincentives to Job Creation," in Reducing
Unemployment: Current Issues and Policy Options, Kansas City Federal Reserve Bank,
1994.
Orszag, J.M. and D. Snower. "From Unemployment Benefits to Unemployment Accounts,"
Birkbeck College, London, mimeo, June 1997.
Stern, J. "The Nature of Unemployment in Britain: Studies of the DHSS Cohort," S. Nickell et al.
(eds.), New York: Oxford University Press, 1989.
Winter-Ebmer, R. and J. Zweimuller. "Do They Come Back Again? Job Search, Labour Market
Segmentation and State Dependence as Explanations of Repeat Unemployment,"
Empirical Economics, Vol. 17, No. 2, 1992, pp 273-92.
Uisa.120598

32

Table A1
Analysis of Alternative Options with PSID Data: Finishers Only
Option 1

Option 2

Option 3

Option 4

Option 5

----------------------------------------- Percentages ---------------------------------------All Employees
(1)

Negative Terminal Balance

5.3

6.6

6.6

6.9

5.5

(2)

Negative Balance Ever

6.4

8.2

8.2

8.5

6.5

Eligible Unemployment Spells
(3)

Negative Balance at end of spell

23.9

30.9

31.5

33.4

27.6

(4)

Negative Balance & Negative Terminal Balance

20.0

25.8

26.1

27.7

21.4

17.6

19.5

19.4

19.0

15.0

Employees with Negative Balances Ever
(5)

Return to Positive Terminal Balance

Unemployment Compensation Dollars
(6)

Negative Balance & Negative Terminal Balance

31.9

39.2

40.0

42.7

34.6

(7)

Negative Terminal Balance

47.6

58.6

58.6

61.4

50.6

31.5

40.7

41.2

43.8

31.4

Net Government Payments
(8)

Percent of Total UISA Payments

The analysis is based on the full sample of 1,990 original heads of households in the PSID sample from 1967 to 1991 who were retired, dead or missing by the end
of 1991. The calculations use the commercial paper rate of return on UISA balances, both positive and negative. See text for definitions.
Option 1: High Wage Base
Option 2: Low Wage Base
Option 3: Target Account Fund
Option 4: Experience-Based Target Account Fund
Option 5: Employer Pays First Five Weeks of Benefits

Uisa.120598

Table A2
Analysis of Alternative Options with PSID Data: 5.5% Return
Option 1

Option 2

Option 3

Option 4

Option 5

-------------------------------------------- Percentages -----------------------------------All Employees
(1)

Negative Terminal Balance

4.9

5.8

6.0

6.4

4.8

(2)

Negative Balance Ever

5.7

7.4

7.8

8.2

6.0

Eligible Unemployment Spells
(3)

Negative Balance at end of spell

20.6

26.1

27.1

28.2

23.8

(4)

Negative Balance & Negative Terminal Balance

18.2

22.4

23.0

24.1

18.4

13.6

21.2

22.7

22.4

19.7

Employees with Negative Balances Ever
(5)

Return to Positive Terminal Balance

Unemployment Compensation Dollars
(6)

Negative Balance & Negative Terminal Balance

27.6

34.0

35.2

37.6

29.5

(7)

Negative Terminal Balance

42.4

49.6

51.4

54.5

42.9

24.6

31.5

33.7

35.4

24.9

Net Government Payments
(8)

Percent of Total UISA Payments

The analysis is based on the full sample of 2,773 original heads of households in the PSID sample from 1967 to 1991. The calculations use a 5.5 percent real rate
of return on UISA balances, both positive and negative. See text for definitions.
Option 1: High Wage Base
Option 2: Low Wage Base
Option 3: Target Account Fund
Option 4: Experience-Based Target Account Fund
Option 5: Experience Rating: Employer Pays 5 Weeks
Uisa.120598

Table A3
Analysis of Alternative Options with PSID Data: Finishers Only, 5.5% Return
Option 1

Option 2

Option 3

Option 4

Option 5

----------------------------------------- Percentages ---------------------------------------All Employees
(1)

Negative Terminal Balance

4.9

5.7

5.8

6.2

4.6

(2)

Negative Balance Ever

5.3

6.9

7.1

7.4

5.4

Eligible Unemployment Spells
(3)

Negative Balance at end of spell

19.9

26.8

27.5

28.5

23.7

(4)

Negative Balance & Negative Terminal Balance

18.0

23.2

23.8

25.0

18.0

8.5

16.5

17.3

16.0

14.7

Employees with Negative Balances Ever
(5)

Return to Positive Terminal Balance

Unemployment Compensation Dollars
(6)

Negative Balance & Negative Terminal Balance

27.8

33.9

35.1

37.7

29.4

(7)

Negative Terminal Balance

45.0

53.2

54.3

58.1

44.1

28.9

35.6

36.9

39.5

28.0

Net Government Payments
(8)

Percent of Total UISA Payments

The analysis is based on the full sample of 1,990 original heads of households in the PSID sample from 1967 to 1991 who were retired, dead or missing by the end
of 1991. The calculations use a 5.5 percent real rate of return on UISA balances, both positive and negative. See text for definitions.
Option 1: High Wage Base
Option 2: Low Wage Base
Option 3: Target Account Fund
Option 4: Experience-Based Target Account Fund
Option 5: Experience Rating: Employer Pays 5 Weeks
Uisa.120598

Table A4
Distributional Effects of Shifting from Current UI Rules to a UISA System
With 5.5 % Rate of Return

Income Quintile

1st

2nd

3rd

4th

5th

Lifetime Mean Annual Income (1991$)

12293

23976

31948

40977

71561

PDV of UISA Positive Terminal Balances minus
UISA Saving Deposits
Option 1
Option 2
Option 3

-410
-397
-390

-428
-410
-407

-521
-454
-453

-341
-325
-319

-202
-161
-159

PDV of Payroll Tax Reductions
Option 1
Option 2
Option 3

331
314
292

448
408
394

463
420
407

482
437
423

509
464
448

PDV of UISA Positive Terminal Balances plus
Payroll Tax Reductions minus
Saving Deposits
Option 1
Option 2
Option 3

-79
-96
-98

20
-2
-13

-58
-34
-46

141
112
104

307
303
289

Option 1: High Wage Base
Option 2: Low Wage Base
Option 3: Target Account Fund
See text for other definitions.
Present discounted values are calculated using the commercial paper rate.
Uisa.120598

