1

I. Introduction
Income and wage inequality among adults with at least some college education has risen in the U.S.
since 1970, so that the difference between a male in this group who is at the 90th percentile of the income
distribution and a male at the 10th percentile has risen from about $13,275 in 1972 to about $49,000 in
1995 (both in 1995 dollars). In this paper, we attempt to decompose the increase in income and wage
inequality into three components. The first is the "extensive margin," or the increase due to the increasingly
diverse backgrounds of people who attend college.1 The second is an increasing rate of return to aptitude,
so that a given distribution of aptitude among the college-educated generates an increasingly wide income
distribution.2 The third component is the change in the market structure of college education such that a
person of a given aptitude interacts differently with colleges. As shown in Hoxby (1997a,b), colleges have
become increasingly segregated on the basis of students' aptitude, so that aptitude differentials within each
college are falling and aptitude differentials between colleges are rising. Also, colleges' per-student
expenditures have become increasing correlated with the aptitude of their student bodies. We call these
phenomena the "intensive margin" because they affect the peers and other inputs that a student experiences
once he has joined the ranks of college students.
We are particularly interested in the intensive margin, partly because it is a phenomena that has not
been studied and partly because it is a mechanism by which a given distribution of aptitude can play out
differently over time as education supply changes. Moreover, it is the only one of the three components

1

The terms "extensive margin" is used to avoid confusion. Alternative terms would be "selection into the
group" or "composition of the group," but the concepts of selection and composition are also needed to explain the
"intensive margin" of college education.
2

We use "aptitude" to refer to the combination of ability and achievement that forms the "aptitude to
succeed in college," the standard used in college admissions tests and similar examinations. Our references to
aptitude should not be interpreted as though they referred to innate, cognitive ability.
Several other authors have suggested that an increasing return to aptitude explains a significant amount of
the increase in income and wage inequality. See Blackburn and Neumark (1993), Heckman (1995), Levy,
Murnane, and Willett (1995), Heckman et al (1996), Cawley, Heckman, and Vytlacil (1998), and Murnane et al
(1998).

2

that is both real and probably permanent. The increasing integration of the market for college appears to
be due to decreased information costs (multilateral information exchanges between students, colleges, and
sources of financial aid) and decreased mobility costs (transportation, long-distance communication, longdistance media and culture). See Hoxby (1997a). These factors–especially the information exchange
mechanisms that now characterize college searches–are likely to be permanent. In contrast, changes in
within-group income inequality that are due to moving the group boundary (the extensive margin) are
mainly of practical policy interest. They suggest that groups may need to be redefined if policies are to
retain their intended meaning. Also, a rising rate of return to aptitude may be the result of a recent tendency
for technological innovations to be complementary to skills. This tendency may continue for some years to
come, but there have been past periods in which technological innovations tended to substitute for skills.
We decompose the increase in income and wage dispersion among the college educated by
comparing the incomes, wages, backgrounds, and college experiences of males who are approximately age
32 in 1972, 1986, and 1995. The males are selected on the basis of age from three data sets: Occupational
Changes in a Generation (OCG, 1972 incomes), the National Longitudinal Study of the Class of 1972
(NLS72, 1986 incomes), and the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY, 1995 incomes). We
matched these data, which we hereafter call "the combined surveys," to detailed information about each
college's student body, selectivity, expenditures, and inputs. The college data come from institutional
surveys and many other sources.
Our results suggest that each of the three components has contributed substantially to the increase
in income and wage inequality. Within the increase in inequality that can be explained by observable
factors, we find that about 1/4th is associated with the extensive margin, about 1/3rd with an increased rate
of return to aptitude, and about 5/12ths with the intensive margin. Naive estimates that do not account for
the intensive margin greatly overstate the pure increase in the rate of return to aptitude. That is, aptitude
would not earn as much as it currently does if it continued to interact with the college market as it did in

3

1970.
In this paper, we may state that a student of a given aptitude earns more if the market changes in
such a way that he experiences a college that has a higher concentration of high aptitude peers and higher
per-student expenditures. This is a treatment effect of the general changes in the college market. We
would not argue that these are individual treatment effects. That is, we would not argue that we could drop
high aptitude peers and high expenditures on other students and expect to see a similar effect on their
earnings. In this paper, we cannot differentiate between an intensive margin that works because high
quality peers and expenditures generate actual human capital and an intensive margin that works because
high quality peers and expenditures are necessary components of an elaborate signaling mechanism that
signals aptitude. In either case, the intensive margin is necessary for aptitude to be associated with greater
earnings, so we will say that the increased earnings are associated with the increasing role of the intensive
margin. We return to this point in the conclusion.
A preview of the empirical strategy is as follows. We first use the Current Population Survey
(CPS) to establish the time trends in income and wage inequality that we are attempting to explain. We
examine males who are college-educated and have either 5 or 25 years of experience. They are
comparable to other estimates of within-college income quantiles from the literature based on the CPS.
Next, we show income and wage quantiles for 1972, 1986, and 1995, based on males who are about age 32
in the combined surveys. For each year, we examine two groups: those who completed at least two years
of college, and and those who have at least a baccalaureate degree. We also show mean incomes and
wages for individuals grouped by their colleges and by their aptitude. In the parametric part of the paper,
we use regression and analysis of variance to decompose each year's variance in incomes and wages into
variance attributable to individual attributes other than aptitude (family background), aptitude, the intensive
margin (peer concentration, per-student expenditure), and residual inequality. We use Oaxaca-type
decompositions to attribute the changes in variance to changes in the variance of attributes (such as

4

increased demographic diversity or increased diversity of per-student expenditure), changes in the return to
attributes (such as the return to aptitude), and changes in the residual. We consider a number of alternative
specifications. In particular, we try different methods of estimating the extensive margin, and we use
simulated instrumental variables to ensure that the attributes of an individual's college do not pick up
unmeasured aptitude. Overall, when our choice of an estimation strategy is likely to bias the results, we
consistently choose the strategy that will favor the conventional explanations of increasing inequality (the
extensive margin, then the return to aptitude) over the intensive margin explanation.

II. Background: Wage Inequality Measures from the CPS 1969-96
The increase in income and wage dispersion in the U.S. since 1970 has been well documented by
numerous authors, for instance Katz and Murphy (1992), Juhn, Murphy, and Pierce (1993), Levy and
Murnane (1992), and Gottschalk (1997). About one-third of this increase is associated with increasing
differentials between groups, such as the differential between people with a college education and just a
high school education. The other two-thirds of the increased dispersion has been within groups. The group
that concerns us, the college-educated, have shown an increase in the variance of their wages that is about
16% larger than the overall increase in variance.3
Figures 1 through 4 show log wages at various percentiles of the income distribution from 1969 to
1996 for white males who report having completed at least 16 years of education.4 Figure 1 shows time
paths of the difference between the 90th and 10th percentiles, the difference between the 90th and 50th, and
the difference between the 50th and 10th for men with 25 years of experience. Figure 2 repeats the exercise
substituting the 75th percentile for the 90th percentile, and the 25th percentile for the 10th percentiles.

3

4

Authors' calculations, based on combined surveys.

For all four surveys used in this paper, hourly wages are constructed from periodic earnings (for
instance, weekly earnings) and usual weekly hours for those men who do not report hourly wages.

5

(Experience is measured as age minus education minus six, so the men are aged about 57.) Figures 3 and 4
show the corresponding time paths for men with 5 years of experience (who are aged about 27). The
estimates for 1969 through 1977 are taken from Buchinsky (1995) and are based on the March CPS. We
estimated the incomes at various percentiles for 1978 to 1996 using the Merged Outgoing Rotation Groups
of the CPS. Our method otherwise replicates that described by Buchinsky (1995) so that the updated series
continues smoothly. Appendix Tables 1-4 present the estimates that are displayed in Figures 1-4.
Figures 1 and 2 show steady upward trends in wage inequality among men with 25 years of
experience. In 1969, wages at the 90th and 10th percentiles are separated by 1.070 log points, and wages at
the 75th and 25th percentiles are separated by 0.540 log points. The corresponding 1996 differences are
1.385 log points and 0.691 log points. The paths show relatively steady rates of increase over the entire
period, with the exception of a dip in the 90th-50th difference from 1983 to 1987. Even though the men
whose wages are shown in Figures 1 and 2 are significantly older than the men we examine in the combined
surveys, it is useful to begin with them. Their wages paths are more steady, reflecting more of the trend in
wage inequality than short term labor market fluctuations. Also, wage inequality among men younger than
30 understates the true inequality in their current earning potential (because schooling activities depress
some men's earnings) and grossly understates the inequality in the lifetime earning potential.5 As Heckman
et al (1996) show, an examination of the incomes of men who are just a few years out of their 20s is much
more informative than an examination of the same men a few years previously.
Figures 3 and 4 show that men with 5 years of experience also displayed increasing wage
inequality over the 1969 to 1996 period. However, the time paths of the percentiles of their income
distribution are much less steady and display plateaus (1971-77, 1981-87, 1990 onwards) and rather
abrupt increases (1970-71, 1977-81, 1987-90). It is difficult to state with confidence whether their wage

5

See Murphy and Welch (1990).

6

inequality has recently stopped growing or whether it is just currently on a plateau and will soon resume the
upward trend shown by the income inequality of men with 25 years of experience. The1969 wages of men
with 5 years of experience differed by 0.930 log points between the 90th and 10th percentiles and by 0.420
log points between the 75th and 25th percentiles. Their 1996 wages differed by 1.311 log points between the
90th and 10th percentiles and by 0.648 log points between the 75th and 25th percentiles.
It is useful to compare the combined survey data to the CPS data just shown. The combined
survey men are about age 32, so they have approximately 10 years of experience (calculated using the ageeducation-6 method). They belong between the figures for men with 5 years and 25 of experience. Also,
all of the CPS males in Figures 1-4 reported that they had completed at least 16 years of education,
supposed to be equivalent to a baccalaureate degree. Unlike the combined surveys, however, the CPS does
not provide other information we might use to confirm the existence of a baccalaureate degree (such as
attending a college that actually grants baccalaureate degrees). Based on our experience with the other
surveys, we expect that a minority of men (15 to 20%) in the CPS group have completed some college but
do not actually have a baccalaureate degree.
The combined surveys' data are shown for the appropriate years as isolated "X"s on Figures 1
through 4. The wage differentials are, as expected, between those of men with 25 years of experience than
for those of men with 5 years of experience. For baccalaureate holders in the combined surveys, wages at
the 90th and 10th percentiles differ by 1.043 log points in 1972 (compare 1.100 log points for CPS men with
25 years of experience and 0.970 log points for CPS men with 5 years of experience) and by 1.288 log
points in 1995 (compare 1.397 log points for CPS men with 25 years of experience and 1.338 log points
for CPS men with 5 years of experience). The corresponding numbers for the 75th and 25th percentiles are
0.547 log points in 1972 (compare 0.540 log points for CPS men with 25 years of experience and 0.470
log points for CPS men with 5 years of experience) and 0.658 log points in 1995 (compare 0.695 log points
for CPS men with 25 years of experience and 0.660 log points for CPS men 5 years of experience).

7

Thus, the combined survey data exhibit a time pattern in wage inequality that is consistent with
that shown by CPS data. Figures 1 through 4 also show that inequality in the combined survey data
continues to grow after the 1972-86 period. For instance, the average annual growth of the 90-10 wage
differential is about the same (0.01 log points) both before and after 1986, according to the combined
survey data. This implies that we should be able to learn as much from comparing NLSY data (1995
wages) to NLS72 data (1986 wages) as we can from comparing NLS72 data (1986 wages) to OCG data
(1972 wages). This implication is useful because the NLSY and NLS72 contain measures of scholastic
aptitude that the OCG does not contain.

III. The Combined Surveys Data
The first principle of our empirical strategy was to choose data from the beginning, middle, and
end of the 1970 to 1995 period that were as comparable as possible before econometric analysis. The
second principle was to choose wage data that would strongly reflect current trends in inequality, yet not
reflect too many competing phenomena–such as job search activities undertaken by young labor market
participants or the changing labor supply behavior of young women.
In practice, these data requirements pose the principal obstacle to empirical work like that we
attempt in this study. We need survey data on wages, incomes, and family background that are nationally
representative (or are provided with appropriate weights to generate nationally representative statistics).
The data must span the period of interest–approximately 1970 to the present–and must identify each
individual's actual college. The data must allow us to compare men who are out of their 20s, yet young
enough to have wages that strongly reflect current trends in inequality and young enough to have attended
college in a period for which college data are available. We must match the survey data to data about each
institution of higher education, drawn for the relevant year. Data on the universe of colleges (not just those
attended by someone in the survey) must be assembled so that colleges may be ranked and we can assess

8

what behavior is typical for a student of given aptitude in a given year. Information on colleges' selectivity
and student bodies is particularly difficult to assemble, because it is scattered in a variety of sources and
comes in a variety of formats. Early (pre-1970) financial information on colleges is also onerous to
assemble.
This section describes the key features of our data. The Data Appendix Table contains sample
information and descriptive statistics for each data set.
A. A Description of the Data
The NLS72 provides us with 1986 wage and income data on X men, whose high school and college
experiences were recorded in earlier waves of the survey (1972-86). Because the NLS72 began with a
sample of people who high school seniors in 1972, the vast majority of the men are age 32 in 1986. We
therefore use 32 as the focal age for drawing samples from the OCG and NLSY surveys. The NLS72 has
clustered sampling based on high schools, and we take account of this clustering in the empirical analysis.6
We use the weights, provided by the survey, that are designed to make the 1986 data nationally
representative. Men are dropped from the sample if they have zero or missing earnings information. This
is true for the other two surveys as well, so that it is appropriate to interpret all the results as "conditional
on having positive earnings." In practice, this is not an onerous restriction because the men whom we
analyze, those with at least some college education, are more likely to have positive earnings. For instance,
among men in the NLS72 who have baccalaureate degrees, only 10.4 percent of the observations must be
dropped because earnings are non-positive or non-interpretable.7
The NLSY provides us with 1995 wage and income data on X men, whose high school and college

6

Stata contains a set of survey or "svy" procedures that account for clustering. These procedures compute
group means, group proportions, regression coefficients, and so on. We define the school as the cluster or
probaptitude sampling unit for the NLS72, and we find that using the "svy" procedures with the school cluster is
important for correct computation of variances and quantiles in the NLS72.
7

This computation does not include men who have already left the sample previous to the 1986 wave.

9

experiences are recorded in waves of the survey dating from 1979 to 1996.8 The men in the NLSY were
aged 30 to 38 in 1995, and we kept observations on those men who were aged 30 to 35. Thus, the sample
is roughly centered on age 32–though there is an asymmetry. In choosing these ages, we considered the
trade-off between the explanatory power we would gain from increasing sample size and the explanatory
power we would need to estimate age effects convincingly enough that the NLSY could be compared to the
NLS72. We use the weights provided by the survey for 1995 data. The NLSY contains an oversample of
people from minority and disadvantaged backgrounds. We found that keeping or excluding this sample did
not affect our results significantly, so long as we used the appropriate weights.9
Men from the NLS72 and NLSY are associated with the college from which they obtained a
baccalaureate degree, if they obtained one. Men who remain unmatched after this procedure are associated
with the college from which they obtained an associates degree, if they obtained one. Men who remain
unmatched after this procedure are associated with the college they attended the longest in an
undergraduate capacity. We create a category for men who claim to have attended college, but whose
reported colleges could not be matched with any accredited institution of higher education by the United
States Department of Education.
So far as we are aware, the OCG is the only nationally representative survey that provides early
1970s wages, incomes, and background data on a large number of men and records the specific college that
each individual attended. The OCG was a CPS supplement, so it has the same sample structure as the
CPS. We use the X men who were aged 30 to 35 in 1972.10 The OCG contains less family background
information than either the NLS72 or the NLSY, so it was the limiting factor in our choice of background
8

NLSY earnings and hours data for 1995 were collected in the 1996 survey.

9

The NLSY also originally contained a military sub-sample, but these men were perforce dropped
because the survey stopped following them before the 1996 wave.
10

The sample was conducted in 1973, but the earnings and hours data apply to 1972. The OCG is not
longitudinal, so some information is retrospective.

10

variables. For all three surveys, however, we were able to obtain the background variables that have
substantial explanatory power for earnings and college attendance: race, ethnicity, parents' completed
education, family income at the time the respondent was in high school, family size, birth order, foreign
birth of parents, and state in which the respondent attended high school. Men in the OCG are associated
with their most recent college. We use the weights provided by the OCG, although these do not make much
difference in practice owing to the sample design.
Colleges' financial and institutional data for 1969 onwards is derived from CASPAR, a panel
version of the data gathered by the U.S. Department of Education in its Higher Education General
Information System (HEGIS) and Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS) surveys. The
variables include expenditures per student, revenues per student, tuition revenue per student, tuition, instate and out-of-state tuition (for colleges that differentiate tuition by state of residence), average faculty
salary, faculty-student ratio, and total enrollment. For the years prior to 1968, the same variables were
coded from a variety of college guides, but especially the American Council on Education's guide entitled
American Universities and Colleges, which includes every accredited institution.11
Each individual was matched with information about the college he attended, where the information
was drawn from the approximate year in which he would have been applying to college if he had applied in
his senior year of high school. Thus NLS72 men are matched with college information from 1971-72,
NLSY men with college information from 1980-81, and OCG men with college information from 1958-60.
We chose this matching procedure partly because of data availability, and partly because we would have
otherwise had to instrument each individual's college information with the college information that would
have pertained if he had applied at the normal time. (Otherwise, the effects of his college characteristics

11

Other guides that provided us with a substantial number of observations on financial and institutional
variables for this period were Lovejoy's Guide to Colleges and Cass and Birmbaum's Comparative Guide to
American Colleges.

11

would be contaminated by the effects of his decision to attend college at an unusual time in his life.) In any
case, the information for a college does not change so rapidly that a mis-match of one or two years would
affect the results.12
Information on colleges' student bodies and selectivity was taken from a variety of college guides,
including Peterson's, Barrons, Cass and Birmbaum's Comparative Guide, Lovejoys, and American
Universities and Colleges. For any given college in any year, multiple sources of information were used.
For instance, general admissions information (admissions tests required, required grade point average, and
so on) might be confirmed by three sources, while Barrons might provide median Scholastic Aptitude Test
(SAT) and/or American College Test (ACT) scores, Peterson's might provide cumulative densities for
various points on the SAT and/or ACT distribution, and Lovejoys might provide mean SAT and/or ACT
scores. Some colleges are nonselective, meaning that they do not have any admissions requirements beyond
a high school diploma or the equivalent. These colleges are identified by a nonselective dummy variable.
Other colleges' student bodies are described by the distribution of their admissions test scores, with ACT
scores translated into SAT scores using the tables provided by the College Board. We then translated SAT
scores translated into 1982 national percentiles using the distribution information published by the College
Board. Since we are interested in how diverse a college's student body is, this translation is important. For
instance, the 100 point difference between 700 and 800 on the SAT verbal test is only 1 percentile, but the
100 point difference between 450 and 550 is 27 percentiles. In addition, the SAT verbal test is
considerably more sensitive than the SAT math test above 550 points, so that a 100 point difference on the
verbal test contains fewer percentiles than a 100 point difference on the math test.13
We estimated the standard deviation of admissions test scores for each college using the method of

12

13

This is one reason why we use surveys that record earnings in years that are about a decade apart.

All of these comments refer to the pre-1994 SAT verbal and math tests, which are relevant for our
analysis. Each test has since been separately recentered.

12

moments on the multiple moments that we typically had for each college and assuming that the distribution
for each college was normal. (Reported means and medians were usually within 10 points of one another
for each college.) For instance, a college's mean SAT verbal score and its percentage of students with SAT
verbal scores above 600 (both translated into national percentile scores first) would generate one method of
moments estimate of the standard deviation of its verbal scores. We then took the mean of each college's
method of moments estimates of the standard deviation of verbal scores (though the median of the estimates
worked similarly). We performed the same procedure for SAT math scores.
B. Two Measurement Issues
We would like a measure of each college's peer influences that indicates how likely a student is, in
an encounter with a fellow student, to meet person who is a beneficial academically. We attempt to form
such a measure by interacting the standard deviation of colleges' admissions test scores with their mean
admissions test scores. For a college with a given mean level of aptitude, peer effects are affected by the
dispersion of aptitude. If we believe, for example, that interactions with much less able peers are
unproductive or bad for a student's achievement, then we would expect that, conditional on attending a
college with high mean SAT scores, a tighter distribution of SAT scores (a smaller standard deviation of
SAT scores) generates better peer effects. On the other hand, if the aptitude of the most able student in the
college is all that matters, excellent peer effects are possible even at a college with low mean SAT scores so
long as the distribution of scores is not tight (the standard deviation in large). It is important to emphasize,
however, that without knowing how peer effects work, we cannot take a stand on the sign of the interaction
term. For instance, homogeneous classes may be good for all students. Or, homogeneous classes may be
good only for students who are of high aptitude and are thereby segregated from low aptitude students. Or,
colleges' dispersion of aptitude may matter very little because there are many means by which students can
self-segregate within colleges. We do not wish to constrain the mechanism by which peer effects work.
We will simply associate peer effects with the effects of the interaction between a college's average SAT

13

score and the standard deviation of its scores, and our preferred specification (see below) allows many
different peer mechanisms to reveal themselves.
The figure below may clarify the intuition. It shows a stylized version of what has happened to the
college market over time. The vertical axis shows SAT scores, arranged so that students are uniformly
distributed over the axis. Each college's student body is represented as a part of this distribution. For
instance, college A's students have SAT scores that are uniformly distributed between the dashed lines.

In
all 3
colleges, the
standard
deviation of
students'
SAT scores shrinks over time. Each college's mean SAT score (not shown, but obviously at the center of
each college's range) also changes. The income of a student who attends college A is not just a function of

14

his own aptitude (measured both by his individual score and the college's mean score), but also a function
of the students he meets in college A. If he attends college A at time 1, he is more likely to meet a low
aptitude student than if he attends college A at time 3. Conversely, a student who attends college C is more
likely to meet a high aptitude student if he attends at time 1 than at time 3. Students at all colleges are
more likely to experience classes with heterogenous students if they attend at time 1 rather than time 3.
In summary, we associate an individual's aptitude scores and the main effect of his college's
average SAT scores with his individual aptitude. That is, we assume that a college's average SAT scores
are another measure of individual aptitude that has descriptive power even when we control for individual
measures of aptitude. Only the interaction between colleges' average SAT scores and the standard
deviations of the scores are associated with the intensive margin. This pattern of association overstates the
role of aptitude and understates the role of the intensive margin. This is one example of how we chose
methods that would understate the intensive margin. Note that the previous literature has conventionally
called the effect of a college's average SAT scores "peer effects" when an individual's own SAT score was
controlled for. If we were to adopt this convention, the role of aptitude in explaining inequality would
shrink and the role of the intensive margin would expand.
Both the NLS72 and NLSY administered tests of math and verbal skills to their entire survey
population. These provide useful measures of scholastic aptitude. The NSL72 test was created by the
United States Department of Education for use in the survey and was administered to all the respondents
when they were high school seniors. We use its mathematics and language/reading components. In the
NLSY, the universally administered test was the ASVAB, from which we use the parts on numerical
analysis, vocabulary, and reading comprehension. Respondents' scores on all these tests are expressed as
percentile scores and have distributions (see the Data Appendix Table). We hereafter give these scores the
generic names of "Verbal Aptitude" and "Math Aptitude," and we claim that these scores measure
attributes in which colleges admissions officers are interested. The NLS72 and NLSY contain respondents'

15

scores on the Preliminary Scholastic Aptitude Test (PSAT), SAT, and ACT.14 The Verbal Aptitude and
Math Aptitude scores are correlated with PSAT, SAT, and ACT scores with correlation coefficients that
consistently exceed 0.90.
No aptitude test was administered as part of the OCG, so the only measure of a student's aptitude
is his college's average SAT score. We use colleges' average SAT scores and the standard deviations of the
colleges' SAT scores in a second empirical strategy that is a small variation on the strategy described in the
preceding paragraph. This second strategy (which is described in detail below) has a few advantages: (1)
it allows use of the OCG and, thus, comparison over a longer period of time; (2) it allows peer effects to be
modeled flexibly, and (3) it eliminates some attenuation bias that might be caused by error in the aptitude
measures.

IV. Descriptive Analysis of the Income and Wage Distributions
In this section, we show that the combined surveys data suggest some role for each of three
possible sources of within-college inequality: the extensive margin, aptitude, and the intensive margin.
Our strategy is to first examine earnings quantiles of the whole sample, then eliminate individuals who are
likely to contribute to inequality through the extensive margin and reexamine the earnings quantiles in the
reduced sample, and finally show how much of income and wage inequality is associated with aptitude or
college rank.
Each figure in this section has a corresponding appendix table that presents the same data
numerically. Thus, all the statistics in Figure 5 are shown in Appendix Tables 5a and 5b, and all the
calculations presented in this section are based on numbers available in the appropriate appendix table. We
prepared statistics for each of four definitions of college-going: attended any college, completed at least 2

14

If a respondent took an admissions or pre-admissions test, the score is recorded on his transcript and
becomes part of the survey record.

16

years of college, attended a baccalaureate-granting college, and earned a baccalaureate degree. Statistics
based on the first three definitions tend to be similar, so, for brevity, we usually present only statistics
based on the second and fourth definitions. Most of the income and wage statistics are expressed in natural
logs, but a few figures show statistics in real dollars because it is instructive to see the analysis both
ways.15
Figure 5 shows income for 1972, 1986 and 1995 at the 95th, 90th, 75th, 50th, 25th, 10th, and 5th
percentiles of the income distribution. The set of all men with a least 2 years of college are shown in one
part of the figure, and the subset of men who have a baccalaureate degree are shown in the other part. The
income distribution is clearly widening over time. Among those who have at least two years of college, the
upper and lower halves of the distribution each account for about an equal share of the widening. Among
the baccalaureate-holders, however, the upper half of the distribution accounts for a slightly
disproportionate share. For them, the 90-10 differential was 34,478 dollars in 1972 and 50,050 dollars in
1995. The 90-50 differential rose from 19,050 dollars to 28,027 dollars over the same period, implying
that the upper half of the distribution accounted for 57.6% of the increase in the 90-10 differential. For
both groups of college-goers, earnings at the 5th and 10th percentile are flat or declining over the period,
while earnings at the 50th percentile and above are rising.
Figure 6 shows the same analysis as Figure 5, except that hourly wages are presented instead of
income. Figure 6 shows increasing dispersion, like Figure 5, but wages increase more on average over the
period than incomes do. Nevertheless, wages at the 5th and 10th percentiles are nearly flat. Among those
with at least 2 years of colleges, the 90-10 differential is 13.47 dollars in 1972 and 18.55 dollars in 1995.
For the same group, the 90-50 differential is 8.45 dollars in 1972 and 10.70 dollars in 1995, implying that
the lower half of the distribution accounts for 55.7% of the increase in dispersion. Among the

15

All results that are mentioned but are not shown are available from the authors.

17

baccalaureate holders, the 90-10 differential grows from 14.39 dollars in 1972 to 19.25 dollars in 1995,
and the two halves of the distribution account for roughly equal shares of the increase in dispersion. In
both groups of men, the increase in dispersion decelerates slightly in the 1986-95 period relative to the
1986-72 period. This deceleration is not observable in the income data shown in Figure 5.
Figures 7a through 8b attempt to show what Figures 5 and 6 would have looked like if the
backgrounds of people going to college had remained the same over the whole period. That is, we attempt
to eliminate the increase in inequality due to the extensive margin in background–especially the increased
access to college among students from socio-economically disadvantaged backgrounds. (There is also an
extensive margin in aptitude, but we do not attempt to estimate it until we do parametric analysis in the
next section.) We wish to overstate rather than understate the increase in inequality due to the extensive
margin in background, so we adopt the following procedure for culling the sample.16 Using the OCG
sample, we estimated probit equations for at-least-two-years-of-college and baccalaureate-degree using all
of the background variables and various interactions among them.17 We calculated a propensity score for
each individual to be a member of each group and we calculated the mean propensity within each group–for
instance, the mean propensity to be a baccalaureate holder, conditional on actually belonging to the
baccalaureate-holding group. We classified the people in the OCG who were above the mean propensity for
each group as "very likely to belong." We used the estimated coefficients from the OCG probit equations to
generate propensity scores for men in the NLS72 and NLSY, and we classified them as "very likely to
belong" to each group if they were above the mean propensity scores calculated using the OCG data (as

16

We do this to emphasize how much of the increase in dispersion remains to be explained even when the
extensive margin has been given (more than) its due. In the next section, we adopt a more balanced method of
computing the increase in variance due to the extensive margin.
17

The variables are number of siblings, number of older siblings, black, hispanic, asian, native american,
maximum of parents' highest grade completed, log(family income) when respondent was in high school, foreignborn parents or major household language is foreign, and indicator variables for state of residence while in high
school.

18

described above). The outcome of the procedure is a sample of men from each of the surveys who would
have been very likely to have at least two years of college or to have baccalaureate degrees if they had lived
when the men in the OCG lived. A by-product of the procedure is a demonstration that selection into
college on the basis of good background characteristics was stronger in the OCG than in the other two
surveys.18
Figure 6a shows what happens to the distribution of income among predicted-baccalaureateholders between 1972 and 1995. The distribution among actual baccalaureate-holders is also shown for
comparison. Careful visual comparisons or, even better, a few calculations using the numbers in Appendix
Table 7a demonstrate that eliminating the extensive margin in background wipes out only a minority of the
increase in income inequality. (Recall that the method employed tends to overstate the role of the extensive
margin.) For instance, the 90-10 differential grew by 15,572 dollars (from 34.378 dollars in 1972 to
50,050 dollars in 1995) among actual baccalaureate-holders. It grew by 14,164 dollars (from 37,888
dollars in 1972 to 52,052 dollars in 1995) among men who were always likely to be baccalaureate-holders.
These numbers imply that the extensive margin in background accounts for about 10% of the increase in
income inequality. We get a larger estimate, 19%, if we examine the 75-25 differential instead of the 90-10
differential.
Figure 7b is the same as Figure 7a, except that hourly wages are shown instead of income. If we
make the same calculations as we made in the preceding paragraph for Figure 7a, we find that the extensive
margin accounts for between 8% and 26% of the increase in wage inequality. The former number is based
on the 90-10 wage differential; the latter number is based on the 75-25 differential.
Figures 8a and 8b repeat the exercise of Figures 7a and 7b, except that at-least-2-years-of-college
is the group of interest, rather than baccalaureate holders. Careful visual comparisons or calculations like

18

Coefficient estimates that show this point are presented in the next section.

19

those above (based on Appendix Tables 8a and 8b) reveal that the extensive margin can account for as
much as 18-30% of the increase in income inequality and 11-47% of the increase in wage inequality among
men with at least 2 years of college. In all cases, the lower estimate of extensive margin's contribution
comes from calculations based on the 90-10 differential, and the higher estimate comes from calculations
based on the 75-25 differential. Having shown that even an exaggerated extensive margin accounts for
only a minority of the increase in inequality, we use regression analysis in the next section to get more
better estimates of the contribution made by the extensive margin. The parametric analysis imposes more
structure, but it also uses all of the available data to calculate each contribution.
In Figures 9a through 10b, we abandon percentiles of the income and wage distributions, and we
instead show incomes and wages for people who attended colleges of differing selectivity. In the figures,
we group colleges into 6 ranks based on their selectivity (for visual clarity, the 12 rank groups used in the
parametric analysis are contracted into 6). Rank group 1 contains nonselective and minimally selective
colleges, and rank group 6 contains the most selective colleges. The first thing we observe about Figure 8a
is that individuals who attend more selective colleges tend to earn higher wages. The second thing we
observe is that the income differentials associated with college rank have grown over time. The increase in
dispersion has occurred especially because the incomes of individuals from colleges with extreme ranks (1
and 6) have moved away from the center.
In Figures 11 and 12, individuals are grouped by their Verbal Aptitude and Math Aptitude scores
into 5 convenient groups, where individuals placed in group 5 have high scores on both the Verbal and
Math tests and those placed in group 1 have low scores on both tests. The groups were constructed so that
the weighted proportion of people in each aptitude group would be the same in both surveys. In other
words, the actual scoring of the tests should not affect the figures. (In any case, both tests are scored in
terms of national percentiles and have quite similar weighted distributions of test scores, as we would
expect.) The figures show only 1986 and 1995 earnings because only the NLS72 and the NLSY contained

20

Verbal Aptitude and Math Aptitude scores.
There is an increase in income and wage dispersion associated with higher aptitude. For instance,
consider the baccalaureate holders in Figure 12. The difference in wages between group 5 (most able) and
group 1 (least able) is 0.17 log points in 1986, but 0.33 log points in 1995.

V. Parametric Decomposition of the Variance of Income and Wages
In this section, we use regression methods to decompose the increase in the variance of income and
wages among the college-going into the extensive margin, the return to aptitude, and the intensive margin.
We want to learn, to the extent possible, how much of the increase in earnings variance is due to the
extensive margin, the return to aptitude, and the intensive margin. We also want to know how the
estimated effects of aptitude change when we add measures of college peers and inputs to an earnings
regression. This will help us sort out the contribution of pure increases in the return to aptitude from the
contribution of the intensive margin (increased variance in college attributes associated with aptitude).
Along the way, we can examine issues such as whether selection into the college-going group has become
less demanding in terms of good background characteristics and aptitude.
The First Empirical Strategy
Our first strategy uses the following earnings regression:
(1)

ln(yit)' Xit $t %Zit *t%Wit (t%,it

where i indexes individuals, t indexes the survey year, and y is the measure of earnings (either income or
wages). The vector Z contains the individual's own Verbal Aptitude or Math Aptitude and his college's
mean SAT scores. The vector W contains measures of the intensive margin. These include college inputs
and college peer effects--that is, interactions between an individual's aptitude measures and his college's
standard deviation of SAT scores. The vector X contains background variables that might affect the
extensive margin–for instance, selection into the group of men with two years of college education. An

21

alternative to including the background variables themselves would be to include a propensity score based
on those background variables and aptitude, weight by a propensity score, or use some other selection
correction technique. We consider these alternatives in the next section, but we find that including the X
variables themselves is the procedure that is, at once, the least restrictive and the most generous towards the
extensive margin. Since we are not interested in identifying the effect of being black, say, on income
separately from its effect on the propensity to go to college, we simply call all of the variation associated
with X and the return to X "the extensive margin." This naturally maximizes the contribution of the
extensive margin, which is acceptable for our purposes.
Before estimating equation (1) itself, we first estimate two restricted versions of the equation. The
first restricted equation contains only the background variables–that is, * and ( are set equal to zero. The
second restricted equation contains only the background and aptitude variables–that is, ( is set equal to
zero. Finally, we estimate equation (1). Each of the above regressions is estimated separately, using
weights, on each of the three surveys. We add explanatory variables sequentially because we are interested
in knowing how the effects of background are affected by aptitude, and how the effects of aptitude are
affected by college attributes.
Having estimated these regressions, we do a standard analysis of the variance of earnings, showing
how much of the total variance is explained by the model and how much is residual variance. We then
compute the partial variance due to each group of variables: the X, Z, and W vectors. That is, we
compute the partial sum of squares for each vector and divide it by the model degrees of freedom. Each of
these partial variances is a rough estimate of the amount that that group of variables contributes to the
explained variance.19 For instance, the partial sum of squares for X in the above model is:

19

If there were no covariances among the blocks of the explanatory variables, it would be an accurate
estimate. In the process of computing the partial variances, we also computed the partial covariances. These were
relatively small for the results we examine in the text (perhaps because so many of the variables in the regression
are indicator variables), and it did not appear that they would be informative if presented.
The equation

22
)

)

&

$̂t ( X t MX & X t ) $̂t

(2)

&)

&

&

&)

where X t '[ Zt Wt] and MX & 'I&X t (X t X t )&1 X t

t

t

This is a rough measure of the contribution of X to the explained variance, since we have partialed out Z
and W. However, we can learn how the contribution of X changes as we add Z and W, since we add them
sequentially.
We can also see how much each of the partial variances increases from survey to survey. That is,
when the total variance of earnings increases from 1972 to 1986, how much of the increase is contributed
by the increases in the partial variances due to X, or Z, and W?
Up to this point, the analysis does not differentiate between changes in the variance of earnings that
are due to changes in the variance of explanatory variables and changes in the returns to those explanatory
variables. Applying an Oaxaca decomposition to our partial variances, we find we need to compute the
following difference:
(3)

)

)

)

)

$̂t ( X t MX & X t ) $̂t&$̂t&1 ( Xt&1 MX & Xt&1) $̂t&1 '
t

)

)

)

t&1

)

)

)

)

)

$̂t ( X t MX & X t ) $̂t & $̂t&1 (X t MX & X t ) $̂t&1 % $̂t&1 ( X t MX & X t ) $̂t&1 & $̂t&1 ( Xt&1 MX & Xt&1 ) $̂t&1
t

t

t

t&1

Alternatively, we could compute the following:
(4)

)

)

)

)

$̂t (X t MX & X t ) $̂t&$̂t&1 ( Xt&1 MX & Xt&1) $̂t&1 '
t

)

)

)

t&1

)

)

)

)

)

$̂t ( X t MX & X t ) $̂t & $̂t (Xt&1 MX & Xt&1 ) $̂t % $̂t ( Xt&1 MX & Xt&1 ) $̂t & $̂t&1 (Xt&1 MX & Xt&1 ) $̂t&1
t

t&1

t&1

t&1

In equations (3) and (4), we decompose the change in the variance into the part due to the change in the
variance of X and the part due to the change in $ (the return to X). Each of these parts is enclosed in
square brackets. In equation (3), the change in the partial variance of the explanatory variables is weighted
by the "old" return and the change in the return is weighted by the "new" partial variance of the explanatory

shown for the partial sum of squares is for exposition. It does not include the weights or cluster design that we
used

23

variables. If returns are increasing and the partial variance of the explanatory variables is also increasing,
this procedure tends to minimize the estimated contribution of the change in the partial variance of the
explanatory variables. It tends to maximize the estimated contribution of the change in the return. In
equation (4), the change in the partial variance of the explanatory variables is weighted by the "new" return
and the change in the return is weighted by the "old" partial variance of the explanatory variables. If
returns are increasing and the variance of the explanatory variables is also increasing, this procedure tends
to maximize the estimated contribution of the change in the partial variance of the explanatory variables
and tends to minimize the estimated contribution of the change in the return.
We computed the decomposition using both equation (3) and equation (4). The two methods
produce similar patterns, but we present the decomposition based on equation (3) in order to maximize the
apparent contribution of the return to aptitude and minimize the apparent contribution of the intensive
margin (which depends on increased partial variation in W). That is, we present the decomposition that
lends itself to the more conventional explanation. Since we sweep both X and the return to X into the
extensive margin, the choice of equation (3) or (4) does not affect our assessment of the importance of that
source of inequality.
The Second Empirical Strategy
There are a few problems with the first empirical strategy. The OCG does not contain individual
measures of aptitude, apart from the average SAT score of an individual's college. Also, there is fair
amount of measurement error in a college's average SAT score, which might cause estimates of the effect
of aptitude to be attenuated. Finally, the independent variables do not easily orthogonalize. This makes the
decomposition less effective and more difficult to interpret--essentially because the covariances among
groups of variables (between W and Z, for instance) must be assigned. The covariances can be assigned to
one group of variables, split between the relevant groups of variables, or assigned to the residual (this is
what we do), but none of these choices is clearly best. If the measures of aptitude are, instead, indicator

24

variables for aptitude groups, the amount of covariance decreases greatly and assignment of covariance is
less of an issue.20
Our second empirical strategy addresses all three problems by grouping colleges into 12 aptitude
rank groups, based on their selectivity. The grouping standards are the same for all years of data. The
regression is a modified version of equation (1), where the vector Z contains indicator variables for the rank
groups instead of individuals' aptitude scores and colleges' average SAT scores. The vector W contains
interactions between each college's rank group indicators and its standard deviation of SAT scores, rather
than interactions between each college's average SAT scores and its standard deviation of scores. The
interpretation is still the same. Z, or the main effect of colleges' aptitude rank, is associated with aptitude.
W is associated with the intensive margin, and X with the extensive margin.
The first empirical strategy produces coefficient estimates that are easier to read and interpret-simply because there are fewer of them--than the coefficient estimates from the second strategy. The
second strategy, however, is more flexible, uses more data, and produces better decompositions. On the
whole, we prefer the second strategy and we present its results as the main results, despite the awkwardness
of presenting so many coefficients. We then show the results of the first strategy.
Table 1 shows the regression of baccalaureate holders' income on their backgrounds, colleges'
aptitude rank, and colleges' peers and inputs. The first three columns of table contain regressions based on
1972 (OCG) data; the next three columns contain regressions based on 1986 (NLS72) data; and the last
three columns contain regressions based on 1995 (NLSY) data. The first column for each survey is the
regression in which only background variables (X) are included. The second column for each survey adds
indicator variables for college selectivity (Z), and the third column for each survey adds the peer measures
and per-student expenditure (W). The coefficients on the background variables mainly have the

20

The analysis of variance section in most statistics textbooks explains this logic.

25

coefficients we expect. It is important to recall that they combine the effects of selection and their own
treatment effects. Computations we make below inform us that the returns to good backgrounds and
penalties for bad backgrounds are generally falling over time, but this pattern is hard to discern from the
individual coefficients on the background variables.
More noteworthy is the pattern of coefficients on the aptitude rank indicators, when these variables
are added in the second column of each survey's set of results. (Aptitude rank=1 is the excluded category.
Colleges in this category are nonselective.) An individual's income increases steadily with the aptitude rank
of his college, but the rate of increase is greater as the survey data become more recent. For instance, in
1972 there is a 0.528 log point difference between the incomes associated with aptitude rank group 12 (the
most selective) and aptitude rank group 1 (nonselective colleges, the omitted category). In 1986, the
difference is 0.645 log points; and, in 1995, the difference is 0.778 log points. Much of this growth in
income differentials takes place in the extreme categories. For instance, the income differential associated
with having a baccalaureate degree from a college that is ultimately selective but minimally so (aptitude
rank=2) versus a college that is ultimately nonselective grows from 0.021 log points in 1972 to 0.082 log
points in 1986 to 0.184 log points in 1995. The income differential associated with having a degree from a
college that has an aptitude rank of 12 versus a college that has an aptitude rank index of 8 grows from
0.200 log points in 1972 to 0.289 log points in 1986 to 0.306 log points in 1995. In summary, the second
regression for each survey suggests that there is a return to a college's aptitude rank and that this return
increased significantly from 1972 to 1995.
Examining the third column for each survey, we see the effect of adding college attributes. (Note
that the nonselective colleges that form the omitted category do not have standard deviations of SAT
scores–by definition. Thus, the main effect of a standard deviation in SAT scores is implicitly included in
the interaction terms.) Attending a college that has a larger standard deviation of SAT verbal scores is
associated with higher individual incomes if that college has low aptitude rank. In contrast, attending a

26

college that has a smaller standard deviation of SAT verbal scores is associated with higher individual
incomes if that college has high aptitude rank. The log of per-student expenditure has a positive effect on
income in all three surveys. A log point difference in per-student expenditure generates a 0.060 log point
difference in income in 1972 , a 0.111 log point difference in 1986, and a 0.119 difference in 1995.
Moreover, adding the college attributes makes the return to aptitude rank increase much less
rapidly over time. In fact, the return to aptitude rank appears to be only slightly higher in 1995 than in
1972, once we control for college attributes. It is still true that higher aptitude rank is associated with
higher income in all years of the survey, but the increase in the return to aptitude rank is small (only really
notable for colleges in aptitude rank groups 9 and 10).
Since the regression estimates for wages and for men with at least 2 years of college display similar
patterns, we do not discuss these results in detail. Appendix Tables 13-15 show results like those in Table
1, substituting wages as the earnings variable (Appendix Table 13) and then examining income and wages
for men who completed at least two years of college (Appendix Tables 14 and 15). However, we do
examine the by-products of those regression estimates: the variance decompositions of Tables 3-5. First,
consider Table 2, which presents the variance decomposition that corresponds to the regressions shown in
Table 1.
In its top panel, Table 2 shows changes in the total variance of income between surveys and
attempts to explain those changes in variance. For reference, the bottom panel displays the variances for
each survey year. "Method 1" indicates the regressions that only include background variables; "method 2"
indicates the regressions that include background and aptitude rank variables; and "method 3" indicates the
regressions that include background, aptitude rank, and college attribute variables. The first row of the
table shows the change in the total variance in log(income) between 1986 and 1972, between 1995 and
1986, and between 1995 and 1972. The next row shows, for method 1, the change in the partial variance
due to background variables. The next two rows split this change into the change in returns to background

27

and the change in the partial variance of background variables. The table also shows residual variance
(plus, in methods 2 and 3, covariances that are not shown elsewhere).
Table 2 has several noteworthy implications. The partial variance due to background accounts for
a smaller share of total variance in income when the aptitude rank variables are added to the regression.
The partial variance due to background grows over time and explains about 12% of the increase in total
variance, but not because the return to background grows. Instead, the returns to background shrink over
time, but the variance in background characteristics among the baccalaureate-holding group grows. When
we do not include college attributes in the regression, the increase in partial variance due to the aptitude
rank variables explains about 48% of the total increase in the variance of income. The increase in the
partial variance due to aptitude rank is mainly due to increases in the returns to aptitude rank. However,
when college attributes are included in the equation, the increase in partial variance due to aptitude rank is
more modest–about 27% of the total increase in the variance of income. Most of the shrinkage in the
contribution of aptitude rank comes from the estimated contribution of its return. This suggests that
college attributes explain a good portion of the increase in the return to aptitude rank. The increase in the
partial variance due to college peers and per-student expenditure accounts for about 32% of the total
increase in the variance of income. The remaining 27% of the total increase in the variance of income
comes from an increase in the sum of the residual and covariances.
Summing up, the extensive margin in background accounts for about 15% of the total increase in
the variance of income and this is because baccalaureate holders' backgrounds are becoming more diverse
over time. The decreasing return to background is making a negative contribution towards the increase in
the total variance of income. Colleges' aptitude rank accounts for another 27% of the total increase in the
variance of income. Most of this is due to an apparent increase in the return to aptitude rank, which can
interpreted as an increase in the return to aptitude (broadly construed as aptitude for college). The
intensive margin accounts for about 32% of total increase in the variance of income. Most of this is due to

28

an increase in the variance of college attributes, not an increase in the return to those attributes. If college
attributes are not included in the analysis, the role of pure increasing returns to aptitude is greatly
overstated (nearly double).
Table 3 is like Table 2, but presents an analysis of the wages of baccalaureate holders. Most of
the implications of Table 3 are the same as those of Table 2. However, it is noteworthy that the increase in
variance due to background accounts for a larger share (about 21%) of the increase in the total variance of
wages.
Tables 4 and 5 are the parallels of Tables 2 and 3, but all men with at least 2 years of college are
included. The first thing to note about these tables is that the model explains a smaller share of the increase
in the total variance of the incomes and wages of these men. Only about 50% of the increase in variance
can be attributed to one of the three measured sources of variance. Background still accounts for between
10% and 20% of the increases in the total variance of earnings, and the returns to background still make a
negative contribution. Thus, the difference is that, among men with at least 2 years of college, colleges'
aptitude rank, college peers, and college spending makes smaller contributions to the increase in the total
variance of earnings. The return to aptitude rank accounts for only a small share of the increase in total
variance. For income, the final breakdown is 18% associated with background, 9% associated with
colleges' aptitude rank (of which 1% is due to increased returns), and 15% associated with college peers
and per-student expenditures. For wages, the final breakdown is 9% associated with background, 16%
associated with colleges' aptitude rank (of which 6% is due to increased returns), and 25% associated with
college peers and per-student expenditures.
The full extensive margin includes the increase in variance due to the increased variance of aptitude
among college students. If we include that piece in the extensive margin, we get the following totals for log
income of baccalaureate holders over the entire 1972-95 period (Table 2, last column): 17.7% of the
increase in total variance associated with the extensive margin, 23.6% associated with the return to aptitude

29

rank (aptitude), and 31.9% associated with the intensive margin.

VI. Direct Measures of Aptitude and Other Alternative Specifications
Table 6 shows the results of regressing log income on background, college attributes, and the
individual's own measured aptitude. Aptitude rank is everywhere replaced by aptitude–with the proviso
that aptitude enters linearly rather than as a series of indicator variables.21 Table 6 displays only the
coefficients of interest–the estimated coefficients on the background variables are similar to those in Table
1–and only shows 1986 and 1995 since the OCG does not contain measures of aptitude.
People with higher aptitude scores earn substantially more income. An improvement of 1 national
percentile point on the Verbal Aptitude test is associated with a 0.0168 log point increase in income in
1986. In addition, attending a college with a mean SAT verbal score that is 1 national percentile point
higher is associated with a 0.0116 log point increase in income. The corresponding numbers for 1995 are
0.0182 log points and 0.0131 log points. Thus, without controlling for college attributes, own aptitude has
a strong positive effect on wages and the effect appears to be increasing over time. This result is consistent
with those of previous studies on aptitude and the return to education (cited in footnote 2). Once we control
for college peers and expenditure per student, however, the increase in the return to aptitude shrinks.
Income is still increasing in an individual's own Verbal Aptitude and the mean SAT verbal score of his
college, and the returns appear to be increasing over time (though not by statistically significant amount).
An improvement of 1 national percentile point on Verbal Aptitude is now associated with a 0.0095 log
point increase in income in 1986 and a 0.0111 log point increase in 1995. Attending a college with a mean
SAT verbal score that is 1 national percentile point higher is associated with a 0.0083 log point increase in

21

If aptitude rank is made to enter linearly, the results are generally similar to those shown in Tables 1
and 2. The breakdown of the increase in the total variance of log income is as follows: 15.3% (total associated
with X), -7.9% (return to X), 23.2% (partial variance of X); 19.4% (total associated with Z), 16.6% (return to Z),
2.8% (partial variance of Z); 27.1% (total associated with W), 2.8% (return to W), 24.3% (partial variance of W).

30

income in 1986 and a 0.0097 log point increase in 1995.
Moreover, college attributes play an important role. A person who attends a college with a low
mean SAT verbal score is better off if his college has a high standard deviation of SAT scores. A person
who attends a college with high mean SAT verbal score ends up with the highest income if that college's
SAT scores were highly concentrated. An additional log point of expenditure per student generates an
increase in income of about 0.1 log points.
Finally, Table 7 shows the accounting for the change in the variance of income for a number of
specifications that are alternatives to the baseline specification presented in Tables 1 and 2. The first
column restates the results of Table 2, for comparison. The next two columns show the accounting for the
increase in variance when actual aptitude measures are used. One of these columns is the counterpart of
Table 6; the other column use math tests rather than verbal tests but is otherwise identical to the
regressions shown in Table 6. It is noteworthy that measured aptitude accounts for a smaller share of the
increase in the total variance of income than the aptitude rank dummies accounted for. This is probably
because the aptitude measures are limited in scope so that they are an erroneous redaction of the full set of
aptitude data that college admissions officers perceive. The next column adds several additional variables
to the college attributes: the log average faculty salary, the faculty-student ratio, and the percentile of
expenditures devoted to instruction. The addition of these variables does increase the contribution of
college attributes slightly, but it is apparent that per-student expenditure was a adequate measure of
institutional inputs for many colleges.
Strictly speaking, it is a poor idea to match each individual with his actual college's characteristics,
since an individual who is matched to a college that appears to unexpectedly selective (given his
characteristics) is likely to have positive traits that we do not observe. These unobserved positive traits
could bias the return to aptitude rank and college attributes upwards. A reasonable way to treat this
problem is simulated instruments–that is, instrumenting for a person's actual college characteristics with

31

the college characteristics he would be predicted to experience. We formed simulated instruments by
creating a prediction equation for each state that was based on all the observations outside that state and its
adjoining states. In practice, we did not expect that instrumenting would reveal that the least squares
coefficients on college characteristics had suffered from positive bias. The reason is that college
characteristics are rather crudely measured, so that instrumenting might so improve attenuation bias that
any reduction in omitted variables bias would be fully offset. This expectation proved true: using the
simulated instruments raises the contribution of college characteristics very slightly.
The final column of Table 7 illustrates an alternative approach to estimating the contribution of the
extensive margin. We controlled for the propensity score directly–the score was computed based on probit
regressions using the OCG. Regardless of whether we included other background variables directly in the
log income equation, the propensity score accounted for only a small share of the increase in the total
variance of income. This is probably because the prediction of the score imposes numerous restrictions on
relationship between the background variables and income. We also tried other, related methods of
controlling for the extension margin explicitly: the Heckman selection correction, censored regression,
weighting by the propensity score. Since we have no particularly convincing way to identify the selection
decision and we do not care to interpret the returns to background variables, our preferred method is
including all the background variables and assigning all partial variance due to them to the extensive
margin.

VI. Conclusions
In this paper, we attempt to explain the rising income and wage inequality among college educated
people. We find that we can explain about 70% of the increase in inequality among baccalaureate holders
and about 50% among people who have completed at least 2 years of college. Although we do not present
the results above, it is worth noting that we can explain only about 38% of the increase among people who

32

have attended any college. As we move towards more marginal college attendees, our measures of aptitude
rank and college attributes fall off in quality. This quality degradation probably accounts for the fact that
our weakening aptitude to explain the increase in inequality among people with slight college experience.
We find that the socio-economic and scholastic achievement backgrounds of people who are going
to college are becoming more diverse over time. However, we estimate that the income reward associated
with a good socio-economic background is falling over time so that the overall contribution of the extensive
margin to within-college income and wage inequality is significant but not large: about 1/4 of the total
increase in inequality.
Like other researchers, we find evidence of an increased return to aptitude over the period. This
increased return is associated with about 1/3rd of the increase in income and wage inequality. However, we
also find that the estimated contribution of an increasing return to aptitude is almost doubled if we do not
allow the intensive margin to affect earnings.
We find that the intensive margin explains about 5/12ths of the increase in the return to aptitude.
College peers and expenditures both make important contributions to the intensive margin. It is, perhaps,
slightly confusing to interpret the intensive margin, so it may be worthwhile to recall that the intensive
margin is identified (separately from aptitude) only because the way in which more and less able people
have been matched to college experiences has changed over time. If colleges were not becoming more
segregated on the basis of aptitude, it would be impossible to identify the interaction terms that make up the
peer effects. If colleges' per-student expenditures were not becoming more correlated with aptitude over
time, adding expenditures to the equation would not diminish the coefficient on aptitude–at an increasing
rate over time. This is not to say that the intensive margin can function separately from aptitude. A
reasonable interpretation of the results is that intensive margin represents the market equilibrium
distribution of human capital inputs to people, based on their aptitude. Perhaps market equilibrium in
previous years associated fewer peer and institutional inputs with highly able students–because mobility or

33

other information costs prevented the current equilibrium from evolving. Since signaling equilibria are also
market equilibria, nothing in this paper enables one to easily dismiss the argument that the intensive margin
represents, at least in part, an elaborate mechanism for credibly signaling aptitude.

34

References
Barron's Educational Series. Barron's Profiles of American Colleges. various editions. Hauppauge,
New York: Barron's Educational Series, various years.
Blackburn, M.L. and D.Neumark. "Omitted Ability Bias and the Increase in the Return to Schooling,"
Journal of Labor Economics, Vol 11 (1993), No. 3.
Blau, P.M., O.D. Duncan, D.L. Featherman, and R.M. Hauser. Occupational Changes in a Generation,
1962 and 1973 [computer file]. Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin [producer], 1983. Ann
Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor], 1994.
Buchinsky, M. "Quantile Regression, Box-Cox Transformation Model, and the U.S. Wage Structure,
1963-1987." Journal of Econometrics Vol. 65 (1995), No. 1: pp. 109-154.
Cass, J. and Birmbaum. Comparative Guide to American Colleges. various editions. New York: Harper
and Row, various years.
Cawley, J., J. Heckman, and E. Tytlacil. "Cognitive Ability and the Rising Return to Education," NBER
Working Paper No. 6388, 1998.
Center for Human Resource Research. National Longitudinal Surveys of Youth. Columbus, OH: Center
for Human Resource Research, The Ohio State University, 1997.
Center for Human Resource Research. National Longitudinal Survey of the Class of 1972, Fifth FollowUp. Columbus, OH: Center for Human Resource Research, The Ohio State University, 1986.
Freeman, R. and L. Katz. "Rising Wage Inequality: The U.S. vs. Other Advanced Countries," In R.
Freeman, ed., Working Under Different Rules. New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 1994. pp.
29-62.
Gittleman, M. and M. Joyce. "Earnings, Mobility, and Long-Run Inequality: An Analysis Using Matched
CPS Data." Industrial Relations, Vol. 35 (1996), No. 2: pp. 180-196.
Gottschalk, P. "Inequality, Income Growth and Mobility: The Basic Facts." Journal of Economic
Perspectives, Vol. 11 (1997), No. 2: pp. 21-40.
Heckman, J. "Lessons from the Bell Curve," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 103 (1995), No. 5: pp.
1091-1120.
Heckman, J., J. Cawley, K. Conneely, and E. Vytlacil. "Measuring the Effects of Cognitive Ability."
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 5645, 1996.
Juhn, C., K. Murphy, and B. Pierce. "Wage Inequality and the Rise in Returns to Skills." Journal of
Political Economy, Vol. 101 (1993), No. 3: pp. 410-442.

35

Katz, L. and K. Murphy. "Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987: Supply and Demand Factors."
Quarterly Journal of Economics Vol. 107 (1992), No. 1: pp. 35-78.
Lerman, R. I. "Reassessing Trends in Earnings Inequality in the U.S." Urban Institute and American
University mimeo, 1997.
Levy, F. and R.J. Murnane. "U.S. Earnings levels and Earnings Inequality: A Review of Recent Trands
and Proposed Explanations." Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 30 (1992), No. 3: pp. 13331381.
Levy, F., R.J. Murnane and J.B. Willett. "The Growing Importance of Cognitive Skills in Wage
Determination." Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 77 (1995), No. 2: pp. 251-266.
Murnane, R.J., J.B. Willett, Y. Duhaldeborde, and J.H. Tyler. "The Role of Cognitive Skills in Explaining
Recent Trends in the U.S. Distribution of Earned Income," mimeo, Harvard Graduate School of
Education, 1998.
Murphy, K. and F. Welch. "Empirical Age-Earnings Profiles," Journal of Labor Economics, Vol 8
(1990), No. 2: pp. 202-229.
Peterson's. Peterson's Annual Guide to Undergraduate Study, various editions. Princeton, NJ:
Peterson's Educational Series, various years.

36
Table 1 - Dependent Variable is Log(Wage and Salary Income) of Male who is approximately Age 32
and has at least a BA Degree -- all covariates shown except for indicator variables for state of high school -1972

1986

1995

Individual Attributes (selection into BA Degree group)
Number of Siblings

Number of Older
Siblings
Black

Hispanic

Asian

-0.0420

-0.0380

-0.0370

-0.0060

-0.0040

-0.0030

-0.0120

-0.0190

-0.0120

(0.0170)

(0.0170)

(0.0170)

(0.0110)

(0.0120)

(0.0120)

(0.0256)

(0.0261)

(0.0271)

0.0360

0.0340

0.0340

-0.0140

-0.0180

-0.0220

0.0190

0.0300

0.0320

(0.0200)

(0.0200)

(0.0200)

(0.0190)

(0.0190)

(0.0190)

(0.0256)

(0.0261)

(0.0267)

-0.1740

-0.1970

-0.2270

-0.0990

-0.0950

-0.0580

0.0000

0.0300

-0.0130

(0.1610)

(0.1610)

(0.1670)

(0.0860)

(0.0810)

(0.0730)

(0.1199)

(0.1222)

(0.1244)

0.2060

0.1690

0.1700

-0.1140

-0.1260

-0.1590

-0.3330

-0.3020

-0.3650

(0.3070)

(0.3060)

(0.3120)

(0.1160)

(0.1220)

(0.1350)

(0.5053)

(0.5086)

(0.5073)

-0.6160

-0.6300

-0.6680

0.2230

0.2180

0.2460

0.3310

0.2660

0.3500

(0.5760)

(0.5730)

(0.5810)

(0.0640)

(0.0780)

(0.0870)

(0.2449)

(0.2523)

(0.2674)

-1.0610

-1.1040

-1.2170

0.2590

0.2620

0.3350

(0.4440)

(0.4280)

(0.4470)

(0.1750)

(0.1763)

(0.1782)

Native American

Parents' Highest
Grade Completed
Log(Fam Income)
when in high school
Parents' High Grd x
Log(Fam Income)
Foreign-Born
Parents
Foreign-Born
Parents x Hispanic
Urban Residence at
Age 32?
Age 30

Age 31

Age 33

Age 34

Age 35

0.1890

0.1410

0.1520

0.1890

0.2270

0.2780

0.0510

0.0060

0.0870

(0.1180)

(0.1190)

(0.1220)

(0.1450)

(0.1450)

(0.1420)

(0.1566)

(0.1603)

(0.1658)

0.0930

0.0440

0.0590

0.1060

0.1660

0.2060

0.0570

0.1220

0.2050

(0.1430)

(0.1430)

(0.1470)

(0.1920)

(0.1900)

(0.1860)

(0.2149)

(0.2192)

(0.2232)

0.0180

0.0130

0.0140

0.0180

0.0220

0.0260

0.0050

0.0010

0.0080

(0.0110)

(0.0110)

(0.0110)

(0.0140)

(0.0140)

(0.0130)

(0.0145)

(0.0148)

(0.0153)

0.0590

0.0540

0.0480

-0.0310

-0.0260

-0.0180

-0.1740

-0.1860

-0.2300

(0.0770)

(0.0770)

(0.0790)

(0.0640)

(0.0650)

(0.0680)

(0.1212)

(0.1223)

(0.1243)

-0.3920

-0.4010

-0.4560

-0.0110

-0.0120

-0.0380

0.5560

0.5290

0.4990

(0.4690)

(0.4670)

(0.4760)

(0.1590)

(0.1670)

(0.1890)

(0.5465)

(0.5507)

(0.5521)

0.1830

0.1540

0.1580

0.0600

0.0490

0.0460

0.1290

-0.1290

-0.1150

(0.0540)

(0.0550)

(0.0570)

(0.0510)

(0.0510)

(0.0520)

(0.0897)

(0.0910)

(0.0923)

-0.1120

-0.1130

-0.1160

na

na

na

-0.0670

-0.0650

-0.0670

(0.0750)

(0.0750)

(0.0770)

na

na

na

(0.0721)

(0.0756)

(0.0737)

-0.0510

-0.0500

-0.0570

na

na

na

-0.0320

-0.0330

-0.0320

(0.0750)

(0.0760)

(0.0780)

na

na

na

(0.0752)

(0.0734)

(0.0739)

0.0510

0.0520

0.0520

na

na

na

0.0320

0.0320

0.0300

(0.0860)

(0.0860)

(0.0890)

na

na

na

(0.0655)

(0.0735)

(0.0756)

0.0870

0.0880

0.0900

na

na

na

0.0620

0.0610

0.0550

(0.0810)

(0.0810)

(0.0830)

na

na

na

(0.0649)

(0.0716)

(0.0735)

0.1170

0.1200

0.0120

na

na

na

0.0910

0.0950

0.0920

(0.0790)

(0.0800)

(0.0820)

na

na

na

(0.0721)

(0.0720)

(0.0710)

College Selectivity Effects and College Attributes
Aptitude rank
Index=2
Aptitude rank
Index=3
Aptitude rank
Index=4
Aptitude rank
Index=5
Aptitude rank
Index=6

0.0210

0.0600

0.0820

0.1460

0.1840

0.2560

(0.1490)

(0.1090)

(0.1690)

(0.1680)

(0.1790)

(0.1244)

0.1810

0.1390

0.1160

0.2010

0.3390

0.1870

(0.1400)

(0.1090)

(0.1960)

(0.1780)

(0.1717)

(0.1270)

0.1930

0.1640

0.1500

0.1930

0.4060

0.2130

(0.1350)

(0.1090)

(0.1610)

(0.1700)

(0.1787)

(0.1297)

0.2840

0.2280

0.1720

0.2170

0.4680

0.2410

(0.1360)

(0.1090)

(0.1600)

(0.1750)

(0.1768)

(0.1325)

0.2650

0.1860

0.2520

0.2180

0.3720

0.2890

(0.1400)

(0.1140)

(0.1640)

(0.1790)

(0.1729)

(0.1303)

37
Aptitude rank
Index=7
Aptitude rank
Index=8
Aptitude rank
Index=9
Aptitude rank
Index=10
Aptitude rank
Index=11
Aptitude rank
Index=12
StdDev in SAT
Verbal x
Selectivity=2
StdDev in SAT
Verbal x
Selectivity=3
StdDev in SAT
Verbal x
Selectivity=4
StdDev in SAT
Verbal x
Selectivity=5
StdDev in SAT
Verbal x
Selectivity=6
StdDev in SAT
Verbal x
Selectivity=7
StdDev in SAT
Verbal x
Selectivity=8
StdDev in SAT
Verbal x
Selectivity=9
StdDev in SAT
Verbal x
Selectivity=10
StdDev in SAT
Verbal x
Selectivity=11
StdDev in SAT
Verbal x
Selectivity=12
Log(Expenditure Per
Student $1995)
College is Selective
but does not use
Admissions Tests
College is Not
Accredited

See notes on following page.

0.3070

0.2610

0.2840

0.2170

0.4570

0.2970

(0.1370)

(0.1650)

(0.1750)

(0.1680)

(0.1724)

(0.1314)

0.3280

0.2740

0.3560

0.2690

0.4720

0.3390

(0.1790)

(0.1630)

(0.1680)

(0.1690)

(0.1825)

(0.1376)

0.3560

0.2090

0.4350

0.3790

0.4640

0.3680

(0.1480)

(0.1610)

(0.2080)

(0.1870)

(0.1828)

(0.1348)

0.4320

0.3050

0.5280

0.3690

0.5420

0.3770

(0.1700)

(0.1620)

(0.2270)

(0.1900)

(0.1798)

(0.1450)

0.4730

0.3220

0.6310

0.3980

0.6680

0.3960

(0.1510)

(0.1670)

(0.2280)

(0.2030)

(0.1962)

(0.1539)

0.5280

0.3910

0.6450

0.3980

0.7780

0.3980

(0.1950)

(0.1630)

(0.2290)

(0.2010)

(0.1950)

(0.1712)

0.0710

0.0770

0.0440

(0.0270)

(0.0290)

(0.0246)

0.0680

0.0580

0.0390

(0.0260)

(0.0290)

(0.0185)

0.0520

0.0320

0.0330

(0.0270)

(0.0310)

(0.0187)

0.0210

0.0150

0.0260

(0.0250)

(0.0260)

(0.0200)

-0.0030

0.0020

0.0160

(0.0220)

(0.0260)

(0.0205)

-0.0040

-0.0090

0.0080

(0.0270)

(0.0250)

(0.0223)

-0.0110

-0.0160

-0.0180

(0.0250)

(0.0290)

(0.0210)

-0.0210

-0.0260

-0.0280

(0.0250)

(0.0270)

(0.0207)

-0.0280

-0.0380

-0.0470

(0.0260)

(0.0270)

(0.0218)

-0.0470

-0.0490

-0.0580

(0.0230)

(0.0230)

(0.0241)

-0.0530

-0.0550

-0.0600

(0.0240)

(0.0260)

(0.0199)

0.0600

0.1110

0.1190

(0.0310)

(0.0400)

(0.0258)

-0.0080

-0.1870

-0.1510

(0.1410)

(0.1900)

(0.2449)

-0.1530

-0.0950

-0.0200

(0.2140)

(0.3230)

(0.6666)

38
Standard error in parentheses. See Data Appendix Table for the number of observations in each regression, variable
means and standard deviations. No age effects are included in 1986 (NLS72) regressions because the survey is based on a
single high school class. Family income (when respondent was in high school) and college expenditure per student are in
1995 dollars. Both of these variables are in logs. Selectivity index combines information from college's average
admissions test scores and admissions procedures indexed by Barron's, Peterson's, and Cass and Birmbaum's college
guides. Standard deviations in SAT verbal scores are measured in 10s of percentile points (based on the national
distribution of SATscores). The omitted category is a college that is accredited but nonselective (aptitude rank index=1).
Such colleges do not have SAT score distributions, so the "main effect" of the standard deviation in SAT scores is
included.

39
Table 2
Decomposition of the Change in the Variance of Log(Wage and Salary Income)
of Males who are approximately age 32 and have a Baccalaureate Degree
Change in the Variance of Log (Wage and Salary Income) between....

total variance to be explained
background

method 1

1972 and 1986

1986 and 1995

1972 and 1995

0.0691

0.0452

0.1143

0.0183

26.5%

0.0169

37.4%

0.0352

30.8%

[) in r to background]

[-0.0120]

[-17.4%]

[-0.0123]

[-27.2%]

[-0.0212]

[-18.5%]

[) in var(background)]

[0.0303]

[43.8%]

[0.0292]

[64.6%]

[0.0564]

[49.3%]

change in
the variance
that is due
to...

residual

0.0508

73.5%

0.0283

62.6%

0.0791

69.2%

method 2

background

0.0119

17.2%

0.0049

10.8%

0.0168

14.7%

[) in r to background]

[-0.0067]

[-9.7%]

[-0.0060]

[-13.3%]

[-0.0143]

[-12.5%]

[) in var(background)]

[0.0186]

[26.9%]

[0.0109]

[24.1%]

[0.0311]

[27.2%]

college selectivity dummies

0.0288

41.7%

0.0259

57.3%

0.0547

47.9%

[) in r to select. dummies]

[0.0267]

[38.6%]

[0.0242]

[53.5%]

[0.0513]

[44.9%]

[) in var(select. dummies)]

[0.0021]

[3.0%]

[0.0017]

[3.8%]

[0.0034]

[3.0%]

residual + covariances

0.0284

41.1%

0.0144

31.9%

0.0428

37.4%

background

0.0119

17.2%

0.0051

11.3%

0.0167

14.6%

[) in r to background]

[-0.0071]

[-10.3%]

[-0.0064]

[-14.2%]

[-0.0086]

[-7.5%]

[) in var(background)]

[0.0190]

[27.5%]

[0.0115]

[25.4%]

[0.0253]

[22.1%]

college selectivity dummies

0.0151

21.9%

0.0155

34.3%

0.0306

26.8%

[) in r to select. dummies]

[0.0129]

[18.7%]

[0.0136]

[30.1%]

[0.0270]

[23.6%]

[) in var(select. dummies)]

[0.0022]

[3.2%]

[0.0019]

[4.2%]

[0.0036]

[3.1%]

0.0194

28.1%

0.0171

37.8%

0.0365

31.9%

[0.0025]

[3.6%]

[0.0024]

[5.3%]

[0.0053]

[4.6%]

[0.0169]

[24.5%]

[0.0147]

[32.5%]

[0.0312]

[27.3%]

0.0227

32.9%

0.0075

16.6%

0.0305

26.7%

change in
the variance
that is due
to...

method 3
change in
the variance
that is due
to...

college peers & spending
[) in r to peers & spending]
[) in var(peers &
spending)]
residual + covariances

Variance of Log (Wage and Salary Income) –from which the above changes were calculated
1972

1986

1995

0.3155

0.3846

0.4298

background

0.0440

0.0623

0.0792

residual

0.2715

0.3223

0.3506

background

0.0412

0.0531

0.0580

college selectivity dummies

0.0192

0.0480

0.0739

residual + covariances

0.2551

0.2835

0.2979

background

0.0409

0.0528

0.0596

college selectivity dummies

0.0178

0.0329

0.0484

college peers & spending

0.0132

0.0326

0.0497

residual + covariances

0.2436

0.2663

0.2721

total variance to be explained
method 1

method 2

method 3

40
See notes following Table 1, which contains the regressions that underlie the above table.

41
Table 3
Decomposition of the Change in the Variance of Log(Hourly Wage)
of Males who are approximately age 32 and have a Baccalaureate Degree
Change in the Variance of Log (Hourly Wage) between....

total variance to be explained
background

method 1

1972 and 1986

1986 and 1995

1972 and 1995

0.0374

0.0148

0.0522

0.0099

26.5%

0.0060

40.5%

0.0159

30.5%

[) in r to background]

-0.0020

-5.3%

-0.0028

-18.9%

-0.0068

-13.0%

[) in var(background)]

0.0119

31.8%

0.0088

59.5%

0.0227

43.5%

change in
the variance
that is due
to...

residual

0.0275

73.5%

0.0088

59.5%

0.0363

69.5%

method 2

background

0.0084

22.5%

0.0024

16.2%

0.0108

20.7%

[) in r to background]

-0.0036

-9.6%

-0.0021

-14.2%

-0.0068

-13.0%

[) in var(background)]

0.0120

32.1%

0.0045

30.4%

0.0176

33.7%

college selectivity dummies

0.0207

55.3%

0.0093

62.8%

0.0300

57.5%

[) in r to select. dummies]

0.0148

39.6%

0.0073

49.3%

0.0218

41.8%

[) in var(select. dummies)]

0.0059

15.8%

0.0020

13.5%

0.0082

15.7%

residual + covariances

0.0083

22.2%

0.0031

20.9%

0.0114

21.8%

background

0.0109

29.1%

0.0031

20.9%

0.0140

26.8%

[) in r to background]

-0.0037

-9.9%

-0.0024

-16.2%

-0.0062

-11.9%

[) in var(background)]

0.0146

39.0%

0.0055

37.2%

0.0202

38.7%

college selectivity dummies

0.0073

19.5%

0.0045

30.4%

0.0118

22.6%

[) in r to select. dummies]

0.0016

4.3%

0.0027

18.2%

0.0040

7.7%

[) in var(select. dummies)]

0.0057

15.2%

0.0018

12.2%

0.0078

14.9%

0.0113

30.2%

0.0046

31.1%

0.0159

30.5%

0.0008

2.1%

0.0012

8.1%

0.0021

4.0%

[) in var(peers &
spending)]

0.0105

28.1%

0.0034

23.0%

0.0138

26.4%

residual + covariances

0.0079

21.1%

0.0026

17.6%

0.0105

20.1%

change in
the variance
that is due
to...

method 3
change in
the variance
that is due
to...

college peers & spending
[) in r to peers & spending]

Variance of Log (Hourly Wage) –from which the above changes were calculated
1972

1986

1995

0.2009

0.2383

0.2531

background

0.0288

0.0387

0.0447

residual

0.1721

0.1996

0.2084

background

0.0292

0.0376

0.0400

college selectivity dummies

0.0208

0.0415

0.0508

residual + covariances

0.1509

0.1592

0.1623

background

0.0261

0.0370

0.0401

college selectivity dummies

0.0206

0.0279

0.0324

college peers & spending

0.0191

0.0304

0.0350

residual + covariances

0.1351

0.1430

0.1456

total variance to be explained
method 1

method 2

method 3

42
See notes following Table 1. See also Appendix Table 13, which contains the regressions that underlie the above table.

43
Table 4
Decomposition of the Change in the Variance of Log(Wage and Salary Income)
of Males who are approximately age 32 and have Attended at least 2 years of College
Change in the Variance of Log (Wage and Salary Income) between....

total variance to be explained
background

method 1

1972 and 1986

1986 and 1995

1972 and 1995

0.1221

0.1129

0.2350

0.0195

16.0%

0.0175

15.5%

0.0370

15.7%

[) in r to background]

-0.0107

-8.8%

-0.0133

-11.8%

-0.0229

-9.7%

[) in var(background)]

0.0302

24.7%

0.0308

27.3%

0.0599

25.5%

change in
the variance
that is due
to...

residual

0.1026

84.0%

0.0954

84.5%

0.1980

84.3%

method 2

background

0.0225

18.4%

0.0097

8.6%

0.0322

13.7%

[) in r to background]

-0.0089

-7.3%

-0.0111

-9.8%

-0.0155

-6.6%

[) in var(background)]

0.0314

25.7%

0.0208

18.4%

0.0477

20.3%

college selectivity dummies

0.0295

24.2%

0.0272

24.1%

0.0567

24.1%

[) in r to select. dummies]

0.0204

16.7%

0.0189

16.7%

0.0375

16.0%

[) in var(select. dummies)]

0.0091

7.5%

0.0083

7.4%

0.0192

8.2%

residual + covariances

0.0701

57.4%

0.0760

67.3%

0.1461

62.2%

background

0.0247

20.2%

0.0184

16.3%

0.0431

18.3%

[) in r to background]

-0.0075

-6.1%

-0.0122

-10.8%

-0.0085

-3.6%

[) in var(background)]

0.0322

26.4%

0.0306

27.1%

0.0516

22.0%

college selectivity dummies

0.0127

10.4%

0.0084

7.4%

0.0211

9.0%

[) in r to select. dummies]

0.0038

3.1%

0.0005

0.4%

0.0023

1.0%

[) in var(select. dummies)]

0.0089

7.3%

0.0079

7.0%

0.0188

8.0%

0.0165

13.5%

0.0176

15.6%

0.0341

14.5%

0.0013

1.1%

0.0009

0.8%

0.0022

0.9%

[) in var(peers &
spending)]

0.0152

12.4%

0.0167

14.8%

0.0319

13.6%

residual + covariances

0.0682

55.9%

0.0685

60.7%

0.1367

58.2%

change in
the variance
that is due
to...

method 3
change in
the variance
that is due
to...

college peers & spending
[) in r to peers & spending]

Variance of Log (Wage and Salary Income) –from which the above changes were calculated
1972

1986

1995

0.3377

0.4598

0.5727

background

0.0429

0.0624

0.0799

residual

0.2948

0.3974

0.4928

background

0.0337

0.0562

0.0659

college selectivity dummies

0.0106

0.0401

0.0673

residual + covariances

0.2934

0.3635

0.4395

background

0.0339

0.0586

0.0770

college selectivity dummies

0.0078

0.0205

0.0289

college peers & spending

0.0052

0.0217

0.0393

residual + covariances

0.2908

0.3590

0.4275

total variance to be explained
method 1

method 2

method 3

44
See notes following Table 1. See also Appendix Table 14, which contains the regressions that underlie the above table.

45
Table 5
Decomposition of the Change in the Variance of Log(Hourly Wage)
of Males who are approximately age 32 and have Attended at least 2 years of College
Change in the Variance of Log (Hourly Wage) between....

total variance to be explained
background

method 1

1972 and 1986

1986 and 1995

1972 and 1995

0.0517

0.0222

0.0739

0.0049

9.5%

0.0011

5.0%

0.0060

8.1%

[) in r to background]

-0.0019

-3.7%

-0.0014

-6.3%

-0.0033

-4.5%

[) in var(background)]

0.0068

13.2%

0.0025

11.3%

0.0093

12.6%

change in
the variance
that is due
to...

residual

0.0480

92.8%

0.0199

89.6%

0.0679

91.9%

method 2

background

0.0067

13.0%

0.0020

9.0%

0.0087

11.8%

[) in r to background]

-0.0023

-4.4%

-0.0015

-6.8%

-0.0042

-5.7%

[) in var(background)]

0.0090

17.4%

0.0035

15.8%

0.0129

17.5%

college selectivity dummies

0.0187

36.2%

0.0066

29.7%

0.0253

34.2%

[) in r to select. dummies]

0.0136

26.3%

0.0045

20.3%

0.0189

25.6%

[) in var(select. dummies)]

0.0051

9.9%

0.0021

9.5%

0.0064

8.7%

residual + covariances

0.0263

50.9%

0.0136

61.3%

0.0399

54.0%

background

0.0063

12.2%

0.0017

7.7%

0.0080

10.8%

[) in r to background]

-0.0014

-2.7%

-0.0019

-8.6%

-0.0035

-4.7%

[) in var(background)]

0.0077

14.9%

0.0036

16.2%

0.0115

15.6%

college selectivity dummies

0.0121

23.4%

0.0036

16.2%

0.0157

21.2%

[) in r to select. dummies]

0.0022

4.3%

0.0014

6.3%

0.0046

6.2%

[) in var(select. dummies)]

0.0099

19.1%

0.0022

9.9%

0.0111

15.0%

0.0124

24.0%

0.0061

27.5%

0.0185

25.0%

0.0012

2.3%

0.0010

4.5%

0.0024

3.2%

[) in var(peers &
spending)]

0.0112

21.7%

0.0051

23.0%

0.0161

21.8%

residual + covariances

0.0209

40.4%

0.0108

48.6%

0.0317

42.9%

change in
the variance
that is due
to...

method 3
change in
the variance
that is due
to...

college peers & spending
[) in r to peers & spending]

Variance of Log (Hourly Wage) –from which the above changes were calculated
1972

1986

1995

0.1924

0.2441

0.2663

background

0.0249

0.0298

0.0309

residual

0.1675

0.2155

0.2354

background

0.0197

0.0264

0.0284

college selectivity dummies

0.0075

0.0262

0.0328

residual + covariances

0.1652

0.1915

0.2051

background

0.0194

0.0257

0.0274

college selectivity dummies

0.0106

0.0186

0.0222

college peers & spending

0.0065

0.0199

0.0260

residual + covariances

0.1590

0.1799

0.1907

total variance to be explained
method 1

method 2

method 3

46
See notes following Table 1. See also Appendix Table 15, which contains the regressions that underlie the above table.

47

Table 6 - Dependent Variable is Log(Wage and Salary Income) of Male who is approximately Age 32
and has at least a BA Degree -- only selected coefficients shown
1986
1995
Individual Attributes (selection into BA Degree group) –not shown
Ability
Own Verbal Ability on High School Test

College's Mean SAT Verbal Score

0.0168

0.0095

0.0182

0.0111

(0.0036)

(0..0038)

(0.0042)

(0.0044)

0.0126

0.0083

0.0131

0.0097

(0.0034)

(0.0037)

(0.0043)

(0.0046)

College Peers and College Inputs
College's StdDev in SAT Verbal

College's StdDev in SAT Verbal x
College's Mean SAT Verbal Score

0.0163

0.0182

(0.0090)

(0.0095)

-0.0011

-0.0013

(0.0004)

(0.0005)

0.0837

0.1192

Log(Expenditure Per Student $1995)

(0.0355)
(0.0654)
The table shows selected coefficients from a regression with all of the covariates shown in Table 1. The only differences
are (1) that the two above measures of ability are substituted for the 11 indicator variables for colleges' aptitude rank and
(2) that the college's standard deviation in SAT verbal and the interaction of the standard deviation with the mean SAT
verbal score are substituted for the 11 interaction terms between aptitude rank and standard deviation of the SAT verbal.
Standard deviations of SAT scores are measured in 10s of national percentile points. See Table 1 and notes to Table 1.
Table 7 - Accounting for the Change in the Variance of Log(Wage and Salary Income)
–Males who are approximately age 32 and have a Baccalaureate Degree–
Specification
Table 1
specification
for reference

ability
measures

ability
measures
using math
tests

additional
college input
variables
facultystudent ratio
etc.

IV for
college
attributes
with
simulated
instruments

control for
the
propensity
score

1972-95

1986-95

1986-95

1972-95

1972-95

1972-95

total

100%

100%

100%

100%

100%

100%

background

14.6%

24.1%

24.4%

14.3%

14.4%

2.7%

[) in r to background]

[-7.5%]

[-14.2%]

[-14.5%]

[-7.4]

[-7.4%]

[-0.6%]

[) in var(background)]

[22.1%]

[38.3%]

[38.9%]

[21.7%]

[21.8%]

[3.3%]

26.8%

14.8%

11.9%

24.9%

26.3%

30.8%

[) in r to select or ability]

[23.6%]

[12.2%]

[9.6%]

[21.8%]

[23.1%]

[26.4%]

[) in var(select or ability)]

[3.1%]

[2.6%]

[2.3%]

[3.1%]

[3.2%]

[4.4%]

31.9%

23.1%

22.6%

34.5%

34.9%

32.6%

[4.6%]

[2.1%]

[2.0%]

[5.8%]

[5.4%]

[4.8%]

[27.3%]

[20.0%]

[20.6%]

[28.7%]

[29.5%]

[27.9%]

period under consideration

coll selectivity or ability

college peers & spending
[) in r to peers & spending]
[) in var(peers &
spending)]

48
residual + covariances

26.7%

39.0%

41.1%

26.2%

24.4%

33.9%

49

50

51

Figure 5: The Distribution of Real Income

95th

95th

90th

90th

75th

75th

50th

50th

25th
10th

25th
10th

5th

5th

Notes: The lines show percentiles of the distribution. The samples contain males of about 32 years of age in the year
shown. Incomes are in 1995 dollars (inflated using DGP index).

95th
95th
90th
90th
75th

75th

50th
25th
10th
5th

50th
25th
10th
5th

Figure 6: The Distribution of Real Wages
Notes: The lines show percentiles of the distribution. The samples contain males of about 32 years of age in the year

52
shown. Wages are in 1995 dollars (inflated using DGP index).

53

Figure 7a: Real Income for the Sample versus Predicted College Graduates

95th
95th

90th

90th

75th

75th

50th
25th

50th

10th

25th
10th

5th

5th

Notes: The predicted group is composed of individuals who had a propensity score to have a baccalaureate degree above
the average propensity score of college students in the original sample (OCG).

Figure 7b: Real Wages for the Sample versus Predicted College Graduates

95th

95th

90th

90th

75th

75th

5th

50th

50th

25th
10th

25th
10th
5th

Notes: The predicted group is composed of individuals who had a propensity score to have a baccalaureate degree above

54
the average propensity score of college students in the original sample (OCG).

55

Figure 8a: Real Income for the Sample versus Men Predicted to have Two Years of College

95th

95th

90th

90th
75th

75th

50th

50th

25th
10th

25th
10th

5th

5th

Notes: The predicted group is composed of individuals who had a propensity score to have two years of college above the
average propensity score of college students in the original sample (OCG).

Figure 8b: Real Wages for the Sample versus Men Predicted to have Two Years of College

95th

95th

90th

90th
75th

75th

50th

50th

25th
10th

25th
10th
5th

5th

Notes: The predicted group is composed of individuals who had a propensity score to have two years of college above the

56
average propensity score of college students in the original sample (OCG).

57

Figure 9: Real Income by College Rank Group (College Selectivity)

Rank 1
Rank 2
Rank 3
Rank 4

Rank 1
Rank 2

Rank 4

Rank 5
Rank 6

Rank 3

Rank 5
Rank 6

Notes: Colleges are divided into six rank groups, based on their admissions selectivity.

Figure 10: Real Wages by College Rank Group (College Selectivity)
Notes: Colleges are divided into six rank groups, based on

Rank 1

Rank 1

Rank 2

Rank 2

Rank 3
Rank 4

Rank 3

Rank 5
Rank 6

Rank 4

Rank 5
Rank 6

their admissions selectivity.

58

Figure 11: Real Income by Aptitude Group

Group 1
Group 1

Group 2

Group 2

Group 3

Group 3

Group 4

Group 4

Group 5

Group 5

Notes: A lower group number indicates higher measured aptitude on mathematics and verbal tests.

Figure 12: Real Wages by Ability Group

Group 1
Group 1

Group 2
Group 3

Group 2

Group 4
Group 5

Group 3
Group 4
Group 5

Notes: A lower group number indicates higher measured aptitude on mathematics and verbal tests.

59
Data Appendix

OCG

NLS72

NLSY

total sample (males, correct age, no missing
background variables or earnings, etc.)

5807

8629

3865

sample with any college

2944
[50.7%]
(54.2%)

5886
[68.2%]
(57.8%)

1886
[48.8%]
(60.5%)

sample with at least 2 years of college

2023
[34.8%]
(37.3%)

4894
[56.7%]
(47.3%)

1570
[40.6%]
(47.9%)

sample who attended a BA granting college

1194
[20.6%]
(24.9%)

4279
[49.5%]
(36.1%)

1339
[34.6%]
(39.4%)

sample with a BA degree

854
[14.7%]
(17.9%)

2524
[29.3%]
(24.0%)

970
[22.5%]
(27.0%)

60
OCG Sample

mean

std. dev.

minimum

maximum

log(wage and salary income) - 1972 dollars

9.1697

0.6637

7.8637

11.5119

log(hourly wage) - 1972 dollars

1.5852

0.4370

0.4097

4.0275

number of siblings

3.5602

2.9368

0

18

number of older siblings

1.7096

2.1520

0

14

black

0.0937

hispanic

0.0273

asian

0.0019

native american

0.0000

max highest grade completed by a parent

10.5617

3.4205

0

17

log(family income) - 1995 dollars

10.2621

0.7557

8.2822

11.4889

parents foreign-born or hh used foreign language

0.0849

lived in a metro area when earnings recorded

0.6763

age 30

0.1937

age 31

0.1810

age 33

0.1565

age 34

0.1605

age 35

0.1482

college ultimate selectivity index=1

0.6001

college ultimate selectivity index=2

0.0810

college ultimate selectivity index=3

0.0598

college ultimate selectivity index=4

0.1094

college ultimate selectivity index=5

0.0547

college ultimate selectivity index=6

0.0277

college ultimate selectivity index=7

0.0328

college ultimate selectivity index=8

0.0144

college ultimate selectivity index=9

0.0140

college ultimate selectivity index=10

0.0130

college ultimate selectivity index=11

0.0088

college ultimate selectivity index=12

0.0041

std. dev. of college's SAT verbal %ile scores

12.3423

6.1110

2.6340

25.0000

std. dev. of college's SAT math %ile scores

17.7693

6.0770

4.4814

25.0000

log(expenditure per student) - 1995 dollars

8.6508

0.5791

8.0603

11.1190

61
NLS72 Sample

mean

std. dev.

minimum

maximum

log(wage and salary income) - 1986 dollars

10.1078

0.7990

8.0781

12.3118

log(hourly wage) - 1986 dollars

2.4187

0.4590

1.2528

4.4466

number of siblings

3.0871

2.3459

0

20

number of older siblings

1.4521

1.6795

0

20

black

0.0525

hispanic

0.0390

asian

0.0081

native american

0.0084

max highest grade completed by a parent

13.3307

2.7051

8

20

log(family income) - 1995 dollars

10.6087

0.5405

9.1177

11.2924

parents foreign-born or hh used foreign language

0.0712

lived in a metro area when earnings recorded

0.7609

college ultimate selectivity index=1

0.1030

college ultimate selectivity index=2

0.2541

college ultimate selectivity index=3

0.1218

college ultimate selectivity index=4

0.2148

college ultimate selectivity index=5

0.1251

college ultimate selectivity index=6

0.0517

college ultimate selectivity index=7

0.0613

college ultimate selectivity index=8

0.0121

college ultimate selectivity index=9

0.0200

college ultimate selectivity index=10

0.0113

college ultimate selectivity index=11

0.0200

college ultimate selectivity index=12

0.0045

std. dev. of college's SAT verbal %ile scores

6.4497

3.8497

2.0000

25.0000

std. dev. of college's SAT math %ile scores

9.0285

4.6123

2.0000

25.0000

log(expenditure per student) - 1995 dollars

9.0025

0.7032

8.1611

11.8519

62
NLSY Sample

mean

std. dev.

minimum

maximum

log(wage and salary income) - 1995 dollars

9.9835

0.9029

8.3012

11.9184

log(hourly wage) - 1995 dollars

2.4958

0.5204

1.3863

4.4592

number of siblings

3.3190

2.1211

0

17

number of older siblings

1.9195

1.8714

0

17

black

0.1286

hispanic

0.0598

asian

0.0082

native american

0.0564

max highest grade completed by a parent

12.4515

3.0484

8

20

log(family income) - 1995 dollars

10.4617

0.7513

9.1969

11.9668

parents foreign-born or hh used foreign language

0.1259

lived in a metro area when earnings recorded

0.7883

age 30

0.1453

age 31

0.1564

age 33

0.1660

age 34

0.1702

age 35

0.1670

college ultimate selectivity index=1

0.1190

college ultimate selectivity index=2

0.2556

college ultimate selectivity index=3

0.1499

college ultimate selectivity index=4

0.1600

college ultimate selectivity index=5

0.1293

college ultimate selectivity index=6

0.0637

college ultimate selectivity index=7

0.0442

college ultimate selectivity index=8

0.0186

college ultimate selectivity index=9

0.0166

college ultimate selectivity index=10

0.0134

college ultimate selectivity index=11

0.0162

college ultimate selectivity index=12

0.0135

std. dev. of college's SAT verbal %ile scores

7.1909

3.2380

2.0000

25.0000

std. dev. of college's SAT math %ile scores

9.6248

3.7957

2.0000

25.0000

log(expenditure per student) - 1995 dollars

9.3704

0.8308

8.5170

11.8613

63
Appendix Table 1
CPS-based Estimates of Wage Inequality – White Men with 25 Years of Experience
Difference between
log(wage) at the 90th
and 10th percentiles
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996

1.070
1.086
1.090
1.100
1.071
1.100
1.080
1.072
1.110
1.159
1.163
1.195
1.197
1.232
1.202
1.173
1.146
1.140
1.138
1.327
1.321
1.350
1.326
1.353
1.388
1.392
1.397
1.385

Cumulative Increase

1.600
2.000
3.000
0.100
3.000
1.000
0.200
4.000
8.900
9.298
12.530
12.730
16.179
13.214
10.263
7.586
7.021
6.819
25.685
25.135
28.024
25.642
28.344
31.826
32.155
32.700
31.477

Difference between
log(wage) at the 90th
and 50th percentiles

Difference between
log(wage) at the 50th
and 10th percentiles

0.533
0.527
0.525
0.535
0.521
0.525
0.510
0.513
0.525
0.537
0.545
0.551
0.545
0.538
0.515
0.485
0.443
0.425
0.413
0.587
0.591
0.605
0.565
0.580
0.603
0.607
0.599
0.609

0.545
0.559
0.565
0.555
0.550
0.563
0.570
0.559
0.570
0.622
0.618
0.644
0.652
0.694
0.687
0.687
0.703
0.715
0.726
0.740
0.731
0.745
0.761
0.774
0.785
0.784
0.798
0.775

The values for 1969-77 are taken from Buchinsky (1995) and are based on the March Current Population Survey (CPS).
The values for 1978-96 are based on the Merged Outgoing Rotations files of the CPS.

64
Appendix Table 2
CPS-based Estimates of Wage Inequality – White Men with 25 Years of Experience
Difference between
log(wage) at the 75th
and 25th percentiles
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996

0.540
0.557
0.520
0.540
0.517
0.540
0.530
0.538
0.540
0.560
0.584
0.592
0.598
0.621
0.641
0.621
0.633
0.640
0.639
0.665
0.659
0.669
0.655
0.668
0.679
0.698
0.695
0.691

Cumulative Increase

1.700
-2.000
0.000
-2.300
0.000
-1.000
-0.200
0.000
2.000
4.366
5.226
5.842
8.090
10.085
8.076
9.269
10.042
9.907
12.494
11.865
12.866
11.504
12.835
13.950
15.850
15.478
15.077

Difference between
log(wage) at the 75th
and 50th percentiles

Difference between
log(wage) at the 50th
and 25th percentiles

0.274
0.272
0.268
0.275
0.254
0.260
0.250
0.261
0.280
0.266
0.275
0.284
0.298
0.296
0.308
0.307
0.301
0.296
0.306
0.312
0.307
0.310
0.298
0.304
0.315
0.327
0.316
0.327

0.274
0.285
0.270
0.272
0.263
0.269
0.282
0.278
0.279
0.294
0.309
0.309
0.301
0.325
0.333
0.314
0.331
0.344
0.333
0.353
0.352
0.359
0.357
0.364
0.364
0.371
0.378
0.364

The values for 1969-77 are taken from Buchinsky (1995) and are based on the March Current Population Survey (CPS).
The values for 1978-96 are based on the Merged Outgoing Rotations files of the CPS.

65
Appendix Table 3
CPS-based Estimates of Wage Inequality – White Men with 5 Years of Experience

1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996

Difference between
log(wage) at the 90th
and 10th percentiles
0.930
0.928
0.980
0.970
0.988
1.000
0.980
1.017
1.010
1.163
1.204
1.239
1.284
1.290
1.281
1.253
1.254
1.262
1.244
1.337
1.327
1.353
1.303
1.322
1.328
1.324
1.338
1.311

Cumulative Increase

-0.200
5.000
4.000
5.800
7.000
5.000
8.700
8.000
23.293
27.393
30.937
35.412
35.976
35.051
32.267
32.433
33.213
31.438
40.691
39.660
42.288
37.293
39.204
39.756
39.359
40.819
38.071

Difference between
log(wage) at the 90th
and 50th percentiles
0.410
0.395
0.400
0.380
0.407
0.415
0.430
0.446
0.445
0.548
0.578
0.589
0.597
0.589
0.573
0.550
0.544
0.519
0.518
0.608
0.605
0.616
0.579
0.598
0.592
0.592
0.603
0.589

Difference between
log(wage) at the 50th
and 10th percentiles
0.530
0.533
0.560
0.570
0.581
0.585
0.550
0.571
0.575
0.614
0.626
0.650
0.687
0.700
0.707
0.702
0.710
0.743
0.727
0.728
0.722
0.737
0.724
0.724
0.735
0.731
0.736
0.722

The values for 1969-77 are taken from Buchinsky (1995) and are based on the March Current Population Survey (CPS).
The values for 1978-96 are based on the Merged Outgoing Rotations files of the CPS.

66
Appendix Table 4
CPS-based Estimates of Wage Inequality – White Men with 5 Years of Experience

1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996

Difference between
log(wage) at the 75th
and 25th percentiles
0.420
0.445
0.470
0.470
0.468
0.480
0.480
0.498
0.510
0.575
0.604
0.616
0.638
0.645
0.655
0.653
0.653
0.660
0.675
0.682
0.679
0.688
0.653
0.667
0.649
0.665
0.660
0.648

Cumulative Increase

2.500
5.000
5.000
4.800
6.000
6.000
7.800
9.000
15.540
18.397
19.592
21.781
22.526
23.481
23.328
23.302
23.970
25.465
26.232
25.882
26.783
23.292
24.697
22.900
24.513
24.035
22.771

Difference between
log(wage) at the 75th
and 50th percentiles
0.196
0.160
0.220
0.210
0.203
0.215
0.235
0.231
0.235
0.281
0.298
0.313
0.326
0.318
0.319
0.322
0.322
0.309
0.330
0.328
0.330
0.326
0.309
0.317
0.307
0.315
0.309
0.307

Difference between
log(wage) at the 50th
and 25th percentiles
0.238
0.248
0.260
0.270
0.265
0.250
0.245
0.267
0.273
0.294
0.306
0.303
0.312
0.327
0.336
0.332
0.331
0.350
0.345
0.354
0.349
0.362
0.344
0.350
0.342
0.350
0.351
0.341

The values for 1969-77 are taken from Buchinsky (1995) and are based on the March Current Population Survey (CPS).
The values for 1978-96 are based on the Merged Outgoing Rotations files of the CPS.

67

Appendix Table 5: The Distribution of Real Income
by Educational Group (1995 Dollars)
1972

1986

1995

95th Percentile

61,749

71,482

75,074

Baccalaureate

90th Percentile

50,581

59,803

65,064

Degree

75th Percentile

40,509

45,264

50,050

50th Percentile

31,531

32,730

37,037

25th Percentile

23,211

22,083

26,026

10th Percentile

16,204

14,425

15,015

5th Percentile

10,729

9,919

9,610

95-5 Diff

51,019

61,563

65,465

90-10 Diff

34,378

45,378

50,050

75-25 Diff

17,298

23,179

24,024

95th Percentile

55,383

68,711

72,071

Two Years of

90th Percentile

45,983

56,612

62,562

College

75th Percentile

36,349

41,851

47,047

50th Percentile

27,371

29,601

35,035

25th Percentile

21,214

20,632

24,024

10th Percentile

13,664

13,215

13,013

5th Percentile

7,883

9,665

6,006

95-5 Diff

47,500

59,046

66,065

90-10 Diff

32,320

43,397

49,549

75-25 Diff
15,135
21,218
23,023
Notes: The respondents are males approximately 32 years of age in the designated year. The figures are from the
following data sets: Occupational Changes in a Generation (for the 1972 group), National Longitudinal Survey, Class of
1972 (for the 1986 group), National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (for the 1995 group). Incomes were adjusted into 1995
constant dollars using the Durable Goods Price Index (Source: The Department of Commerce).

68

Appendix Table 6: The Distribution of Real Wages
by Educational Group (1995 Dollars)
1972

1986

1995

95th Percentile

28.07

34.33

34.26

Baccalaureate

90th Percentile

22.11

26.86

26.95

Degree

75th Percentile

17.68

20.61

21.78

50th Percentile

13.47

14.94

16.18

25th Percentile

10.21

10.56

11.23

10th Percentile

7.72

7.39

7.70

5th Percentile

6.89

5.92

5.97

95-5 Diff

21.18

28.40

28.30

90-10 Diff

14.39

19.47

19.25

75-25 Diff

7.48

10.05

10.55

95th Percentile

25.26

31.06

32.72

Two Years of

90th Percentile

20.84

24.41

25.91

College

75th Percentile

16.01

18.60

20.21

50th Percentile

12.39

13.56

15.21

25th Percentile

9.53

9.39

10.56

10th Percentile

7.37

6.70

7.36

5th Percentile

6.63

5.30

5.56

95-5 Diff

18.63

25.75

27.16

90-10 Diff

13.47

17.72

18.55

75-25 Diff
6.48
9.21
9.65
Notes: The respondents are males approximately 32 years of age in the designated year. The figures are from the
following data sets: Occupational Changes in a Generation (for the 1972 group), National Longitudinal Survey, Class of
1972 (for the 1986 group), National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (for the 1995 group). Wages were adjusted into 1995
constant dollars using the Durable Goods Price Index (Source: The Department of Commerce).

69

Appendix Table 7a: The Distribution of Real Income (1995 Dollars)
Men with a Baccalaureate Degree: Actual versus Predicted Groups
1972

1986

1995

95th Percentile

61,749

71,482

75,074

Actual

90th Percentile

50,581

59,803

65,064

Group

75th Percentile

40,509

45,264

50,050

50th Percentile

31,531

32,730

37,037

25th Percentile

23,211

22,083

26,026

10th Percentile

16,204

14,425

15,015

5th Percentile

10,729

9,919

9,610

95-5 Diff

51,019

61,563

65,465

90-10 Diff

34,378

45,378

50,050

75-25 Diff

17,298

23,179

24,024

95th Percentile

63,500

77,973

75,074

Predicted

90th Percentile

52,552

59,038

65,064

Group

75th Percentile

39,414

44,619

45,045

50th Percentile

28,904

31,954

32,032

25th Percentile

21,845

21,594

22,022

10th Percentile

14,665

14,463

13,013

5th Percentile

8,978

10,061

6,006

95-5 Diff

54,523

67,912

69,068

90-10 Diff

37,888

44,574

52,052

75-25 Diff
17,569
23,034
23,023
Notes: The respondents are males approximately 32 years of age in the designated year. The figures are from the
following data sets: Occupational Changes in a Generation (for the 1972 group), National Longitudinal Survey, Class of
1972 (for the 1986 group), National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (for the 1995 group). Incomes were adjusted into 1995
constant dollars using the Durable Goods Price Index (Source: The Department of Commerce). The Predicted group is
composed of individuals who went to college and had a propensity to attend college above the average propensity of
college students in the original sample (OCG).

70

Appendix Table 7b: The Distribution of Real Wages (1995 Dollars)
Men with a Baccalaureate Degree: Actual versus Predicted Groups
1972

1986

1995

95th Percentile

28.07

34.33

34.26

Actual

90th Percentile

22.11

26.86

26.95

Group

75th Percentile

17.68

20.61

14.05

50th Percentile

13.47

14.94

16.18

25th Percentile

10.21

10.56

11.23

10th Percentile

7.72

7.39

7.70

5th Percentile

6.89

5.92

5.97

95-5 Diff

21.18

28.40

28.30

90-10 Diff

14.39

19.47

19.25

75-25 Diff

7.48

10.05

10.55

95th Percentile

28.77

34.78

34.01

Predicted

90th Percentile

22.11

26.57

26.18

Group

75th Percentile

17.06

20.02

19.73

50th Percentile

12.64

14.57

14.68

25th Percentile

9.53

10.14

9.94

10th Percentile

7.52

7.15

7.11

5th Percentile

6.63

5.44

5.56

95-5 Diff

22.13

29.34

28.44

90-10 Diff

14.59

19.43

19.07

75-25 Diff
7.53
9.88
9.79
Notes: The respondents are males approximately 32 years of age in the designated year. The figures are from the
following data sets: Occupational Changes in a Generation (for the 1972 group), National Longitudinal Survey, Class of
1972 (for the 1986 group), National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (for the 1995 group). Wages were adjusted into 1995
constant dollars using the Durable Goods Price Index (Source: The Department of Commerce). The Predicted group is
composed of individuals who went to college and had a propensity to attend college above the average propensity of
college students in the original sample (OCG).

71

Appendix Table 8a: The Distribution of Real Income (1995 Dollars)
Men with Two Years of College: Actual versus Predicted Groups
1972

1986

1995

95th Percentile

55,383

68,711

72,071

Actual

90th Percentile

45,983

56,612

62,562

Group

75th Percentile

36,349

41,851

47,047

50th Percentile

27,371

29,601

35,035

25th Percentile

21,214

20,632

24,024

10th Percentile

13,664

13,215

13,013

5th Percentile

7,883

9,665

6,006

95-5 Diff

47,500

59,046

66,065

90-10 Diff

32,320

43,397

49,549

75-25 Diff

15,135

21,218

23,023

95th Percentile

59,121

73,045

70,069

Predicted

90th Percentile

48,173

59,479

60,060

Group

75th Percentile

37,224

44,109

42,042

50th Percentile

27,371

31,117

30,030

25th Percentile

20,684

21,179

20,020

10th Percentile

14,233

14,626

12,012

5th Percentile

7,883

10,136

6,006

95-5 Diff

51,238

62,910

64,063

90-10 Diff

33,940

44,853

48,048

75-25 Diff
16,540
22,931
22,022
Notes: The respondents are males approximately 32 years of age in the designated year. The figures are from the
following data sets: Occupational Changes in a Generation (for the 1972 group), National Longitudinal Survey, Class of
1972 (for the 1986 group), National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (for the 1995 group). Incomes were adjusted into 1995
constant dollars using the Durable Goods Price Index (Source: The Department of Commerce). The Predicted group is
composed of individuals who went to college and had a propensity to attend college above the average propensity of
college students in the original sample (OCG).

72

Appendix Table 8b: The Distribution of Real Wages (1995 Dollars)
Men with Two Years of College: Actual versus Predicted Groups
1972

1986

1995

95th Percentile

25.26

31.06

32.72

Actual

90th Percentile

20.84

24.41

25.91

Group

75th Percentile

16.01

18.60

20.21

50th Percentile

12.39

13.56

15.21

25th Percentile

9.53

9.39

10.56

10th Percentile

7.37

6.70

7.36

5th Percentile

6.63

5.30

5.56

95-5 Diff

18.63

25.75

27.16

90-10 Diff

13.47

17.72

18.55

75-25 Diff

6.48

9.21

9.65

95th Percentile

26.32

31.90

32.08

Predicted

90th Percentile

21.05

25.15

25.02

Group

75th Percentile

16.42

19.46

18.42

50th Percentile

12.36

14.19

13.90

25th Percentile

9.48

9.97

9.81

10th Percentile

7.39

6.99

6.85

5th Percentile

6.73

5.20

5.56

95-5 Diff

19.60

26.69

26.53

90-10 Diff

13.66

18.16

18.17

75-25 Diff
6.94
9.48
8.61
Notes: The respondents are males approximately 32 years of age in the designated year. The figures are from the
following data sets: Occupational Changes in a Generation (for the 1972 group), National Longitudinal Survey, Class of
1972 (for the 1986 group), National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (for the 1995 group). Wages were adjusted into 1995
constant dollars using the Durable Goods Price Index (Source: The Department of Commerce). The Predicted group is
composed of individuals who went to college and had a propensity to attend college above the average propensity of
college students in the original sample (OCG).

73

Appendix Table 9: Log Mean Income by College Rank
Grouped by Educational Attainment
Baccalaureate Degree

At Least Two Years of College

1972

1995

1972

1995

Rank 6

10.65

10.91

10.66

10.87

Rank 5

10.60

10.76

10.56

10.79

Rank 4

10.55

10.67

10.53

10.65

Rank 3

10.43

10.55

10.39

10.44

Rank 2

10.41

10.51

10.27

10.39

Rank 1

10.32

10.32

10.20

10.33

Diff 6 - 1

0.33

0.59

0.45

0.54

Diff 5 - 2
0.19
0.25
0.29
0.39
Notes: The respondents are males approximately 32 years of age in the designated year. The figures are from the
following data sets: Occupational Changes in a Generation (for the 1972 group), National Longitudinal Survey, Class of
1972 (for the 1986 group), National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (for the 1995 group). Incomes were adjusted into 1995
constant dollars using the Durable Goods Price Index (Source: The Department of Commerce). A higher college rank
constitutes a higher-quality college.

Appendix Table 10: Log Mean Wage by College Rank
Grouped by Educational Attainment
Baccalaureate Degree

At Least Two Years of College

1972

1995

1972

1995

Rank 6

3.01

3.13

3.00

3.13

Rank 5

2.86

3.07

2.83

3.07

Rank 4

2.79

2.91

2.76

2.87

Rank 3

2.71

2.88

2.68

2.84

Rank 2

2.69

2.82

2.61

2.75

Rank 1

2.66

2.71

2.55

2.66

Diff 6 - 1

0.35

0.42

0.46

0.48

Diff 5 - 2
0.17
0.25
0.22
0.32
Notes: The respondents are males approximately 32 years of age in the designated year. The figures are from the
following data sets: Occupational Changes in a Generation (for the 1972 group), National Longitudinal Survey, Class of
1972 (for the 1986 group), National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (for the 1995 group). Incomes were adjusted into
1995 constant dollars using the Durable Goods Price Index (Source: The Department of Commerce). A higher college
rank constitutes a higher-quality college.

74

Appendix Table 11: Log Mean Income by Ability
Baccalaureate Degree

Two Years of College

1986

1995

1986

1995

Group 5

10.60

10.67

10.57

10.63

Group 4

10.53

10.60

10.47

10.48

Group 3

10.48

10.45

10.41

10.38

Group 2

10.39

10.43

10.28

10.28

Group 1

10.28

10.41

10.23

10.20

Diff: Groups 5-1

0.32

0.27

0.33

0.43

Diff: Groups 4-2
0.15
0.17
0.18
0.20
Notes: The respondents are males approximately 32 years of age in the designated year. The figures are from the
following data sets: Occupational Changes in a Generation (for the 1972 group), National Longitudinal Survey, Class of
1972 (for the 1986 group), National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (for the 1995 group). Incomes were adjusted into 1995
constant dollars using the Durable Goods Price Index (Source: The Department of Commerce). Group 5 contains the
individuals with the highest ability while Group 1 has the individuals with the least level of ability as measured by the
tests.

Appendix Table 12: Log Mean Wage by Ability
Baccalaureate Degree

Two Years of College

1986

1995

1986

1995

Group 5

2.87

2.95

2.84

2.91

Group 4

2.78

2.91

2.71

2.87

Group 3

2.77

2.85

2.70

2.69

Group 2

2.76

2.67

2.59

2.65

Group 1

2.70

2.62

2.58

2.58

Diff: Groups 5-1

0.17

0.33

0.26

0.33

Diff: Groups 4-2
0.02
0.23
0.12
0.22
Notes: The respondents are males approximately 32 years of age in the designated year. The figures are from the
following data sets: Occupational Changes in a Generation (for the 1972 group), National Longitudinal Survey, Class of
1972 (for the 1986 group), National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (for the 1995 group). Incomes were adjusted into 1995
constant dollars using the Durable Goods Price Index (Source: The Department of Commerce). Group 5 contains the
individuals with the highest ability while Group 1 has the individuals with the least level of ability as measured by the
tests.

75
Appendix Table 13 - Dependent Variable is Log(Hourly Wage) of Male who is approximately Age 32
and has at least a BA Degree -- all covariates shown except for indicator variables for state of high school -1972

1986

1995

Individual Attributes (selection into BA Degree group)
Number of Siblings

Number of Older
Siblings
Black

Hispanic

Asian

Native American

Parents' Highest
Grade Completed
Log(Fam Income)
when in high school
Parents' High Grd x
Log(Fam Income)
Foreign-Born
Parents
Foreign-Born
Parents x Hispanic
Urban Residence at
Age 32?
Age 30

Age 31

Age 33

Age 34

Age 35

-0.0138

-0.0094

-0.0074

-0.0059

-0.0044

-0.0038

-0.0096

-0.0164

-0.0114

(0.0108)

(0.0107)

(0.0108)

(0.0097)

(0.0101)

(0.0101)

(0.0204)

(0.0208)

(0.0215)

0.0150

0.0129

0.0139

-0.0151

-0.0179

-0.0190

0.0273

0.0301

0.0348

(0.0129)

(0.0128)

(0.0129)

(0.0132)

(0.0134)

(0.0130)

(0.0203)

(0.0208)

(0.0212)

-0.0934

-0.1276

-0.1495

-0.0124

-0.0029

-0.0145

0.0633

0.0997

0.0438

(0.1025)

(0.1023)

(0.1042)

(0.0758)

(0.0735)

(0.0745)

(0.0965)

(0.0987)

(0.1003)

0.0207

-0.0164

-0.0475

-0.0854

-0.1005

-0.0890

-0.2931

-0.2576

-0.2486

(0.1953)

(0.1938)

(0.1938)

(0.1067)

(0.1107)

(0.1187)

(0.3925)

(0.3962)

(0.3955)

na

na

na

0.0385

0.0424

0.0430

0.3989

0.4197

0.4380

na

na

na

(0.0628)

(0.0638)

(0.0707)

(0.1915)

(0.1981)

(0.2104)

na

na

na

-0.4075

-0.4268

-0.5401

0.3320

0.3378

0.4041

na

na

na

(0.1873)

(0.1793)

(0.1961)

(0.1433)

(0.1444)

(0.1464)

-0.0461

-0.0011

0.0020

-0.1704

-0.1781

-0.2401

-0.2126

-0.2208

-0.0753

(0.0764)

(0.0765)

(0.0771)

(0.1097)

(0.1138)

(0.1146)

(0.1248)

(0.1280)

(0.1322)

-0.0070

0.0391

0.0499

-0.1200

-0.1385

-0.2080

-0.2461

-0.2492

-0.1133

(0.0924)

(0.0923)

(0.0932)

(0.1450)

(0.1482)

(0.1501)

(0.1721)

(0.1762)

(0.1791)

0.0060

0.0014

0.0008

0.0164

0.0170

0.0226

0.0205

0.0210

0.0073

(0.0071)

(0.0072)

(0.0072)

(0.0102)

(0.0106)

(0.0107)

(0.0115)

(0.0118)

(0.0122)

-0.0293

-0.0414

-0.0455

0.0144

0.0146

0.0003

-0.0708

-0.0719

-0.0783

(0.0500)

(0.0501)

(0.0501)

(0.0549)

(0.0558)

(0.0570)

(0.0971)

(0.0985)

(0.1002)

-0.1218

-0.1002

-0.1051

0.0101

0.0219

-0.0234

0.3449

0.2974

0.2405

(0.2984)

(0.2956)

(0.2957)

(0.1424)

(0.1432)

(0.1531)

(0.4256)

(0.4300)

(0.4305)

0.1717

0.1372

0.1545

0.0722

0.0648

0.0692

-0.0363

-0.0240

-0.0132

(0.0351)

(0.0357)

(0.0364)

(0.0357)

(0.0361)

(0.0364)

(0.0712)

(0.0724)

(0.0731)

-0.1038

-0.1074

-0.1224

na

na

na

-0.0615

-0.0614

-0.0634

(0.0482)

(0.0483)

(0.0485)

na

na

na

(0.0715)

(0.0722)

(0.0725)

-0.0560

-0.0565

-0.0529

na

na

na

-0.0301

-0.0325

-0.0312

(0.0486)

(0.0486)

(0.0493)

na

na

na

(0.0722)

(0.0718)

(0.0730)

0.0461

0.0481

0.0341

na

na

na

0.3390

0.0338

0.0323

(0.0552)

(0.0553)

(0.0560)

na

na

na

(0.0691)

(0.0706)

(0.0737)

0.0920

0.0609

0.0578

na

na

na

0.0599

0.0623

0.0620

(0.0518)

(0.0517)

(0.0522)

na

na

na

(0.0725)

(0.0738)

(0.0760)

0.1231

0.1028

0.0948

na

na

na

0.0908

0.0911

0.0903

(0.0504)

(0.0507)

(0.0511)

na

na

na

(0.0736)

(0.0743)

(0.0766)

College Selectivity Effects and College Attributes
Ultimate Selectivity
Index=2
Ultimate Selectivity
Index=3
Ultimate Selectivity
Index=4
Ultimate Selectivity
Index=5
Ultimate Selectivity
Index=6

0.0524

0.0331

0.0400

0.0279

0.0942

0.0675

(0.1125)

(0.1155)

(0.1591)

(0.1192)

(0.1757)

(0.1442)

0.1097

0.0655

0.0538

0.0486

0.1402

0.0835

(0.1123)

(0.1148)

(0.1595)

(0.1191)

(0.1360)

(0.1442)

0.1565

0.0905

0.1345

0.1132

0.1784

0.1129

(0.1121)

(0.1149)

(0.1595)

(0.1189)

(0.1291)

(0.1441)

0.1988

0.1076

0.1805

0.1369

0.2646

0.1386

(0.1124)

(0.1150)

(0.1595)

(0.1188)

(0.1316)

(0.1443)

0.2370

0.1245

0.2792

0.1371

0.3623

0.1687

(0.1120)

(0.1145)

(0.1591)

(0.1200)

(0.1388)

(0.1439)

76
Ultimate Selectivity
Index=7
Ultimate Selectivity
Index=8
Ultimate Selectivity
Index=9
Ultimate Selectivity
Index=10
Ultimate Selectivity
Index=11
Ultimate Selectivity
Index=12
StdDev in SAT
Verbal x
Selectivity=2
StdDev in SAT
Verbal x
Selectivity=3
StdDev in SAT
Verbal x
Selectivity=4
StdDev in SAT
Verbal x
Selectivity=5
StdDev in SAT
Verbal x
Selectivity=6
StdDev in SAT
Verbal x
Selectivity=7
StdDev in SAT
Verbal x
Selectivity=8
StdDev in SAT
Verbal x
Selectivity=9
StdDev in SAT
Verbal x
Selectivity=10
StdDev in SAT
Verbal x
Selectivity=11
StdDev in SAT
Verbal x
Selectivity=12
Log(Expenditure Per
Student $1995)
College is Selective
but does not use
Admissions Tests
College is Not
Accredited

0.2679

0.1339

0.1772

0.1968

0.4327

0.1711

(0.1119)

(0.1151)

(0.1591)

(0.1201)

(0.1355)

(0.1445)

0.3268

0.1604

0.3740

0.2353

0.4700

0.2114

(0.1126)

(0.1184)

(0.1582)

(0.1342)

(0.1379)

(0.1450)

0.2904

0.1743

0.4630

0.2731

0.5186

0.2327

(0.1123)

(0.1190)

(0.1603)

(0.1377)

(0.1539)

(0.1458)

0.3697

0.1906

0.4369

0.3612

0.6163

0.2752

(0.1125)

(0.1171)

(0.1642)

(0.1419)

(0.1935)

(0.1812)

0.4105

0.2063

0.5609

0.3635

0.6721

0.3581

(0.1121)

(0.1196)

(0.1593)

(0.1705)

(0.1828)

(0.1611)

0.4427

0.2485

0.6200

0.3900

0.7699

0.3740

(0.1125)

(0.1169)

(0.1611)

(0.1731)

(0.1557)

(0.1445)

0.0612

0.0632

0.0641

(0.0164)

(0.0246)

(0.2100)

0.0282

0.0297

0.0414

(0.0153)

(0.0209)

(0.0187)

0.0080

0.0172

0.0258

(0.0159)

(0.0212)

(0.0205)

-0.0178

0.0417

-0.0059

(0.0169)

(0.0215)

(0.0212)

-0.0007

-0.0096

-0.0159

(0.0171)

(0.0234)

(0.0224)

-0.0136

-0.0197

-0.0234

(0.0170)

(0.0232)

(0.0218)

-0.0265

-0.0268

-0.0230

(0.0175)

(0.0207)

(0.0205)

-0.0458

-0.0453

-0.0469

(0.0190)

(0.0196)

(0.0213)

-0.0510

-0.0524

-0.0589

(0.0202)

(0.0212)

(0.0208)

-0.0634

-0.0569

-0.0657

(0.0185)

(0.0201)

(0.0208)

-0.0671

-0.0673

-0.0736

(0.0224)

(0.0212)

(0.0216)

0.0470

0.0699

0.0841

(0.0195)

(0.0235)

(0.0250)

-0.0239

-0.0486

-0.0765

(0.0554)

(0.0686)

(0.0359)

-0.0632

-0.1061

-0.1276

(0.0704)

(0.0772)

(0.0656)

See notes to Table 1. See also Data Appendix Table for number of observations in each regression, variable means and
standard deviations.

77
Appendix Table 14 - Dependent Variable is Log(Wage and Salary Income) of Male who is approximately Age 32
and has at least 2 years of college -- all covariates shown except for indicator variables for state of high school -1972

1986

1995

Individual Attributes (selection into 2-years-of-college group)
Number of Siblings

Number of Older
Siblings
Black

Hispanic

Asian

Native American

Parents' Highest
Grade Completed
Log(Fam Income)
when in high school
Parents' High Grd x
Log(Fam Income)
Foreign-Born
Parents
Foreign-Born
Parents x Hispanic
Urban Residence at
Age 32?
Age 30

Age 31

Age 33

Age 34

Age 35

-0.0345

-0.0288

-0.0286

-0.0025

0.0004

0.0014

-0.0319

-0.0335

-0.0350

(0.0100)

(0.0100)

(0.0101)

(0.0075)

(0.0075)

(0.0080)

(0.0212)

(0.0214)

(0.0221)

0.0350

0.0291

0.0302

-0.0105

-0.0145

-0.0127

0.0213

0.0249

0.0279

(0.0132)

(0.0131)

(0.0133)

(0.0123)

(0.0122)

(0.0124)

(0.0217)

(0.0219)

(0.0225)

-0.2119

-0.1476

-0.1584

-0.1585

-0.1578

-0.1599

-0.1594

-0.1267

-0.1423

(0.0708)

(0.0715)

(0.0725)

(0.0587)

(0.0565)

(0.0599)

(0.0938)

(0.0943)

(0.0956)

0.1671

0.1197

0.1063

-0.1373

-0.1389

-0.1471

-0.1175

-0.0839

-0.0500

(0.1944)

(0.1925)

(0.1949)

(0.0896)

(0.0898)

(0.0915)

(0.4498)

(0.4485)

(0.4513)

-0.3475

-0.3262

-0.3327

0.2104

0.2060

0.1500

0.4936

0.3753

0.4216

(0.2780)

(0.2754)

(0.2776)

(0.0857)

(0.0870)

(0.0883)

(0.2289)

(0.2350)

(0.2660)

na

na

na

-0.4936

-0.5268

-0.5715

-0.2876

-0.2875

-0.2800

na

na

na

(0.3328)

(0.3334)

(0.3393)

(0.1520)

(0.1518)

(0.1545)

0.0150

0.0133

0.0079

0.2693

0.2670

0.2969

0.1212

0.1700

0.2479

(0.0712)

(0.0707)

(0.0718)

(0.1480)

(0.1471)

(0.1442)

(0.1263)

(0.1274)

(0.1305)

0.0430

0.0585

0.0508

0.2292

0.2341

0.2669

0.2873

0.3401

0.4227

(0.0860)

(0.0853)

(0.0865)

(0.2058)

(0.2044)

(0.2023)

(0.1677)

(0.1687)

(0.1720)

0.0030

0.0000

0.0006

0.0260

0.0255

0.0281

0.0098

0.0149

0.0226

(0.0068)

(0.0067)

(0.0068)

(0.0139)

(0.0138)

(0.0135)

(0.0117)

(0.0119)

(0.0122)

0.0180

0.0173

0.0182

-0.0226

-0.0262

-0.0373

-0.2025

-0.2017

-0.2499

(0.0550)

(0.0546)

(0.0556)

(0.0685)

(0.0698)

(0.0706)

(0.0905)

(0.0906)

(0.0929)

-0.2012

-0.1381

-0.1357

-0.1439

-0.1409

-0.1318

0.2472

0.1976

0.1848

(0.2608)

(0.2582)

(0.2606)

(0.2835)

(0.2826)

(0.2879)

(0.4752)

(0.4743)

(0.4781)

0.2250

0.2086

0.2096

0.0453

0.0411

0.0265

0.0725

0.0627

0.0670

(0.0368)

(0.0369)

(0.0376)

(0.0351)

(0.0359)

(0.0367)

(0.0718)

(0.0720)

(0.0730)

-0.0858

-0.0784

-0.0750

na

na

na

-0.0634

-0.0621

-0.0647

(0.0523)

(0.0519)

(0.0526)

na

na

na

(0.0728)

(0.0728)

(0.0755)

-0.0677

-0.0752

-0.0669

na

na

na

-0.0321

-0.0340

-0.0361

(0.0540)

(0.0537)

(0.0546)

na

na

na

(0.0744)

(0.0744)

(0.0765)

0.1080

0.1199

0.1249

na

na

na

0.0286

0.0281

0.0274

(0.0574)

(0.0572)

(0.0583)

na

na

na

(0.0756)

(0.0758)

(0.0768)

0.1179

0.1033

0.1000

na

na

na

0.0605

0.0602

0.0682

(0.0573)

(0.0569)

(0.0580)

na

na

na

(0.0772)

(0.0775)

(0.0793)

0.1466

0.1187

0.1184

na

na

na

0.1007

0.1068

0.1120

(0.0572)

(0.0570)

(0.0581)

na

na

na

(0.0758)

(0.0757)

(0.0777)

College Selectivity Effects and College Attributes
Ultimate Selectivity
Index=2
Ultimate Selectivity
Index=3
Ultimate Selectivity
Index=4
Ultimate Selectivity
Index=5
Ultimate Selectivity
Index=6

0.0766

0.0643

0.0514

0.0952

0.1370

0.0857

(0.1978)

(0.1096)

(0.1942)

(0.1162)

(0.1865)

(0.1957)

0.1331

0.1217

0.1019

0.0712

0.2106

0.1296

(0.1987)

(0.1080)

(0.1825)

(0.1145)

(0.1856)

(0.1961)

0.1267

0.1420

0.1466

0.1392

0.2652

0.1654

(0.1954)

(0.1107)

(0.2060)

(0.1161)

(0.1832)

(0.1964)

0.2241

0.2076

0.2307

0.1801

0.3467

0.2051

(0.1971)

(0.1118)

(0.1942)

(0.1177)

(0.1855)

(0.2019)

0.1788

0.1493

0.2141

0.2219

0.3558

0.2088

(0.2027)

(0.1098)

(0.2376)

(0.1278)

(0.1941)

(0.2018)

78
Ultimate Selectivity
Index=7
Ultimate Selectivity
Index=8
Ultimate Selectivity
Index=9
Ultimate Selectivity
Index=10
Ultimate Selectivity
Index=11
Ultimate Selectivity
Index=12
StdDev in SAT
Verbal x
Selectivity=2
StdDev in SAT
Verbal x
Selectivity=3
StdDev in SAT
Verbal x
Selectivity=4
StdDev in SAT
Verbal x
Selectivity=5
StdDev in SAT
Verbal x
Selectivity=6
StdDev in SAT
Verbal x
Selectivity=7
StdDev in SAT
Verbal x
Selectivity=8
StdDev in SAT
Verbal x
Selectivity=9
StdDev in SAT
Verbal x
Selectivity=10
StdDev in SAT
Verbal x
Selectivity=11
StdDev in SAT
Verbal x
Selectivity=12
Log(Expenditure Per
Student $1995)
College is Selective
but does not use
Admissions Tests
College is Not
Accredited

0.3235

0.2050

0.3531

0.2680

0.4183

0.2174

(0.2008)

(0.1147)

(0.2466)

(0.1249)

(0.1901)

(0.1951)

0.3278

0.2233

0.3835

0.2992

0.4885

0.2176

(0.2492)

(0.1164)

(0.2500)

(0.1282)

(0.2477)

(0.2417)

0.3537

0.2508

0.4560

0.2543

0.4704

0.2258

(0.2135)

(0.1090)

(0.2417)

(0.1364)

(0.2119)

(0.2181)

0.3453

0.2655

0.5906

0.3245

0.5494

0.2507

(0.2396)

(0.1118)

(0.2541)

(0.1318)

(0.2361)

(0.2270)

0.4413

0.3069

0.6464

0.3470

0.6420

0.3427

(0.2232)

(0.1268)

(0.3099)

(0.1480)

(0.2304)

(0.2347)

0.5130

0.3583

0.7983

0.3691

0.7648

0.3745

(0.2130)

(0.1572)

(0.3175)

(0.1598)

(0.2278)

(0.2305)

0.0259

0.0180

0.0282

(0.0191)

(0.0123)

(0.0171)

0.0159

0.0193

0.0271

(0.0130)

(0.0120)

(0.0158)

0.0147

0.0061

0.0039

(0.0174)

(0.0136)

(0.0118)

0.0449

0.0150

-0.0109

(0.0164)

(0.0161)

(0.0155)

0.0355

-0.0023

-0.0111

(0.0148)

(0.0145)

(0.0162)

0.0167

-0.0122

-0.0161

(0.0200)

(0.0178)

(0.0194)

-0.0435

-0.0310

-0.0225

(0.0162)

(0.0257)

(0.0264)

-0.0390

-0.0364

-0.0350

(0.0310)

(0.0258)

(0.0285)

-0.0408

-0.0488

-0.0386

(0.0281)

(0.0168)

(0.0294)

-0.0493

-0.0550

-0.0526

(0.0281)

(0.0179)

(0.0302)

-0.0592

-0.0646

-0.0606

(0.0232)

(0.0273)

(0.0322)

0.0471

0.0668

0.0669

(0.0232)

(0.0273)

(0.0242)

-0.1185

-0.0846

-0.1236

(0.2141)

(0.1811)

(0.2048)

-0.1783

-0.2068

-0.2050

(0.1579)

(0.2196)

(0.1890)

See notes to Table 1. See also the Data Appendix Table for variables mean and standard deviations.

79
Appendix Table 15 - Dependent Variable is Log(Hourly Wage) of Male who is approximately Age 32
and has at least 2 years of college -- all covariates shown except for indicator variables for state of high school -1972

1986

1995

Individual Attributes (selection into 2-years-of-college group)
Number of Siblings

Number of Older
Siblings
Black

Hispanic

Asian

Native American

Parents' Highest
Grade Completed
Log(Fam Income)
when in high school
Parents' High Grd x
Log(Fam Income)
Foreign-Born
Parents
Foreign-Born
Parents x Hispanic
Urban Residence at
Age 32?
Age 30

Age 31

Age 33

Age 34

Age 35

-0.0161

-0.0120

-0.0118

-0.0133

-0.0107

-0.0092

-0.0236

-0.0228

-0.0166

(0.0063

(0.0062)

(0.0062)

(0.0065)

(0.0065)

(0.0065)

(0.0148)

(0.0150)

(0.0152)

0.0192

0.0156

0.0169

-0.0015

-0.0057

-0.0038

0.0123

0.0121

0.0141

(0.0082

(0.0081)

(0.0082)

(0.0092)

(0.0091)

(0.0088)

(0.0152)

(0.0154)

(0.0155)

-0.1495

-0.1182

-0.1187

-0.0238

-0.0226

-0.0295

-0.1186

-0.0935

-0.1387

(0.0433

(0.0439)

(0.0441)

(0.0496)

(0.0484)

(0.0483)

(0.0664)

(0.0670)

(0.0670)

-0.0539

-0.0788

-0.0870

-0.0688

-0.0665

-0.0596

-0.2066

-0.1954

-0.2233

(0.1178

(0.1169)

(0.1169)

(0.0798)

(0.0795)

(0.0808)

(0.3074)

(0.3071)

(0.3042)

-0.3126

-0.2609

-0.2675

0.1049

0.1043

0.0833

0.4402

0.4204

0.3688

(0.1909

(0.1896)

(0.1887)

(0.0659)

(0.0639)

(0.0658)

(0.1573)

(0.1621)

(0.1705)

na

na

na

-0.2145

-0.2456

-0.2928

-0.2791

-0.2878

-0.3010

na

na

na

(0.1438)

(0.1488)

(0.1634)

(0.1076)

(0.1077)

(0.1080)

0.0213

0.0235

0.0253

0.1154

0.0935

0.1360

0.1528

0.1373

0.0343

(0.0453)

(0.0451)

(0.0452)

(0.0850)

(0.0863)

(0.0850)

(0.0914)

(0.0925)

(0.0942)

0.0297

0.0458

0.0523

0.0331

0.0155

0.0614

0.1870

0.1671

0.0644

(0.0547)

(0.0544)

(0.0545)

(0.1081)

(0.1093)

(0.1074)

(0.1228)

(0.1239)

(0.1250)

0.0017

0.0008

0.0011

0.0117

0.0092

0.0129

0.0149

0.0131

0.0035

(0.0043)

(0.0043)

(0.0043)

(0.0079)

(0.0080)

(0.0079)

(0.0085)

(0.0086)

(0.0088)

0.0191

0.0140

0.0069

0.0237

0.0217

0.0165

-0.0550

-0.0578

-0.0749

(0.0338)

(0.0337)

(0.0338)

(0.0384)

(0.0374)

(0.0378)

(0.0641)

(0.0645)

(0.0653)

-0.0510

-0.0861

-0.0879

-0.1232

-0.1261

-0.1086

-0.1711

-0.1440

-0.1461

(0.1576)

(0.1563)

(0.1561)

(0.1154)

(0.1143)

(0.1177)

(0.3261)

(0.3263)

(0.3235)

0.1752

0.1595

0.1675

0.0472

0.0395

0.0299

0.0618

0.0520

0.0588

(0.0230)

(0.0231)

(0.0233)

(0.0243)

(0.0244)

(0.0250)

(0.0503)

(0.0506)

(0.0505)

-0.0744

-0.0742

-0.0815

na

na

na

-0.0654

-0.0633

-0.0649

(0.0322)

(0.0320)

(0.0320)

na

na

na

(0.0529)

(0.0537)

(0.0545)

-0.0330

-0.0404

-0.0460

na

na

na

-0.0313

-0.0304

-0.0325

(0.0333)

(0.0331)

(0.0333)

na

na

na

(0.0536)

(0.0540)

(0.0539)

0.0653

0.0586

0.0622

na

na

na

0.0316

0.0320

0.0339

(0.0353)

(0.0353)

(0.0354)

na

na

na

(0.0531)

(0.0534)

(0.0546)

0.0715

0.0584

0.0434

na

na

na

0.0625

0.0645

0.0621

(0.0351)

(0.0350)

(0.0351)

na

na

na

(0.0543)

(0.0547)

(0.0555)

0.0964

0.0736

0.0645

na

na

na

0.0966

0.0932

0.0902

(0.0350)

(0.0350)

(0.0351)

na

na

na

(0.0538)

(0.0539)

(0.0553)

College Selectivity Effects and College Attributes
Ultimate Selectivity
Index=2
Ultimate Selectivity
Index=3
Ultimate Selectivity
Index=4
Ultimate Selectivity
Index=5
Ultimate Selectivity
Index=6

0.0032

0.0044

0.0069

0.0033

0.0573

0.0364

(0.0887)

(0.0882)

(0.1178)

(0.1177)

(0.1167

(0.1156)

0.0242

0.0635

0.0061

0.0168

0.1093

0.0756

(0.0889)

(0.0882)

(0.1177)

(0.1183)

(0.1166)

(0.1157)

0.0913

0.0902

0.1010

0.0704

0.2343

0.1267

(0.0877)

(0.0881)

(0.1178)

(0.1181)

(0.1167)

(0.1158)

0.1122

0.1309

0.1246

0.1115

0.2585

0.1541

(0.0892)

(0.0881)

(0.1177)

(0.1183)

(0.1167)

(0.1157)

0.1510

0.1520

0.1561

0.1407

0.3404

0.1528

(0.0877)

(0.0884)

(0.1174)

(0.1205)

(0.1165)

(0.1145)

80
Ultimate Selectivity
Index=7
Ultimate Selectivity
Index=8
Ultimate Selectivity
Index=9
Ultimate Selectivity
Index=10
Ultimate Selectivity
Index=11
Ultimate Selectivity
Index=12
StdDev in SAT
Verbal x
Selectivity=2
StdDev in SAT
Verbal x
Selectivity=3
StdDev in SAT
Verbal x
Selectivity=4
StdDev in SAT
Verbal x
Selectivity=5
StdDev in SAT
Verbal x
Selectivity=6
StdDev in SAT
Verbal x
Selectivity=7
StdDev in SAT
Verbal x
Selectivity=8
StdDev in SAT
Verbal x
Selectivity=9
StdDev in SAT
Verbal x
Selectivity=10
StdDev in SAT
Verbal x
Selectivity=11
StdDev in SAT
Verbal x
Selectivity=12
Log(Expenditure Per
Student $1995)
College is Selective
but does not use
Admissions Tests
College is Not
Accredited

0.1782

0.1673

0.2289

0.1719

0.3125

0.1787

(0.0875)

(0.0882)

(0.1179)

(0.1170)

(0.1165)

(0.1177)

0.2163

0.1786

0.3091

0.2320

0.4422

0.2547

(0.0930)

(0.0941)

(0.1172)

(0.1310)

(0.1172)

(0.1163)

0.2185

0.1866

0.3541

0.2532

0.5509

0.2279

(0.0899)

(0.0932)

(0.1186)

(0.1228)

(0.1172)

(0.1171)

0.2489

0.1953

0.4200

0.3146

0.5741

0.3219

(0.0934)

(0.0902)

(0.1206)

(0.1384)

(0.1168)

(0.1187)

0.3639

0.2037

0.5592

0.3643

0.6830

0.3470

(0.0891)

(0.0956)

(0.1176)

(0.1535)

(0.1177)

(0.1197)

0.3737

0.2000

0.6450

0.3724

0.7275

0.3699

(0.0953)

(0.0958)

(0.1191)

(0.1615)

(0.1160)

(0.1202)

0.0287

0.0285

0.0476

(0.0258)

(0.0247)

(0.0210)

0.0154

0.0236

0.0363

(0.0190)

(0.0180)

(0.0261)

0.0124

0.0140

0.0266

(0.0188)

(0.0196)

(0.0184)

0.0127

-0.0159

0.0103

(0.0187)

(0.0229)

(0.0174)

-0.0012

-0.0197

-0.0139

(0.0215)

(0.0243)

(0.0172)

-0.0047

-0.0239

-0.0166

(0.0209)

(0.0224)

(0.0192)

-0.0273

-0.0256

-0.0339

(0.0205)

(0.0183)

(0.0200)

-0.0300

-0.0309

-0.0471

(0.0201)

(0.0186)

(0.0187)

-0.0459

-0.0452

-0.0578

(0.0227)

(0.0211)

(0.0198)

-0.0493

-0.0518

-0.0648

(0.0177)

(0.0187)

(0.0195)

-0.0566

-0.0559

-0.6582

(0.0176)

(0.0212)

(0.0253)

0.0123

0.0624

0.0618

(0.0177)

(0.0208)

(0.0362)

-0.0421

-0.0856

-0.0981

(0.0913)

(0.0943)

(0.0628)

-0.0853

-0.1354

-0.1275

(0.1204)

(0.1693)

(0.0837)

See notes to Table 1. See also Data Appendix Table for number of observations in each regression, variable means and
standard deviations.

