On May 2, 1998, the leaders of the countries of the European Union formally selected those
countries deemed eligible to participate in a common currency union. This union, commonly
referred to as the European Monetary Union (EMU)1, was the third and final stage of a process
established under the Maastricht treaty of December, 1991. While various criteria were established
in that treaty as pre-conditions for membership, the most severe constraints were with respect to the
“convergence” criteria regarding acceptable levels of inflation rates, interest rates, budget deficits
and national debt. An additional criterion of exchange rate stability became obsolete after the
European currency crises of 1992 and 1993. 11 countries2 were selected as eligible; an additional
3 (Denmark, Sweden, and the U.K.) chose not to participate, while Greece failed to meet the
convergence criteria.

Although the EMU now appears virtually certain to begin on January 1, 1999 with broad
participation, that outcome was not expected over most of the 1992-98 period. Academics discussed
a two-tiered Europe consisting of a few core countries that would meet the convergence criteria, and
a broader group that would not qualify until later. Paralleling this uncertainty, various academic
researchers and banks developed “EMU probability calculators” to infer from financial data the
probability of various countries qualifying for admission. The best-known is probably the one
developed by J.P. Morgan, the results of which were regularly reported in the Financial Times. Four
such probability calculations for Italy are illustrated below in Figure 1.3

1

Technically, EMU is the acronym used by the European Commission for Economic and
Monetary Union, of which the currency union is the final stage.
2

Austria, Belgium, Finland France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands,
Portugal, and Spain.
3

The Favero et al (1997) and Lund (1998) EMU probability assessments are the quarterly and
weekly numbers, respectively, provided by the authors. The De Grauwe (1996) and Morgan (1997)
estimates are representative monthly rates estimated from published graphs of daily data.

2

1.00
Morgan
0.80
0.60

Favero et al

Lund

0.40
De Grauwe
0.20
0.00
Apr-95 Oct-95 May-96 Dec-96 Jun-97 Jan-98

Jul-98

Figure 1. EMU probability assessments for Italy, 1995-98. Lund’s
(1998) and Favero et al’s (1997) estimates are inferred probabilities of Italy
joining the EMU during 1999-2001. The time frame for the other two
estimates is roughly comparable.
This article primarily reviews the methodologies employed in constructing such calculators.
While the initial group of participants has now been determined, many other countries are waiting
in the wings and may join later. A retrospective examination of the methodologies may therefore
be useful in providing a guide to constructing new calculators for prospective entrants. Section I
discusses two alternative direct approaches (Arrow-Debreu contracts, options-based assessments)
to creating EMU probability assessments, while Section II examines the more common approaches
that use the term structures of European interest rates. Section III concludes with some discussion
of what can be inferred from financial data regarding future policies of the new European Central
Bank.

3
I. Non-standard EMU Probability Calculators
I.A. Arrow-Debreu contracts
The most direct assessments of the probabilities of specific countries joining a European
currency union are the prices of Arrow-Debreu securities that pay off contingent upon the countries
being admitted. Two such contracts, on Italy and on Spain, began trading on the Iowa Electronic
Markets on March 3, 1998. Each contract paid off $1 conditional upon Italy or Spain being selected
by the European Council as eligible to participate in the currency union -- which transpired at the
summit meeting on May 2. Market prices and volumes for the two contracts are graphed below, in
Figure 2.

1.00
0.95

Italy

0.90
0.85
0.80
0.75

Spain

0.70
Italy
Spain

100
10
1
03/03

03/11

03/19

03/27

04/04

04/12

04/20

04/28

Figure 2. EMU Membership contracts: price and volume. Prices are for contracts
that pay off $1 conditional upon admittance. Volume figures are the total number of
country-specific contracts traded per day -- both “in” and “out” contracts.

Unfortunately, the contracts were introduced too late in the EMU process to contain much
insight into the alternate methods of assessing EMU probabilities. The contracts actually began

4
trading shortly after the European governments released their official economic results for 1997.
All countries except Greece that were interested in participating in the currency union met the
interest rate, inflation and budget deficit criteria of the Maastricht treaty, while exemptions on the
public debt criterion for heavily indebted Italy and Belgium were widely expected on the grounds
of substantial improvement.4 Consequently, the prices on Italian and Spanish admission rapidly
gravitated to 95 cents on the dollar once trading began in earnest on the contracts. Further
substantial trading volume and price movements were observed prior to the March 27 official reports
of the European Monetary Institute and the European Commission regarding countries’ eligibility,
at which time prices moved to 99 cents on the dollar

I.B Options-based EMU assessments
An alternate direct method of assessing EMU probabilities is to exploit the information from
currency options’ implicit volatilities regarding future intra-European cross exchange rate volatility.
Stochastic volatility option pricing models such as Scott (1987) and Hull and White (1987) indicate
that the “implicit” variance that equates the Garman-Kohlhagen (1983) currency option pricing
formula to observed option prices should roughly be the expected average variance of exchange rate
percentage changes over the lifetime of the option:5
2

F̂t, T .

1
dS
t%T
Et
VarJ
dJ
mt
T
S

(1)

4

New York Times, “Europeans Clear Remaining Hurdle to Currency Unity.” February 28,
1988,p.1ff.
5

Several issues are being ignored in this simplified exposition: a concavity bias that (slightly)
biases downward at-the-money implicit variances relative to expected average variance, the impact
of volatility risk premia, and Hull and White’s assumption that asset return shocks and volatility
shocks are uncorrelated. For further discussion of these issues, see Bates (1996, pp. 590-91).

5
Furthermore, currency options’ implicit volatilities do appear to forecast future exchange rate
volatility reasonably well in general -- in contrast to those from stock or stock index options.6
Consequently, setting implicit forward variances

2

2
F̂t, T1 6 T2

t % T2
1
dS
/
Et
VarJ
dJ '
T2 & T1 mt % T1
S

2

F̂t, T2 T2 & F̂t, T1 T1
T2 & T1

.

(2)

equal to the probability-weighted average of the zero value expected conditional upon currency
union, and a higher estimated value conditional upon EMU not occurring, would appear a natural
and direct way of assessing the probability of EMU transpiring.

The major difficulty with this approach is data availability. Interbank options on pound/DM,
DM/FF, and DM/lira are actively traded, but primarily only for maturities of up to one year.7
International convertible bonds such as those studied by Jennergren and Näslund (1990) often
contain longer-maturity intra-European cross-rate options, but extracting implicit option prices is
severely complicated by the plethora of bond-specific features. Consequently, the effective absence
until 1998 of data on actively traded options maturing after January 1, 1999 has precluded the
construction of EMU calculators based upon intra-European currency options. Some studies have,
however, used such options to assess developments in the run-up to the currency union; notably
Campa, Chang, and Reider (1997), Butler and Cooper (1997), and Adão, Cassola, and Luíz (1998).

6

Most empirical work on currency options has used the $/FC options traded on centralized
exchanges. Those studies typically find implicit volatilities are roughly unbiased forecasts of future
volatility; see Bates (1996) for a survey. The over-the-counter intra-European cross-rate options
offered by many banks have been less actively studied, because of difficulties in acquiring data.
7

The Bank for International Settlements (1996, Table D-8) reports that turnover in pound/DM
over-the-counter options averaged about $1½ billion/day in April 1995, while FF/pound options’
turnover was about $2 billion/day. However, Table D-6 indicates only 11% of all OTC currency
options had maturities greater than 1 year.

6
Even if the data were available, implicit volatility-based EMU calculators would suffer from
many of the difficulties of the interest rate-based calculators discussed below. The major issue is
estimating what cross-rate volatility would be conditional upon a specific country failing to join the
EMU. If, for instance, non-members nevertheless fix their exchange rates against the Euro-bloc
countries (Butler and Cooper’s ERM-2 scenario), the EMU and non-EMU cross-rate volatilities are
virtually identical and EMU probability computations are infeasible. Nevertheless, using currency
options to assess shifts in exchange rate regimes is a more direct approach than inferring shifts in
regimes from bond yields, and it is regrettable that the data are not readily available.

II. Term structure-based EMU probability calculators
II.A. Theoretical foundations
The equilibrium approach to bond pricing exemplified by Cox, Ingersoll, and Ross (1985a,b)
identifies zero-coupon bond prices of maturity T as
B(t, T ) ' Et [ M̃ exp(&rt, T T ) ]
(3)

(

/ Et [ exp(&rt, T T ) ] ,
where M is a positive pricing kernel with mean 1, rt, T /
(

interest rate over [t, t+T], and Et

1

t%T

r ds is the (random) average
mt t%s
is a “risk-neutral” probability measure defined by (3) that
T

incorporates the appropriate compensation for interest rate risk. The continuously compounded yield
to maturity yt, T and instantaneous forward rate ft, T of maturity T are defined implicitly by
t%T

B(t, T ) / exp(&yt, T T ) ' exp &

mt

ft, J dJ .

(4)

Equivalently, the forward rate ft, T contractible now for instantaneously depositing or borrowing T
periods hence is given by

7
ft, T / &

M ln B(t, T )
MT
(

'

Et r̃t%T exp(&rt, T T )
(

(5)

Et exp(&rt, T T )
(

' Et [Ñ r̃t%T ]
((

/ Et [r̃t%T ] ,

((

where Et

is an alternate probability measure constructed analogously to the transformation in (3),
(

using the Radon-Nikodym derivative Ñ ' e &r T / Et [ e &r T ] . (5) can alternately be derived from the
equilibrium condition that the “risk-neutral” expected discounted profit from forward rate
speculation be zero:
(

Et e

&rt, T T

( r̃t%T & ft, T ) ' 0 .

(6)

The basic EMU probability calculator approach implemented inter alia by De Grauwe
(1996), J.P. Morgan (1997) and Favero, Giavazzi, Iacone, and Tabellini (1997) uses the interest rate
forecasts inferred from intra-European forward rates to assess the probability of any two countries
entering into a currency union. For instance, if both Germany and Italy enter into a permanent
currency union, the elimination of currency risk implies that DM and lira Italian money market
deposits and loans become perfect substitutes, with identical interest rates. By contrast, a failure to
achieve currency union implies a gap, presumably positive, between Italian and German interest
rates. The Marshallian expectations hypothesis ft, T ' Et (rt%T ) , combined with a particular estimate
of the expected future interest rate spread conditional upon EMU not occurring (NEMU), yields a
method of inferring the probability of EMU occurring from observed forward rate differentials:
ITL

DEM

ft, T & ft, T

ITL

DEM

' BEMU × 0 % BNEMU Et [ rt%T & rt%T * NEMU ] .

(7)

8
The alternate EMU probability calculators diverge primarily in their method of estimating the noEMU scenario for future interest differentials, and in the selection of the future time interval.

Figure 3 shows the forward spreads for 7 currencies and for the ECU currency basket.
Instantaneous forward rates corresponding to fixed 1999, 2002, and 2005 future maturities were
computed from 3-, 6-, and 12-month Eurocurrency rates and 1-10 year swap rates, using Svensson’s
extension of the Nelson-Siegel (1987) methodology as described in Söderlind and Svensson (1997). 8
Forward spreads over 1991-98 were predicting relatively narrow post-1998 interest rate spreads
relative to Germany for Belgium, Denmark, the ECU, France, and the Netherlands, but substantially
larger spreads for Italy, Sweden, and the U.K. The forward spreads for most of the countries
participating in the currency union (Belgium, France, and the Netherlands) had converged to zero
by or before the fixing of official bilateral rates against the DM at the May 1998 summit.
Interestingly, however, both the Italian and the ECU 1999 forward spreads were still slightly positive
as of the summer of 1998. The latter can be attributed to exchange rate uncertainty regarding the rate
of conversion of the ECU into euros, given the presence in the currency basket of non-EMU
currencies such as the pound. The positive Italian spreads suggests that some uncertainty also
remains as to whether the official lira/DM bilateral rate will in fact be achieved -- an uncertainty
reflected in an unsuccessful speculative attack on the lira in August.9

Of the three countries (Denmark, Sweden, and the U.K.) that chose not to participate in the
EMU in 1999, two (Denmark and Sweden) nevertheless exhibited substantial convergence in post1998 forward rates relative to Germany over 1997 and 1998. The convergence was even more
pronounced for Swedish 2002 and 2005 forward spreads, suggesting the possibility of delayed entry.

8

Further information on the data and the estimation methodology are in the appendix.

9

New York Times, “Euro: Prenatal Force to Contend With”, November 4, 1998.

Figure 3. Instantaneous forward spreads relative to Germany.

10
British 1999 forward rates by contrast diverged increasingly over 1995-98 from German rates, but
a sharply inverted forward spread curve over 1997-98 also suggests the possibility of delayed entry.

An immediate problem for EMU probability calculators is that although Germany is assumed
to be the low-interest rate country, as has historically been the case within the European Union over
1977-98, forward spreads relative to Germany have occasionally been negative by 0-40 basis points
for Denmark, France, the Netherlands, the U.K., and the ECU. This implies that despite history,
market participants are assigning some probability to a post-1998 non-EMU scenario in which
Germany is no longer the low-interest country. EMU probability calculators influenced by historical
norms that calculate positive interest spreads conditional on EMU not occurring consequently
estimate negative BNEMU values over these periods, and BEMU values greater than 1. De Grauwe’s
and Morgan’s EMU calculators set such BEMU values to 1, under the interpretation that they indicate
a strong probability of EMU. Theoretically, however, a negative forward rate spread can constitute
as strong evidence against future interest rate convergence as a positive spread.

Three issues arise in the assessment of whether EMU probability calculators are likely to do
a good job. First is the issue of whether European term structures of interest rates have in fact
demonstrated any ability to forecast future intra-European interest rate differentials. Second, there
are assorted convexity biases, risk adjustments, and currency adjustments that can potentially bias
inferred probabilities of monetary union away from the true conditional probabilities. Finally, there
is the key issue of identifying the non-EMU regime.

II.B. The expectations hypothesis
EMU probability calculators are useless if European term structures contain little information
regarding future interest rate changes. However, as discussed in Gerlach and Smets (1997a,b),
Hardouvelis (1994), and Bekaert, Hodrick and Marshall (1997), European term structures tend to

11
be more consistent with the expectations hypothesis than has been the U.S. experience. Table 1A
reports country-specific estimates of the forward expectations hypothesis
n

Rt% n & Rt

n

n

' " % $ [ F(t, t% n 6 t% 2n) & Rt ] % gt% n

(8)

n

for n-month Eurodeposit rates Rt (n = 3, 6) relative to the forward rates F inferred from n-month
and 2n-month Eurodeposit rates. Short-maturity forward rates are definitely informative with regard
to future short-term rates, but the unbiasedness hypothesis is rejected for about half of the countries.
Table 1B shows that intra-European forward spreads relative to the German forward rates do even
better when forecasting of future interest rate differentials, with only 3 regressions out of 18 rejecting
the unbiasedness hypothesis.

As discussed in Gerlach and Smets (1997a,b), part of this greater consistency with the
expectations hypothesis is undoubtedly attributable to the greater past predictability of European
interest rate changes. Speculative attacks on the weaker currencies participating in the European
Monetary System generate temporarily high short-term interest rates for those currencies, and sharply
inverted term structures that correctly predict future interest rate declines once the currency is
devalued.10 The expectations hypothesis fares less well for the DM, pound, and dollar, which were
typically less constrained by exchange rate targets over 1977-98.

A past ability of term structures to forecast largely predictable changes in interest rates
primarily associated with currency crises does not guarantee good forecasting performance for the
future. A currency union is a European exchange rate regime previously experienced only by
Belgium and Luxembourg, while the interest rate consequences of failing to achieve union could be

10

Gerlach and Smets (1997b) note that while these crises are unquestionably important in
tests of the expectations hypothesis, the hypotheis is also not rejected in more tranquil periods.

12
difficult to forecast. Nevertheless, it is reassuring that there are no strong grounds a priori for
rejecting the use of forward spreads as a forecast of future interest rate differentials.

II.C. Divergences between inferred and conditional probabilities
As indicated above in equations (3) - (5), equilibrium bond pricing theory does not in general
predict that forward rates should be unbiased predictors of future short-term interest rates. There are
three potential sources of bias. First is the interest rate risk premium (or term premium) when going
from conditional to “risk-neutral” bond pricing probability measures. Second is the use of forward
rates rather than bond prices, inducing biases indicated in equation (4).

Third is a currency

conversion issue when comparing forward rates from different currencies.

According to equation (3), EMU probabilities inferred from bond prices are “risk-neutral”
(

(or risk-adjusted) probabilities computed under the probability measure Et :
(

(

B(t, T ) ' BEMU Et [e &r T * EMU ] % BNEMU Et [e &r T * NEMU ]

(9)

(

Equivalently, BEMU / Probt [EMU ] is the current futures price on an Arrow-Debreu contract that
pays off conditional upon EMU occurring. If the difference between EMU and no-EMU is
associated with a major difference in investment opportunities, hedging against those differences
could create a significant divergence between conditional probabilities and Arrow-Debreu futures
prices.

Whether European Monetary Union will have real economic effects, and of what sign, has
been a matter of considerable debate. Bean (1992), for instance, argued that both the long-term costs
and the long-term benefits are likely to be small, implying little divergence between actual and riskneutral probabilities. On the other hand, the short-term consequences for economic policies and
interest rates of failing to achieve membership in a currency union could in principle be substantial.

13
For instance, a failure by Italy to achieve either the interest rate or inflation criteria of the Maastricht
treaty might well have caused yet tighter monetary policy, in order to qualify at a later date. Whether
this matters for risk premia does, however, depend upon the degree to which Italian bond markets
are segmented from world markets. It appears appropriate to interpret inferred probabilities as “riskneutral” probabilities and, to a first approximation, as conditional probabilities as well.

A crude calibration of the potential difference between actual and “risk-neutral” probabilities,
inspired by Hansen and Jagannathan (1991) and Cochrane and Saa-Requejo (1996), can be obtained
by placing bounds on the maximal feasible Sharpe ratio from speculating in an Arrow-Debreu
forward contract on EMU occurring. If B is the futures price on EMU and p is the true probability,
this approach implies *p & B* # srmax p (1 & p) # ½ srmax . Using srmax ' .3 T (the historical
Sharpe ratio on the U.S. stock market) implies that actual and risk-neutral probabilities should
deviate by less than 15% at an annual forecast horizon. However, this approach is too imprecise at
longer horizons, indicating tighter theoretical bounds on srmax are needed.

Forward rates versus bond prices
The second issue is the bias induced by using forward rates instead of bond prices when
inferring (risk-neutral) probabilities of EMU occurring. Bond prices can be written as
(

B(t, T ) ' Et [e &r T ] ' BEMU E [e &r T * EMU ] % BNEMU E [e &r T * NEMU ]
/ BEMU BEMU % BNEMU BNEMU .
Consequently the forward rate is

(10)

14
ft, T / &

Mln B(t, T )
MT
(

'

(

BEMU Et [rt%T e &rT * EMU ] % BNEMU Et [rt%T e &rT * NEMU ]
B

' BEMU

BEMU
B

(

f EMU % BNEMU

BNEMU
B

f NEMU

(

/ BEMU fEMU % BNEMU f NEMU

(

where fEMU / Et [rt%T e &r T * EMU ] / BEMU is the current forward rate conditional upon EMU
occurring, and fNEMU is defined similarly. The former is typically assumed equal to the current DM
forward rate; the latter is estimated by various methods discussed in section II.C below. Divergences
in bond prices conditional upon EMU occurring or not occurring will yield biased inferences of the
probability of currency union from the current observed forward rate ft, T .

How severe is this bias relative to risk-neutral probabilities inferred from bond prices? Reexpressing in terms of bond yields,
(

BEMU / B
' B

BEMU
B
e
Be

&y EMU T

&y EMU T

% (1 & B )e

(12)
& y NEMU T

. B % B (1 & B) ( yNEMU & yEMU ) T .

Thus, the bias depends upon the maturity of the forward rates used in assessing EMU prospects, and
the divergence between the EMU and non-EMU contingencies. If, for instance, 1999 forward rates
are used, then bond yields correspond to 1999 maturities and differ only insofar as the event of EMU
occurring or not is associated with divergences in pre-1999 interest rate paths. For instance, Italy

15
might be more likely to join the EMU under tighter pre-1999 monetary policies, implying
yEMU > yNEMU and a downward bias in inferred EMU probabilities.

If forward rates from later maturities are used, as in Favero et al (1997) and as graphed above
in Figure (3), alternate biases arise. Bond yields for longer maturities can be decomposed into the
1999 bond yield and post-1998 average forward rates:
yt, T T ' yt, 1999 & t (1999 & t ) % f1999 6 T (T & 1999) .

(13)

Assuming for calibration purposes that the term structures conditional on EMU occurring or not
(

occurring differ only in the average forward rates, EMU probabilities BEMU inferred from forward
rates are biased upward by the amount
(

BEMU . BEMU % BEMU (1 & BEMU ) f NEMU & f EMU (T & 1999) .

(14)

If the difference between EMU occurring and not occurring implies a difference of 4% in the average
forward rates, using instantaneous forward rates for the year 2002 would bias inferred probabilities
upward by at most ¼ (.04) (3) ' .03 . Thus, using forward rates instead of bond prices does not
appear to significantly influence EMU probability computations.

Currency issues
A further potential bias originates in numeraire issues when considering the forward
expectations hypotheses underlying EMU probability calculators. The “risk-neutral” expectational
operators that incorporate the assorted risk premia by changing the probability measure do depend
upon which currency is used when assessing investments. Consequently, forward rates from Italian
and German swap rates cannot be compared without first expressing the underlying investments in
a common currency.

16
The “risk-neutral” equilibrium condition that future currency speculation is currently expected to
yield zero discounted profits indicates that
E( e

&rt, T T

(

dS
S

rt%T dt %

t%T

& rt%T dt

' 0,

(15)

(

where rt%T is the future foreign interest rate and S is the exchange rate. Equivalently,
((

Et ( dS / S )t%T
dt
((

where Et

((

((

(

' Et (rt%T ) & Et (rt%T )

(16)

is the risk-adjusted expectations operator relevant to the domestic investor when

assessing future speculations, given the domestic discount factor used in (15). From (5) above,
((

ft, T ' Et (rt%T ) . However, the same is not true for the relationship between the foreign forward
interest rate and future spot rate from the domestic investor’s perspective. The zero-profit
equilibrium condition on contracting to borrow foreign currency at the forward interest rate and
subsequently investing at the spot interest rate is
((

(

(

Et [ St%T ( r̃t%T & ft, T )] ' 0 ,

(17)

which implies that the foreign forward rate is
(

((

ft, T ' Et

(
(rt%T )

((

%

(

Covt (St%T , rt%T )
((

Et ( St%T )

.

(18)

Consequently, the relationship between forward spreads and future expected exchange rate changes
when using the domestic currency as numeraire is

17
(

((

ft, T & ft, T '

Et dS / S
dt
((

t%T

((

(

Covt (St%T , rt%T )

&

((

Et ( St%T )
((

' BEMU × 0 % BNEMU

((

Et ( dS / S )t%T | NEMU
dt

((

&

((

(19)

(

Covt (St%T , rt%T )

.

Et ( St%T )

I know of no EMU probability calculator that considers this potential source of bias. Papers
that test or use the intra-European uncovered interest parity hypothesis at maturities of less than a
year typically rule out a substantial effect from numeraire issues from the fact that intra-European
exchange rate volatilities are small. 11 However, the maturities in (17) and (18) are substantially
longer, creating the possibility of a greater impact.

II.C. Estimating the non-EMU scenario
One of the most critical issues in identifying the probability of two countries joining in a
currency union is estimation of the relevant forecast conditional upon EMU not occurring. As this
scenario represents a counterfactual hypothesis, the merits of the forecasts cannot directly be tested,
but can only be judged by the overall merits of the methodologies. Three quite different approaches
will be discussed here: J.P. Morgan’s “kitchen sink” regression, Favero et al’s central bank reaction
function, and Lund’s term structure model. A fourth approach used by De Grauwe (1996) and
Credito Italiano employs the average spreads from a period with low EMU prospects. De Grauwe
uses 1990 average spreads, while Credito Italiano uses 1993.12 Other banks have also created EMU
calculators, but Morgan’s is one of the few to publicly document its methodology.

11

See, e.g., Bertola and Svensson (1993).

12

Favero et al (1997), p. 15.

18
J.P. Morgan’s EMU calculator identifies non-EMU forward rate spreads by regressing daily
10-year swap spreads (the difference, e.g., between Italian and German swap rates) on a set of nonEuropean interest rate variables intended to capture “international factors relating to investors
appetite for risk or the supply of liquidity.”13 Non-European variables were used for exogeneity
reasons, and the regression interval 1988-1992 was selected as a period in which expectations of
future currency union were plausibly not affecting intra-European interest differentials. Regressions
were only run through December 1991 for those countries that experienced currency devaluations
in the fall of 1992. Various regressors are considered; the analysis concludes “[w]e are principally
left with using the average of the U.S.-Canada and Japan-Australia 10yr bond spread and the U.S.
and Japanese 10yr-2yr yield spread.” The estimated “non-EMU” 10-year swap spread is then
transformed into an estimate of the post-1998 forward swap spread by using the observed pre-1999
swap spread and the average slope of the swap spread curve over 1988-92.

While the objective of proxying for global trends in credit markets is laudable, the
diagnostics of model performance in- and out-of-sample overstate the model’s reliability. The major
difficulty is that the independent and dependent variables, while stationary, are highly persistent.
The high reported R 2 ’s (ranging from 61% to 83% on 1300 daily observations over 1988-92) are
therefore to be expected, while good out-of-sample forecasting performance over 1993 is also to be
expected for highly persistent variables. Dickey-Fuller tests for stationarity of in-sample residuals
are also run -- the standard Engle-Granger test for cointegrated variables -- but since the variables
are stationary the relevance of this test is not apparent.

It does appear that the global variables used in assessing Morgan’s non-EMU scenario
contain some information for post-1992 swap spreads. In particular, several countries experienced
temporary declines in swap spreads relative to Germany over 1992-94, and again after 1995 (see

13

Morgan (1997), p. 4.

19
Figure 3) that are in part correlated with Morgan’s estimated non-EMU swap spreads.14 Overall, the
regression approach appears somewhat preferable to just using average spreads over some interval
as an estimate of the non-EMU scenario.15 Nevertheless, it must be recognized that the non-EMU
estimate potentially contains considerable structural instabilities that could affect EMU probability
inferences.16

A further issue emphasized in Favero et al (1997), is that Morgan’s use of the post-1998
section of 10-year swap spreads ignores the possibility of delayed EMU entry. For instance, a 10year Italian-German swap spread as of January 1, 1995 incorporates instantaneous forward spread
predictions of future interest differentials over 1999 through 2005. Morgan’s EMU probability
estimates should therefore be loosely interpreted as the probability of EMU entry on or some time
after 1999.

Central bank reaction functions
Favero, Giavazzi, Iacone, and Tabellini (1997) use macroeconomic variables instead of
financial variables in their forecast of the non-EMU scenario. Quarterly 3-month Euro-lira rates are
regressed over 1987:I through 1996:II upon a lagged value, the inflation and growth gaps relative
to Germany, a growth gap shift variable for the impact of German reunification, current and lagged
log $/DM exchange rates, current and lagged 3-month Euro-DM interest rates, and dummy variable

14

See Morgan (1997), Charts 3-9, which compare actual and non-EMU fitted swap spreads
over 1988-97 for Italy, Belgium, Spain, Denmark, U.K., Sweden and France.
15

Favero et al (1997) argue that Morgan’s results for the lira are in fact very similar to those
of Credito Italiano, which uses the average spread approach.
16

Morgan (1997) argues that the results are insensitive to misspecification, and that a ±15%
shift in the non-EMU forecast only shifts the inferred EMU probability roughly ±8% if the true
probability is 50%. However, a 15% percentage error in a 4% swap spread forecast is only a 0.6%
error absolute -- quite small compared to the forecast errors that might result from a misspecified
regression equation and the observed large movements over 1988-98 in, e.g., Japanese bond yields.

20
that eliminates the impact of the 1992:IV interest rate outlier. The regression results are interpreted
as representing the Bank of Italy’s reaction function to macroeconomic fundamentals over 1987-96.17
This regression, combined with current forecasts of the regressors,18 is used to forecast future interest
rates, and this forecast is used as the non-EMU scenario. The probabilities of Italy joining Germany
in a currency union by 1999 or by 2001 are then inferred using (7) above and instantaneous forward
rates computed from Euro-lira rates and lira swap rates via Svensson’s extended Nelson-Siegel
approach.

Favero et al emphasize that the decline in Italian forward rate spreads after 1996 was
primarily attributable to improved fundamentals (e.g., falling Italian inflation) shifting the non-EMU
forecast. The residual explanation of shifting EMU probabilities played less of a role. Their
estimates also showed a relatively low probability over December 1995 through March 1997 of Italy
joining the EMU in 1999, but a higher probability of it joining by 2002. The difference apparently
reflects the sharply inverted term structure of forward rate spreads evident in Figure 3.

It seems likely that the reaction function estimated by Favero et al is partly capturing Italian
monetary policy over 1987-1996. Achieving the Maastricht criteria certainly would create concern
about inflation differentials, while the pre-1993 Exchange Rate Mechanism implies German interest
rates were relevant over that period. However, whether forecasts based on this reaction function are
relevant conditional upon Italy failing to enter EMU in 1999 is open to question. While the
objective of qualifying by 2002 or later would plausibly prompt retention of the same reaction
function, an alternate hypothesis is that the Bank of Italy might revert to its policies of the 1980's.
The Bank of Italy reaction function estimated by Clarida, Galí, and Gertler (1997) over 1981:6
17

Favero et al found no statistical evidence supporting interest rate sensitivity to a somewhat
more traditional output gap measure: the deviation of actual GDP from a Hodrick-Prescott trend.
18

The forecasts for inflation, output, and exchange rates for out to two years are based on
“consensus” forecasts, while German interest rate forecasts are inferred from German forward rates.

21
through 1989:12 is quite different from that in Favero et al; in particular, higher steady-state real
interest rates, and lower long-run sensitivity to Italian inflation, Italian output, and German interest
rates. If this were used instead as the non-EMU scenario, inferred EMU probabilities would be quite
different.

Bond pricing models
Lund (1998) provides a good example of the application of current bond pricing models to the issue
of inferring EMU probabilities. Lund models, e.g., Italian instantaneous interest rates as the sum of
the German rate and the Italian-German spread:
rt

ITL

' rt

DM

/ rt

DM

% (r t
% st

ITL

& rt

DM

)

(20)

ITL

and makes the critical identifying assumption that the instantaneous spot rate spread evolves
independently of the German interest rate. Under this assumption, plus the assumption that the
exchange rate does not jump at EMU inception, he builds an explicit model of yield spreads. From
(3) above, Italian bond prices are given by19
(

DM
B ITL(t, T ) ' Et exp &(rt,T
% st,ITL
T )T

(

T

' B DM(t, T ) Et exp &

mt

ITL

s u du

(21)

implying yield differentials between Italian and German discount bonds depend upon the expected
future evolution of instantaneous spot rate differentials:

19

Lund’s derivation ignores the numeraire issues discussed in section II.B above. In
particular, because of exchange rate risk prior to EMU, a lira-based risk-neutral expectation of the
(
DM stochastic discount factor, Et exp[&rt,DM
T ] , differs from the DM-based risk-neutral expectation,
and consequently is not necessarily equal to the German bond price

22
ITL

DM

S ITL(t, T ) / yt, T & yt, T

' &[ln B ITL (t, T ) & ln B DM (t, T ) ] / T
(

' ln Et exp &

mt

T ITL
s u du

(22)

.

If the two currencies join together in a currency union, the instantaneous spread drops instantly to
zero. Rather than modeling this as only occurring on January 1, 1999, however, Lund posits a postJanuary 1999 hazard rate that allows for delayed entry. The current assessment 2t of that hazard rate
determines the current EMU probability assessment [ 1 & exp(&2t J) ] of a country joining Germany
in a currency union within J years after 1/1/99. Combined with assumed independent OrnsteinUhlenbeck (or AR(1)) processes for the instantaneous spread st conditional upon no unification and
the market price 8t of spread risk, Lund develops a 3-factor model of yield spreads. In continuous
time, the pre-EMU “risk-neutral” processes used in pricing spreads via (22) are
ds ' [61 (µ 1 & s ) % 61 8] dt % F1 dW1 & s dq
d8 ' 62 (µ 2 & 8) dt % F2 dW2

(23)

d2 ' F3 dW3
where the W’s are independent Wiener processes and q is a 0- or 1-valued indicator for the
commencement of the currency union:
Prob[dqt ' 1] '

0 if t # 1/1/99
2t dt otherwise .

(24)

But whereas the yield spreads S ITL(s t , 8t , 2t , t, T ) for different maturities are priced as if the state
variables follow (23), the actual instantaneous spreads st (roughly equal to short-maturity Eurorate
differentials) are assumed to follow the AR(1) process
ds ' 61 (µ 1 & s ) dt % F1 dW1

(25)

23
prior to January 1, 1999.

Lund estimates the parameters in (12) and the state variable realizations via nonlinear
Kalman filtration, using two data sources: weekly 1-, 2-, 3-, 6-, and 12-month Eurorate differentials,
and 1-10 year yield differentials inferred from swap rates. The broadest data interval was January
1990 through August 12, 1998, although subsets of that interval were used for specific countries
either because of data unavailability, or because of deliberate data exclusion. First, short-maturity
interest rates were excluded for currencies affected by speculative attacks prior to September 1993,
so that the impact of a fourth underlying state variable (currency crises) could plausibly be ignored.
Second, post-1999 maturities were not considered prior to 1995, because of lack of confidence in
the inferred EMU hazard rates. The vector of yield spreads for different maturities provided crosssectional evidence each period regarding parameter values and state variable realizations, while the
time series evolution of those yield differentials provided further evidence regarding parameter
values.

Lund makes two key identifying assumptions. First, he explicitly rules out the “doubledecay” process of Jegadeesh and Pennacchi (1996) on the grounds of parsimony, and assumes that
the “risk premium” state variable 8t does not affect the actual AR(1) process (25) followed by the
instantaneous spread. This assumption appears empirically reasonable for the 1990-98 period
considered, as will be discussed below. However, one advantage of the more general model, as
recognized in Andersen and Lund (1996), is that the second state variable can capture structural
shifts in the nominal interest spread processes resulting, e.g., from shifts in inflation targets.

Second, the model implies yield spreads from bonds maturing prior to January 1, 1999 are
unaffected by shifts in the EMU probability state variable 2t . This is critical, because the “market
price of risk” 8t is also a free state variable that captures some movements in the shape of the term

24
structure unjustified by the AR(1) process (25) estimated for the instantaneous spread st .2021
However, 8t affects all maturities, whereas 2t affects only post-1999 maturities. 2t is inferred in
essence by the difference between the observed post-1999 portion of the yield curve, and the post1999 “local yield curve” predicted by extrapolating the pre-1999 yield curve for estimated state
variables ( st, 8t ). Thus, Lund’s EMU probability assessments are essentially assuming that the nonEMU scenario for interest rate differentials is largely identified by the estimated 2-factor behavior
of the term structure of yield spreads over 1990-98 for pre-1999 maturities.

Judging from Figure 1, Lund’s model appears to estimate generally lower Italian-German
interest differentials conditional upon EMU not occurring, and consequently higher non-EMU
probabilities (lower EMU probabilities) than other models. Despite the low standard errors of
Lund’s structural parameter estimates, however, it is not really possible to say whether Lund’s
inferred non-EMU scenarios are better or worse than the Morgan and Favero et al approaches. The
problem is that structural parameters are inferred partly from the time series behavior of the term
structure of yield spreads, and partly from what is needed to match the cross-sectional patterns of
yield spreads on individual weeks. The appropriate statistical theory for assessing the latter
informational source has not really been developed. The typical null hypothesis also used here is that
market participants know the true, time-invariant deep structural parameters and the state variable
realizations with certainty when pricing bonds, and that observed and actual bond prices deviate only
by independent, homoskedastic measurement error. Under this strong null hypothesis and given
abundant cross-sectional data, inferred parameters tend to have low estimated standard errors.

20

The 1-factor Vasicek model given by the risk-neutral equivalent of (14) primarily allows
upward or downward sloped term structures that converge exponentially at longer maturities towards
a fixed infinite-maturity yield; see Hull (1993, ch. 11). 2-factor models allow more complicated
hump and U shapes, as well as more (state-dependent) variation over time in the slope and curvature
of the term structure.
21

The current bond pricing literature does not typically attempt to impose constraints on such
risk premia from asset pricing models. See, e.g., Duffie and Singleton (1997).

25
Lund’s estimates are best viewed as a model-specific description of a non-EMU scenario consistent
with term structures of yield spreads observed over 1990-98. Term structures observed over the
1980's might yield different estimates of the non-EMU scenario.

Some insight into the time series stability of the term structure of spreads at short maturities
can be gleaned from Eurocurrency spreads, for which data over a longer time interval are more
readily available. Lund’s model implies that the instantaneous spread is Markov, so the slope of the
term structure of spreads contributes no additional information. A crude proxy for the former that
partially avoids the impact on short maturities of speculative attacks is the six-month Eurocurrency
spread; the latter is proxied by the difference between 12- and 6-month spreads. Table 2 reports
estimates of the regression
6

6

12

6

s t ' a % b st & 1 % c [st & 1 & st & 1 ] % gt

(26)

for weekly data over 1977-1998, estimates for c over the 1990-98 subsample used by Lund, and
heteroskedasticity-consistent Chow tests of process stability.

With the exception of the Dutch-German spread slope, all subsample estimates of ĉ1990&98
are statistically insignificant, justifying Lund’s specification. Over the longer 1977-98 interval,
spread slopes are statistically significant for Denmark, Italy, and the Netherlands, but not for the
other five countries. However, it does appear that including the spread slope captures parameter
instabilities in the estimated spread process to some extent. P-values are substantially lower for
subsample stability tests of Lund’s AR(1) than for stability tests of (26), for 7 out of 8 countries.
Parameter stability of (26) is rejected at the 10% level for 3 countries (Belgium, Great Britain, and
Sweden), whereas the subsample stability of Lund’s AR(1) is also rejected for these three, Denmark
and Italy.

26
III. Prospects for the Future
There has been considerable speculation regarding what monetary policies will be pursued
by the new European Central Bank (ECB). Some have argued that the ECB is likely to initially
pursue a tight monetary policy, in order to establish an anti-inflationary reputation. The selection
of Duisenberg as its initial head is certainly consistent with this perspective. Others have argued that
the voting power of countries such as Italy that historically have been less concerned about inflation
may result in monetary policy somewhat weaker than that historically pursued by the Bundesbank.

Morgan (1997) argues that the EMU probability calculators indicate a weak-ECB scenario.
Fluctuations in the average EMU probability of three “periphery” countries (Italy, Spain, and
Sweden) have been strongly correlated with deutsche mark weakness against the dollar. The
argument is illustrated in Figure 4, which shows that the average Italian-Swedish 1999 forward
spread against the DM has indeed fluctuated roughly in tandem with the $/DM exchange rate.

5
4

Forward spread
(left scale)

3
0.70

2
1

$/DM rate
(right scale)

0.60

0
0.50

910626 920701 930630 940629 950628 960626 970709 980708

Figure 4. Average of Italian and Swedish 1999 forward spreads
relative to Germany, and the $/DM exchange rate.

27

10

7y
5y
3y

8

12m
3m

6
4
0.7
2

$/DM
(right scale)

0.6
0.5

910626 920624 930623 940622 950621 960619 970618 980617

Figure 5. 3- and 12-month DM Eurodeposit rates, 3-, 5-, and 7-year
forward rates, and the $/DM exchange rate.
Narrowing spreads (which EMU probability calculators would interpret as higher unification
probabilities) have roughly coincided with a weakening DM, while widening spreads have coincided
with a strengthening DM.

One difficulty with this argument is that forward spreads over this period are a good proxy
for the overall level of European bond yields and forward rates, and for German rates in particular.
Figure 5 shows German 3-month Eurodeposit rates and forward rates at various maturities over the
same interval. Falling German rates were accompanied by even greater declines in non-German
rates, while rising German rates accompanied larger increases elsewhere. The synchroneity was
most pronounced for forward rates of at least 1 year in maturities. Consequently, in terms of the
implications for the $/DM exchange rate, it is impossible to distinguish the weak-ECB hypothesis
from an alternate hypothesis that the exchange rate fluctuations reflected German forward interest
rate fluctuations over 1992-96 resulting, e.g., from shifting near-term expectations of future
Bundesbank monetary policy.

28
Filtration-based assessments
As indicated above in Figure 3, forward rates for all countries participating in the currency
union have currently essentially converged to a common “Euro” term structure. Some insights into
financial markets’ assessment of the future interest rate policies of the ECB relative to earlier
Bundesbank policies can potentially be gleaned by comparing this yield curve with historical German
norms. To this end, a state space representation of the vector of Eurocurrency deposit rates and
swap rates for German instruments maturing prior to January 1, 1999 was estimated via Kalman
filtration on weekly data:
y t ' A % H z t % u t , u t - N(0, R )
z t ' F z t& 1 % v t ,

v t - N(0, Q )

(27)

where y t is a 9 × 1 vector of 3-, 6-, and 12-month Euro-DM deposit rates and 1-7 year swap rates
(excluding 6-year rates), expressed as continuously compounded yields; and z t is a 4 × 1 vector of
underlying state variables.

The Euro-DM data were available from January 5, 1997, while most of the swap rate data
began in June 24, 1991.22 Data for post-1998 maturities were treated as missing data, with only 3and 6-month Euro-DM rates available for inference on the final date of July 1, 1998. The estimated
state space model summarizes the time-series based information contained in the level and shape of
the German term structure with regard to future term structure evolution, as well as the current
assessment of the state vector conditional on pre-1999 maturities. The model was used to address
two questions:
1. How does the current term structure of German swap yields compare with the
German pre-1999 norm represented by the final filtered value ŷT *T ?

22

Further details on data, estimation methodology, and identifying restrictions are provided
in the appendix.

29
2. How does the current term structure of German forward rates compare with the future
3-month spot rates that would be predicted based upon pre-1999 norms?
Figure 6 shows the actual and fitted yield curves, as well as 95% confidence intervals around
the fits. The current DM yield curve is flatter than that which would be predicted based up historical
German swap rates over 1991-1998 and given current short-term interest rates. The divergence is
statistically significant at longer maturities. However, it should be recognized that the fits for longer
maturities are based upon term structure relationships estimated on increasingly narrower subsets
of the 1991-97 swap data interval, given the deliberate exclusion of swaps with payments beyond
January 1, 1999.

Figure 7 presents a different picture of future interest rate prospects. The German 3-month
interest rate is stationary but highly persistent, with a weekly autocorrelation of .9969 over 1977-98.
Based upon current and recent German term structures for pre-1999 maturities, the state space model

7

Fitted
Actual

6

5

4

3
0

1

2

3
4
Maturity (years)

5

6

7

Figure 6. Actual and fitted continuously compounded DM yields on July 1, 1998.
3-12 month LIBID rates, and 1-7 year swap rates.

30

8
7
6
5
4
E[r(t+T)]
current f(t,T)
predicted f(t,T)

3
2
1
0

1

2

3

4
5
6
T (years)

7

8

9

Figure 7. Alternate forecasts of future Euro interest rates. Forecasts
are based upon the German state space model, on the current forward
curve, and on the German forward curve predicted by the German state
space model. Confidence intervals (shaded region) reflect uncertainty
about the appropriate forecast.
would forecast gradual mean reversion in German rates back to a steady-state level of 4.75%. The
current “unusually” flat Euro forward rate curve is largely consistent with that forecast. By contrast,
the forward rate curve consistent with the fitted “German” yield curve of Figure 6 implicitly
forecasts considerably faster increases in future German rates.

In summary, the current Euro term structure is unusually flat by German standards, but that
flatness is consistent with how German short-term rates have historically evolved. This suggests that
German term structures have historically been inconsistent with German short-term rate evolution
(a hypothesis supported by the short-maturity rejections of German forward rate unbiasedness in
Table IA above), but doesn’t answer the question of how ECB monetary policies are likely to
compare with past Bundesbank policies. At present, the only evidence we have is from exchange

31
markets, and even that has multiple interpretations. The overall declines in German and European
interest rates over 1996-98 have accompanied substantial weakening of the EMU currencies against
the dollar. However, those could be interpreted either as a vote of no confidence in future ECB
policies, or as an expectation of future economic recession.

32
Appendix
Data
Interest rate data were obtained from two sources. The Bank for International Settlements
provided daily 3-, 6-, and 12-month Eurocurrency deposit rates for 21 countries, collected around
10 AM Swiss time. The data begin on January 3, 1977 for five currencies (German mark, Dutch
guilder, Swiss franc, pound, and U.S. dollar), on September 1, 1977 for most other currencies, and
run through August 31, 1998.

Swap rate data were downloaded from Datastream for nine European countries. Swap rates
are the European coupon rates in a semiannual exchange of fixed European interest payments against
floating dollar interest rate payments indexed to the Eurodollar interest rate; principal is also
exchanged at maturity. Since the dollar floating-rate cash flows are at par at the swap’s inception,
swap rates provide the European coupon rate such that a European bond with semiannual coupons
would be at par -- or, equivalently, the European semiannual yields to maturity, times two. Swap
rate data are more readily available than country-specific bond yields. As with other Euromarket
data, swap rates also alleviate concerns about country-specific default risk, capital controls, and tax
issues, as well as eliminating heterogeneity across national data sources.

Midpoint swap rates were used; the average of bid and ask. Swap rates for 2-5, 7, and 10year maturities were available for all countries except Denmark and Sweden beginning on June 24,
1991. Danish swap rates began on February 25, 1993, while Swedish rates began on January 2,
1992. Data for 1-, 6-, 8-, and 9-year maturities began on November 15 or 16, 1994 for all countries
except France. French franc 1-year swap rates began on October 31, 1994, while 6-, 8-, and 9-year
maturities began on January 24, 1995. Weekly (Wednesday) observations were selected from the
daily data, with the nearest other day used when Wednesday was a holiday.

Forward rates
The 3- and 6-month forward rates used in testing the expectations hypothesis in section II.B were

33
computed from the Eurodeposit rates using the formula1
1 % F [t, T1 6 T2]

N2 & N1
360

/

1 % Rt, N 2 ( N2 / 360)
1 % Rt, N 1 ( N1 / 360)

.

(A.1)

where N1 ( N2 ) is the number of days until the shorter (longer) Eurodeposit matures. For 3-month
forward rates, N1 was roughly 91 days and N2 was roughly 182 days, although there was some
variation across months and because of bank holidays (identified by missing data) and weekends.
This 3-month forward rate was used to forecast the future 3-month rate on a Eurodeposit that begins
when the deposit corresponding to Rt, T 1 ends -- i.e., the rate 2 business days before the first contract
matures. Because of weekends and holidays, this second 3-month deposit did not necessarily mature
precisely on the same day as the 6-month contract. This minor deviation in maturity was not
considered a serious concern. 6-month forward rates were constructed analogously from 12- and 6month Eurodeposit rates.

The instantaneous forward rates computed in section II.A used Svensson’s extension of the NelsonSiegel method, as described in Söderlind and Svensson (1997):
ft, T ' $0 % $1 exp &

T
J1

% $2

T
T
exp &
J1
J1

% $3

T
T
exp &
J2
J2

(A.2)

where $0, $0 % $1, J1 and J2 are free positive parameters and $2 and $3 are unconstrained
parameters. The continuously compounded yields for zero coupon bonds can be evaluated using the
relationship
yt, T T '

t%T

mt

ft, s ds;

(A.3)

analytic solutions are in Söderlind and Svensson (1997). The parameter vector for each day was
estimated using 3 Eurodeposit rates and up to 10 swap rates, using the following loss function:

1

See, e.g., Grabbe (1991, pp.264-5).

34
3

N

ln B̂(T n, cn ; 2)

n'4

½ D(Tn, cn )

ln L(2) ' min j { yt, T & [ ŷ(Tn, 2) & k ]} % j
n
2

n'1

2

(A.4)

where
yt, T , n ' 1, ... 3 , is the continuously compounded yield computed from Eurodeposit rates;
n

ŷ(Tn, 2 ) is the fitted yield given parameter vector 2;
k is a free parameter used to splice together Eurodeposit and swap rate data;2
B̂(Tn, cn ; 2) is the estimated price of a bond paying semiannual coupons at swap rate cn over
maturity Tn , given parameter vector 2; and
&2T n

D(Tn , cn ) '
cn .

1 & (1 % ½ cn )

1 & (1 % ½ cn )&1

is the semiannual duration of a par bond with coupon rate

The loss function is essentially in yield space rather than in bond price space, reflecting the way the
data are quoted. In particular, weighting log bond prices by the inverse of duration approximately
transforms the last terms in (A.4) into the deviation between the observed swap rate cn and the U.S.style yield to maturity Yˆ inferred from fitted bond prices:
ln B̂(T n, cn ; 2) . ln 1 %

M ln B̂
M ln(1 % ½ Y )

/0
[ ln(1 % ½ Yˆ ) & ln(1 % ½ cn ) ]
00 Y ' c
n

(A.5)

. ½ D(T n, cn) ( Yˆ & cn ) ,

exploiting the fact that swap rates are coupon rates for bonds that are at par. All parameters were
estimated using the Davidon-Fletcher-Powell nonlinear optimization algorithm (GQOPT subroutine
DFP), with various parameter transformations used to enforce nonnegativity constraints.

2

Figure 6 illustrates the significant gap between 1-year Eurodeposit rates and 1-year
midpoint swap rates that necessitated the splicing parameter k.

35
Kalman filtration
A state space representation is of the form
y t ' A % H z t % u t , u t - N(0, R )
z t ' F z t& 1 % v t ,

v t - N(0, Q )

(A.6)

where y t , A , and u t are N × 1 , z t and v t are K × 1 , R is an N × N matrix assumed diagonal and
nonnegative, Q is a K × K positive semidefinite matrix, and N > K . (A.6) is underidentified, since
any transformation of the underlying state vector(e.g., x t ' M z t ) constitutes an equally valid
representation. Provided the N × K matrix H is of full rank K, the state space representation can be
uniquely identified by imposing semi-arbitrary restrictions on any K rows of the matrix; for instance,
setting HN ' (I K H2N ) , where H2 is an unconstrained (N & K ) × K matrix. The system (A.6) can
be estimated by Kalman filtration methods discussed in Shumway and Stoffer (1982), Watson and
Engle (1983), and Hamilton (1994).

The data vector yt consists of 3-, 6-, and 12-month DM Eurodeposit rates, and 1-7 year swap rates.
All instruments maturing after January 1, 1999 were excluded, resulting in total elimination of the
6-year swap rates that only became available in 1994. Eurodeposit rates were available over an
extended 1977-1998 interval; swap rates only after June 24, 1991. However, Kalman filtration
methods can cope relatively easily with mismatched data sets and missing data.

The system (A.6) was estimated using various choices of the number K of factors. The first three
identifying restrictions were chosen successively to mimic the level, slope, and curvature term
structure factors advocated by Litterman and Sheinkmann (1988) -- albeit for the short-maturity
Eurodeposit rates for which there was the most data. The fourth factor was chosen to mimic the
slope of the term structure for longer maturities. As discussed above, these restrictions are arbitrary.
Many of the factors exhibited near-unit root behavior. For instance, the single-factor model of the
term structure had a weekly autocorrelation of .99772, reflecting high persistence in German interest
rates. Consequently, a conditional Kalman filtration was estimated that included estimation of the
initial state vector z0 as of December 27, 1976.

36
Table A.1 below summarizes the performance of the various models. While adding more factors
continued to be highly significantly statistically up through five factors, out-of-sample forecasts for
the five-factor model were more unstable. Furthermore, there were difficulties in inverting the
information matrix when computing standard errors. Consequently, the 4-factor model was used.

Table A.1: Summary statistics for multifactor models.
# factors

# parameters

log likelihood

Eigenvalues of F (modulus)

1

29

4,373.35

.998

2

49

8,020.72

.997, .978

3

54

8,856.16

.997, .969, .969

4

68

9,033.24

.989, .989, .971, .743

5

83

9,117.60

.992, .992,. .931, .877, .736

The final forecasts ŷT % n * T ' A % H F n ẑT * T for July 1, 1998 and beyond were computed based
upon the estimated process (A.6) and conditional upon pre-1999 maturity data, up through and
including 3- and 6-month Eurodeposit rates observed on July 1. Standard errors were computed
using the covariance matrix
Var ŷT % n *T '

MŷT % n *T
M2N

Var(2̂)
/0
00 2 ' 2̂

MŷT %n *T
M2

% ĤF n PT *T F n N ĤN
/0
00 2 ' 2̂

(A.7)

where Var(2̂) was estimated from the information matrix computed during optimization, and PT *T
was the estimated conditional covariance matrix of the final state variable realization. The first term
captures the impact of parameter uncertainty; the second, the impact of uncertainty regarding the
current state variable. It should be emphasized that the standard errors computed in this fashion
reflect the uncertainty about the current forecast of future data; not the uncertainty about the future
data. The purpose is to compare this forecast with other forecasts constructed using post-’99
maturities.

37
References
Adão, Bernardino, Nuno Cassola, and Jorge Barros Luíz (1998). "The Correlation Between the
Escudo and the German Mark Implied in Currency Options." Banco de Portugal working paper,
May.
Andersen, Torben G. and Jesper Lund (1996). "Stochastic Volatility and Mean Drift in the Short
Term Interest Rate Diffusion: Sources of Steepness, Level and Curvature in the Yield Curve."
Northwestern University working paper.
Bank for International Settlements (1996). 1995 Central Bank Survey of Foreign Exchange and
Derivatives Market Activity, Basel.
Bates, David S. (1996). "Testing Option Pricing Models," in G.S. Maddala, C.R. Rao, eds.,
Statistical Methods in Finance. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 567-611.
Bean, Charles R. (1992). "Economic and Monetary Union in Europe." Journal of Economic
Perspectives 6, 31-52.
Bekaert, Geert, Robert J. Hodrick, and David A. Marshall (1997). "‘Peso Problem’ Explanations
for Term Structure Anomalies." National Bureau of Economic Research working paper 6147.
Bertola, Giuseppe and Lars E. O. Svensson (1993). "Stochastic Devaluation Risk and the Empirical
Fit of Target-Zone Models." Review of Economic Studies 60, 689-712.
Butler, Creon and Neil Cooper (1997). "Implied Exchange Rate Correlations and Market
Perceptions of European Monetary Union." Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin , 413-423.
Campa, Jose M., P. H. Kevin Chang, and Robert L. Reider (1997). "ERM Bandwidths for EMU and
after: Evidence from Foreign Exchange Options." Economic Policy 24, 55-89.
Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler (1998). "Monetary Policy Rules in Practice: Some
International Evidence." National Bureau of Economic Research working paper 6254.
Cochrane, John H. and Jesús Saá-Requejo (1996). "Beyond Arbitrage: "Good-Deal" Asset Price
Bounds in Incomplete Markets." National Bureau of Economic Research working paper 5489.
Cox, John C., Jonathan E. Ingersoll,Jr., and Stephen A. Ross (1985a). "A Theory of the Term
Structure of Interest Rates." Econometrica 53, 385-407.
Cox, John C., Jonathan E. Ingersoll,Jr., and Stephen A. Ross (1985b). "An Intertemporal General
Equilibrium Model of Asset Prices." Econometrica 53, 363-384.

38
De Grauwe, Paul (1996). "Forward Interest Rates as Predictors of EMU." CEPR working paper
1395.
Favero, Carlo A., Francesco Giavazzi, Fabrizio Iacone, and Guido Tabellini (1997). "Extracting
Information from Asset Prices: The Methodology of EMU Calculators." CEPR working paper 1676
Garman, Mark B. and Steven W. Kohlhagen (1983). "Foreign Currency Option Values." Journal
of International Money and Finance 2, 231-237.
Gerlach, Stefan and Frank Smets (1997a). "The Term Structure of Euro-rates: Some Evidence in
Support of the Expectations Hypothesis." Journal of International Money and Finance 16, 305-321.
Gerlach, Stefan and Frank Smets (1997b). "Exchange Rate Regimes and the Expectations
Hypothesis of the Term Structure." Bank for International Settlements working paper, July.
Hamilton, James D. (1994). Time Series Analysis, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Hansen, Lars P. and Ravi Jagannathan (1991). "Restrictions on Intertemporal Marginal Rates of
Substitution Implied by Asset Returns." Journal of Political Economy 99, 225-262.
Hardouvelis, Gikas A. (1994). "The Term Structure Spread and Future Changes in Long and Short
Rates in the G7 Countries: Is There a Puzzle?" Journal of Monetary Economics 33, 255-283.
Hull, John (1993). Options, Futures, and Other Derivative Securities, 2nd edition. New Jersey:
Prentice-Hall, Inc.
Hull, John and Alan White (1987). "The Pricing of Options on Assets with Stochastic Volatility."
Journal of Finance 42, 281-300.
J.P.Morgan &.Co. (1997). EMU Calculator Handbook, London:
Jegadeesh, Narasimhan and George Pennacchi (1996). "The Behavior of Interest Rates Implied by
the Term Structure of Eurodollar Futures." Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 28, 426-446.
Jennergren, L. Peter and Bertil Näslund (1990). "Models for the Valuation of International
Convertible Bonds." Journal of International Financial Management and Accounting 2, 93-110.
Lund, Jesper (1998). "A Model for Studying the Effects of EMU on European Yield Curves."
Aarhus School of Business (Denmark) working paper, September.
Nelson, Charles R. and Andrew F. Siegel (1987). "Parsimonious Modeling of Yield Curves."
Journal of Business 60, 473-489.

39
Scott, Louis O. (1987). "Option Pricing When the Variance Changes Randomly: Theory,
Estimation, and an Application." Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 22, 419-438.
Shumway, R. H. and D. S. Stoffer (1982). "An Approach to Time Series Smoothing and Forecasting
Using the EM Algorithm." Journal of Time Series Analysis 3, 253-264.
Söderlind, Paul and Lars E. O. Svensson (1997). "New Techniques to Extract Market Expectations
from Financial Instruments." Journal of Monetary Economics 40, 383-430.
Watson, Mark W. and Robert F. Engle (1983). "Alternative Algorithms for the Estimation of
Dynamic Factor, MIMIC, and Varying Coefficient Regression Models." Journal of Econometrics
23, 385-400.

Table IA
n
n
n
Tests of forward interest rate unbiasedness: Rt % n & Rt ' " % $ [ F(t, t% n 6 t% 2n ) & Rt ]

Country

Starting
Date

#obs.
(3-mth)

Germany
Belgium
Denmark
ECU
France
Italy
Netherlands
Sweden
U.K.
U.S.

770105
770907
770907
841107
770907
770907
770105
770907
770105
770105

1117
1082
1082
708
1082
1082
1117
1082
1117
1117

n = 3 months

P-value: " ' 0, $ ' 1

n = 6 months

"

(s.e.)

$

(s.e.)

"

(s.e.)

$

(s.e.)

3 mths

6 mths

-.02
.11
.20
.02
-.03
.18
-.02
.27
.10
-.03

(.09)
(.12)
(.15)
(.07)
(.20)
(.18)
(.10)
(.12)
(.16)
(.15)

.53
.70
.79
.85
.97
1.01
.84
.84
.59
.76

(.20)
(.17)
(.10)
(.14)
(.15)
(.14)
(.18)
(.12)
(.17)
(.30)

.05
.09
.17
.03
.21
.54
.04
.26
.28
.06

(.16)
(.19)
(.20)
(.16)
(.28)
(.28)
(.17)
(.20)
(.26)
(.24)

.60
.43
.59
.81
.77
.79
.85
.61
.61
.43

(.29)
(.25)
(.18)
(.25)
(.11)
(.10)
(.24)
(.19)
(.19)
(.31)

.054
.155
.047
.521
.964
.592
.683
.027
.004
.687

.377
.058
.031
.962
.016
.012
.796
.035
.015
.168

Table IB
n
n
n
n
Tests of forward spread unbiasedness (relative to German rates): Rdift % n & Rdift ' " % $ [ Fdif t & Rdift ]

Country

Starting
Date

#obs.
(3-mth)

n = 3 months
"

(s.e.)

$

P-value: " ' 0, $ ' 1

n = 6 months
(s.e.)

"

(s.e.)

$

(s.e.)

3 mths

6 mths

Belgium
770907
1082
.13 (.11)
.76 (.19)
.05 (.11)
.51 (.29)
.525
Denmark
770907
1082
.19 (.21)
.76 (.14)
.15 (.21)
.69 (.20)
.027
ECU
841107
708
.06 (.06)
.98 (.23)
.11 (.08) 1.15 (.29)
.515
France
770907
1082
-.02 (.22) 1.00 (.17)
.08 (.26)
.71 (.16)
.995
Italy
770907
1082
.18 (.23) 1.01 (.09)
.52 (.29)
.90 (.21)
.734
Netherlands
770105
1117
.00 (.09)
.95 (.15)
-.06 (.10) 1.09 (.25)
.911
Sweden
770907
1082
.27 (.14)
.82 (.13)
.19 (.20)
.64 (.16)
.044
U.K.
770105
1117
.16 (.16)
.72 (.17)
.43 (.23) 1.07 (.26)
.048
U.S.
770105
1117
-.04 (.14) 1.41 (.33)
.03 (.21)
.83 (.20)
.459
Standard errors have been corrected for heteroskedasticity, and for serial correlation from overlapping observations.

.231
.197
.387
.166
.108
.734
.060
.157
.691

Table II
Estimates and stability tests of the time series process followed by Eurocurrency spreads
6

6

12

6

st ' a % b st& 1 % c [ st& 1 & st& 1 ] % gt

(26),

and stability tests of the AR(1) subcase.

Country

Start

#obs.
(3-mth)

Belgium
Denmark
ECU
France
Italy
Netherlands
Sweden
U.K.

770914
770914
841114
770914
770914
770112
770914
770112

1081
1081
707
1081
1081
1116
1081
1116

Full sample (1977-98)
a
-.012
-.004
-.019
.001
.006
-.016
-.010
.106

1990-98

(s.e.)

b

(s.e.)

c

(s.e.)

(.016)
(.024)
(.018)
(.028)
(.016)
(.038)
(.010)
(.043)

.982
.963
.974
.956
.989
.959
.964
.955

(.010)
(.014)
(.015)
(.042)
(.009)
(.023)
(.021)
(.024)

.037
.065
.052
.073
.012
.081
.067
.039

(.022)
(.029)
(.030)
(.063)
(.020)
(.041)
(.035)
(.046)

c
.155
.153
.061
.042
.044
.042
.121
.101

(s.e.)

Eq. (26)a

AR(1)b

(.082)
(.100)
(.048)
(.036)
(.068)
(.039)
(.046)
(.134)

.081
.294
.611
.578
.061
.532
.365
.085

.071
.031
.291
.176
.063
.091
.148
.061

P2(3) test of stability of (â, b,
ˆ ĉ ) estimates across 1977-89 and 1990-98 subsamples,
2
b P (2)
ˆ estimates across 1977-89 and 1990-98 subsamples, with c set to zero.
test of stability of (â, b)
All standard errors and stability tests were adjusted for heteroskedasticity.
a

Subsample stability
tests (P-values)

