4
Introduction
On October 22, 1906, Paul Cézanne died in Aix-en-Provence, at the age of 67. In time he
would come to be widely regarded as the most influential painter who had worked in the
nineteenth century. So for example in 1914 the English critic Clive Bell would declare that “In so
far as one man can be said to inspire a whole age, Cézanne inspires the contemporary movement,”
and nearly four decades later, in 1951, the American critic Clement Greenberg would write that
“Cézanne, as is generally enough recognized, is the most copious source of what we know as
modern art.”1 It is also generally recognized that Cézanne did his most important work late in his
life. Thus historian Theodore Reff concluded that “If ... one period in Cézanne’s long
development has been of special importance, it is surely the last one, comprehending the
extraordinary changes that occurred in his work after 1895, and especially after 1900,” echoing
Meyer Schapiro’s earlier judgment of Cézanne that “the years from 1890 to his death in 1906 are
a period of magnificent growth.”2
In the spring of 1907 - less than a year after Cézanne’s death - in Paris 25-year-old Pablo
Picasso showed a few friends a large new painting that would be given the title Les Demoiselles
d’Avignon. Critic John Russell later declared that “In the art of this century one painting has a
place apart ... [T]here is no doubt that the Demoiselles is the white whale of modern art: the
legendary giant with which we have to come to terms sooner or later.”3 The privileged position
of the painting is a consequence of its role as the forerunner of Cubism, “perhaps the most
important and certainly the most complete and radical artistic revolution since the Renaissance.”4
Picasso would go on to paint for another 66 years, until his death in 1973 at the age of 92.
During his long and enormously productive career, Picasso would become by far the most

5
celebrated artist of the twentieth century. Yet he would never again produce a painting as
important as the Demoiselles, nor create another body of work as significant as that he executed
in the years between 1907 and the outbreak of World War I.
The dramatic contrast between the careers of Cézanne and Picasso raises an intriguing
question about artists’ productivity: at what stages of their careers have modern painters typically
done their best work? This question has not been addressed systematically by art historians.
Biographies and studies of individual artists suggest that there has been considerable variation.
Yet in the absence of systematic comparative study, the pattern and source of this variation
remains unknown. Using evidence drawn from the twentieth-century auction market, this paper
will examine the relationship between artists’ ages and the value of their paintings for a group of
important modern artists. The group studied consists of 50 painters, born during the nineteenth
century, who were either natives of France or who worked there for substantial periods. This
study of the careers of the painters who dominated the early development of modern art can
provide a systematic basis for understanding when, and why, modern artists have made the
contributions that have come to be seen as their most important.

The Sample of Artists
The purpose of this paper is to study the artists who created and developed modern art in
France in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. The goal in constructing the sample of
artists to be studied was to select the most important painters who lived and worked in France
during roughly the first century of modern art. This selection began by listing all artists who had
at least one painting reproduced in three or more of six designated art history textbooks published

6
during the past three decades.5 The 29 artists included in this list who had been born in France
from 1819-1900 were placed in the sample. Another eight artists on the list born outside France
during the same period but who spent significant portions of their careers in France were added to
the sample.6 Two groups of artists were then added to enlarge the sample in specific areas. One
of these was made up of important painters from the generation immediately preceding the
Impressionists; the eight artists in this group were born in France during 1796-1825.7 The second
consisted of five artists who each participated in at least four of the eight group shows held by the
Impressionists.8
The 50 artists thus selected are listed in Table 1. They include the central figures in a
series of celebrated groups of French artists - the Barbizon School, the Impressionists, the PostImpressionists, the Fauves, and the Cubists - as well as several key members of the Dada and
Surrealist movements. Together they include all the major artists who dominated modern
painting in France during the nineteenth century, and well into the twentieth. The total number
considered, and their distribution over time, allow the possibility of finding shared patterns among
members of particular cohorts, and changes in these patterns across cohorts.

Data and Econometric Analysis
The data analyzed in this paper are drawn from auctions of fine art held since 1970. The
source of these data is the annual editions Le Guide Mayer, which compiles the results of art
auctions held all over the world.9 Mayer classifies the works sold into five categories: prints,
drawings, watercolors, paintings, and sculptures. This study collected the records of all sales for
the 50 artists studied from the 28 annual editions of Mayer for auctions held during 1970-97, in

7
the two categories of watercolors and paintings. This yielded a total of 18,333 sales of individual
works. For each painting in the data set, the coding for this study recorded the support (paper or
canvas), size, date of execution, date sold, and price.10
For the econometric analysis, each painting sold constituted a single observation.
Separate regression equations were estimated for each artist. The dependent variable was the
natural logarithm of the sale price in dollars.11 The principal interest of this study was in the
impact on a painting’s auction price of the artist’s age at the time of its execution. To test for the
best form for this relationship, five regressions were estimated for each artist, beginning with a
linear specification, then adding successively higher order terms in age, up to a fifth degree
polynomial. A binary independent variable was included to indicate whether the work was done
on paper or canvas. The size of the work was controlled, using the natural logarithm of the
surface area. Substantial fluctuations occurred in the art market during the period from which the
data are drawn, and independent variables were consequently included to allow for the effect of
the date at which the work was auctioned.

Regression Estimates of Age-Price Profiles
The estimated regressions for the 50 artists considered in the study are presented in the
appendix. Of the five specifications estimated for each artist, the one reported is that which
produced the best fit, as measured by the adjusted R2. For each case in which the variant reported
is not simply linear in age, the table shows the results of an F test for the joint statistical
significance of the estimated age coefficients.12 Overall, age had a statistically significant effect on
the value of an artist’s work for 42 of the 50 artists considered. For these 42, Table 2 shows the

8
age at which the value of each artist’s work peaked, as calculated from the estimated age
coefficients shown in the appendix.13
With the artists listed in order of their birth dates, Table 2 shows a striking change over
time. Eighteen of the artists included in the table were born before 1850. For 17 of these 18
(94%) the value of their work peaked above the age of 30; for 13 (72%), the value peaked at 40
or above. In contrast, for the 24 artists born after 1850, the value of the work of 17 (71%)
peaked below the age of 40; for 9 (38%), their most valuable work was done during their 20s.
The median age at which the peak value occurred was 44 for the 18 artists born before 1850,
whereas the median age for the 24 born after 1850 fell to 35. Thus considering those artists for
whom age statistically significantly affected the value of their work, only one of 18 of these born
in the first half of the century did his best work before the age of 30, while nearly two-fifths of
those born after 1850 did their most valuable work before they reached 30.
Looking at the earliest artists of Table 2 in more detail, six were born in 1825 or before.
All of these had peak value ages above 40, with a median peak age of 51. In contrast, the median
peak age for the 12 artists born during the 1830s and ‘40s fell to 42. Interestingly, six of these 12
artists had peak value ages of 40 or below - and were closely associated with each other, as
members of what came to be called the Impressionist movement. The impact of their association
on their peak ages will be considered below, but at this point it is relevant to note that the
tendency for artists’ peak value ages to decline across cohorts was present from the beginning of
the period studied here.
To show the age-price relationships more fully, Figures 1-42 present graphically the full
profiles implied by the regression estimates for all the artists for whom age was found to have

9
significantly affected price. For each artist, the relevant figure traces out the hypothetical auction
prices of a series of paintings, of identical size, done in each year of the artist’s career.14 A wide
variety of shapes appear across artists, but the diagrams do point to a change over time. Among
the most important of the early artists, Manet’s profile rises throughout a long career; Cézanne’s
rises steeply for several decades early in his career, and again sharply to a peak in the last decade
of his life. In contrast, the profiles of both Picasso and Braque fall almost throughout their long
careers, from peaks in their mid-20s to their deaths, in both cases more than 50 years later. The
latter phenomenon is perhaps the most distinctive feature of the change in these profiles over
time: the pattern of extended decline of a profile from an early peak is virtually absent from the
careers of artists born before 1850.

Market Values and Critical Evaluation
The econometric results thus provide evidence of a shift over time in the market valuation
of artists’ work over the course of their careers, as artists born late in the nineteenth century were
more likely to produce their most valuable work at younger ages than were their predecessors.
These results emerge from analysis of sales from art auctions. Yet the art market is often
dismissed by art critics and historians as having little relevance to true art appreciation, with prices
determined by wealthy collectors whose purchases are of no scholarly interest. Before evaluating
the econometric results, an important question therefore concerns whether they represent the
outcomes of decisions based on educated judgments. One way to answer this is to compare the
results of the econometric analysis with the evaluations of art experts.
Systematic evidence on scholars’ evaluations of when artists did their best work in the

10
form of explicit statements is elusive. For many artists this question has not been addressed
directly. Even when it has, critics’ judgments can be elliptical; and when unambiguous statements
can be found, critics often disagree. Yet clear implicit evidence of scholars’ judgments of when
an artist’s best work was done is available. Furthermore, this testimony is available from
sufficiently large numbers of scholars to indicate whether a consensus exists in most cases.
This implicit evidence is provided in published surveys of art history. Whether
monographs or textbooks, these books contain photographs of the work of leading artists, chosen
to illustrate each artist’s most important contribution, or contributions. Although no single book
can be considered definitive, examining a number of books can serve to survey critical opinion.
The decision in this study was to use all available recent books that surveyed all of the relevant
period of art history. Although the specific purposes of these books vary, their scores of authors
and co-authors include many of the most eminent art historians, critics, and curators of the recent
past and the present, and the number of books consulted is sufficiently large that no important
conclusion depends on the opinion of any one author, or any one book.
A total of 33 books were found that were published in English in the past 30 years, and
that provide illustrated surveys of modern painting.15 A data set was created by listing every
appearance of every painting reproduced in these books by any of the artists included in Table 2
who were born after 1825.16 There was a total of 1,976 reproductions for the 36 artists in this
group. Based on this data set, for each artist Table 3 shows both the percentage of all illustrations
of the artist’s work that are of paintings done within 10 years of the estimated age of peak value
from Table 2, and the age of the artist in the single year represented by the largest number of
illustrations.17

11
For 22 of the 36 artists in Table 3 - just over 60% - three-quarters or more of the
illustrations collected from the textbooks were of paintings executed within ten years of the age
estimated to be that of the artist’s most valuable work. In assessing these figures, the length of
the artist’s career is obviously important, for these percentages will necessarily be high for
painters whose careers were short. Yet for example Braque’s career - measured by his earliest
and latest paintings sold at auction - spans a period of more than 50 years; not only were 93 of the
115 illustrations of his work of paintings done within 10 years of his estimated age of peak value,
of 28, but the single age with the most illustrations is just one year later, at 29. Similarly, 56 of
the 74 Renoirs illustrated date from within 10 years of his estimated peak age of 35, and the single
year most often represented by the reproductions is that same year.
For another five artists in Table 3, from half to three-quarters of the illustrations represent
work done within ten years of their estimated ages of peak value. As in the cases of Braque and
Renoir, several of these were major figures with long and varied careers, resulting in frequent
discussions in the textbooks, with accompanying illustrations, of how their work developed over
time. Monet and Picasso are obvious examples. Monet’s three important periods - his early
Impressionist breakthrough of the late 1860s and early `70s, the series paintings of the `90s, and
the water-lilies done after 1900 - are all commonly illustrated, but in spite of this nearly threefifths of all the illustrations of his work surveyed fall within 10 years of his estimated age of peak
value at 29. Similarly, Picasso’s long career is notable for a number of major innovations, and his
paintings are more often illustrated than those of any other artist studied here, but the single year
of his career represented by the most reproductions is age 26, the same year his work is estimated
to peak in value.

12
Another six artists in Table 3 had between one-quarter and one-half of all the illustrations
of their paintings represent work done within ten years of their age of peak value. Three of these
were very important artists, each with more than 50 illustrations. Cézanne had only 54 of 136
total illustrations fall within ten years of his peak value at age 67. Yet this is again a result of the
importance and length of his career, as many texts provide illustrations that document the
development of his technique over time. However his age of peak value is also that of his most
important work, as more illustrations - 31 of the total of 136 - date from the final year of his life
than from any other. For Manet, only 38 of a total of 128 illustrations date from within ten years
of his age of peak value of 50. His case is interesting, for textbook treatments of his career are to
a great extent dominated by three remarkable paintings. Together these three account for 42% of
his total illustrations. Two - the Déjeuner sur l’herbe and the Olympia - were completed in 1863,
while the third - the Bar at the Folies-Bergère - was his last major painting, done in 1882. The
first two were done during the period in the early 1860s that one student of his work characterizes
as his “anni mirabiles,” that “established Manet’s reputation as the leader of a new generation,”
while the third marked the culmination of the period after 1870 that another Manet scholar
regards as that of “his enduring contribution to modern art.”18 The significance of Manet’s work
was extremely controversial in his time, and continues to be controversial today.19 In view of this,
it is perhaps not surprising that there is less scholarly consensus on the relative importance of the
phases of his career than is the case for other artists. Miró also produced important work over an
extended period. As a result, only 26 of his 64 total illustrations fall within ten years of his age of
peak value.
Finally, for three artists Table 3 shows that less than one-quarter of their illustrated

13
paintings date from within ten years of their ages of peak value. Two of these, Bonnard and
Rouault, are not among the most important artists considered in this study. Thus Table 3 shows
that neither is among the leaders in total illustrations. Figures 22 and 25 show that for both there
is also relatively little variation with age in the value of their work. And for neither does the
distribution of the dates of the paintings illustrated show a sharp peak. For these reasons, for
these two artists the apparent disagreement between the market and the scholarly evaluations does
not seem troubling. Yet none of these qualifications applies to the third artist in this category.
Matisse’s total illustrations,169, are second in number in this study only to Picasso. Figure 24
shows that his work varies substantially in value with age. And the textbook illustrations reveal a
clear critical consensus that his most important work was done much earlier in his career than his
age of peak value at 66. Thus 105 of his illustrations - 62% - are of paintings done in the ten
years after 1903, an extraordinary period in which he moved through Neo-Impressionism to
become the recognized leader of the Fauves. His case is clearly the greatest single discrepancy
between market and critical evaluations. Yet it might be noted that although Matisse’s most
celebrated innovations were produced early in his career, critics have remarked on the appearance
of important developments throughout his career, including the later stages.20
In general, the auction market appears to produce valuations of work over the course of
artists’ careers that are similar to the evaluations of scholars. The agreement tends to be clearest
in the cases of artists whose careers were dominated by one important achievement. But it also
appears for most of the major artists who had a number of important achievements over the
course of long careers, as the text illustrations track their development over time, but usually
agree with the market on the single most important period. Among major artists, only for Matisse

14
is there a strong disagreement between the two sources. The general agreement of the scholarly
evaluations with those of the market valuations heightens the interest in explaining the patterns
produced by the age-price profiles.

The Question
The shift described above in the careers of nineteenth-century artists has been noticed in
part by art historians, if only because of the remarkable achievements of some major PostImpressionists in spite of their early deaths. Thus for example the historian John Rewald made
this observation in the introduction to his biography of Georges Seurat:
Seurat, van Gogh, Lautrec: three glorious names in the art of
the dying nineteenth century, three industrious lives broken at
the height of their élan. When van Gogh committed suicide in
1890 he was thirty-seven years old. When in 1891 Seurat
suddenly died he was only thirty-one. Lautrec burnt himself
out in 1901 at the age of thirty-seven. Despite their youth all
three achieved what Cézanne called realization, giving their
full measure at an age when others are still seeking.21
The puzzle this raises, of how the accomplishments of these three artists were possible at such
early ages, is an intriguing one. As noted earlier, Cézanne produced the work that became his
greatest legacy only in his later 50s and 60s. Similarly, a critic would write of one of his greatest
contemporaries that “Degas’ career offers strong proof of the fact that a painter must live long to
live forever.”22 Yet instead of pursuing the question posed by his observation, Rewald dismisses
the issue: “As if recognizing that they had only a few years in which to express themselves, they
passed by the halting places without stopping, reached maturity speedily and left us the fully
achieved work which bears the ringing message of their genius.”23 The question of how it was

15
possible for Seurat and his contemporaries to become so important to the development of modern
art at such early ages, in sharp contrast to such earlier artists as Cézanne and Degas, remains
unanswered - not only by Rewald, but by art historians in general. And this question looms even
larger for those who follow the course of art history further in time, as Picasso, Braque, and
others later would again revolutionize modern art when even younger than Seurat, van Gogh, and
Lautrec had been at the time of their greatest contributions.
Although art historians have occasionally noted their awareness of the shift described
above in the careers of nineteenth-century artists, none has analyzed it systematically. Yet it
appears that the central elements of an explanation for the shift can be drawn from existing studies
by critics and historians, and from the testimony of the artists themselves. These elements, which
involve changes over time in the nature of painting and in the market
conditions facing artists, appear to provide a convincing answer to this puzzling question.

The Growing Demand for Innovation in Modern Painting
The story of the early development of modern art in nineteenth-century France is a familiar
one, often told by art historians. Basic to this story is a series of changes during the second half of
the nineteenth century in the institutional setting of fine art: the declining importance of the Ecole
des Beaux-Arts as a training place for aspiring artists; the concomitant decline of the official Salon
as the showplace for fine art, with a resulting decline in the power of its jury of selectors to
enforce the tradition-bound standards of the Académie de Peinture et Sculpture; and the rise of
the dealer-critic system, with independent private dealers competing for the custom of both artists
and clients, and critics competing for distinction by championing individual artists, or groups of

16
artists, and thus bringing them to the attention of the rising numbers of middle-class collectors.24
These institutional changes contributed to a transformation of the ways in which many painters
conceived of art, and in the ways in which they produced their work. The element of this
transformation that appears to have been of greatest significance for the question posed in this
study is the growing importance of innovation in painting. This development can most tellingly be
chronicled through the language of contemporary art critics.
Perhaps the single most important critical statement, generally considered the first
declaration of the modern revolution, was an essay published by the poet and critic Charles
Baudelaire in 1863.25 Writing in praise of The Painter of Modern Life, Baudelaire challenged the
Academy’s insistence on the superiority of paintings with historical themes, declaring that “The
pleasure which we derive from the representation of the present is due not only to the beauty with
which it can be invested, but also to its essential quality of being present.” In a formulation that
would become a manifesto for many young artists, Baudelaire asserted that the painter of modern
life was in search of “‘modernity’ [by which] I mean the ephemeral, the fugitive, the contingent,
the half of art whose other half is the eternal and the immutable.” This search implied a
redirection of artists’ efforts: “It is doubtless an excellent thing to study the old masters in order
to learn how to paint; but it can be no more than a waste of labor if your aim is to understand the
special nature of present-day beauty.”26
Other critics soon followed Baudelaire’s lead, with increasingly explicit statements of the
value of developing new techniques to portray modern life. In 1867, the novelist and critic Emile
Zola drew a parallel between modern science and art. In an article about Edouard Manet, Zola
called the artist “a child of our times. To me he is an analytical painter. Since science required a

17
solid foundation and returned to the exact observation of facts, everything has been called in
question. This movement has occurred not only in the scientific world. All fields of knowledge,
all human undertakings look for constant and definite principles in reality. Our modern landscape
painters have far surpassed our painters of history and genre because they have studied our
countryside, content to set down the first edge of a wood they come to. Manet applied the same
method in each of his works. While others rack their brains to paint a new Death of Caesar or a
new Socrates Drinking the Hemlock, he calmly poses figures and objects in his studio and starts
to paint...”27
To a growing number of critics, innovation increasingly became a central criterion for
importance among the emerging group of painters, of whom Manet was considered a leader. In
1870, Théodore Duret wrote that “We can now relish Manet ... for what in his work is excellent
and novel ... [H]e is an innovator, one of the rare beings who has his own view of nature.”28
Similar terms appear in a pamphlet written in 1876 by Edmond Duranty, who praised Manet for
having “repeatedly produced the most daring innovations,” embodied in “works full of depth and
originality standing apart from all others.” Referring more generally to the group of artists who
were currently exhibiting their work at the Durand-Ruel gallery, Duranty declared that “the battle
really is between traditional art and the new art, between old painting and the new painting.”29 In
the same year the poet Stéphane Mallarmé published an appreciation of the Impressionists.
Mallarmé singled out Manet as the leader of the group, and praised him for both his technique and
his choice of subjects.

Mallarmé took Manet’s Olympia as a laudable example of a subject

chosen under this “influence of the moment,” and remarked on the result of its unconventional
content: “Rarely has any modern work been more applauded by some few, or more deeply

18
damned by the many, than was that of this innovator.” Concerning the Impressionists as a group,
Mallarmé concluded that “honor is due to those who have brought to the service of art an
extraordinary and quasi-original newness of vision,” and he concluded that “Impressionism is the
principal and real movement of contemporary painting.”30
During the 1880s and `90s, praise for artists as innovators became commonplace. In 1880
the novelist and critic J. K. Huysmans described Degas as “the greatest artist we possess today in
France,” and recalled his first sight of Degas’ work: “A painter of modern life had been born,
moreover a painter who derived from and resembled no other, who brought with him a totally
new artistic flavor, as well as totally new skills.”31 In 1887 the critic Félix Fénéon criticized
Impressionism - which was already coming under attack as outdated - for its haphazard technique,
declared that within the past two years, “Impressionism has come into possession of this rigorous
technique. M. Georges Seurat was its instigator. The innovation of M. Seurat ... is based on the
scientific division of the tone.”32 And in 1892 a young symbolist writer, Albert Aurier, stated that
“Paul Gauguin seems to me to be the initiator of a new art.”33 The regularity of these declarations
linking importance to novelty has led one scholar to characterize the Paris art world of the 1880s
as “competitive, aggressive, swept by the demand that artists come up with something new or
perish.”34
Artists clearly felt this pressure of the demand for innovation and novelty. In 1887
Pissarro reported that Seurat was reluctant to exhibit his work for fear that others would copy
him.35 The following year another member of the Neo-Impressionist group, Signac, was angered
by an article that praised Seurat as the originator of the style, then added that he “sees his
paternity of the theory contested by misinformed critics and unscrupulous comrades.” Seurat’s

19
response to Signac disavowed responsibility for the accusation, and elaborated his fears as he
described his interview with the journalist: “I have never told him anything but what I have always
thought: the more numerous we are, the less originality we shall have, and the day when
everybody uses this technique, it will no longer have any value and one will look for something
else as has already happened.” The young master then added: “It is my right to think and to say
so, since I paint in this way only in order to find something new, an art entirely my own.”36
The artists’ perception of the persistent demand for novelty appears in the form of
frustration as well as anxiety. When Albert Aurier wrote an article in 1890 praising van Gogh as
“the only painter who perceives the coloration of things with such intensity,” and describing him
as a symbolist who “considers this enchanting pigment only as a kind of marvelous language
destined to express the Idea,” the artist wrote to Aurier in embarrassment, avowing his debt to
other painters, and expressing his discomfort at what he considered critics’ exaggerated
differentiation among artists: “You see, it seems to me so difficult to make a distinction between
impressionism and other things; I do not see the necessity for so much sectarian spirit as we have
seen in the last years; in fact I fear its absurdity.”37 In 1895 Pissarro, who had had a great impact
on Cézanne’s early development, complained to his son of the oversimplification of a critic’s
praise for Cézanne : “He simply doesn’t know that Cézanne was influenced like all the rest of us,
which detracts nothing from his qualities.” Pissarro was irritated by critics who “imagined that
artists are the sole inventors of their styles and that to resemble someone else is to be
unoriginal.”38 In an essay written in 1902, Paul Gauguin expressed similar feelings: “At an
exhibition in London, one sagacious critic wrote: ‘Monsieur Degas seems a good pupil of Nittis!’
Doesn’t this reflect that mania which men of letters have for squabbling in court over who had a

20
given idea first? And the mania spreads to painters who take great care of their originality ...”39
Comparisons that glorified the innovations of young artists at the expense of the old
clearly hurt those who were aging. In 1896, the 66-year-old Pissarro reported to his son the
opening of a show of his recent paintings: “All my friends say the exhibition is very beautiful.” He
then added: “Degas told me that no matter what the ‘great masters’ of the youth, who treat us as
dolts, say, we still have the upper hand.” Later he complained that “The yap of La Revue Blanche
[a symbolist periodical] seems hostile to me, it is the organ of the new generation.”40
The growth of a new class of art galleries dealing in contemporary painting has also been
identified as a stimulus for young artists to innovate, in order to differentiate their work in the
hope of gaining a following of collectors. Unlike the annual Salon run by the Academy, which
showed the work of hundreds of artists, private dealers would invest in the paintings of individual
artists and show them to best advantage. For young painters who worked within the Academic
system, the progress of their careers would necessarily be slow, not only because their work had
to be acceptable to the conservative Salon jury, but also because the enormous size of the Salon
exhibition generally prevented the one or two entries of a young painter from receiving much
attention.41 In contrast, a one-man show at a private gallery held out the possibility of making the
public familiar with an artist’s work much more rapidly. In an influential study, Harrison and
Cynthia White stressed that the new private dealers could offer artists a series of benefits:
visibility, publicity, purchases, a more steady income, and social support.42
Yet the impact of the new system of private dealers on the careers of artists in the
nineteenth century should not be exaggerated. The number of private dealers was very small, and
grew slowly in the late nineteenth century, so few artists appear to have benefited from

21
competition among dealers. In one example, John Rewald quotes a series of excuses the dealer
Paul Durand-Ruel made to Pissarro during 1883-84 for his lack of sales, then comments:
“Durand-Ruel could hardly expect his painters to subsist on these complaints, and as a matter of
fact they often threatened to abandon him, only to return to the realization that no other dealer or
collector was willing to offer them even the few francs Durand-Ruel still managed to send.”43
And in 1891 Pissarro still complained to his son that Durand sold none of his work: “If anyone
else were available, I would unhesitatingly turn to him, but there is nobody.”44 Durand-Ruel, who
took over his father’s gallery in 1865, was the most important dealer in the decades that followed,
and his gallery did become a source of considerable success for a number of artists. But this
success came slowly, as Durand initially concentrated on the work of the older, Barbizon School
painters, and only began to represent the Impressionists after 1870. Durand did not find regular
markets for their work until after 1880, and even then sales were poor, and other galleries few.
Thus when Vincent van Gogh arrived in Paris as an aspiring artist in 1887, he reported of the art
market that “Trade is slow here. The great dealers sell Millet, Delacroix, Corot, Daubigny,
Dupré, a few other masters at exorbitant prices. They do little or nothing for young artists. The
second class dealers contrariwise sell those at very low prices.”45 Three years later, the work of
the new artists still received little interest from the major dealers. In 1890, distraught at the
suicide of his brother Vincent, Theo van Gogh resigned from his job with the gallery of Boussod
& Valadon, one of Durand-Ruel’s few competitors. The gallery’s owner subsequently
complained that Theo had “accumulated appalling things by modern painters which had brought
the firm to discredit.” Theo’s inventory included works by Pissarro, Degas, Monet, Redon,
Guillaumin, Gauguin, and Lautrec, but Boussod claimed only Monet’s paintings could be sold.46

22
One problem slowing the progress of private galleries was a widespread suspicion of their
commercial motives, which resulted in distaste for their activities. The Salon had long been the
source of respectability and legitimacy for artists’ work, and this traditional belief in the
importance of large-scale group shows lay behind the Impressionists’ decision to create a société
anonyme (joint stock company) to present their work in the group exhibitions they began in 1874,
instead of relying on private dealers.47 As late as 1883, Pissarro reported to his son that Monet’s
new show at Durand’s gallery, “which is marvelous, has not made a penny.” He attributed this to
the consequences of the commercial setting: “The newspapers, knowing that a dealer is behind it,
do not breathe a word.” He concluded that it was “a poor idea to have one-man shows.”48
The small size of the market for paintings controlled by galleries, and the caution of
dealers in choosing artists to represent, meant that few young artists were significantly affected by
the new system of private galleries during the nineteenth century.49 Eventually this would change,
as the growing number of galleries committed to the sale of contemporary art could provide even
young artists with the opportunity to gain early economic success. The first modern artist who
would gain both fame and fortune in Paris almost exclusively through shows at private galleries
was the young Spaniard Pablo Picasso, who had his first Paris gallery show in 1901, at the age of
twenty.50 Picasso’s precocious artistic genius was complemented by a shrewd business sense that
led him to take advantage of competition among dealers throughout his career, and in his case
early artistic innovation may have been influenced by market outcomes.51 Thus later in his life
Picasso suggested that his radical departure into Cubism in 1907 might have been affected by his
earlier success, which he called his “protective wall”: “The blue period, the rose period - they
were the screens that sheltered me ... It was in the shelter of my success that I was able to do

23
what I wanted to do.”52 But although the private gallery system might later become a powerful
influence on artists’ careers, its slow early development appears to have made its effect much
smaller in the nineteenth than in the twentieth century.53

Changes in Artists’ Careers: An Explanation
The growing emphasis placed on innovation as a central criterion for the importance of
new art after mid-century appears to have given rise to a changing conception of painting that
allowed artists to make significant contributions at progressively younger ages. Throughout the
first half of the nineteenth century the dominant method of training artists, in which young artists
were effectively apprenticed to masters who were members of the Academy, reflected a
conception of painting as essentially a skilled craft. The training process, which consisted of
repetitious copying and execution of assigned canonical subjects, was based on the assumption
that excellence in painting came from practice and imitation. The hierarchical organization of the
Academy, which largely controlled the supply of new paintings to the French market for fine art,
equally demonstrated a belief in the value of experience to painters: members of the Academy
were elected for life, with an average age at entry above 50, and an average term of service of 25
years.54
Although few painters in this study were born before 1830, the evidence for those few is
generally consistent with the idea that an artist’s mature work was his best: the earliest peaks in
value occur for Boudin, Jongkind, and Millet, when they were in their mid-40s, while the peak
values for Delacroix, Daumier, and Daubigny occur from 50 to 60. Even Manet, often considered
the first modern painter, has a peak value at 50, at the end of his remarkable career.

Although

24
Manet’s work was revolutionary in many ways, and he was widely regarded as the inspirational
leader of the new painters who began to gain attention during the 1870s, the deviation of his
painting from accepted norms was tempered by his continued commitment to the Academic
system. A friend quoted him as saying “The Salon is the true field of battle - it is there that one
must measure oneself.”55 He declined ever to participate in the group shows organized by the
Impressionists, and instead continued to submit his work to the Salon, in spite of its famous
rejection of his Déjeuner sur l’herbe in 1863.56 After his death, Pissarro remarked sadly that
“Manet, great painter that he was, had a petty side, he was crazy to be recognized by the
constituted authorities, he believed in success, he longed for honors ...”57
Although Manet remained traditional in his attitudes toward the institutions of fine arts,
the innovations he made in his painting, including his rejection of historical subjects in favor of the
modern and his abandonment of the conventional use of shadow in modeling, pointed the way
toward a modern art that would portray contemporary scenes and that would progressively
deemphasize the importance of illusionistic representation.58 During the late 1860s and `70s the
Impressionists added their own innovations, which included not only changes in their approach to
painting and in the visual results they achieved, but also changes in the way art would be
presented to the public.
One of the Impressionists’ most interesting innovations was in the organization of the way
painters learned and worked. During the 1860s, the core group of Impressionists functioned very
much like participants in a modern scholarly research project. Monet, Renoir, Sisley, and Bazille
had become friends when all were students in the studio of Charles Gleyre. When Gleyre closed
his studio in 1864, the group chose to work on its own. With Monet as the informal leader, for a

25
number of years these four often worked with each other, sometimes joined by other artists,
including Monet’s mentors Boudin and Jongkind, and occasionally Courbet, Pissarro, and
Whistler.59 Working together was of course not a new custom for artists; the Barbizon painters
had worked side by side, and the Ecole des Beaux-Arts had long organized artists into groups in
studios.60 But the Impressionists worked together as equals, unlike in the Academy’s
apprenticeship system of master and pupils, and their attitude toward their enterprise appears to
have differed from that of the Barbizon School. Thus a historian of the Barbizon painters notes
that although they gained social and professional support from their contact with each other, they
did not generally seek artistic advice.61 In contrast, the Impressionists actively debated artistic
goals and techniques, and stressed the value of the group as a source not only of companionship
and support, but also of learning. So for example in 1864 Monet wrote to admonish Bazille:
“What I’m certain of is that you don’t work enough, and not in the right way ...[A]ll alone, there
are some things that one cannot fathom.” Later the same year Monet again scolded Bazille for his
absence: “There are a lot us at the moment in Honfleur ... Boudin and Jongkind are here; we are
getting on marvelously. I regret very much that you aren’t here, because in such company there’s
a lot to be learned.”62 The Impressionists’ belief that the group could help them succeed
individually led eventually to their establishment of the famous group exhibitions, beginning in
1874, which they designed as an alternative to the official Salon for the display of their work to
the public.63
The Impressionists were critical of the teachings of the Ecole des Beaux-Arts,64 and they
rejected the judgments of their work made by the jury of the Salon.65 Yet although Monet and his
friends consciously set out to change modern painting, like others of their generation they still had

26
a traditional conception of art that led them to distrust rapid change, and to believe that valuable
achievements could be made only slowly and incrementally, as a result of long periods of study
and experimentation. Monet believed that progress in art was possible only with total
commitment and long hours of work. Even as late as 1890, at the age of 50, he described
painting as “a continual torture,” and reported to a friend: “I am working at a desperately slow
pace, but the further I go, the more I see I have to work a lot in order to manage to convey what I
am seeking: ‘instantaneity,’ above all, the envelopment, the same light spread over everywhere;
and more than ever, easy things achieved at one stroke disgust me.”66 Renoir shared this ethic: in
1881 he complained to Durand-Ruel that “I wanted to send you a mass of pictures ... But I am
still bogged down in experiments - a malady. I’m not satisfied, so I clean things off again and
again.” But he did say that although he’d bring few paintings back from his current trip abroad, “I
think I shall have made some progress, which always happens after experimenting for a long
time.”67
The innovations of the Impressionists were consequently based on experimentation,
motivated by esthetic criteria: in Monet’s celebrated formulation, “it is by dint of observation and
reflection that one makes discoveries,” and his career was an extended effort to capture the
elusive visual effects of “the weather, the atmosphere, the surroundings.”68 But the
Impressionists’ most productive experiments occurred only after Monet had made a bold
conceptual innovation. Later in his life, he recalled that in 1867, owing to his desire not to lose
the transient effects of light and atmosphere by working in the studio, he began to work entirely
outdoors: “I threw myself body and soul into the plein air.”69 Although starting paintings
outdoors was not uncommon among the Barbizon painters and others, including Boudin and

27
Jongkind, and even executing entire paintings outdoors was not unprecedented, Monet’s decision
to work entirely in the open air marked a new departure.70 Looking back on his decision, Monet
remarked that “It was a dangerous innovation. Up to that time no one had indulged in it, not even
Manet, who only attempted it later, after me. His painting was still very classical and I still recall
the contempt that he showed for my beginnings. It was in 1867; my manner had shaped itself,
but, after all, it was not revolutionary in character. I was still far from having adopted the
principle of the subdivision of colors that set so many against me, but I was beginning to try my
hand at it partially, and I was experimenting with effects of light and color that shocked accepted
customs.”71
The abruptness of the decision to work entirely outdoors, as well as Monet’s complete
commitment to it, mark it not as a tentative, experimental innovation, but as a conceptual one,
born of conviction. Yet this decision in itself did not constitute an artistic breakthrough: as Monet
noted, the results he had achieved in his art were not yet revolutionary. The Impressionists’
artistic breakthrough came later, after several years of additional experimentation with the “effects
of light and color,” by Monet, Bazille, Renoir, Sisley, and Pissarro. The 1870s became the
triumphant decade of Impressionist painting, and historians generally attribute this to a
breakthrough eventually made by Monet and Renoir during the summer of 1869, which they spent
painting together at a riverside café near Paris. Kenneth Clark called that café, La Grenouillère, “
the birthplace of impressionism,” as the friendship of Monet and Renoir became “one of those
conjunctions ... from which new movements in the history of art are often born.” Their novel
treatment of “the sparkle and reflection of light on water” led to a new technique so powerful
“that it not only captivated sympathetic spirits like Sisley and Pissarro, but imposed itself on

28
painters to whom it was quite alien,” as even Manet, Gauguin, and van Gogh were lured into
experiments with Impressionist methods. For Clark, during the late 1860s and early ‘70s, Monet,
Sisley, and Pissarro “achieved the most complete naturalism that has ever been made into art.” 72
Table 2 shows that within a brief period the members of this core group of Impressionists
all produced what would be their most valuable work: Monet’s work reached its peak value in
1869 (when he was 29 years old), Sisley’s in 1874 (at age 35), Pissarro’s in 1875 (at 45), and
Renoir’s in 1876 (at 35). The value of the work of two other close followers also reached a peak
in this same period - Morisot in 1874 (at age 33), and Guillaumin in 1876 (age 35). In view of the
central place of Impressionism in the history of nineteenth-century modern art, it is perhaps not
surprising that the careers of those closest to the school’s most distinctive breakthrough were
greatly affected by it, and most of all that of Monet, who is generally given the greatest credit for
the breakthrough. Monet’s determination coupled with his enduring commitment to an
experimental approach motivated by observation would lead him to make other important
contributions in his long and productive career, including the famous series paintings of the 1890s
and the paintings of waterlilies done in Giverny after 1900.73 But arguably none of these later
innovations would be as important for the development of modern painting as his first discovery,
which resulted in his being set apart in this study as the only artist born before 1850 to produce
his most valuable work before the age of 30.
Cézanne was a contemporary of Monet, and the only member of the cohort who would
eventually have a greater impact on the development of modern art. Cézanne failed the entrance
exam for the Ecole des Beaux-Arts, but he did paint in Paris as a young man.74 He was influenced
by the early discoveries of the Impressionists, which he learned about mainly from Pissarro in the

29
early 1870s.75 His submissions to the official Salon were consistently rejected during the 1860s
and ‘70s, and after exhibiting in the Impressionist group shows in 1874 and 1877, he chose not to
join them thereafter. From the 1880s, Cézanne became increasingly reclusive, choosing to work
alone in his native Provence, “in silence until the day when I should feel myself able to defend
theoretically the result of my attempts.” 76 Like Monet, Cézanne was committed to a conception
of art in which progress could come only slowly, as the result of extensive experimentation and
careful observation of nature. A biographer, Roger Fry, wrote of Cézanne that “For him, as I
understand his work, the ultimate synthesis of a design was never revealed in a flash; rather he
approached it with infinite precautions ... For him the synthesis was an asymptote toward which
he was forever approaching without ever quite reaching it; it was a reality, incapable of complete
realization.”77 Throughout his long career, Cézanne expressed frustration at his inability to
achieve what he called realization in his art. In 1903, at the age of 64, he wrote “I have made
some progress. Why so late and with such difficulty?” The following year: “I progress very
slowly, for nature reveals herself to me in very complex ways; and the progress needed is
endless.” In September, 1906, the month before his death, he wrote to his son that “as a painter I
am becoming more clear-sighted before nature, but ... the realization of my sensations is always
painful. I cannot attain the intensity that is unfolded before my senses. I have not the magnificent
richness of coloring that animates nature.” Later the same month he wrote to the young painter
Emile Bernard: “Will I ever attain the end for which I have striven so much and so long? I hope
so ... I am always studying after nature and it seems to me that I make slow progress.”78
Cézanne’s painting began to have a profound impact on the course of modern art late in his life,
and its influence became enormous after his death, when the innovations of the last decade of his

30
life became the primary inspiration for Cubism.79 In his approach, Cézanne epitomized the
experimental artist, developing his work incrementally, based on esthetic criteria. His art is
recognized by art historians as a “model of steadfast searching and growth” that continued to the
very end of his life.80 This is clearly reflected by the market, as his most valuable work is that
done at the end of his long career.
The other major artist who consistently exhibited in the Impressionist group shows was
Edgar Degas. Unlike Monet and Cézanne, Degas was not committed to open-air painting, or to
studying nature; indeed he was quoted as saying that “the study of nature is of no significance, for
painting is a conventional art, and it is infinitely more worthwhile to learn to draw after
Holbein.”81 Although he studied only briefly at the Ecole des Beaux-Arts, he was not hostile
toward Academic technique or methods of instruction. Among living artists he most admired the
dominant Academic painter of the time, Ingres, and he endorsed the Ecole’s emphasis on
imitation: to learn his craft a painter “must copy the masters and recopy them, and after he has
given every evidence of being a good copyist, he might then reasonably be allowed to do a radish,
perhaps, from Nature.”82 Degas did not share Cézanne’s interest in landscape, preferring instead
to paint interior scenes, often with ballerinas or female nudes, but he did share the belief that
progress could be made only slowly: “No art was ever less spontaneous than mine. What I do is
the result of reflection and study of the great masters; of inspiration, spontaneity, temperament ...
I know nothing.”83 Degas also resembled Cézanne in his belief in the value of repetition of the
same subjects; “one must redo ten times, a hundred times the same subject.”84 Although Degas
arrived at radical innovations in the use of materials and the representation of space, his
conception of art as governed by convention clearly molded his approach, for he proceeded

31
incrementally, according to aesthetic criteria. His most acclaimed work was done later in his
career. Figure 9 shows that his work rose sharply in value to a peak at age 46, and remained quite
high from then until the end of his life.
The next group of artists chronologically, who came to maturity in the 1880s and ‘90s,
was dominated by Gauguin, van Gogh, Seurat, and Toulouse-Lautrec. Their work marked a
sharp break with that of their immediate predecessors. The innovations of the Impressionists and
Cézanne were driven by visual criteria: Monet’s stated belief in the need to observe nature, and
Cézanne’s repeated insistence on the importance of studying nature, clearly reveal their goals of
using paint to capture visual sensations. In contrast, the innovations of the young artists who
followed them derived from a very different source. That it was possible for these artists to make
great contributions in spite of the brevity of their careers appears to stem directly from the fact
that their approach was neither visual nor experimental. Instead, these painters made
breakthroughs that were conceptually motivated, as increasingly color and form were used to
symbolize nature rather than to describe it. One consequence of this change was that innovations
could be made more quickly, for the painstaking experimental approach that Monet and Cézanne
had devised for capturing visual appearances was not deemed necessary for the expression of
ideas, thoughts, or emotions.
Seurat’s inspiration came from science. As a student at the Ecole des Beaux-Arts, he
began to read scientific treatises on the visual perception of colors, and he became fascinated by
the proposition of one aesthetician that “Color, which is controlled by fixed laws, can be taught
like music.”85 In seeking to put into practice the principles embodied in these laws, he and his
followers - a group to which critic Félix Fénéon gave the name of Neo-Impressionists - criticized

32
Impressionism for its rejection of “all precise scientific methods.”86 In the words of a critic who
admired Seurat, he “wished to make of painting a more logical art, more systematic, where less
room would be left for accidental effect. Just as there are rules for technique, he wanted them
also for the conception, composition, and expression of subjects.”87 At the age of 25, based on
his understanding of color theory, Seurat systematically and methodically set out to produce a
masterpiece that would serve as a manifesto for his approach. After two years of painstaking
work, he completed a painting more than 65 square feet in size that his disciple Paul Signac could
fairly call “an epoch-making picture.”88 Sunday Afternoon on the Island of the Grande Jatte,
completed when Seurat was just 27, is probably the single most often reproduced painting made
in the nineteenth century.89 In the few years that remained in his life after completing it, Seurat
searched for a “logical, scientific, and pictorial system ... to coordinate the lines of a picture
towards harmony just as I am able to coordinate colors.”90 Henri Matisse later stated that
Seurat’s achievement was “the great innovation of that day.”91 That Seurat could accomplish this
in spite of his premature death appears to be a consequence of the conceptual basis of his
innovations: in the words of Pissarro, who for a time in the late 1880s became a disciple of
Seurat, for the Neo-Impressionists, “As far as execution is concerned, we regard it as of little
importance: art, as we see it, does not reside in the execution.”92
The belief that the ideas embodied in a painting were more important than representing
visual perceptions of nature was also used during the 1880s and ‘90s to support the very different
approach of the symbolist artists, of whom Gauguin and van Gogh became the most prominent.
Gauguin became committed to painting only in 1883, at the age of 35, when he resigned his job in
the stock exchange. His professional income had allowed him to buy paintings by the leading

33
Impressionists, and his interest in them led him to study with Pissarro. Although Gauguin was a
good pupil, Pissarro was troubled by his eagerness to sell his work as he embarked on his new
career. Thus Pissarro wrote to his son in 1883: “Gauguin disturbs me very much, he is so deeply
commercial ... I haven’t the heart to point out to him how false and unpromising is his attitude.”93
Gauguin did gain influence quickly in the art world, if not commercial success, but he did it by
rejecting Impressionism. Within only a few years he had become the leader of a group of young
symbolist painters who worked in the town of Pont-Aven, in Brittany. Pissarro, who distrusted
rapid success, acknowledged Gauguin’s achievement but questioned its source: in 1887 Pissarro
wrote to his son that “it must be admitted that he has finally acquired great influence. This comes
of course from years of hard and meritorious work - as a sectarian!”94 Pissarro remained skeptical
about Gauguin’s success, telling his son in 1891 that “Gauguin is not a seer, he is a schemer.”95
Yet in 1891 Gauguin was hailed by the symbolist critic Albert Aurier as “the initiator of a new
art.” Aurier declared that “The normal and final goal of painting, as of all arts, cannot be the
direct presentation of objects. Its ultimate goal is to express Ideas.” Toward this end the artist
had the duty to avoid illusionism, and the right “to exaggerate, to attenuate, to deform ...
according to the needs of the Idea to be expressed.”96 Gauguin’s most valuable works were done
in the years immediately before and after Aurier’s declaration, both in Pont-Aven and in Tahiti,
where he went in 1891 in search of a simpler and more primitive way of life. His rejection of
naturalism and his use of color to evoke emotion influenced many painters of the next century,
and the conceptual simplification of his art allowed him to achieve this within his brief career.
Gauguin did not believe in the painstaking approach of the Impressionists. In contrast to their
belief that dedicated effort might lead to slow progress, Gauguin’s advice to a fellow painter was:

34
“Go on working, freely and furiously, you will make progress ... Above all, don’t perspire over a
picture. A strong emotion can be translated immediately.” In a slighting reference to Degas’
painstaking technique, he declared “I am not going to spend my life rubbing pumice stone over an
inch of canvas during five sittings of a model.” And he advised “don’t paint too much direct from
nature. Art is an abstraction!”97
Van Gogh’s career as an artist lasted barely a decade, from his decision in 1881 to be a
painter, after failed careers as an art dealer and pastor, to his suicide in 1890, at the age of 37. He
was a self-taught painter, and his greatest work was done after his arrival in France, during the
last four years of his life. In his first two years in France, in Paris, he assimilated modern art at an
extraordinary rate, before leaving in 1888 for the quieter setting of Arles. His most celebrated and most valuable - work was done in the two years that followed. The eloquent descriptions of
his work in his letters clearly state his goal of expressing emotion rather than describing nature.
Thus for example as he described his famous 1888 painting of the Night Café in Arles, “It is color
not locally true from the point of view of the ... realist, but color suggesting some emotion of an
ardent temperament.” His goal in the painting was “to express the terrible passions of humanity
by means of red and green.” Later he added “I have tried to express the idea that the café is a
place where one can ruin oneself, go mad, or commit a crime.”98 Van Gogh’s position that
“instead of trying to reproduce what I have before my eyes, I use color more arbitrarily in order to
express myself forcibly,”99 which endeared him to the same critics who praised Gauguin,100 would
also make him an inspiration to many artists of the next century. That he could produce works
that would have such far-reaching influence so soon after his first exposure to modern art is again
a clear consequence of the conceptual basis of his art: the powerful emotion that distinguishes his

35
late works required neither long periods of experimentation nor extended observation.
Of the 18 artists in the sample who were born after 1870, more than two-thirds did their
most valuable work before the age of 40, and one-third did their most valuable work while still in
their twenties. Two of the latter - Vlaminck and Derain - were painters whose best work was
done while they were members of the Fauves. Led by Matisse, the Fauves were a small group
who produced paintings distinguished by bright, anti-naturalistic color, a flattened picture surface,
and crude, visible brushwork. Their style came into existence quickly, it was practiced intensively
only briefly, during 1904-07, and it was then largely abandoned by most of those involved. Given
these characteristics, and the youth of Vlaminck and Derain at the time, it is not surprising that the
art had conceptual origins. When André Gide first saw Matisse’s work in this style, he described
it as “the product of theories. Everything in it can be deduced, explained; intuition has no place in
it ... Yes, this sort of painting is certainly rational.”101 Fauvism did not derive from observation,
but from thought. As Derain later admitted, “We painted with theories, ideas.”102
More important among the artists of this period whose age-price profiles reached early
peaks are Georges Braque, Juan Gris, and the most dominant figure in the painting of the
twentieth century, Pablo Picasso. These three were the creators of Cubism, generally considered
the most influential single development in twentieth-century art. Just as Cézanne can serve as the
archetype of the visually-motivated, experimental innovator, Picasso is a prime example of the
conceptual innovator. In contrast to Cézanne’s belief in the need to study nature in the hope of
representing its complexity, Picasso brusquely declared “I paint objects as I think them, not as I
see them.”103 In contrast to Cézanne’s pained description of striving endlessly for the goal of
realization, Picasso stated “I can hardly understand the importance given to the word research in

36
connection with modern painting. In my opinion to search means nothing in painting. To find, is
the thing. Nobody is interested in following a man who, with his eyes fixed on the ground, spends
his life looking for the pocketbook that fortune should put in his path ... When I paint my object is
to show what I have found and not what I am looking for.”104
Table 2 shows that Picasso’s age-price profile peaks in 1907, the year he executed the
Demoiselles d’Avignon, which would become the single most reproduced painting of this
century.105 Although the painting was not exhibited publicly until 1916, those who saw it in
Picasso’s studio immediately recognized that it represented a new type of painting. André
Salmon, a young poet who was the first to write about the painting, described its figures as “stark
problems, white numbers on a blackboard. This is the first appearance of the paintingequation.”106 Braque’s age-price profile peaks in 1910. Although Braque saw the Demoiselles in
1907, and began working in a Cubist style, he did not begin his famous collaboration with Picasso
until 1909. From then until 1912 they worked together, in Braque’s words “like two
mountaineers roped together.”107 The results of their work include Braque’s greatest, and most
valuable, accomplishments.
Dozens of painters became Cubists in the years that followed, as the style spread across
Europe and spawned a number of derivative schools.108 Yet the two leading historians of Cubism,
Cooper and Golding, agree that only one other artist joined Picasso and Braque as a creator of
true Cubism. Juan Gris was a young Spaniard who met Picasso in 1906, but initially worked as a
commercial artist. In 1912 he exhibited paintings in a Cubist style, and in the next few years he
devised an approach distinct from that of Picasso and Braque. His age-price profile peaks in
1915, the year in which he felt he did his best work. In that year he wrote to his dealer, “I think I

37
have really made progress recently and that my pictures begin to have a unity which they lacked
till now.” Gris’ enterprise, like Picasso’s, was conceptually driven: he described his approach as
“a deductive method,” based on “the mathematics of picture-making.”109
Picasso, Braque, and Gris created an art that transformed the painting of the twentieth
century. Douglas Cooper compares Cubism to the artistic revolution of the Renaissance:
although stylistically opposite, Cooper observes that both movements “were initiated by a few
artists, spread quickly throughout the western world and became the starting-point of a new and
more modern art.”110 This twentieth-century revolution was developed not by established artists
who had undergone long years of study, but by young men in their twenties barely trained in the
craft of painting. This was possible because of the nature of their innovation: in Golding’s words,
“the Cubism of Picasso and Braque was to be essentially conceptual. Even in the initial stages of
the movement, when the painters still relied to a large extent on visual models, their paintings are
not so much records of the sensory appearance of their subjects, as expressions in pictorial terms
of their idea or knowledge of them.”111

38

Conclusion
The auction market of the past three decades provides the basis for a systematic evaluation
of the careers of the painters who invented and developed modern art in late nineteenth- and early
twentieth-century France. Econometric analysis of auction sales reveals that there was a
persistent tendency over time for leading artists of this era to produce their most valuable work at
progressively younger ages. Whereas the most valuable work of the painters from the generation
before the Impressionists was done well above the age of 40, the core group of the Impressionists
produced their most valuable work during their early 30s, and in the cohorts that followed the
leading painters became more likely to execute their most valuable paintings while still in their
20s.
The shift over time in the careers of these painters appears to have been a result of
changes in the nature of painting, driven by changes in the institutions and the market for fine art.
The earliest painters considered in this study entered a profession based heavily on tradition, in
which success depended to a great extent on imitation and repetition of conventions passed down
from one generation to the next. Baudelaire and later critics, and Manet and later painters,
contributed to the transformation of painting, so that innovation became a principal determinant of
an artist’s importance. Critics played a key role in raising the demand for innovation in modern
art, as many leading literary figures wrote in praise of innovative painters, and in some cases even
proposed new artistic goals to them. The artists themselves became eager for change; from the
Impressionists on, aspiring artists increasingly came to Paris not to study in the classrooms and
studios of the official Ecole des Beaux-Arts, but instead to seek out the innovative painters of the

39
day, and to work in informal groups with them and with their own contemporaries. And perhaps
some impetus for change came from the new private art galleries. Although their number grew
slowly as the public’s demand for the new art lagged behind its rapid development, the possibility
the galleries appeared to hold out of developing a career more rapidly than had been feasible in
the past may have spurred some young artists to develop their own distinctive styles more
quickly.
The innovations in modern art that occurred in the late nineteenth century had an
important implication for artists’ careers. The trend in painting, away from naturalistic
representation of visual sensations, and toward the symbolic expression of ideas and emotions,
resulted in a progressive abandonment of the traditional emphasis on the importance of practice
and study, in favor of an approach that stressed the primary significance of generating new ideas.
The increasingly conceptual basis of artistic innovation made it possible for painters to make
important contributions at younger ages than in the past: youth became less of a barrier to doing
significant work, and indeed was often an advantage, as modern art tended to become one of the
disciplines in which dramatic improvements in the existing technology are often made by the
young.112

40
Endnotes

I am grateful to Britt Salvesen, Lester Telser, and David Weir for discussions of the issues
treated in this paper, and to Thomas Walker, Mark Schmeller, Sean Buckley, Shahrina
Chowdhury, Rebecca Kalmus, Julie Lee, Sharon Liu and John Storm for research assistance.

1.

Clive Bell, “The Debt to Cézanne,” in Francis Frascina and Charles Harrison, eds.,
Modern Art and Modernism (New York: Harper and Row, 1982), p. 75; Clement
Greenberg, Affirmations and Refusals, 1950-56 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1993), p. 83.

2.

Theodore Reff, “Painting and Theory in the Final Decade,” in William Rubin, ed.,
Cézanne: The Late Work (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1977), p. 13; Meyer
Schapiro, Paul Cézanne (New York: Abrams, 1952), p. 27.

3.

John Russell, The Meanings of Modern Art (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1974),
p. 97.

4.

John Golding, Cubism: A History and An Analysis, 1907-1914, Third edition (Cambridge:
Harvard University Press, 1988), p. xiii.

5.

The six books surveyed are: George Heard Hamilton, 19th and 20th Century Art (New
York: Abrams, 1970); Russell, Meanings of Modern Art ; H.H. Arnason, History of
Modern Art, Third edition (New York: Abrams 1986); Robert Hughes, The Shock of the
New (New York: Knopf, 1982); Sam Hunter and John Jacobus, History of Modern Art,
Third edition (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1992); Daniel Wheeler, Art Since MidCentury (Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall, 1991).

6.

These artists were Chagall, Gris, Miro, Modigliani, Picasso, Soutine, van Gogh, and
Whistler.

7.

These artists were Boudin, Corot, Daubigny, Daumier, Delacroix, Jongkind, Millet, and
Théodore Rousseau.

8.

These artists were Caillebotte, Cassatt, Guillaumin, Morisot, and Sisley.

9.

Le Guide Mayer (Lausanne: Sylvio Acatos, annual).

10.

The sale price recorded in Mayer and used in this study is the hammer price. This
normally includes the commission charged by the auction house to the seller, but not the
premium charged to the buyer. Mayer does not report prices for works that were bought
in, i.e. that were not sold for failure to reach their reserve prices.

41
11.

Prices were converted to constant 1983 dollars using the CPI.

12.

The .10 level is used as the criterion for statistical significance.

13.

Note the agreement between the peak ages estimated here and the estimates for seven
artists given by Madeleine de la Barre, Sophie Docclo, and Victor Ginsburgh, “Returns of
Impressionist, Modern and Contemporary European Paintings, 1962-1991,” Annales
d’Economie et de Statistique, No. 35 (1994), Table 5, p. 161.

14.

All values in the figures were calculated for paintings on canvas, 24" x 24", sold in 199094, in constant (1983) dollars. Each profile is bounded by the ages at the second and 98th
percentiles of the age distribution produced by all the works of the artist in the sample
analyzed; this is done to avoid obtaining extreme estimated prices at very high and low
ages at which there are few observations to constrain the estimates.

15.

General surveys of all art history are therefore included among these books, as well as
these devoted entirely to modern art.

16.

Many of the books used to make Table 3 treated only modern art. Since Courbet and
Manet are often considered the first modern painters, these books typically do not cover
earlier artists. Sample members older than Manet - with the exception of Pissarro, who
became a member of the Impressionists - were consequently not included in this part of
the study.

17.

No entry is given for the single year when two or more years are tied for most
illustrations. In nearly every case, these ties occur because the numbers of illustrations are
very low, and the results are consequently of little interest.

18.

Michael Fried, Manet’s Modernism (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1996), pp. 12; George Heard Hamilton, Manet and his Critics (New Haven: Yale University Press,
1954), p. 18.

19.

E.g. see Paul Hayes Tucker, ed., Manet’s Le Déjeuner sur l’Herbe (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1998); T. J. Clark, The Painting of Modern Life (Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1984), Chap. 2, “Olympia’s Choice;” and Bradford R. Collins,
ed., 12 Views of Manet’s Bar (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1996.)

20.

E.g. see Greenberg, Affirmations and Refusals, p. 173; Richard Shiff, Cézanne and the
End of Impressionism (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1984), p. 56; David Carrier,
Artwriting (Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 1987), p. 43.

21.

John Rewald, Georges Seurat (New York: Wittenborn, 1943), p. xvii.

22.

Harold Van Doren, “Introduction,” in Ambroise Vollard, Degas: An Intimate Portrait
(London: Allen and Unwin, 1928), p. 13.

42
23.

Rewald, Georges Seurat, pp. xvii-xviii. Compare the similar statement of Meyer
Schapiro: “Seurat’s art is an astonishing achievement for so young a painter. At 31 Seurat’s age when he died in 1891 - Degas and Cézanne had not shown their measure.
But Seurat was a complete artist at twenty-five when he painted the Grande Jatte;”
Schapiro, Modern Art (New York: George Braziller, 1982), p. 104.

24.

E.g. see Harrison C. White and Cynthia A. White, Canvases and Careers: Institutional
Change in the French Painting World (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1965);
Patricia Mainardi The End of the Salon: Art and the State in the Early Third Republic
(New York: Cambridge University Press, 1993).

25.

Charles Baudelaire, The Painter of Modern Life and Other Essays (New York: Da Capo
Press, 1964). On Baudelaire’s influence on painting in his time, see e.g. Clark, The
Painting of Modern Life; Nigel Blake and Francis Frascina, “Modern Practices of Art and
Modernity,” in Frascina, et. al., Modernity and Modernism: French Painting in the
Nineteenth Century (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1993), pp. 50-140. For one
instance of persisting impact of Baudelaire’s essay over time, see John Richardson, A Life
of Picasso, Volume 2: 1907-1917, The Painter of Modern Life (New York: Random
House, 1996), Chap. 1.

26.

Baudelaire, Painter of Modern Life, pp. 1,13.

27.

Hamilton, Manet and His Critics, pp. 95-6.

28.

Ibid., p. 146.

29.

Louis Emile Edmond Duranty, “The New Painting,” in Charles Moffett, ed., The New
Painting: Impressionism 1874-1886 (San Francisco: Fine Arts Museums of San
Francisco, 1986), pp. 41-2.

30.

Stéphane Mallarmé, “The Impressionists and Edouard Manet,” in Moffett, The New
Painting, p. 29, 33.

31.

J. K. Huysmans, “L’Exposition des Independants in 1880,” in Frascina and Harrison,
Modern Art, pp. 45-48.

32.

Norma Broude, ed., Seurat in Perspective (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1978), p.
40.

33.

John Rewald, Post-Impressionism: From Van Gogh to Gauguin, Second edition (New
York: Museum of Modern Art, 1962), p. 481.

34.

Arthur C. Danto, Embodied Meanings (New York: Farrar, Straus, and Giroux, 1994), p.
85.

43
35.

John Rewald, ed., Camille Pissarro: Letters to his Son Lucien (New York: Da Copo
Press, 1995), pp. 99-100.

36.

Rewald, Post-Impressionism, p. 114.

37.

Rewald, Post Impressionism, pp. 368-72.

38.

Rewald, Camille Pissarro, p. 276; John Rewald, The History of Impressionism, Revised
ed. (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1961), pp. 292-94, 578-79.

39.

Daniel Guérin, Paul Gauguin: The Writings of a Savage (New York: Da Capo Press,
1996), p. 219.

40.

Ibid., pp. 286-7.

41.

The nine Salons held during 1861-70, for example, exhibited an average of 3,780
paintings, and the nine held during 1872-90 had an average of 4,280; Mainardi, End of the
Salon, pp. 19-47.

42.

White and White, Canvases and Careers, p. 150.

43.

John Rewald, Studies in Impressionism (New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1985), p. 199.

44.

Rewald, Camille Pissarro, p. 174.

45.

Vincent van Gogh, The Complete Letters of Vincent van Gogh, Vol. 2 (London: Thames
and Hudson, 1958), p. 515.

46.

Rewald, History of Impressionism, p. 560.

47.

Robert Jensen, Marketing Modernism in Fin-de-Siècle Europe (Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1994), Chap. 3.

48.

Rewald, Camille Pissarro, p. 23.

49.

Compare White and White, Canvases and Careers, p. 151, with Jensen, Marketing
Modernism, pp. 51-2.

50.

Ibid., p. 134.

51.

Michael C. Fitzgerald, Making Modernism: Picasso and the Creation of the Market for
Twentieth-Century Art (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1995).

52.

Brassaï, Picasso and Company (New York: Doubleday, 1966), p. 132.

44
53.

On this relationship in a later era, see Diana Crane, The Transformation of the AvantGarde: The New York Art World, 1940-1985 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1987); David W. Galenson, “The Careers of Modern Artists: Evidence from Auctions of
Contemporary Paintings,” National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper 6331
(December, 1997).

54.

White and White, Canvases and Careers, p. 17; Albert Boime, The Academy and French
Painting in the Nineteenth Century (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1971).

55.

Anne Coffin Hanson, Manet and the Modern Tradition (New Haven: Yale University
Press, 1977), p. 44.

56.

Hamilton, Manet and his Critics; Moffett, The New Painting.

57.

Rewald, Camille Pissarro, p. 50.

58.

Briony Fer, “Introduction,” in Frascina, Modernity, pp. 21-30.

59.

John Rewald, The History of Impressionism, Revised edition (New York: Museum of
Modern Art, 1961), Chaps. 4-5.

60.

White and White, Canvases and Careers, pp. 116-17.

61.

Steven Adams, The Barbizon School and the Origins of Impressionism (London:
Phaidon, 1994), p.98.

62.

Rewald, History of Impressionism, p. 111.

63.

Ibid., Chap. 9.

64.

E.g. ibid., pp. 70-1; Ambroise Vollard, Renoir: An Intimate Record (New York: Knopf,
1925), p. 30.

65.

Paul Tucker, “The First Impressionist Exhibition in Context,” in Moffett, The New
Painting, pp. 93-104.

66.

Linda Nochlin, ed., Impressionism and Post-Impressionism, 1874-1904: Sources and
Documents (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1966), p. 34.

67.

Ibid., p. 53.

68.

Ibid., pp. 31, 34.

69.

Ibid., p. 42.

45
70.

Rewald, History of Impressionism, pp. 95-6; John House, Monet: Nature into Art (New
Haven: Yale University Press, 1986), Chap. 7. An early historian of the Impressionists,
Théodore Duret, who identified Monet as the leader of a group that also comprised
Pissarro, Renoir, and Sisley, observed that they “were not the originators of open-air
painting; but their great innovation was to establish as a fundamental system a practice
that other painters, including Constable, Corot, and Courbet had used only exceptionally
and incidentally ... The exclusive use of bright color, and the continuous practice of
painting in full light in the open air, formed a new and daring combination, which gave rise
to an art possessing certain novel features;” Manet and the French Impressionists
(Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott, 1910), pp. 71-2, 118-19.

71.

Nochlin, Impressionism, p. 42. Painting in the open air had only become practical around
1850, with the first commercial appearance of paint in metal tubes; David Bomford, et. al.,
Art in the Making: Impressionism (London: National Gallery Publications, 1990), pp. 3940. Renoir later remarked that “Paints in tubes, being easy to carry, allowed us to work
from nature, and nature alone. Without paints in tubes, there would have been no
Cézanne, no Monet, no Sisley or Pissarro, nothing of what the journalists were later to call
Impressionism;” Jean Renoir, Renoir, My Father (Boston: Little Brown, 1958), p. 77.

72.

Kenneth Clark, Landscape Into Art, Second edition (New York: Harper and Row, 1976),
pp. 170-76.

73.

E. g. Daniel Wildenstein, Monet (Koln: Taschen, 1996); Joel Isaacson, Claude Monet:
Observation and Reflection (Oxford: Phaidon, 1978); Clement Greenberg, “The Later
Monet,” in Art and Culture (Boston: Beacon Press, 1961), pp. 37-45.

74.

Ambroise Vollard, Cézanne (Mineola, NY: Dover Publications, 1984), p. 24.

75.

Rewald, History of Impressionism, pp. 292-4.

76.

John Rewald, Paul Cézanne, Letters, Fourth edition (New York: Da Capo Press, 1976),
p. 231.

77.

Roger Fry, Cézanne: A Study of His Development (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1989), p. 3.

78.

Rewald, Paul Cézanne, pp. 293, 299, 302, 329-30.

79.

E. g. see Rewald, Post-Impressionism, pp. 308-10; Shiff, Cézanne and the End of
Impressionism, Chap. 12; William Rubin, “Cézannisme and the Beginnings of Cubism,” in
Reff, Cézanne, pp. 151-202.

80.

Schapiro, Paul Cézanne, p. 10.

81.

Vollard, Degas, p. 96.

46
82.

Richard Thomson, The Private Degas (London: Herbert Press, 1987), p. 9.

83.

George Moore, Impressions and Opinions (New York: Brentano, 1913), p. 229.

84.

Marcel Guérin, ed., Lettres de Degas (Paris: Bernard Grasset, 1931), p. 107.

85.

George Heard Hamilton, Painting and Sculpture in Europe, 1880-1940, Revised edition
(Harmondsworth, Middlesex: Penguin, 1972), p. 49.

86.

Paul Signac, From Eugène Delacroix to Neo-Impressionism,” in Floyd Ratliff, Paul
Signac and Color in Neo-Impressionism (New York: Rockefeller University Press, 1992),
pp. 244-45.

87.

Broude, Seurat, p. 31.

88.

Signac, “From Eugène Delacroix,” p. 247.

89.

The painting is reproduced in 24 of the 33 textbooks analyzed above (see Table 3), more
than any other painting executed in the nineteenth century.

90.

William Innes Homer, Seurat and the Science of Painting (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1964),
p. 181.

91.

Broude, Seurat, p. 55.

92.

Rewald, Camille Pissarro, p. 64.

93.

Ibid., p. 44.

94.

Ibid., p. 97.

95.

Ibid., p. 164.

96.

Rewald, Post-Impressionism, p. 481.

97.

Maurice Malingue, ed., Paul Gauguin: Letters to his Wife and Friends (Cleveland: World
Publishing, 1949), pp. 35, 100, 132.

98.

Van Gogh, Letters, Vol. III, pp. 28-31.

99.

Van Gogh, Letters, Vol. III, p. 6.

100.

Rewald, Post-Impressionism, p.368-71.

101.

Marcel Giry, Fauvism: Origins and Development(New York: Alpine Fine Arts, 1982), p.
104.

47
102.

Ibid., p. 250.

103.

Golding, Cubism, p. 51.

104.

Alfred H. Barr, Picasso: Fifty Years of His Art (New York: Museum of Modern Art,
1946), p. 270.

105.

The painting is reproduced in 30 of the 33 books analyzed above, more than any other
painting by an artist in this study.

106.

Beth Gersh-Nesic, The Early Criticism of André Salmon (New York: Garland, 1991), p.
40. “Ce sont des problèmes nus, des chiffres blancs au tableaux noir. C’est le principe
posé de la peinture-équation.” The translation is mine.

107.

Douglas Cooper, The Cubist Epoch (London: Phaidon, 1971), p. 42.

108.

Ibid., Chap. 3.

109.

Golding, Cubism, pp. 141-3.

110.

Cooper, Cubist Epoch, p. 11.

111.

Golding, Cubism, p. 51.

112.

See Dean Keith Simonton, Scientific Genius: A Psychology of Science (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1988), pp. 66-74.

