industry. Evaluating this possibility requires a model in which growth and location are
endogenous.
      Second, policy makers often justify regional policies on the assumption that there is
a connection between regional growth rates and possession of an industrial base. In order
to evaluate the static and dynamic benefits of policies aimed at creating a ‘vibrant regional
economy,’ it is necessary to precisely model the links between policies, location and
growth.
       Third, the traditional axis of investigation in economic geography models focuses on
the cost of selling goods at a distance. Lowering the cost of trade in goods, however, is
only one aspect of integration. Another important aspect of regional integration is its
effect on the cost of sharing knowledge. In Europe, for instance, integration means that
people now know much more about each other’s nations, cultures, businesses, and
technology. Two facets seem to stand out here, business and personal travel, and cross-
border merger and acquisitions (M&A) activity. The volume of both travel and M&A
activity has expanded rapidly due to European integration and this has clearly reduce the
localisation of commercially relevant knowledge (e.g. product and process innovations).
Moreover, many governments seem to act on the belief that increasing knowledge flows
can help peripheral regions. The promotion of regional universities and high-technology
industrial parks in disadvantaged regions provide some examples. This suggests that the
traditional focus on the cost of trading goods should be augmented by a focus on the cost
of trading ideas. Of course, evaluating the impact of this sort of integration requires a
model in which knowledge spillovers matter. Again, augmenting the standard core-
periphery model to allow for endogenous is the natural way of doing this.
     The final reason is purely academic. The underlying structures of geography and
growth models are remarkably similar (e.g., both are based on Dixit-Stiglitz monopolistic
competition). It seems important to theoretically explore the connections and similarities
between the two literatures that have developed independently.
       This paper extends the well-known core-periphery model of Krugman (1991) by
introducing endogenous growth of the Romer (1990) type. There are certainly many
issues to explore in models that allow location and growth to be jointly determined. As a
first step, this paper focuses primarily on stability issues, that is to say, on how the
introduction of endogenous growth affects the stability of the symmetric equilibrium. We
also briefly consider how agglomeration affects long-run growth. What we show is that in
addition to the usual demand-linked and cost-linked circular causality cycles (so-called
backward and forward linkages), endogenous growth introduces a growth-linked cycle of
circular causality. In the absence of inter-regional knowledge spillovers, this extra
centripetal force is strong enough to make the symmetric equilibrium unstable at any level
of trade costs. We further investigate the impact of endogenous growth on stability by
showing that international knowledge spillovers are a stabilising force. Finally, we show
that in our model, geographic agglomeration speeds real income growth in all regions.
This opens the door to a possibility that dynamic gains from agglomeration may help
offset the well-known static income losses in regions that lose industry.




                                              3
      Our study is related to, but quite distinct from, Martin and Ottaviano (1996). That
paper introduces Romer-type endogenous growth into an economic geography model
based on the Venables (1996), and Krugman and Venables (1995) models of
agglomeration with vertically linked industry. In contrast, our paper works with the
Krugman (1991) model with footloose labour. Furthermore, Martin and Ottaviano (1996)
focus on illustrating how growth affects location and location affects growth. They do not
address stability issues in detail.
       The rest of this paper is organised into six sections. Section 2 presents and solves
the core-periphery model with endogenous growth using a q-theory approach to trade and
endogenous growth models. Section 3 presents the formal analysis necessary to evaluate
the stability of the symmetric and core-periphery outcomes. Section 4 considers stabilising
and de-stabilising integration. Section 5 looks at the growth effects of agglomeration and
its welfare effects. The last section contains a summary and our concluding remarks.

2. Core-Periphery Model with Endogenous Growth

     Our dynamic model finds its foundations in the standard core-periphery model of
Krugman (1991). To bolster intuition and introduce notation, we briefly review that model
without explicitly reporting its equations (our functional form assumptions are made
below when growth is introduced).

2.1 The Static Core-Periphery Model

       The static model assumes two initially symmetric regions (north and south), two
factors of production (workers L and agriculturists A) and two sectors (manufactures X
and agriculture Z). Regional supplies of A as well as the global supply of L are fixed, but
the inter-regional distribution of L is endogenous with L flowing in response to real wage
differences. The monopolistically competitive, increasing returns X-sector employs only L
to produce output. Z is a homogenous good produced under perfect competition and
constant returns using only A. Units of Z are chosen such that Z’s unit input coefficient is
unity. Z and X are traded with Z-trade being cost-less, but X-trade being inhibited by
frictional (i.e. iceberg) trade costs such that τ≥1 units must be shipped to sell one unit in
the other region.* The preferences of all citizens are identical; namely upper tier
preferences of the representative consumer (in each region) are Cobb-Douglas with µ (a
mnemonic for manufactures) as the expenditure share on the X-sector composite.
Preferences over X-varieties are given by the standard CES sub-utility function with σ as
the constant elasticity of substitution.




*
    τ-1 is the tariff equivalent of all natural and man-made barriers to trade in goods.


                                                        4
2.2 Adding Growth

       Ceaseless accumulation of human, knowledge and/or physical capital is the source of
all long-run growth. We must therefore implicitly or explicitly add capital to get
endogenous growth. We choose the explicit route by assuming that making each X-variety
entails a one-time fixed cost--consisting of one unit of capital K--in addition to the usual
variable cost involving only L. The specific (flow) cost function is π+ waXxi, where π is
K’s rental rate, w is the wage, aX is the unit labour requirement and xi is variety i output.
      We view capital as new knowledge embedded in a manufacturing facility that is
immobile across regions. Using the terminology of the growth literature, our capital is
putty-clay as far as location is concerned.
      Adding growth also requires introduction of a capital-producing sector--the I-sector,
where I is a mnemonic for ‘investment goods’ (and innovation). K is the output of the
perfectly competitive I-sector and we assume that a new unit of capital is made with ‘aI’
units of L. To individual I-firms aI is a parameter, however following Lucas (1988), Romer
(1990), and Grossman and Helpman (1991), the I-sector is assumed to be subject to
technological externalities. That is, aI falls as the I-sector’s level of production rises.
       Formally, the I-sector production function is*:

                              LI              1
                      QK =       ; aI =               ,                                            (1)
                              aI        K −1 + λK *−1

where QK is the flow of new capital and LI is I-sector employment; variables without time
subscripts are contemporaneous and those with the subscript “-1” are lagged one period.
Given (1), the difference equation for K is:

                       K t = (1 − δ ) K t −1 + Q K                                                 (2)
where the amount of depreciation depends upon capital’s life span, T.
      Adding endogenous growth also requires intertemporal preferences. With ρ>0 as the
discount rate, preferences of the infinitely lived representative consumer are:
                                                                 1
       ∞                                      K + K * 1-1/σ    1-1/σ       1
U = ∑ β t ln C t ; C = C Xµ C Z1− µ , C X =  ∫ ci            
                                                                      ;β =      ; σ > 1, 0 < µ < 1 (3)
    t =0                                      i =0                        1+ ρ

where CZ and CX are per capita consumption of Z and the CES X composite, and ci is per
capita consumption of X-variety i. Full employment (with one-unit of capital per variety)
implies that K+K* is the global number (mass) of varieties, and ‘*’ denotes southern
variables. The mass of northern-based workers is L, so regional income is wAA+wL+πK,
where wA is the wage of A.


*
 This functional form, which is from Baldwin and Forslid (1996), is similar to that of Van de Klundert
and Smulders (1996)


                                                        5
       Following Krugman (1991) and Fujita, Krugman and Venables (1998), we assume
that the flow of interregional migration of workers is proportional to ‘wage pressure’.
Wage pressure in the static framework of Krugman and others is simply the
contemporaneous difference in real wages. This, of course, requires workers to have static
expectations about future wages, or to ignore future wage changes altogether. In our
model we allow for forward looking behaviour in the sense that wage pressure is related
to the (log) difference in the present values of real wages.* Finally, workers are assumed to
migrate in response to the difference in the present value of utility (call this ratio W). The
specific law of motion assumed is†1:

               L − L−1 = W ( Lw − L−1 )                                                            (4)
where W is the shadow value of migration and Lw is the total labour supply. In steady
states, W is the present value of the log real wage difference.
       Finally, consider way in which θK evolves. Given (1) and (2):

                                 (1 − δ ) K t −1 + Q K
       θ K , +1 =                                                                                   (5)
                    (1 − δ ) K t −1 + QK + (1 − δ ) K t*−1 + Q K*
This expression is significantly simpler when T=∞ or T=1.

2.3 Important Intermediate Results

     Utility optimisation yields a constant division of expenditure between X and Z, and
CES demand functions for X-varieties. The latter may be written as:

                                s j µE                     p 1j−σ
                         cj =            ;   sj ≡       K +K*
                                                                                                   (6)
                                                    ∫
                                 pj                                 1−σ
                                                                p   i     di
                                                    i=0

where sj is variety-j’s market share and E is region-specific consumer expenditure.
Optimisation also implies a transversality condition and the Euler equation,
E/ E −1= (1 + r ) /(1 + ρ ) , where r is the rate of return on savings.
      On the supply side, free trade in Z equalises northern and southern agriculturists’
wage rates (both countries always produce Z). Thus, taking Z as numeraire
pZ=wA=wA*=1. As usual, ‘milling pricing’ is optimal for X-firms, so measuring units such
that aX=(1-1/σ) implies that the northern local and export consumer prices are:
       p = w,               p * = wτ                                                               (7)
Similar pricing rules hold for southern firms. For convenience, we follow Krugman (1991)
and choose units such that Lw=χµ and 2A=χ(1-µ), so w=w*=1 in the symmetric


*
  There are, of course, other considerations involved in the migration decision that may play a role. Here
we stick to a simple formulation in order to focus on essentials.
†
  Numbered notes refer to endnotes that contain more extensive, technical discussions and derivations.


                                                                      6
equilibrium and w=1 in the core-periphery outcome. The parameter χ is a scaling factor
that permits calibration to an arbitrary growth rate.
      Since K is variety specific, K’s reward is the operating profit of a typical X-firm.
Due to mill pricing, operating profit π is the value of sales divided by σ, where the value
of sales is defined to be production at producer prices, or consumption as consumer
prices. Thus π can be written in two ways:

                        wL X    µ
                π=             = ( sE + s * E*)                                               (8)
                      (σ − 1) K σ
The first and second expressions define sales in terms of production and consumption, s is
a typical northern firm’s share in its local market, and s* is its share in its export market.
Analogous expressions hold for π*.
         Turning to the I-sector, we note that competition implies that K is priced at waI.
      The market for northern X-varieties must clear at all moments. By symmetry, output
per variety is LX/aXK and this must equal sµE+ s*µE*. Exploiting symmetry of varieties
and rearranging, the north’s aggregate market clearing condition is:

           wL X            w1−σ µEθ K                   φw1−σ µE * θ K
                  =                              +                             ;        φ ≡ τ 1−σ    (9)
         1 − 1 / σ θ K w1−σ + φ (1 − θ K ) w *1−σ φθ K w1−σ + (1 − θ K ) w*1−σ

where θK≡K/(K+K*) is Jonesian share notation for north’s share of world K, and φ
measures the ‘free-ness’ of trade (φ equals zero when τ=∞ and equals unity when τ=1).
This expression, which is an excess-supply-equals-zero condition, is often referred to as
the ‘wage equation’ since it--together with its analogue for the south--determines the
market clearing w and w* for any given θK.
      The north’s price index, denoted as P, equals wA1-µ(Kw1-σ+ φK*w*1-σ )µ/(1-σ) and the
south’s is analogous.

2.4 Solving for the Long-Run Growth Equilibrium

        As a generic property, simple endogenous growth models are marked by a long-run
(i.e. steady state) equilibrium in which the sectoral and international division of factors is
time-invariant.* Exploiting this notion of a ‘static economy representation’, Baldwin and
Forslid (1999) show that solving for the steady-state growth path is very much like solving
for the equilibrium resource allocation in a static economy. We employ the same approach
here. In particular, characterising the long-run equilibrium requires us to solve for the
steady-state allocation of A and L within each region as well as the allocation of L
between the two regions. The allocation of A is trivial, due to the core-periphery model’s
assumptions that A is internationally immobile and sector-specific. The long-run allocation
of L is a more challenging problem.

*
    We say ‘time-invariant’ rather than ‘constant’ to avoid the impression that the allocation is exogenous.


                                                       7
2.4.1 Two-step Solution Technique
      The inter-regional allocation of L depends upon migration and migration is driven by
the discounted real wage difference. This difference itself depends upon the division of
each region’s L-supply between its X and I sectors. The LI’s, in turn, affect θK and the
LX’s and thus they affect real wages via the w’s and the perfect price indices. Given this
simultaneity, it proves convenient to solve for the long-run equilibrium in two steps. First,
taking L and L* as given, we characterise how the other endogenous variables depend
upon L and L*. Second, we identify the L and L* that are consistent with equilibrium in
the inter-regional labour allocation, i.e. no migration.
      As we shall see, the state of the dynamic system is fully characterised by L, W and
θK, so we take these as our state variables.*
      Given the North’s as-yet undetermined level of L, the sectoral division of L is pinned
down by finding the equilibrium level of LI (full employment implies LX=L-LI). LI is the
amount of labour devoted to the creation of new K, so it is really nothing more than the
level of real investment. Moreover, given that LI drives the accumulation of the K, we see
that characterising the endogenous growth rate boils down to characterising the level of
investment in a general equilibrium model. While there may be many ways of determining
investment, Tobin’s q-approach, introduced by Tobin (1969), is a powerful, intuitive, and
well-known method for characterising investment in a general equilibrium model. The
essence of Tobin’s approach is to assert that the equilibrium level of investment is
characterised by the equality of the stock market value of a unit of capital--which we
denote with the symbol V--and the replacement cost of capital, which is waI in our model.
Tobin took the ratio of these, so what might be called the X-sector free-entry condition
becomes Tobin’s famous steady-state condition q≡V/waI=1.†
      Specifically, to characterise the long-run equilibrium, we find the time-invariant LI
and θK consistent with q=1. Whatever levels these turn out to be, their time invariance
implies two important facts. From (1) and (2), the growth rates of capital--g and g*--are
time-invariant, and from the full employment condition the LX’s are time-invariant.
Furthermore, the second fact and the constancy of the (yet to be determined) θK imply (via
the wage equations) that w and w* will be time-invariant.‡ We turn now to q’s numerator.
      V is, by definition, the present value of the income stream accruing to one unit of
capital. Steady state V’s are easy to solve for in two cases, T=1 and T=∞. Neither is
particularly realistic, but for reasons of algebraic elegance, the latter has been the focus of
most of the endogenous growth literature. When T=∞, Vt=πt/(1-β(1+g)) and the law of




*
  Using a more elaborate terminology, L and θK are state variables while W is a co-state variable.
†
  Note that the steady-state investment level can also be found by assuming I-sector and X-sector activities
are integrated in each firm as in Peretto (1996).
‡
  Given the non-linearity of the market-clearing conditions (8), the exact dependency of the w’s on θK, φ
and LX is too complex to be revealing. Be that as it may, the only relevant fact for our analysis is that the
resulting w and w* are time-invariant.


                                                     8
motion for K is that K-K-1 equals LI(K-1+ λK*-1). For our purposes, however, it turns out
simpler to take T=1 so that Vt=πt and K is given by LI(K-1+ λK*-1).*
      Utilising (1) to write the replacement cost of capital as waI in terms of LI and (7) to
write out Vt=πt in terms of LI, q=1 implies2:

               LI = L / σ                                                                   (10)
Full employment implies LI*=(Lw-L)/σ.
       The second step is to return to the issue of which L and θK are logically consistent
with a time-invariant inter-regional and inter-sectoral division of labour. W drives changes
in L, so we first turn to the expression for W. W is the shadow value of migrating versus
not migrating. As usual this is governed by an asset-pricing-like condition. In discrete
time, this is:

               W+1 = (1 / β )W − (1 / β ) ln Ω                                              (11)
where Ω is the ratio of contemporaneous real wages. Consider next θK’s law of motion.
When T=1—i.e. capital lasts only one period (we think of a period as 10 years each)—
then (1), (2), (10) and full employment imply:

                                  L(θ K + λ (1 − θ K ))
       θ K , +1 =                                                                           (12)
                    L(θ K + λ (1 − θ K )) + ( Lw − L)(λθ K + 1 − θ K )
       By definition of a long-run equilibrium, the equilibrium values of L, W and θK must
be such that L, W and θK stop evolving. Solving (11), we see that the stationary value for
W is lnΩ/(β-1). Consequently, migration stops only if W=0 or the core-periphery outcome
is reached. W=0, however, when lnΩ=0 for all future periods. This tells us that any
interior long-run equilibrium must be marked by equal real wages. Solving (12) for the
steady-state θK (i.e., when θK,+1=θK), implies (g-g*)(1-θK)θK/(1+(g-g*)θK+g*)=0. By
inspection this implies that any long run equilibrium must be a core-periphery outcome, or
an interior equilibrium with equal growth rates. In short, there are only two types of
steady states: (i) the core-periphery outcome or (ii) interior steady states with equal real
wages and equal growth rates. The symmetric equilibrium plainly satisfies the equal wage
and growth condition. There are other interior equilibria that satisfy these requirements
but, as we shall see, they are always unstable.

3. Stability Analysis

       Implicitly or explicitly, all economic geography models are dynamic models and a
key question is the stability of various long-run equilibria. One particularly important issue
is the way in which changing trade costs can cause spatial structures to emerge or change.


*
  Assuming capital lasts only one period, reduces the number of state variables from five to three. And by
taking periods to be rather long, e.g. ten years, the T=1 assumption is no less unrealistic than T=∞.


                                                       9
As we shall see, an entirely distinct issue arises naturally in our model, namely is the way
in which changing the cost of trading ideas can affect spatial structures.

3.1 Formal Stability Analysis
      Standard stability analysis in the core-periphery model (introduced by Krugman
1991) has a strong intuitive appeal. Starting from the symmetric equilibrium in the
canonical Krugman-Venables model, one considers the contemporaneous real wage
impact of moving a small amount of labour between the two regions. If this perturbation
raises the real wage in the receiving region, the location equilibrium is considered unstable.
Otherwise, it is stable. While this intuitive approach has no obvious basis in formal stability
analysis, it turns out to be exactly right in simple models.
     Unfortunately, in more complex model, such as ours, it is not sufficient in general,
so we must rely on a more formal, more elaborate approach (see the appendix of Barro
and Sala-i-Martin 1995 for an excellent introduction to these methods).

3.2 Stability of the Symmetric Equilibrium
      The three difference-equations (4), (11) and (12) control the dynamics—and
therefore the stability—of our model. Since these are non-linear in the state variables L, W
and θK, we linearise the system about the symmetric steady state and study the stability
properties of the resulting equations. The linearised system is:

      xt +1 = J xt , xt ≡ ( Lt − LW / 2,Wt ,θ K − 1 / 2) T                      (13)
where J is the Jacobian matrix (i.e. matrix of own and cross partials) evaluated at the
symmetric steady state. Specifically, J evaluated at the symmetric outcome is:

           1     µ /2         0          
          
      J =  J 21 1 / β       J 23                                              (14)
                                          
          1 / µ  0   (1 − λ ) /(1 + λ )

where J21 equals d(lnΩ)/dL times (-1/β) and J23 equals d(lnΩ)/dθK times (-1/β); recall that
Ω is the ratio of the real wages.
      Evaluating the derivatives in J that involve Ω is something of a challenge. Although
Ω is clearly a function of L and θK, the function cannot be explicitly defined (the wages
equations cannot be solved for w and w*, since they involve the power 1-σ, which is, in
general, not an integer). For the purposes at hand, however, we only need the derivatives
of the function evaluated at a specific point. To get these, we write the excess-supply (i.e.
wage) equations and perfect price indices in implicit form, namely, as XSi[L, θK] and
Pj[w,w*,θK] (j=1,2), where XS is a mnemonic for excess supply. Using these, and noting
that Ω≡(w/P)/(w*/P*), we have:

d (ln Ω) 1 dw 1 dw * 1 ∂P dw ∂P dw * 1 ∂P * dw ∂P * dw *
        =     −      −       −        +        +                                       (15)
   dL     w dL w * dL P ∂w dL ∂w * dL   P ∂w dL ∂w * dL


                                                  10
where all derivatives are evaluated at the symmetric steady state. We can find dw/dL and
dw*/dL by totally differentiating the two wage equations, evaluating the derivatives at the
symmetric steady state and then solving for the desired derivatives. Since both P and P*
can be written as explicit functions of the w’s and θK, direct calculation establishes the
partials involving the P’s. An analogous expression is used to establish d(lnΩ)/dθK.
        Four features of J21 and J23 are worth noting. First, the major components d(lnΩ)/dL
and d(lnΩ)/dθK are functions of the free-ness of trade, φ. Second, d(lnΩ)/dL is negative
for all φ. Migration therefore always has a stabilising effect on the relative nominal wages
(i.e. the wages measured in terms of the numeraire). This differs from the static core-
periphery model, where d(w/w)/dL switches sign from negative (for high trade barriers) to
positive (for low barriers). This difference is easily accounted for. In the static model,
changes in L are automatically accompanied by proportional changes in the number of
firms (since firms are assumed to instantaneously enter and exit and the cost function in
homogenous). In our model, however, L and θK can vary independently. The third fact is
that d(lnΩ)/dθK is positive for all φ. Thus we see that raising θK always tends to raise the
real wage difference and this acts as a destabilising mechanism. The fourth fact is that the
strengths of the two effects are affected in opposite ways by a lowering of trade costs. The
derivative d(lnΩ)/dL tends to approach zero (i.e. gets less negative) as φ approaches unity,
but d(lnΩ)/dθK gets more positive as φ approaches unity.

Finding the Eigenvalues and the Stability Test
      It is straightforward to analytically find the three eigenvalues of the J matrix. They
are, however, the solutions to a third-order polynomial and are therefore quite complex (in
both sense of the word). Indeed, even in simple cases such as λ=0 or 1, they are too
unwieldy to report (a MAPLE spreadsheet that derives them is available from the authors
upon request).
      The eigenvalues can, however, be readily evaluated for various values of the
underlying parameters (σ, µ and β) and then plotted for all possible policy parameters
0≤λ≤1 and 0≤φ≤1.* In our calculations, we take σ=5 µ=1/4 and β=1/2 (this discount
factor implies an annual discount rate of about 7% when periods are 10 years); extensive
sensitivity analysis (not reported here) shows that the gist of results hold for all reasonable
values of the underlying parameters.
       Since only one of our three state variables can jump, stability requires that the real
part of at least two eigenvalues are less than unity. In particular, the system is saddle-path
stable when two of the three real parts are less than unity (with two real parts less than
unity, the system can jump on to the saddle ‘path’, i.e. stable manifold, from any arbitrary
initial condition on the non-jumpers).
      Calculation shows the first eigenvalue always exceeds unity, while the real part of
the second is always less than unity. The real part of third switches between greater than
and less than unity depending upon the policy parameters λ and φ.


*
    One advantage to working with φ instead of τ is that it yields a compact parameter space.


                                                      11
       Since the stability of the system depends only upon the magnitude of the real part of
the third eigenvalue, we can fully describe the stability of the symmetric equilibrium by
studying the level of the third eigenvalue’s real part. This is accomplished in Figure 1 by
numerically evaluating the eigenvalue’s real part for a fine grid of λ and φ values. Given
the stability test, we need only show the level curve that corresponds to the knife-edge
case where the real part of the third eigenvalue is equal to unity.

Figure 1: Symmetric Equilibrium Stability Map
      λ (knowledge spillovers)

              1
                     stable




                                        unstable




                                                                  φ (free-ness
             0            0.2    0.4       0.6         0.8    1   of trade)
Implied τ −> ∞           1.50    1.26      1.14        1.06   1

      The first point to note is that endogenous growth is per se a de-stabilising force.
When λ=0 (no learning spillovers between regions), the system is always unstable,
regardless of the level of trade free-ness.
      Intuition for this result is simple. As Grossman and Helpman (1991) show in their
‘hysteresis in growth’ model, the case of no spillovers implies that any perturbation will
cause the relative capital stocks (of initially symmetric nations) to diverge forever. The
reason is that the nation with the slight head-start finds that it accumulates I-sector
experience faster than the other nation. This lowers the replacement cost of capital--
denominator of its Tobin’s q--faster and this in turn attracts more resources to the I-sector
of the fast-accumulating nation. With love-of-variety preferences, the difference in the rate
of K accumulation implies a continual increase in the real wage gaps (in favour of the
nation with faster capital growth). Thus, if one allows labour mobility (as in our model),
labour would move continuously to the fast-growth region. Moreover, this shift in labour
forces would exaggerate the growth rate difference. In short, a growth-linked chain of
circular causality would imply that the symmetric equilibrium is unstable for any level of
trade costs.



                                                  12
       The second point is that knowledge spillovers are a stabilising force. There are two
ways to see this. With λ=1 (perfect knowledge spillovers between regions), the system is
stable for sufficient low levels of trade free-ness (i.e. for high levels of trade costs). Our
findings show that the critical level of φ does not vary much with the underlying
parameters. For the parameters used in Figure 1, the critical level is about 0.6. With σ=5,
this implies at trade cost of about 1.14. Thus, when knowledge spillovers are perfect, the
symmetric outcome is stable for even quite low trade costs (recall that τ reflects all costs
of selling goods at a distance, not just transport costs). Second, as is clear from the figure,
the range of φs for which the system is stable expands as λ rises. In this sense, knowledge
spillover is a stabilising force that goes a long way to countering the de-stabilising effects
of growth.
      The intuition for this result is also uncomplicated. The production externalities in the
I-sector (which are necessary for growth) create their own circular causality encouraging
agglomeration. The strength of this force, however, depends upon the extent to which the
externalities are localised. As λ rises to unity, the growth-linked agglomeration force
disappears.

3.3 Stability of the Core-Periphery Equilibrium
       It is simpler to study the stability of the core-periphery (CP) outcome since the
perturbation method is perfectly valid in this case. This validity is easily seen. With some
work, we find that the three eigenvalues for the CP equilibrium are (1-W, 1/β, 0).*
Clearly, the equilibrium is stable only if W>0 (recall that stability requires two eigenvalues
to be less than unity). Since W>0 if and only if the relative real wage is greater than unity,
we can conduct our analysis by asking how a small migration shock would alter the
relative real wage.
       If the CP equilibrium is to be unstable then it must be that a small group of migrating
workers will find it worth their while to build new capital in the periphery. Using the
Section-2 reasoning, we know that of the dL* migrants, dL*/σ will work in the I-sector
and the rest in the X-sector. As usual, q*=1, i.e. π*=w*aI*, must hold if they are
optimising. Employing (6), this means that w*/λK-1 equals (µw*1-σ/σK)(φE/∆+E*/∆*)
where ∆ is defined as (1+(K*/K)φ w*1-σ), ∆* is defined as (φ+(K*/K) w*1-σ), and K* and
K are given by (dL*/σ)(λK-1) and (L/σ)(λK-1), respectively. Taking the limit as dL*
approaches zero and rearranging, the incipient w* in the CP equilibrium is
  *
wCP  = ((λµ / Lw )(φ ( Lw + A) + A / φ ))1 / σ . Furthermore, if the CP equilibrium is unstable it
must be that the small vanguard of migrants earns a higher real wages than their core-
based colleagues. This real-wage condition is w*cp>φµ/(1-σ), so with some manipulation our
stability test is:

                λ (φ 2 (1 + µ ) + 1 − µ ) ≤ 2φ 1− µ /(1−1 / σ )                           (16)



*
    The MAPLE worksheet stab_CP.mws showing this is available from the authors.


                                                            13
      As with the symmetric equilibrium, we can map this stability condition in (λ,φ) space
(as noted above, this is identical to mapping the third eigenvalue of the Jacobian
      Figure 2: Core-Periphery Stability Map

         λ (knowledge spillovers)

               1
   CP Unstable,        D            C
   Symm.Stable


    CP Stable,
                        A           B
    Symm.Stable
                                          CP Stable,
                                          Symm.Unstable




                                                                     φ (free-ness
                0            0.2        0.4     0.6       0.8    1   of trade)
   Implied τ −> ∞           1.50        1.26   1.14       1.06   1
evaluated at the CP equilibrium). The result is Figure 2 (this assumes the same values of
the underlying parameters as the previous figure). The dividing line between the stable and
unstable regions is defined by the combinations of λ and φ where the real-wage condition
is zero. The heavy solid line shows this by plotting the zero-level curve of the w*cp-φµ/(1-σ)
function. What we find is that for a large portion of the (λ,φ) space, the core-periphery
outcome is stable. For instance, consider λ=0. Here, starting up K production in the
periphery is prohibitively expensive, so the CP outcome is stable for all level of trade free-
ness. At the other extreme, when λ=1 the CP outcome can be unstable, but only for very
high level of trade costs.
       Note that increasing λ expands the range of instability (in terms of trade free-ness).
Thus, spillovers increase the range of stability for the symmetric equilibrium, but widens
the range of instability for the CP outcome. In this sense, we can say that endogenous
growth is an agglomeration force, but knowledge spillovers are a dispersion force.
Intuitively, spillovers are de-stabilising for the CP outcome since mitigate the force of
‘growth-linked’ circular causality discussed above.
      For comparison, we have reproduced the knife-edge level curve for the symmetric
equilibrium in Figure 2 (shown by the dotted locus). The two level curves partition the
policy space, viz. λ and φ space, into three regions. In small, northwest region, where λ is
high and φ is low, the CP outcome is unstable but the symmetric equilibrium is stable. In
the middle region both equilibria are stable and in the large, southeast region, only the CP
steady state is stable.



                                                  14
        Plainly, the middle region corresponds to what FKV call the ‘tomahawk diagram’—
i.e. a situation of overlapping stability. That is, if we took the level of λ as given and
investigated only how changes in trade costs affect stability, we would find that for some
levels of φ, both the symmetric and CP outcomes were stable.

4. Stabilising and Destabilising Integration
      The traditional axis of investigation in economic geography models focuses on the
cost of selling goods at a distance. Lowering the cost of trade in goods, however, is only
one aspect of integration.
      Europe, for instance, is much more closely integrated now than it was twenty years
ago. Some part of the this is due to greater trade in goods (fostered by lower trade costs),
but much of this comes in the form of what European know about each others’ cultures,
businesses and technology. Examples abound. Many more Europeans are able to receive
foreign TV channels and speak a foreign language. Business and personal travel has
increased enormously and cross-country educational exchanges are common. More
directly relevant, however, has been the rapid expansion of intra-European merger and
acquisitions and the remarkable rise in intra-European foreign direct investment FDI. Such
undertakings clearly reduce the localisation of commercially relevant knowledge, such as
product and process innovations. There is some evidence that this knowledge-sharing
aspect of integration has outpaced the increase in goods trade. The European
Commission, for instance, reports that the Single Market Programme induced intra-EU
FDI to expand seven times faster than intra-EU trade.
      Finally, encouraging knowledge spillovers are frequently the object of explicit
policy. Much of EU research spending, for instance, is explicitly linked to the goal of
fostering intra-European knowledge exchanges. The EU’s Human Capital and Mobility
and Training and Research Mobility programmes, for example, funded research networks
the involved institutions in a several EU nations and paid for EU post-graduate students to
work in other EU nations). Additionally, national and EU regional policies are often aimed
at encouraging the inflow of knowledge to disadvantaged regions (e.g. via regional
universities) and the inflow of people with knowledge (e.g. via high-technology industrial
parks).
      In short, the cost of trading ideas has also fallen along with the cost of trading
goods. This suggests that the traditional focus on goods costs should be augmented by a
focus on the cost of trading ideas. In our model we take φ as a measure of the former and
λ as a measure of the latter.
      Given Figure 2 and this mapping between real-world integration and our policy
variables, the assertion that integration may be stabilising or destabilising is
straightforward. A purely trade-cost reducing integration policy encourages
agglomeration. A policy that moved the world from, say point A in Figure 2 to point B
would result in extreme agglomeration. By contrast, a policy that lowered the cost of
trading both goods and ideas reduces the risk of extreme agglomeration. For example, a
policy combination that raised both φ and λ, taking the world from point A to point C
would result in gains from trade without delocalisation. Indeed, an integration policy that


                                             15
raises learning spillovers sufficiently can, in some case, lead to a dispersion of economic
activity. For example, if the world started out in a CP situation at A (recall A is consist
with either a CP or a symmetric equilibrium) and λ were raised enough to move the
economy to D, integration would result in a radical dispersion of industrial activity.

5. Growth, Agglomeration and Welfare
      Due to the localised nature of learning externalities, agglomeration is pro-growth.
Moreover, the presence of I-sector externalities also ensures that laissez-faire growth is
sub-optimal. This raises the interesting possibility that the pro-growth aspect of
agglomeration will mitigate and might entirely offset the static welfare loss experienced by
periphery agriculturists.*
       More specifically, real income and consumption growth rates are identical in both
regions in either the CP or symmetric configuration. This statement is obvious for the
symmetric case. It holds for the CP case since once the CP outcome is obtained, the
perfect price index in both nations will fall (thereby yield rising real incomes) at the same
rate. The rate of rise will be µ/(σ-1) times the growth rate. Importantly, however, even
though the slopes of the core’s and the periphery’s price-index paths are identical, the
periphery’s path is permanently higher, as long as φ < 1, due to the usual variety effect
first explored by Venables (1987).
       Plainly many welfare exercises suggest themselves, for example tracing out the
welfare of a particular integration path. However to run a very clean comparison and keep
the analytics simple, we consider a very stark policy experiment. That is, we consider a
policy that forces the symmetric equilibrium to switch to a CP equilibrium without
changing φ or λ. For this to be possible, the world must initially find itself in the
overlapping stability region where there are two perfectly valid long-run equilibria, one in
which industry is equally divided and one in which industry is concentrated in the core. It
is well known that in the static core-periphery model moving from the symmetric to CP
outcomes is always good for the mobile factor, always good for agriculturists in the core,
but always bad for the agriculturists in the periphery (since they must pay higher prices for
their X-sector consumption). When the agglomeration also changes the growth rate,
however, the outcome is ambiguous. In particular, it would seem possible that the
dynamic gain more than compensates periphery-based agriculturists for their static losses.
In this case the catastrophic agglomeration would be a Pareto improving transformation.
       We turn now to evaluating this possibility in our model by comparing steady-state
utility levels

5.1 Welfare Impact of Agglomeration: Static and Dynamic Effects
      Whenever, the economy is forever in a single long-run equilibrium, the present value
of an agriculturist’s utility flow is†:

*
  Of course the first-best policy would be free trade in X and a production subsidy to the I-sector in the
core country. In this case, agglomeration would be unambiguously welfare improving for both regions.
†
  This is simply the present value of EA/P, where EA is the expenditure of a typical agriculturist. The fact


                                                     16
       U A = ln(
                   A
                   P0
                             (
                      ) − ln 1 − β (1 + g ) µ /(σ −1)   )                                           (17)

The first term in this expression captures static effects, i.e. one-time changes in income or
prices. The second term captures dynamic effects, i.e. changes in the rate at which the
price index falls.
       To focus tightly on key issues, we consider the UA for an agriculturist based in the
south, i.e. the region that has no industry in the CP equilibrium. The symmetric equilibrium
price index, call it PoS equals (Kow(1+φ)/2)µ/1-σ, where Kow is the period zero level of the
world capital stock, i.e. the number of varieties produced world wide. In the CP
equilibrium, the corresponding index, PoC, equals (Kowφ)µ/1-σ. The growth factors, i.e. 1+g,
in the symmetric and CP equilibria are Lw(1+λ)/2σ and Lw/σ, respectively. Using these
facts in (17), we have:

                        −µ      1+φ          1 − β (1 + Lw (1 + λ ) / 2σ ) µ /(σ −1) 
       U AC − U AS =        ln(     ) + ln                                                      (18)
                       σ −1      2φ              1 −  β (1 + Lw
                                                                 / σ ) µ /(σ −1)
                                                                                       
The first term shows the static welfare effect (this is unambiguously negative) and the
second term shows the dynamic welfare effect (this is strictly positive when λ<1). The
lower is λ, the larger is the dynamic gain and so the more likely it is that the (18) is
positive. Similarly, raising φ lowers the static loss to periphery agriculturist and so makes a
gain more likely.
       Figure 3: Dynamic Gains from Agglomeration
                          λ (knowledge spillovers)

                                  1




                                                                                     φ (free-ness
                                 0            0.2       0.4        0.6    0.8    1   of trade)
                    Implied τ −> ∞           1.50    1.26          1.14   1.06   1

      From (18) it is clear that there is some combination of φ and λ where periphery
agriculturists are just indifferent to agglomeration. A convenient way to characterise this



that A= EA is not obvious. It follows from the fact that in this model, investment spending is exactly equal
to capital’s income.


                                                              17
line is to simply plot the zero level curve of (18) in φ, λ space, using the same underlying
parameter values employed in Figures 1 and 2. The result is shown in Figure 3.
      Interestingly, the range of φ and λ where the dynamic effect is large enough to
outweigh the static loss—shown by the shaded area--does not overlap with the stability
region for the symmetric equilibrium. This finding, which is robust to sensitivity analysis
on µ, σ and β, is not unexpected. For the dynamic effect to be large, λ must be low,
however when λ is low, symmetry is unstable since we approach the Grossman-Helpman
hysteresis-in-growth world. For (18) to be positive for high values of λ, the level of φ
must be very close to unity (to keep the static loss low). Again in this case, the symmetric
equilibrium is unstable since the model approaches the standard static core-periphery
model.
      This lack of overlap suggests the compensating growth effects can only mitigate the
periphery’s loss. That is, any small change in λ and φ that switches the economy from a
symmetric to asymmetric outcome will unambiguously harm residents of the periphery.
Moreover, once the total agglomeration has occurred, further changes in λ have no impact
on the welfare of any consumer.

6. Summary and Concluding Remarks

      Using the q-approach to trade-and-endogenous growth models developed in
Baldwin and Forslid (1999), this paper shows that it is relatively simple to introduce
endogenous growth into the standard Krugman (1991) core-periphery model with
footloose labour. The resulting model can be thought of as a marriage between the
Krugman economic geography model and a Romer-Grossman-Helpman endogenous
growth model. The paper shows that growth can be a powerful destabilising force. We
also show that inter-regional learning spillovers are a stabilising force.
      Including endogenous growth explicitly also allows us to take a more subtle view of
integration. Traditionally, integration is viewed simply lowering the cost of trading goods.
Many aspects of integration, however, might more naturally viewed as lowering the cost
of trading information, i.e. as reducing the extent to which learning externalities in growth
sectors are localised. We show that this form of integration tends to be stabilising. This
contrasts sharply with the traditional analysis that views integration as inevitably
destabilising. This expansion of the research agenda is welcomed since many real-world
regional policies—e.g. encouragement of regional universities, subsidisation of high-
technology industrial parks in disadvantaged regions—seem aimed at combating the
localisation of learning externalities in the core.
      Finally we show that agglomeration of industry is favourable to growth. Since
laissez-faire growth is socially sub-optimal in the symmetric equilibrium, agglomeration
produces a welfare-enhancing pro-growth effect. We show that this can mitigate loses to
residents of the periphery, but it cannot turn catastrophic agglomeration into a Pareto
improvement.




                                             18
References
Baldwin R.E. and R. Forslid, (1999) "Trade Liberalisation & Endogenous Growth: A q-
      Theory Approach," forthcoming Journal of International Economics.
Barro, R. and X. Sala-i-Martin (1995) Economic Growth, McGraw Hill, New York.
Eaton, J. and S. Kortum (1996) "Trade in ideas: Productivity and patenting in the OECD,"
      Journal of International Economics, 40, pp 251-278.
Fujita M., Krugman P. and A. Venables, (1997) “The Spatial Economy: Cities, Regions
      and International Trade”, manuscript.
Grossman, G. and Helpman, E. (1991), Innovation and Growth in the World Economy,
      MIT Press, Cambridge USA.
Krugman P. (1991a) “Increasing Returns and Economic Geography”, Journal of Political
      Economy, 99, pp.483-99.
Krugman P. and A. Venables (1995) “Globalisation and the Inequality of Nations”,
      Quarterly Journal of Economics, 60, pp.857-80.
Lucas, R. (1988) "On the mechanics of economic development," Journal of Monetary
      Economics, pp.3-42.
Martin P. and G.I.P. Ottaviano (1996) “Growth and Agglomeration”, CEPR working
      paper, no. 1529.
Peretto, P. (1996) Sunk Costs, Market Structure, and Growth, International Economic
      Review, November.
Puga, D. (1997) "The rise and fall of regional inequalities”, CEP working paper, LSE.
Romer, P. (1990) "Endogenous Technological Change" Journal of Political Economy, 98,
      pp.71-102.
Tobin, J. (1969) "A General Equilibrium Approach to Monetary Theory" Journal of
      Money, Credit and Banking, pp 15-29.
Van de Klundert, T and S. Smulders, North-South knowledge spillovers and competition:
      convergence versus divergence, Journal of Development Economics, 50, 2, 213-
      233.
Venables, A. (1987) “Trade and trade policy with differentiated products: A
      Chamberlinian-Ricardian model,” Economic Journal, 97, pp 700-717.
Venables, A. (1996) "Equilibrium location with vertically linked industries," Journal of
      International Economics.




                                          19
Supplemental Guide to Calculations
1
  We can justify the migration equation as follows (we work in continuous time to allow
for more compact expressions; the conversion to discrete time is obvious). Consider a
southern household that is considering sending some labour to the north to maximise its
real earnings. The problem is faces is to the migration rate in order to solve the following
problem:
                  ∞
                          (                                   )
             max ∫ e − ρt ln Lω + (1 − L)ω * −γm 2 / 2(1 − L) dt
                  0

where we have assumed migration costs are quadratic in the rate of migration (as a
proportion of the sending population) and m = L& .

                                                    (                         )
      The current valued Hamiltonian is e − ρt ln sLω + (1 − s L )ω * −γm 2 / 2 + e − ρtWm and
the necessary conditions are:
            m = L& = W (1 − L) / γ ,
            W& = ρW − ln(ω − ω *)
      Aggregating over household yields a law of motion similar to the one in the text.
2
 With (1) and (7), q=1 can be written as:
             w( L − LI ) / K (σ − 1)
                                     =1
               w /( K −1 + λK −*1 )
Realising that 1+g=K/K-1, using the growth form of the I-sector production function,
namely, (1+g)=LI(1+λ(1-θK)/ θK), and simplifying, we get the expression in the text.




                                               20
