1. Introduction

       During the past twenty years, commitments to the U.S. venture capital industry have

grown dramatically. This growth has not been uniform: it has occurred in quite concentrated

areas of the country and peaks in fundraising have been followed by major retrenchments.

Despite the importance of the venture capital sector in generating innovation and new jobs, few

academic studies have attempted to determine the underlying causes of these dramatic

movements in venture fundraising.



       In this paper we examine the forces that affect fundraising by independent venture capital

organizations from 1972 through 1994. We study both industry fundraising patterns and the

fundraising success of individual venture organizations.       We find that regulatory changes

affecting pension funds, capital gains tax rates, overall economic growth, and research and

development expenditures—as well as firm-specific performance and reputation—affect

fundraising by venture capital organizations.        The results are potentially important for

understanding and promoting venture capital investment.



       Various factors may affect the level of commitments to venture capital organizations.

Poterba (1989) argues that many of the changes in fundraising could arise from changes in either

the supply of or the demand for venture capital. When we refer to the supply of venture capital,

we mean the desire of investors to place money into venture capital funds. Demand is then the

desire of entrepreneurs to attract venture capital investment in their firm. For example, decreases

in capital gains tax rates might increase commitments to venture capital funds through increases

in the desire of taxable investors to make new commitments to funds as well as through increases
in the demand for venture capital investments when workers have greater incentives to become

entrepreneurs. Our research methodology attempts to distinguish between supply and demand

factors that affect the quantity of venture capital.



        We find that demand-side factors appear to have had an important impact on

commitments to venture capital funds. Capital gains tax rates have an important effect at both

the industry, state-, and firm-specific levels.        Decreases in the capital gains tax rates are

associated with greater venture capital commitments. The effect, however, appears to occur

through the demand for venture capital: rate changes affect both taxable and tax-exempt

investors.   Similarly, R&D expenditures, especially expenditures by industrial firms, are

positively related to venture investments in particular states.



        We also find that The Department of Labor’s clarification of its “prudent man” rule,

which enabled pension funds to freely invest in venture capital, and individual venture firm

performance and reputation influence fundraising. Higher recent returns (as measured by the

value of equity held in firms taken public) lead to greater capital commitments to new funds.

Older and larger organizations also attract more capital. Finally, we examine factors that affect

venture organizations’ decisions to raise funds targeted at early-stage, start-up firms. These

funds are potentially the most important for generating new firms and innovation. We find that

smaller, West Coast venture organizations are more likely to have raised an early-stage venture

fund.




                                                   2
          The rest of the paper is organized as follows: A brief discussion of the institutional details

of venture capital is presented in Section 2. Section 3 discusses the economics of venture capital

and presents factors that might affect venture capital fundraising. Industry-wide fundraising

patterns, at both the aggregate and state level, are explored in Section 4. Section 5 explores

fundraising by individual venture organizations in an exhaustive database of venture capital

funds. Section 6 considers alternative explanations. Section 7 concludes.



2. The Institution of Venture Capital1

          In this section we briefly review the institutional details of venture capital organizations.

The discussion highlights the structure and function of venture capital organizations in the U.S. and

how venture capital is distinct from other sources of financing for young, entrepreneurial

companies. In addition, we seek to place the development of the venture capital industry in context

so the tests discussed in Section 3 are better understood.



          Many start-up firms require substantial capital. A firm’s founder may not have sufficient

funds to finance these projects alone and might therefore seek outside financing. Entrepreneurial

firms that are characterized by significant intangible assets, expect years of negative earnings, and

have uncertain prospects are unlikely to receive bank loans or other debt financing. For many of

these young companies, the tremendous uncertainty and asymmetric information may make venture

capital the only potential source of financing. Venture capital organizations finance these high-risk,

potentially high-reward projects, purchasing equity stakes while the firms are still privately held.

Venture capitalists have backed many high-technology companies including Apple Computer,


1
    Much of this discussion is based on Gompers and Lerner (1996).



                                                    3
Cisco Systems, Genentech, Intel, Microsoft, Netscape, and Sun Microsystems.           A substantial

number of successful service firms (including Federal Express, Staples, Starbucks, and TCBY) have

also received venture financing.



       Venture capitalists are often active investors, monitoring the progress of firms, sitting on

boards of directors, and meting out financing based on the attainment of milestones. While banks

monitor the financial health of firms that they lend to, venture capitalists monitor strategy and

investment decisions as well as take an active role in advising the firm. Venture capitalists often

retain important control rights that allow them to intervene in the company’s operations when

necessary. In addition, venture capitalists provide entrepreneurs with access to consultants,

investment bankers, and lawyers. Brav and Gompers (1997) show that venture capital backing adds

value even after the initial public offering: venture-backed companies substantially outperform

nonventure-backed firms in the public aftermarket.



       The first modern venture capital firm, American Research and Development (ARD), was

formed in 1946 by MIT President Karl Compton, Harvard Business School Professor Georges F.

Doriot, and local business leaders. A small group of venture capitalists made high-risk investments

into emerging companies that were based on technology developed for World War II. The success

of the investments ranged widely: almost half of ARD's profits during its 26-year existence as an

independent entity came from its $70,000 investment in Digital Equipment Company (DEC) in

1957, which grew in value to $355 million. Because institutional investors were reluctant to invest,

ARD was structured as a publicly traded closed-end fund and marketed mostly to individuals [Liles




                                                 4
(1977)]. The few other venture organizations begun in the decade after ARD's formation were also

structured as closed-end funds.



        The first venture capital limited partnership, Draper, Gaither, and Anderson, was formed in

1958. Imitators soon followed, but limited partnerships accounted for a minority of the venture pool

during the 1960s and 1970s. Most venture organizations raised money either through closed-end

funds or small business investment companies (SBICs), federally guaranteed risk-capital pools that

proliferated during the 1960s. While the market for SBICs in the late 1960s and early 1970s was

strong, incentive problems ultimately led to the collapse of the sector. Even so, the annual flow of

money into venture capital during its first three decades never exceeded a few hundred million

dollars and usually was substantially less.



        One change in the venture capital industry during the past twenty years has been the rise of

the limited partnership as the dominant organizational form.2 Limited partnerships also have an

important advantage which makes them attractive to tax-exempt institutional investors: capital gains

taxes are not paid by the limited partnership. Instead taxes are paid only by the (taxable) investors.

Venture partnerships have pre-determined, finite lifetimes (usually ten years though extensions are

often allowed). Investors in the fund are limited partners. In order to maintain limited liability,

investors must not become involved in the day-to-day management of the fund.




2
 The rise of the limited partnership also allows us to accurately track venture capital fundraising.
Venture capital limited partnerships raise a pre-specified amount of money to be invested. The
data discussed in Section 5 is fund-by-fund tracking of these amounts.



                                                  5
3. The Economics of Venture Capital

       3.1. Supply and demand in venture capital

       In this section we develop predictions about what factors might influence the quantity of

venture capital provided in an economy. In order to understand the mechanism through which

these factors work, it is important to discuss supply and demand in the venture capital market.

Figure 1 presents a simple illustration of equilibrium in the venture capital market. Supply of

venture capital is determined by the willingness of investors to provide funds to venture firms. The

willingness of investors to commit money to venture capital is dependent upon the expected rate of

return on venture investments. Therefore, in the venture capital market, price is the expected rate

of return on new venture capital investments. Higher expected returns lead to a greater desire of

investors to supply venture capital, i.e., like most supply schedules it slopes upward.



       The demand schedule is simply the quantity of entrepreneurial firms seeking venture capital

that can supply a particular expected rate of return. As the price increases—the expected return

increases—fewer entrepreneurial firms demand capital because the quantity of projects meeting that

threshold declines. The demand schedule therefore slopes downward.



       We will discuss the equilibria in the supply and demand framework by examining the

quantity of venture capital. While any supply and demand equilibrium also implies a particular

price, i.e., an expected rate of return, we can not measure the anticipated rate of return in the

venture capital market. Nor does the actual rate of return provide a useful proxy. Returns from

venture capital investments can only be observed many years after the original investments

because private firms are valued at cost until they are sold or taken public many years later.




                                                   6
Because of these accounting policies, the stated returns for venture funds are exceedingly variable

and somewhat misleading. [See the discussion in Gompers and Lerner (1997).]3 We feel fairly

comfortable that the expected rate of return, i.e., price, will not vary substantially across the sample

period. As discussed below, however, supply curves for venture capital are likely to be very

elastic. Hence, changes in equilibrium will have a significantly larger effect on quantities than on

prices.




          The supply schedule for venture capital is likely to be quite flat. Investors choose to place

money in financial assets because of the monetary returns that they return.             Because close

substitutes for these cash flows exist either through a single security or combination of securities,

investors will have a particular expected return on venture capital that just compensates for the

systematic riskiness of the investments [Scholes (1972)]. If perfect substitutes for venture capital

existed, then the supply curve should be totally flat. We draw supply curves as slightly upward

sloping in Figure 1. One source of an upward slope would be differential taxes. Because the return

on venture capital investments is taxable, investors with higher tax rates would require progressively

higher expected rates of return to induce them to invest in venture funds versus some tax-free

investment.



          3.2. The Employment Retirement Income Security Act and venture commitments

          One policy decision that potentially had an effect on commitments to venture funds via

supply changes is the clarification by the U.S. Department of Labor of the Employment Retirement


3
 In addition, practices of reporting valuations of companies across various venture organizations
is often quite different. Finally, information on fund returns is closely guarded, and even the
intermediaries who specialize in compiling this data do not have very comprehensive coverage.


                                                   7
Income Security Act’s (ERISA) prudent man rule in 1979.           Through 1978, the rule stated that

pension managers had to invest with the care of a “prudent man.” Consequently, many pension

funds avoided investing in venture capital entirely: it was felt that a fund’s investment in a start-up

could be seen as imprudent.       In early 1979, the Department of Labor ruled that portfolio

diversification was a consideration in determining the prudence of an individual investment. Thus,

the ruling implied that an allocation of a small fraction of a portfolio to venture capital funds would

not be seen as imprudent. That clarification specifically opened the door for pension funds to invest

in venture capital.



        We conjecture that the supply curve for venture capital before the clarification of ERISA

might have looked like S1. The upward inelastic segment of S1 results because pension funds, a

segment of the U.S. financial market that controls substantial amounts of capital, were unable to

invest in venture funds. The supply of venture capital may have been limited at any expected rate of

return. If the initial demand for venture capital were given by D1, then the equilibrium quantity of

venture capital would be given by Q1.



        After ERISA, the supply curve moved to S2. The supply curve moved down and flattened

out. The supply curve moved down because pension funds, which are tax exempt, required a lower

expected rate of return on venture investments than other taxable investors. The curve would not

have an inelastic segment because the resources of pensions could now be invested in venture

capital funds. When we look at the data, we expect that the quantity of venture capital supplied will

increase after ERISA was clarified to Q2. This effect should only be significant for contributions by

pension funds because ERISA regulations have no bearing on other types of investors.




                                                  8
       3.3. Capital gains taxes and venture capital fundraising

       The effect of capital gains tax rates on commitments to the venture capital industry has been

debated in the academic literature as well as political circles. The effect of reductions in the capital

gains tax rate on commitments to venture capital was one of the intended benefits of the reduction

of the tax from 28% to 14% on investments in small companies held for five years that was enacted

in 1993.



       Poterba (1989) argued that it was unlikely that capital gains taxes affected venture capital by

shifting the supply curve. The supply effect of capital gains tax reductions is illustrated by C in

Figure 1. A reduction in the capital gains tax rate would lower the required expected (pre-tax) rate

of return on venture investments for taxable investors. This would cause the right-hand side of

supply curve S2 to shift down to S3. Most investors in venture capital after 1980 have been tax-

exempt institutions and the supply effect may therefore have been small.



       Poterba then develops a model of the decision to become an entrepreneur. He argues that

the capital gains tax rate could have a dramatic effect on this choice. Lower capital gains tax rates

make it relatively more attractive for a manager or worker to start his or her own company. Most of

a manager’s compensation comes in the form of salary and cash bonuses which are taxed at the

ordinary income tax rate. Most of the compensation from being an entrepreneur is in the form of

capital appreciation on the equity of the company. Poterba argues that it is possible that reductions

in the capital gains tax rates could have a first-order effect on the demand for venture capital as

more people are induced to become entrepreneurs and better projects are brought to market. This




                                                   9
would increase the quantity of venture capital demanded to D2 and increase the equilibrium quantity

of venture capital to Q3.4



        If the capital gains tax rate has an important impact on commitments to venture capital

funds, then we would expect a significant relation at the industry level and at the fund-specific level.

Lower capital gains taxes should lead to increases in commitments to the industry as a whole as well

as to individual funds. We can also shed light on whether Poterba’s argument about supply and

demand effects is valid. If capital gains taxes affect commitments to venture capital primarily

through the demand for venture capital, then we expect that reductions in the capital gains tax rate

should have a positive impact on the commitments of both tax-exempt and tax-sensitive investors.

If the effect is primarily due to supply changes, then contributions by tax-exempt investors should

be unrelated to the capital gains tax rate. Because we can separate contributions to venture funds by

investor type, we should be able to determine whether the demand effects (B in Figure 1) or supply

effects (C in Figure 1) of decreases in the capital gains tax rate are more important.



        3.4. Other macroeconomic factors and venture fundraising

        Venture capital fundraising is potentially affected by other macroeconomic factors as well.

Commitments could be affected by both the expected return on alternative investments and the


4
 Anand (1996) examines the effects of capital gains tax rates on investment in the
communications industry. He examines investments by venture capital firms into private
communication companies and finds that the level and composition of investment appears to be
affected negatively by increases in the capital gains tax rate. The author’s ability to draw
conclusions, however, is limited by the fact that he looks only at one industry. Investments in
one industry may be affected by myriad other factors, including technology shifts, tastes, or other
investment opportunities. Examining the impact of capital gains tax rates on the quantity of
venture capital raised appears to be a much more satisfactory way to address the issue.




                                                  10
general health of the economy. If the economy is growing quickly, then there may be more

attractive opportunities for entrepreneurs to start new firms and, hence, increases in the demand for

venture capitalists. Formally, the demand curve would shift to the right. The greater investment

opportunity set might be associated with greater commitments to the venture capital industry. GDP

growth, returns in the stock market, and R&D expenditures would all be potential proxies for

demand conditions.



        The level of interest rates in the economy also could affect the supply of venture capital. An

alternative investment to venture capital is bonds. If interest rates rise, then the attractiveness of

investing in venture capital funds may decline. This would decrease the willingness of investors to

supply venture capital at all prices, i.e., at all expected return levels.



        3.5. Firm performance and fundraising

        In this section we develop hypotheses about factors that might affect venture capital

fundraising at the firm level. In addition to the market-wide factors discussed above, we look for

venture capital firm-specific characteristics that may influence fundraising. First, a substantial body

of research examines the relation between past performance and investment.             Allocations by

investors across asset classes seem to be driven by, in part, the relative performance of various

sectors over the recent past. If there is short-run momentum in returns—as shown by Grinblatt,

Titman, and Wermers (1995)—this response may be rational.



        The flow of money into and out of various types of financial institutions in response to

performance has been documented extensively of mutual funds. While the early research on mutual




                                                     11
funds [Jensen (1968); Ippolito (1989)] indicated that mutual fund managers as a group do not

significantly outperform the market, recent work has shown cash flows appear to respond to past

performance.     Sirri and Tufano (1998) find that performance relative to peers in the same

investment category is an important determinant of new capital commitments to mutual funds.

They examine 690 equity mutual funds and rank the funds by their performance relative to funds

that have the same investment focus. They find that the top performing funds in any particular

investment style have substantial new commitments to their funds in the subsequent year. The

relation between performance and commitments, however, is not linear. Funds that perform poorly

do not appear to be penalized in the following year. Money does not leave poor performing funds.

Sirri and Tufano (1998) find that one exception to these findings is new funds. Money does seem to

leave a new fund if it is a poor performer.



        Chevalier and Ellison (1997) examine how these patterns affect investment incentive

functions. They find that funds which have underperformed their peers in the first part of the year

have an incentive to increase the riskiness of their portfolios in order to increase the chances that

they will end up near the top of the performance charts. If they bet wrong and fail, they will lose

few of their current investors.



        If the evidence from mutual funds has implications for venture capital, then we would

expect that recent performance would be positively related to commitments to new funds. As in

Sirri and Tufano’s (1998) mutual fund results, reputation of the venture organization may influence

the flow of new commitments when it raises a new fund. Several measures of reputation may be

important. These include venture organization age and capital under management. Older and larger




                                                 12
venture organizations are likely to have more established reputations. They may therefore receive

larger capital commitments than similar younger funds.



4. Venture Industry-Wide Results

        We examine the implications of performance and capital gains tax rates for commitments to

venture capital funds by performing two layers of analysis: aggregate flows and commitments to

individual funds. The first level of analysis examines the flow of venture capital commitments into

the industry. We examine the commitments to new venture capital funds from 1969 through 1994

first aggregating all commitments in the U.S. We then take up an analysis of the level of venture

activity on a state-by-state basis.



        4.1. Aggregate fundraising results

        Data on annual commitments to U.S. venture capital funds come from the consulting firm

Venture Economics. This organization has tracked venture fundraising since the 1960s. This

database not only records venture capital organizations, but also the names of their individual

funds. We have checked the entries in this database against the historical information reported in

over 400 venture offering memorandums and partnership agreements, as well as against the fund

profiles in the Venture Capital Journal and Private Equity Analyst. [The construction and

verification of the database are described in Gompers and Lerner (1998a).] This database is also

used in the analysis of individual organizations’ fundraising data analyzed in Section 5.



        This database includes over two thousand venture capital funds, SBICs, and related

organizations. It is used in preparation of directories such as their annual volume Venture Capital




                                                 13
Performance. It is compiled from information provided by venture capitalists and institutional

investors. In examining fundraising behavior, we only look at venture capital limited partnerships.

First, these partnerships are the dominant organizational form in the industry, accounting for

roughly 80% of commitments to the venture capital industry in recent years. Furthermore, the

actual size of SBICs and corporate venture affiliates is often very difficult the estimate. SBICs have

access to matching government funds, often several times greater than the amount contributed by

private investors. Corporate programs usually do not have a pool of capital specified in advance

and are frequently disbanded before being investing much capital. Limited partnerships—with their

well-defined size and life-span—offer the cleanest estimate of venture capital inflows.



       We total commitments to venture funds each year. Commitments are defined as the pledges

that venture capitalists receive for investment over the lifetime of the fund. They are not the amount

of money that is actually invested in a given year. Typically, venture funds draw on and invest the

committed capital over a two to three year time period. For example, in 1995 Sierra Ventures raised

their fifth fund with aggregate commitments of $100 million. This $100 million would be invested

between 1995 and about 1999, but we would classify the entire $100 million as having been

committed in 1995.



       We also need some measure of returns in the venture capital industry. Ideally, we would

have year-by-year performance data for individual funds. These data present several problems. As

discussed above, calculation of returns is hampered by policies of many venture organizations that

potentially delay the write-up or write-down of assets. As a proxy for performance of the venture

organizations, we use a measure of the market value of equity held by venture capitalists in firms




                                                 14
that went public in a particular year. This measure will be highly correlated with returns on venture

funds. Most money in venture capital is earned on firms that eventually go public. Ignoring the

companies that do not go public is reasonable because their impact on returns is usually quite small.

A Venture Economics study (1988) finds that a $1 investment in a firm that goes public provides an

average cash return of $1.95 in excess of the initial investment with an average holding period of

4.2 years. The next best alternative, an investment in an acquired firm, yields a cash return of only

40 cents over a 3.7 year mean holding period.     Using the IPO measure also makes sense because

marketing documents for venture capital funds often highlight the successful public companies

which have been backed by the venture organization. We therefore expect that the amount of

venture capital raised will be a positive function of the value of firms taken public by venture

capitalists in the previous year.



        We identify potential venture-backed IPOs using three sources. The first is the listings of

venture-backed IPOs published in Venture Economics' Venture Capital Journal. This is the

same source used by Barry, et al. (1990) and Megginson and Weiss (1991). We also use listings

of the securities distributions by venture funds.      Venture capitalists typically unwind their

successful investments by distributing the shares to their limited partners. They avoid selling the

shares themselves and distributing the proceeds to their limited partners because their investors

include both tax-exempt and tax-paying parties. To sell the shares would generate an immediate

tax liability, which some of the limited partners may wish to avoid. We obtain lists of the

distributions received by a pension fund which is among the largest venture investors and by

three investment managers [Gompers and Lerner (1998b)]. (These investment managers allocate

funds from numerous pension funds into venture capital and other asset classes.) These investors




                                                 15
had received distributions from 135 venture funds, most of which are managed by the oldest and

most established venture organizations in the industry. Most of the successful investments by

these funds can be identified from these lists.



          The final source used to identify IPOs for the sample are the offering documents used by

venture capitalists to raise new funds from investors. Venture organizations will often list in

these offering memorandums their past investments that either went public or were acquired on

favorable terms. We examine over four hundred of these memorandums in the files of Venture

Economics [Gompers and Lerner (1998a)]. We identify any investments listed as having gone

public.     Most of the offering documents compiled by Venture Economics are from young

venture organizations.     This is because their Fund Raiser Advisory Service counsels less

experienced firms on strategies for raising capital.



          We include in the IPO sample all firms if a venture investor listed in the "Management"

and "Principal and Selling Shareholders" sections of the IPO prospectus is listed in the Venture

Economics database. In many cases, it is not immediately obvious whether a venture investor or

director is an exact match with a venture organization listed in the database.5 To address these

ambiguities, we consult the edition of Venture Economics' Pratt's Guide to Venture Capital

Sources (1996) published in the year of the IPO. We compare the addresses and key personnel

of each of these ambiguous venture organizations with the information reported in the

prospectus. If we are not virtually certain that the venture organizations in the prospectus and


5
 In many cases, individual investors (often called "angels") will describe themselves as venture
capitalists. Groups of individual investors often make their investments through partnerships,
which frequently are given a name not unlike those of venture capital organizations.



                                                  16
the database are the same, we do not code it as a match. For each investor, we code the venture

organization, the particular venture fund investing in the firm, and the size of the stake before

and after the offering. This process leads to the identification of 885 IPOs in which a venture

capitalist served as a director or a venture capital fund was a blockholder.



       In each year, we calculate the market value of the equity stakes in firms going public held

by each venture capital organization. This value is the number of shares held by the venture

organization multiplied by the IPO offering price. We then sum the market values for each IPO

in a given year to obtain an annual performance number for each venture capital organization.

We then sum across all venture organizations in a given year to get a measure of venture industry

performance.



        In Figure 2, we graph the time series of venture capital commitments and the market value

of all firms brought public by venture capitalists in each year from 1969 through 1994. We see that

from 1969 through 1979, commitments to venture capital and venture-backed IPOs were quite low.

Starting in 1980, both commitments to the venture capital industry and the value of firms brought

public by venture capitalist rise. The rise of both reversed in 1983. After 1983, it appears that the

shift in venture-backed IPO market leads to changes in commitments to new venture funds. For

example, increases in the market value of venture-backed IPOs in both 1986 and 1991-1992

preceded resurgences in the venture capital market.



       The relation between capital gains taxes and venture capital commitments is documented in

Figure 3. The relation is clearly negative. In the 1970s, high capital gains tax rates were associated




                                                 17
with low levels of venture capital fundraising. Increases in the capital gains tax rates in 1988 were

followed by reductions in venture capital commitments, while the reduction of capital gains for

long-held investments in 1993 was followed by a rise in venture fundraising. This negative relation

between venture capital funding levels and capital gains tax rates is clearly only suggestive, because

the influence of multiple factors needs to be examined.



       Detailed information on the nature of commitments is shown in Table 1. Several patterns

are prominent. First, the volatility of commitments is readily apparent. The level of fundraising

(expressed in 1994 dollars) can vary dramatically from one year to the next. The volatility in

venture fundraising is mirrored by a similar volatility in the IPO market, both for venture-backed

companies and for the entire IPO market. We see the dramatic shift from individuals to pension

funds over the past fifteen years as the primary capital source for new venture funds.6



       In order to assess the impact of each of these variables controlling for the others, we present

multivariate regressions in Table 2. Our approach here and in the individual firm regressions is to

estimate reduced-form specifications and identify which factors potentially work through demand

shifts and which factors work through supply shifts. The time series of data runs from 1972 through

1994. The dependent variable is the natural logarithm of real commitments to the venture capital

industry (in millions of 1994 dollars). We present regressions for commitments to the entire venture

capital industry, as well as four subgroups: taxable investors, tax-exempt investors, individuals, and

pension funds. The independent variables include the natural logarithm of the market value of firms


6
 The measures of the sources of funds are taken from various issues of Venture Economics’
Venture Capital Journal.




                                                 18
brought public by venture organizations in the previous year (in millions of 1994 dollars), the real

return on Treasury bills in the previous year, the real CRSP value-weighted stock market return in

the prior year, the previous year’s real GDP growth, a dummy variable that equals one for years

after 1978 when ERISA’s prudent man rule was clarified, and the top marginal capital gains tax

rate.



        Changes in ERISA’s prudent man rule are associated with greater commitments to the

venture capital industry, but the effect is not significant for commitments by taxable investors and

individuals. As expected, the strongest effect of ERISA’s clarification is on contributions by

pension funds. An F-test of the null hypothesis that the coefficient for pension funds is significantly

different from the coefficient for individuals and taxable investors shows that ERISA’s effect on

contributions by pension funds is different at the five percent level. This is consistent with a supply

side effect: the easing of pension fund restrictions increased the number of investors wishing to

invest in venture capital funds.



        Increases in capital gains tax rates have a consistently negative effect on contributions to the

venture industry, although the effect is only significant for contributions to the entire industry and

contributions by pension funds.7 While we do find an effect of capital gains taxes on venture capital

commitments, it does not appear to be working through the supply side. If changes in the capital

gains tax rates had a first-order effect on investors’ willingness to invest in venture capital, then the


7
 The coefficients on capital gains tax rates are not significantly different from one another across
different investor classes. The purpose of the comparison is simply to show whether capital
gains tax rates affect taxable investors only (as the supply effect would predict) or whether they
affect all investors equally (as the demand effect would predict).




                                                   19
effect would be strongest for individuals and taxable parties. The opposite is true. As Poterba

(1989) suggests, the effect of changes in the capital gains tax rate is likely to come through changes

in the demand for venture capital. More and better quality managers are incented to become

entrepreneurs when the capital gains tax rate declines and thus the demand for venture capital

increases. This increase in demand leads to a greater quantity of venture capital being supplied in

equilibrium.



       Once other factors are included, the value of firms taken public by venture organizations in

the previous year does not appear to have a dramatic effect on contributions. While we cannot rule

out a role for IPOs creating liquidity in the venture sector and potentially affecting contributions, we

cannot find an effect in the multivariate regressions. This finding is contrary to the arguments of

Black and Gilson (1998), who emphasize the importance of a vibrant public market in the

development of a venture capital industry. It is consistent, however, with the experience of Israel

and Singapore, whose venture industries have experienced dramatic growth without having strong

domestic public equity markets.



       Of the macroeconomic variables, only real GDP growth is important. Increases in the real

rate of growth lead to greater commitments to venture funds. Once again, this suggests that

increasing demand for venture capital is an important determinant of the quantity. Robust economic

growth creates new opportunities for entrepreneurs and increases demand for such capital.



       One concern may be that because we are using time series observations on venture

fundraising and the independent variables, the results may be affected by serial correlation in the




                                                  20
error terms. The Durbin-Watson statistics for each of the regressions were between 1.88 and 2.00,

indicating that such serial correlation does not affect the results. As a diagnostic, we also ran

Cochrane-Orcutt regressions using a lag term which did not materially change the results.



        4.2. State-level venture activity

        One difficulty with the analysis in the previous section was the relatively small number of

observations. In order to gain additional power for our tests of market-wide venture activity, we

examine venture capital activity in each of the fifty states and the District of Columbia from 1976

through 1994. We can then examine how state level demand and supply factors affect venture

investing in those states.



        We employ a slightly different approach here than in Sections 4.1 and 5: rather than

examining the formation of venture funds in each state, we measure the actual venture capital

investments. This reflects the difficulty of assigning venture organizations to particular states.

Many venture organizations have multiple offices, which may account for differing shares of the

investments. Venture organizations’ headquarters may reflect the need to be proximate to their

sources of capital and not their portfolio firms.    For instance, many venture organizations are

based in New York City, even though this has historically been the site of few start-up firms.

This pattern is particularly true for groups specializing in the later-stage investments, which

typically occur after other groups (who may be geographically more proximate to the portfolio

firm) have already joined the board [Lerner (1995)].




                                                21
       We once again use the data of Venture Economics to determine venture capital activity

by state. In this case, we undertake a special tabulation of the number of companies financed

and dollar volume of financing in each state and year between 1976 and 1994. We include all

investments by private equity groups into young entrepreneurial firms, but exclude investments

into leveraged buyouts and restructurings by groups that primarily make venture capital

investments.



       We also collect a variety of additional data on a state by state basis. Gross state product

has been compiled on an annual basis by the Department of Commerce’s Bureau of Economic

Analysis (1997) [also used was Friedenberg and Beemiller, (1997)]. For each state, we compiled

the total amount of research performed in industry and in academia, regardless of funding source.

The state industrial R&D data was compiled by the National Science Foundation (NSF) as part

of the “Survey of Research and Development in Industry” (1980, 1998b). The data posed two

problems. First, since 1978 this information has only been collected on a biannual basis. Thus,

it was necessary to impute the missing years. Second, certain states are persistently missing. In

these instances, the unassigned R&D in each region is assigned to each suppressed state on the

basis of its Gross State Product.8 The allocation of academic R&D expenditures by state is

determined the NSF’s annual “Survey of Research and Development Expenditures at

Universities and Colleges” (1998a). We obtain the marginal state tax rate on capital gains

through the use of the TAXSIM tax simulation program. We compute the impact of $1000 of


8
 For instance, in 1977, as in earlier and later years, data for New Hampshire and Vermont are
suppressed. Of the $2.4 billion of R&D spending in New England in that year, $2.3 billion is
accounted for by Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, and Rhode Island. We divide the
remaining amount 65%-35% between New Hampshire and Vermont, proportional to their Gross
State Products in that year.



                                               22
capital gains on a wealthy individual in each state and year, controlling for the possible

deductibility of state taxes in Federal taxes. [The program is described in Feenberg and Coutts

(1993);       the     simulation    and      the        resulting   data    are     reproduced       at

http://www.nber.org/~taxsim/state-rates.]



          Table 3 looks at venture capital activity in each state by tabulating the total number of

companies that received venture capital and the total amount of venture capital invested from 1976

through 1994.       The tremendous concentration of investment in four states is clearly evident.

California has by far the most venture investing activity with nearly $20 billion invested (in 1994

dollars). Massachusetts, New York, and Texas are the next most active states and account for the

bulk of the remaining capital. It is also clear that many states have almost no venture capital

activity. We seek to explore these patterns in a regression framework.



          In Table 4 we present state fixed-effects regressions for the level of venture capital

investment per capita (in millions of 1994 dollars) and the number of companies receiving venture

capital per capita. We employ an observation for each year in each state, i.e., a balanced panel.

Independent variables include market-wide measures used in the regressions in Table 2 (logarithm

of IPO activity, the previous year’s real T-bill return, and the previous year’s equity market return).

In addition, we include several variables that might proxy for state-level demand conditions. These

include the previous year’s growth in state Gross State Product (GSP) per capita as well as measures

of last year’s academic and industrial expenditure on R&D (in millions of 1994 dollars) per capita.

The R&D expenditure potentially captures demand effects of high-technology firms. If R&D is




                                                   23
higher in a state, it may mean that the number of potential entrepreneurs with promising ideas may

be greater.



        In addition, we include a dummy variable that is equal to one after 1978 to capture the effect

of changes in ERISA’s prudent man rule. Finally, we include several measures of the capital gains

tax rate burden. We first control for state and Federal capital gains taxes separately by including the

maximum marginal state and Federal capital gains tax rate separately. We then add the Federal and

state rates to create a variable which captures the total capital gains tax burden in that state.9



        Table 4 shows that both industrial and academic R&D spending are significantly related to

state-level venture capital activity. Increases in state R&D levels increase both the amount of

venture capital invested as well as the number of firms receiving venture capital. This result

suggests that both academic and industrial R&D spending are potentially important for the creation

of entrepreneurial firms that demand venture capital.



        Similarly, growth in GSP per capita is positively related to venture capital activity. This

result, consistent with the aggregate results, may indicate the importance of the demand effects, i.e.,

it is important to have a strong growing economy to create new firms that need venture capital

financing.




9
 The state tax measure only includes the marginal impact: i.e., any savings in Federal taxes due
to the deductibility of state taxes are factored in. All regressions include state fixed-effects.




                                                    24
        The dummy variable measuring the shift in ERISA policy continues to have a positive effect

in the state-level regressions. After the clarification of ERISA, the amount of venture capital

invested per capita as well as the number of firms receiving venture capital per capita increases.

Finally, capital gains tax rates continue to matter. In the regressions including both state and

Federal rates, it is only the Federal rate that is significantly related to venture capital activity. The

state capital gains tax rate is, however, always negatively related to venture capital activity and is of

the same order of magnitude as the effect of Federal rates. The combined Federal and state capital

gains rate is also significantly related to venture capital activity. The result confirms the earlier

results. Capital gains tax rates do appear to be negatively related to venture capital activity.



5. Individual venture organization results

        5.1. Summary statistics

        In this section, we examine fundraising patterns by individual venture organizations. We

perform three levels of analysis. First, we present summary statistics for the database, both in its

entirety and segmented by year. We then analyze factors affecting the fundraising ability of

individual venture organizations. Finally, we examine the decision of venture organizations to

raise funds with a focus on early- and seed-stage firms. The importance of early- and seed-stage

funds in creating new firms is widely recognized. Many of the efforts to stimulate venture

activity focus on stimulating seed capital funds. Understanding the unique factors affecting the

decision to target these firms is important for potential policy decisions. We examine fund

information collected by Venture Economics from 1961 through 1992.



        Table 5 presents information on the completeness of the venture fundraising database. In

all, we have information on 1294 venture capital funds. Of those, we have information on the fund


                                                   25
size and closing date for 846 (20 of these are missing month of closing). The average venture

organization in the sample raised 2.23 funds while the median raised only 1. The maximum number

of venture funds raised by an organization is 25. The average venture organization raised $126

million in 1994 dollars while the largest organization had raised over $2 billion.



       The time series distribution of our sample is presented in Table 6. We see growth in both

the number of funds raised and dollar volume of commitments in the early- and mid-1980s. The

sample also appears to exhibit a slight growth in the size of funds raised (in constant 1994 dollars).

If we look at the sum of all the funds in our sample, we have data on $45.0 billion in venture

funding which represents nearly all the capital raised by organized venture capital partnerships

during the sample period.10 The lack of size data for 448 of the funds does not impart bias to our

results. Our data cover almost all the capital raised over the sample period and, hence, the results

are clearly applicable to the most important firms.



       5.2.Fundraising regression results

       We analyze firm level fundraising by using one yearly observation for each venture

organization starting with the year that they raise their first venture capital fund. The dependent

variable is either a dummy variable indicating whether the venture organization raised a fund or

the amount of money (in millions of 1994 dollars) raised in that year. Independent variables

include the age of the venture organization, the amount of money it raised during the previous




10
 The Federal government does not collect numbers on venture capital inflows. The Venture
Economics database, however, corresponds closely to those of another consulting firm, Asset
Alternatives, as well as estimates by practitioners.



                                                  26
ten years11 (in millions of 1994 dollars), the value of equity held by this venture organization in

firms brought public in that year and the previous year, the value of all venture-backed firms

brought public in the previous year, real GDP growth in the previous year, the previous year’s

Treasury bill return, the previous year’s stock market return as measured by the annual return on

the CRSP value weighted market index, a dummy variable that equals one after 1978 (indicating

years after the clarification of the ERISA prudent man rule), and the top marginal capital gains

tax rate on individuals.



       We estimate a Heckman two-stage model. The Heckman model estimates two equations.

The first is the probability that a fund was raised in a given year. The second equation then

estimates the amount raised given that a fund was raised in a particular year. This two-stage

model is appropriate if the correct decision is that venture capitalists first decide whether to raise

a new fund or not. Once they decide to raise a new fund, the venture capitalists then decide the

size of fund they wish to raise. The two equations give us insights about factors that affect the

probability of raising a new fund and ones that primarily affect the optimal fund size.



       Table 7 gives the results from the Heckman models. The first regression in each model

gives the probability of raising a new fund, while the second regression gives the size of a fund

conditional on it being raised. We find that neither the capital gains tax rate nor ERISA’s

clarification have a significant effect on the probability of a venture organization raising a new

fund. The ERISA dummy has no effect on the size of the fund either. The capital gains tax rate


11
  We look at money raised over the previous ten years because that is the specified life-span of a
typical venture capital limited partnership agreement. The ten-year sum provides the best
available estimate of capital under management.



                                                 27
does, however, have a significant effect on the size of the fund raised. Lower capital gains tax

rates are associated with larger funds. This would be expected if venture organizations raised

new funds on a normal cycle that was typically unaffected by external factors. Changes in the

capital gains tax rate may affect the quantity of good start-ups to finance as managers are

induced to start firms. The greater quantity of good projects would lead venture capitalists to

raise larger funds.



       We also find that firm performance has a dramatic effect on fundraising. Both the value

of equity held in firms taken public by the venture capital firm in the current year and in the

previous year have a positive effect on the probability of raising a new fund and the size of the

fund. The effect of the previous year’s IPO volume is nearly four times as large as the current

year’s. This might be due to the long process of raising a new fund (which may take many

months).    Venture organizations go on “road shows” and gauge investor interest, sign up

prospective investors, and generate the necessary documents prior to closing. The more relevant

performance is probably the previous year’s returns, which are foremost in investors’ minds

during fundraising.



       Reputation also appears to have a positive effect on the size of the fund raised. Older and

larger venture organizations have higher probabilities of raising funds and raise larger funds.

The reputation variable potentially captures beliefs about future returns not captured in recent

performance variables. The effect of venture organization size is particularly strong on the size

of the fund raised. This could indicate that venture organization size is a good proxy for

reputation. Venture organization size might also measure the need to raise larger funds. Large




                                               28
venture organizations may have more employees and general partners. In order to keep all of

them working at capacity, the minimum fund size needed is substantially higher.



       We find that the Treasury bill return in the previous year is positively related to the

probability of raising a new fund. This effect may stem from the rapid increase in funds being

raised in the early 1980s at a time when real interest rates were high. Both the probability of

raising a fund and the size of a new fund raised first decline and then increase with time from the

previous fund.12



       We present the fixed-effects regression models in Table 8. The fixed-effects models

include dummy variables for each venture organization that are intended to pick up unmeasured

firm-specific factors. If we find a result even after controlling for firm fixed effects, we can be

confident that the effects are robust. We could not estimate the fixed-effects Heckman model.

Therefore, we run two separate regressions. The first is a fixed-effects logit which estimates the

probability of raising a fund in a given year. The second regression is a fixed-effects least

squares regression that estimates the size of funds raised conditional on a fund being raised. The

approximation to the two-stage maximum likelihood Heckman model is consistent in the

estimations without the fixed effects, so we are confident that the results in Table 8 are

reasonable [Maddala (1987)].



       In both specifications, the capital gains tax rate continues to be a significant factor in

venture fundraising. A decrease in the capital gains tax rate increases the size of funds raised in

12
  The regression results are robust to various segmentations of the data, e.g., examining firms
located on the West Coast and East Coast.


                                                29
all the specifications. In the first model, the ERISA dummy variable has an important impact.

Controlling for firm factors, the ERISA clarification leads to a greater probability of raising a

new fund.



       Venture organization performance (as measured by the value of equity stakes in initial

public offerings) continues to have a positive effect on fundraising. In the two-stage model with

firm fixed effects, the probability of raising a fund increases with greater performance, but the

size of the fund does not appear to be affected. We find, however, that the reputation variables

have mixed signs in the fixed-effects regression, which are different from the regressions without

the firm fixed effects. In the two-stage model, the probability of raising a fund is lower for older

and larger organizations, but the fund size is larger. As a firm ages, the probability of raising a

new fund declines, although the size of funds being raised increases. This lower probability of

raising a fund may reflect the retirement of partners within older venture organizations.

Unconditionally, older firms are more likely to raise a fund because of their better track record.

Controlling for firm effects, however, as a firm ages, it becomes less likely to raise a fund.



       5.3.Stage focus results

       We also undertake an analysis of the ability of venture capital organizations to raise a

fund that focuses on early-stage investments. The early-stage venture market is often seen as

being critical to the success of later-stage investments. Early-stage funds provide new firms with

critical financing in their infancy [see for instance OECD (1996)]. Many of the policy initiatives

undertaken across the country and around the world are aimed at increasing the availability of

early-stage capital. Similarly, firms in their very early stages are the most prone to capital




                                                 30
rationing and liquidity constraints because the uncertainty and asymmetric information are the

greatest. If we can understand the incentives to raise a focused fund, we might be able to

understand industry dynamics better and may make better recommendations about promoting

new entrepreneurial firms.



       We divide firms into two categories in this analysis. We indicate whether the funds

analyzed above have a stated investment focus on early-stage firms only. (Venture Economics

characterizes each fund’s focus in their database.) Table 9 presents summary statistics for

venture funds that have a stated early-stage focus and those that do not. We find that funds

focusing on early-stage investments are significantly smaller, with a mean [median] size of $42

[$25] million, than are funds that do not focus on early-stage investments (mean of $57 [$36]

million). This makes sense because early-stage investments are typically smaller than later-stage

investments. Gompers (1995) finds that the average early-stage investment is only half as large

as the mean later-stage investment. Because the amount of time spent during the investment and

monitoring process (e.g., due diligence, negotiations, etc.) and the need for oversight after the

investment is similar, early-stage funds are usually smaller.



       We also find that early-stage funds tend to be raised by venture organizations that are

slightly older and larger. One possibility is that older, more experienced venture organizations

have the necessary knowledge to raise a focused fund. The early-stage funds are, on average,

more recent and are more likely to be raised on the West Coast. Clearly, the mix of investments

on the West Coast, primarily California, is heavily concentrated on early-stage, technology-based




                                                31
companies. East Coast firms are more balanced and tend to invest in greater fractions of later-

stage companies.



        In Table 10 we present multivariate regressions analyzing the determinants of fund focus.

We use each new venture capital fund as an observation and examine whether it had an early-

stage focus. As the summary statistics hinted, smaller funds are more likely to have an early-

stage focus. Similarly, we find that firms on the West Coast are more likely to raise an early-

stage fund. Finally, we find that a venture organization is more likely to raise a fund with an

early-stage focus after the Department of Labor’s clarification of ERISA’s prudent man rule.

This greater probability following ERISA change is potentially due to the clarification stating

that investments would be judged prudent not by their individual risk, but by their contribution to

portfolio risk.    Prior to this amendment, early-stage funds may have been viewed as too

speculative and may have had a more difficult time raising money than a later-stage or general

purpose venture capital fund. After the amendment, venture organizations could raise focused

funds without worrying that pension funds would avoid it out of concern over its perceived

riskiness.



6. Alternative Explanations

        Several alternative explanations may account for the findings in Sections 4 and 5. First,

the supply and demand for venture capital may be affected by the supply of substitute financing.

We have attempted to control for the cost of credit by including the real interest rate. In periods

of high real interest rates, venture capital may be more attractive from the entrepreneur’s

perspective.      Similarly, if the availability of bank financing were a major factor in the




                                                32
determination of venture capital commitments, then we should have seen an increase in venture

capital commitments in the late 1980s and early 1990s, when bank credit to young, small firms

substantially declined. Instead, we see a decline in venture capital commitments over this time

period, indicating that bank credit and venture fundraising moved together.



       A second alternative explanation for our results on capital gains taxes and venture

commitments may be the inability to accurately measure expected GDP growth. If expected

GDP growth is somehow correlated with capital gains tax rates, then we might be incorrectly

interpreting the significance to capital gains tax rates. In unreported regressions, we modeled

expected GDP growth using the previous four years of real GDP growth. Instead of lagged GDP

growth, we reestimated the regressions using the expected GDP growth rate. Results were

qualitatively the same as in Sections 4 and 5. This is not surprising since the expected GDP

growth rate is primarily affected by last year’s growth.



       Finally, the growth in venture capital commitments may have less to do with policy

changes and more to do with changes in the amount of technological opportunities. In fact, the

state level R&D expenditures indicate that this may be the case. If changes in technological

opportunity were causing increases in venture capital investments, we would expect several

measures of technological innovation to lead increases in venture fundraising. In particular,

Kortum and Lerner (1998) show that a surge of patents occurred in the late 1980s and 1990s.

This suggests that some of the recent growth in venture capital fundraising in the mid-1990s may

be due to increases in technological opportunities. The increase in venture fundraising in the late

1970s and 1980s (the period of our sample), however, does not seem to be caused by similar




                                                33
technology shifts.     Similarly, the state level analysis shows that even controlling for R&D

spending, regulatory policies still have an effect.



7. Conclusion

          In this paper, we examine the determinants of fundraising for the venture industry and

individual venture organizations.      We examine supply and demand effects as well as the

importance of individual firm performance and reputation.



          We find that demand for venture capital appears to play a critical role. Higher GDP

growth and increases in R&D spending lead to greater venture capital activity. We also find that

capital gains tax rates matter, with lower rates leading to a greater quantity of venture capital

raised.    The effect, however, appears to stem from a greater demand for venture capital:

commitments by tax-exempt pension funds are the most affected by changes in the capital gains

tax rate. We find evidence that ERISA clarification in rules governing pension fund investment

have generally increased commitments to the industry.



          Fund performance is an important determinant of the ability of venture organizations to

raise new capital. Firms that hold larger equity stakes in firms that have recently gone public

raise funds with greater probability and raise larger funds. Reputation, in the form of firm age

and size, also positively impacts the ability to raise new capital.



          We also provide evidence that the decision to raise an early-stage venture fund has been

affected by pension regulations.      The probability of raising a focused fund increased after




                                                  34
ERISA’s clarification. We also find greater early-stage activity in smaller funds and venture

organizations on the West Coast where technology-based startups are more prevalent.



       Our research has a variety of implications for policy makers who wish to stimulate

venture capital activity.   The fundraising results indicate that regulatory reform and policy

decisions may have an effect on commitments to the venture industry. While the capital gains

tax rate is an important driver of venture capital fundraising, blanket reduction in capital gains

tax rates may be a blunt instrument for promoting venture capital. Our analysis suggests that an

important factor for the increase in venture capital is probably increases in the number of high

quality startups. The greater number of good firms leads to more demand for venture capital.

Policies that increase the relative attractiveness of becoming an entrepreneur and promote

technology innovation probably would have more of an effect on venture capital investments

than an across the board cut in the capital gains tax rate. Furthermore, the results highlight the

highly localized nature of venture capital activity. Countries that wish to promote venture capital

activity may consider concentrating efforts rather than spreading resources uniformly around the

country. This is in contrast to many of the efforts that various countries have instituted.



       The results also raise a series of questions for further research. In general, the role of

reputation and performance as determinants of fundraising is consistent with earlier literature for

other types of money managers. The decision to invest is clearly predicated on the expectation

of future returns, and both past performance and reputation are components of the expected

future returns. But in recent years, many of the most established venture organizations in the

U.S. have experienced internal corporate governance problems and have been disbanded. The




                                                 35
issue of who carries the reputation with them is important. Does reputation follow general

partners who start their own fund or must they establish new reputations? In markets without

experienced venture capitalists, how can the lack of reputation be overcome? Clearly, more

work is necessary.



       Another set of unanswered questions relates to the effectiveness of public efforts to

transfer the venture capital model to other regions. Even if venture capital organizations spur

technological innovation in the United States, it is not evident that the model can be seamlessly

transferred abroad.   Different employment practices, regulatory policies, or public market

avenues might limit the formation these funds [see Black and Gilson (1998) for a discussion].

Even if it were feasible to transfer such efforts, public economic development programs can be

subject to political manipulation: e.g., pressures to award funds to politically connected

businesses.



       On the other hand, overseas venture initiatives may be able to benefit from the experience

of venture organizations in the United States. In particular, the Israeli Yozma program seems to

have successfully captured “spillovers” of knowledge from U.S. and British venture

organizations. In contrast to many forms of government intervention to boost economic growth,

the implementation of these programs has received little scrutiny by economists. [Two recent

exceptions are Irwin and Klenow (1996) and Lerner (1996).] This is a ripe area for further

exploration.




                                               36
       Venture capital is increasingly regarded as an important component of the U.S. economic

landscape. While policy makers have often tried to affect the flow of funds into the sector, little

has been known about the real impact of such policy measures. Our paper begins to answer

those questions and points towards areas for future research.




                                                37
                                         References

Anand, Bharat. 1996. “Tax Effects on Venture Capital.” Unpublished working paper, Yale School
of Management.

Barry, Christopher B., Chris J. Muscarella, John W. Peavy III, and Michael R. Vetsuypens. 1990.
"The Role of Venture Capital in the Creation of Public Companies: Evidence from the Going
Public Process." Journal of Financial Economics 27: 447-71.

Black, Bernard S., and Ronald J. Gilson. 1998. “Venture Capital and the Structure of Capital
Markets: Banks versus Stock Markets.” Journal of Financial Economics 47: 243-278.

Brav, Alon, and Paul A. Gompers. 1997. “Myth or Reality? The Long-Run Underperformance of
Initial Public Offerings: Evidence from Venture Capital and Nonventure Capital-backed
Companies.” Journal of Finance 52: 1791-1822.

Chevalier, Judith A., and Glenn D. Ellison. 1997. “Risk Taking by Mutual Funds as a Response to
Incentives.” Journal of Political Economy 105: 1167-1200.

Feenberg, Daniel R., and Elizabeth Coutts. 1993. “An Introduction to the TAXSIM Model.”
Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 12: 189-194.

Friedenberg, H.L., and R.M. Beemiller. 1997. “Comprehensive Revision of Gross State Product
by Industry. 1977-94.” Survey of Current Business 77 (June): 15-41.

Gompers, Paul A. 1995. “Optimal Investment. Monitoring. and the Staging of Venture Capital.”
Journal of Finance 50: 1461-1490.

Gompers, Paul A., and Josh Lerner. 1996. "The Use of Covenants: An Empirical Analysis of
Venture Partnership Agreements." Journal of Law and Economics 39: 463-498.

Gompers, Paul A., and Josh Lerner. 1997. "Risk and Reward in Private Equity Investments: The
Challenge of Performance Assessment.” Journal of Private Equity 1: 5-12.

Gompers, Paul A., and Josh Lerner. 1998a. "An Analysis of Compensation in the U.S. Venture
Capital Partnership." Journal of Financial Economics forthcoming.

Gompers, Paul A., and Josh Lerner. 1998b. "Venture Capital Distributions: Short- and Long-Run
Reactions." Journal of Finance forthcoming.

Grinblatt, Mark, Sheridan Titman, and Russ Wermers. 1995. "Momentum Investment Strategies,
Portfolio Performance, and Herding: A Study of Mutual Fund Behavior.” American Economic
Review 85: 1088-1105.

Ippolito, Richard. 1989. “Efficiency with Costly Information: A Study of Mutual Fund
Performance, 1965-1984.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 104: 1-23.



                                              38
Irwin, Douglas A., and Peter J. Klenow. 1996. “High Tech R&D Subsidies: Estimating the Effects
of Sematech.” Journal of International Economics 40: 323-344.

Jensen, Michael. 1968. “The Performance of Mutual Funds in the Period 1945-1964.” Journal of
Finance 23: 389-416.

Kortum, Samuel, and Josh Lerner. 1998. “Stronger Protection or Technological Revolution: What
is Behind the Recent Surge of Patenting?” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy
forthcoming.

Lerner, Josh. 1995. "Venture Capitalists and the Oversight of Private Firms." Journal of Finance
50: 301-18.

Lerner, Josh. 1996. “The Government as Venture Capitalist: The Long-Run effects of the SBIR
Program.” Working paper no. 5753, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Liles, Patrick. 1977. Sustaining the Venture Capital Firm. Cambridge: Management Analysis
Center.

Maddala, G.S. 1987. Limited-Dependent and Qualitative Variables in Econometrics. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

Megginson, William C., and Kathleen A. Weiss. 1991. "Venture Capital Certification in Initial
Public Offerings." Journal of Finance 46: 879-93.

Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development. 1996. Government Programs for
Venture Capital. Paris: Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development.

Poterba, James. 1989. “Venture Capital and Capital Gains Taxation.” In Lawrence Summers.
editor. Tax Policy and the Economy. Cambridge: MIT Press.

Scholes, Myron S. 1972. “The Market for Securities: Substitution versus Price Pressure and the
Effects of Information on Share Prices.” Journal of Business 45: 179-211.

Sirri, Erik, and Peter Tufano. 1998. "Costly Search and Mutual Fund Flows.” Journal of Finance
forthcoming.

U.S. Department of Commerce. Bureau of Economic Analysis. 1997. “Gross State Product by
Industry: Original Experimental Estimates, 1963-1986.” Unpublished data file (Washington).

U.S. National Science Foundation. Division of Science Resource Studies. 1980. Research and
Development in Industry—1979. Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office.

U.S. National Science Foundation. Division of Science Resource Studies. 1998a. “Survey of
Research and Development Expenditures at Universities and Colleges.” http://caspar.nsf.gov.



                                              39
U.S. National Science Foundation. Division of Science Resource Studies. 1998b. “Survey of
Research and Development in Industry.” http://www.nsf.gov/sbe/srs/sind/start.htm.

Venture Economics. 1988. Exiting Venture Capital Investments. Needham: Venture Economics.

Venture Economics. 1996. Pratt’s Guide to Venture Capital Sources. New York: SDC Publishing.




                                            40
Price




                                                             S1




                        B

                                                                         A

                                                                                                         S2

                                                                                                         C

                                                                                                         S3

                                                                                                          D2

                                                                                                                    D2

                                                                                            D1


                                                                                                             Quantity
                                    Q1          Q2                                   Q3
                                                                                                             6



    Figure 1 Supply and demand in venture capital. This figure gives a graphical illustration for the changes in supply and demand in the venture capital
    market. Equilibrium prior to the clarification of ERISA is represented by Q1. After ERISA, the supply curve shifts down to S2 (A) and the new
    equilibrium quantity of venture capital is Q2. Capital gains tax reductions move both demand to D2 (B) and supply to S3 (C) and the equilibrium quantity
    of venture capital moves to Q3.
                                       $6,000                                                                                                                                                                                          $25,000


                                       $5,000
  Commitments to the Venture Capital




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       $20,000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Market Value fo Venture Capital-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      backed IPOs (1994 $s)
                                       $4,000
         Industry (1994 $s)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       $15,000

                                       $3,000

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       $10,000
                                       $2,000


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       $5,000
                                       $1,000


                                          $0                                                                                                                                                                                           $0
                                                1969
                                                       1970
                                                              1971

                                                                     1972

                                                                            1973

                                                                                   1974

                                                                                          1975
                                                                                                 1976
                                                                                                         1977

                                                                                                                1978
                                                                                                                       1979

                                                                                                                              1980
                                                                                                                                     1981

                                                                                                                                            1982

                                                                                                                                                   1983
                                                                                                                                                          1984
                                                                                                                                                                 1985
                                                                                                                                                                        1986
                                                                                                                                                                               1987

                                                                                                                                                                                      1988

                                                                                                                                                                                             1989
                                                                                                                                                                                                    1990
                                                                                                                                                                                                           1991

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1992
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1993
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1994
                                                                                                                                      Year


                                                                                                        Net New Commitments to the Venture Capital Industry ($ millions)
                                                                                                        Total Market Value of Companies



Figure 2 Venture fundraising and IPO activity. The bar graph shows annual commitments to the venture capital industry in millions of constant 1994 dollars. The line
graph shows the annual market value of all venture capital-backed firms issuing equity in an initial public offering.
                                               $6,000                                                                                                                                                                     50%

                                                                                                                                                                                                                          45%
                                               $5,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          40%
          Commitments to the Venture Capital




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          35%




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Capital Gains Tax Rate
                                               $4,000
                 Industry (1994 $s)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          30%

                                               $3,000                                                                                                                                                                     25%

                                                                                                                                                                                                                          20%
                                               $2,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          15%

                                                                                                                                                                                                                          10%
                                               $1,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          5%

                                                  $0                                                                                                                                                                      0%
                                                        1972

                                                               1973

                                                                      1974

                                                                             1975

                                                                                    1976

                                                                                           1977

                                                                                                  1978

                                                                                                         1979

                                                                                                                1980

                                                                                                                       1981

                                                                                                                              1982

                                                                                                                                      1983

                                                                                                                                             1984

                                                                                                                                                    1985

                                                                                                                                                           1986

                                                                                                                                                                  1987

                                                                                                                                                                         1988

                                                                                                                                                                                1989

                                                                                                                                                                                       1990

                                                                                                                                                                                              1991

                                                                                                                                                                                                     1992

                                                                                                                                                                                                            1993

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1994
                                                                                                                                     Year

                                                                                                                Net New Commitments to the Venture Capital Industry ($ millions)
                                                                                                                Capital gains tax




Figure 3 Venture fundraising and capital gains tax rate. The bar graph shows annual commitments to the venture capital industry in millions of constant 1994 dollars. The
line graph shows the highest marginal capital gains tax rate effective in that year.
                                                                                                Table 1

Venture capital industry summary statistics. All figures in millions of 1994 dollars.

                                           1978     1979     1980     1981     1982     1983     1984      1985     1986     1987     1988     1989     1990     1991     1992     1993     1994
      Net New Commitments to               $427     $483    $1,245   $1,712   $2,089   $5,453   $4,839    $4,191   $4,427   $5,378   $3,718   $3,458   $2,507   $1,529   $2,011   $2,545   $4,766
      Independent Venture Capital
      Partnerships (1994 $ millions)
Source of Venture Contributions
      Corporations                         10%       17%      19%      17%      12%      12%      14%       12%      11%      10%      12%      20%       7%       5%       3%       8%       9%
      Individuals                          32%       23%      16%      23%      21%      21%      15%       13%      12%      12%       8%       6%      11%      12%      11%       7%      12%
      Pensions Funds                       15%       31%      30%      23%      33%      31%      34%       33%      50%      39%      47%      36%      53%      42%      42%      59%      47%
      Foreign                              18%       15%       8%      10%      13%      16%      18%       23%      11%      14%      13%      13%       7%      12%      11%       4%       2%
      Endowments                             9%      10%      14%      12%       7%       8%       6%        8%       6%      10%      11%      12%      13%      24%      18%      11%      21%
      Insurance Companies                  16%        4%      13%      15%      14%      12%      13%       11%      10%      15%       9%      13%       9%       5%      15%      11%       9%
Venture Capital-Backed Initial Public Offerings
      Number of Companies                      6       4        27       68       27     121        53        46      97        81       35       39    42.00     122        157     165     136
      Total Amount Raised                  $231      $95     $563     $946     $661 $3,605       $863      $979 $2,546      $2,156    $851    $1,068   $1,158 $4,031      $4,702 $4,923 $3,351
      Total Market Value of Companies      $501     $335    $3,519   $4,436   $2,860 $16,694    $4,059    $3,805 $10,136    $8,078   $3,516   $4,183   $5,536 $19,269    $22,476 $23,531 $16,018
All IPOs
      Number of Companies                     42      103       95     227       100     504     213     195     417     259      96     254     213     403      605    819    646
      Total Amount Raised                  $835    $1,189   $1,460 $3,346     $1,461 $11,395 $2,956 $3,698 $10,204 $6,118 $2,694 $14,699 $10,481 $26,001 $41,057 $58,248 $33,841
      Total Market Value of Companies    $2,320    $4,334   $7,662 $13,423    $6,585 $48,140 $12,534 $13,570 $37,998 $27,908 $13,242 $46,445 $28,841 $72,668 $104,775 NA     NA



Source: Authors’ analysis of Venture Economics’ database, Brav and Gompers [1997], and various issues of the Venture Capital Journal.
                                                        Table 2

Regressions for industry-wide fundraising. The dependent variable is the natural logarithm of the amount of
venture capital commitments (in millions of 1994 dollars) for either all independent private venture capital funds or
only those commitments by various groups of investors from 1972 through 1994. Taxable commitments are defined
as all commitments from individuals, corporations, or insurance companies. Nontaxable contributions are defined as
those from pension funds and endowments. Independent variables include the natural logarithm of the market value
of all venture capital-backed firms issuing equity in the previous year (in millions of 1994 dollars), the previous
year’s real growth in gross domestic product (GDP), the return on t-bills in the previous year, the previous year’s
CRSP value weighted stock market return, a dummy variable that equals one if the Department of Labor clarified
the prudent man rule and allowed pension investment in venture capital (equals one for all years after 1978), and the
highest marginal capital gains tax rate effective in that year. All regressions are ordinary least squares estimates. [t-
statistics are in brackets.]


                                                                Dependent Variable
                                          Natural logarithm of commitments to the venture capital industry
                                                                (millions of 1994 $):
Independent Variable                      Total        Taxable      Tax-exempt Individuals         Pensions
Natural logarithm of value of all       -0.0124        -0.0300        -0.2453         0.0046       -0.3037
venture capital-backed IPOs in           [-0.06]        [-0.11]        [-1.71]        [0.17]        [-1.92]
previous year (millions of 1994 $)
Previous year’s real GDP growth          13.28          16.08          14.48           14.92          12.38
                                         [2.01]         [2.34]         [3.92]          [2.10]         [3.05]
Previous year’s t-bill return           0.0022         0.0436         -0.1212         0.0417         -0.1556
                                        [0.04]         [0.64]          [-3.28]        [0.59]          [-3.83]
Previous year’s equity market           0.3836         -0.2240         0.1648         -0.3920        -0.1092
return                                  [0.48]          [-0.22]        [0.30]          [-0.36]        [-0.18]
Was ERISA’s prudent man rule             2.172         0.8598          2.183          0.6299          2.454
clarified?                               [3.05]        [1.25]          [5.92]         [0.89]          [6.05]
Capital gains tax rate                  -3.835         -2.068          -1.803         -2.498          -2.726
                                        [-1.66]        [-0.96]         [-1.65]        [-1.52]         [-2.14]
Constant                                 6.551         5.3195          8.579           5.307          8.918
                                         [3.01]        [1.95]          [5.85]          [1.88]         [5.53]
Adjusted R2                              0.824          0.303           0.874          0.250          0.884
p-value of F-statistic                   0.000          0.000           0.000          0.000          0.000
Number of observations                     22             17              17             17             17




                                                           45
                                                       Table 3

Summaries of venture capital activity by state. The sample is all venture capital investments by independent
venture organizations by state from 1976 through 1994. The table indicates the number of companies receiving
venture capital and total amount of venture capital invested in each state during this time period. For those with size
data, the distribution of total funds committed in each state is also tabulated with size denoted in millions of 1994
dollars.


                   Companies         Total Venture                          Companies        Total Venture
State               Financed       Capital Invested     State                Financed      Capital Invested
Alaska                     3                 $52.11     Montana                    17                $49.19
Alabama                      75               199.12    Nebraska                      15                 8.05

Arizona                     189               693.91    Nevada                        22                25.77
Arkansas                     12                14.69    New                          136              344.32
                                                        Hampshire
California                6,154            19,967.67    New Jersey                   643            2,019.21
Colorado                    609             1,557.01    New Mexico                    38                56.47
Connecticut                 486             2,094.18    New York                     811            2,369.43
Washington,                  70               210.95    North Carolina               239              612.23
DC
Delaware                     26                42.62    North Dakota                   4                28.23
Florida                     338               779.66    Ohio                         342            1,351.21
Georgia                     395               872.04    Oklahoma                      60              134.78
Hawaii                        4                 1.23    Oregon                       297              789.34
Idaho                        12                58.46    Pennsylvania                 575            2,292.38
Illinois                    514             1,879.06    Rhode Island                  85              226.61
Indiana                     137               260.33    South Carolina                37              165.86
Iowa                         60               143.39    South Dakota                  15                 7.57
Kansas                       46                90.33    Tennessee                    235              844.14
Kentucky                     59               173.54    Texas                      1,254            3,861.13
Louisiana                    45               137.59    Utah                         117              246.69
Maine                        50               126.77    Vermont                      313              969.05
Maryland                    321               989.15    Virginia                      17                61.55
Massachusetts             2,276             5,886.44    Washington                   327              835.79
Michigan                    267               808.56    West Virginia                 16                33.68

Minnesota                   483               837.11    Wisconsin                    144              269.40
Mississippi                  26                32.01    Wyoming                        5                 4.22
Missouri                    107               611.60




                                                          46
                                                       Table 4

Regressions for state level venture capital activity. The dependent variable is the venture capital activity at the
state level (either amount invested in millions of 1994 dollars per million residents or the number of companies
receiving financing per 1,000 residents) for each year from 1976 through 1994. Independent variables include the
natural logarithm of the market value of all venture capital-backed firms issuing equity in the previous year (in
millions of 1994 dollars), the previous year’s real growth in gross state product (GSP) for that state per capita, the
natural logarithm of the previous year’s expenditure on academic and industrial R&D per capita in the state (in 1994
dollars), the return on t-bills in the previous year, the previous year’s CRSP value weighted stock market return, a
dummy variable that equals one if the Department of Labor clarified the prudent man rule and allowed pension
investment in venture capital (equals one for all years after 1978), and the highest marginal capital gains tax rate
effective in that year at the state and national level. All regressions include state fixed effects (not reported). [t-
statistics are in brackets.]


                                                                 Dependent Variable
                                      Logarithm of real venture capital     Number of companies receiving
                                     investment in the state per million venture financing in state per 1,000
Independent Variable                             residents                             residents
Logarithm of value of all venture        -0.2008            -0.1973            -0.2414            -0.2372
capital-backed IPOs in previous          [-3.35]             [-3.37]           [-1.46]             [1.46]
year (millions of 1994 $s)
Logarithm of previous year’s real        0.5343             0.5438              4.5621              4.5854
GSP per capita                           [1.73]             [1.77]              [4.59]              [4.68]
Previous year’s real GSP growth          0.0480             0.0478              0.1609              0.1605
in the state                             [3.11]             [3.11]              [3.45]              [3.45]
Logarithm of previous year’s real        0.7939             0.8032              0.1898              0.2044
expenditure on academic R&D              [4.88]             [5.15]              [0.36]              [0.39]
per capita in the state
Logarithm of previous year’s real        0.1359             0.1362              0.3208              0.3211
expenditure on industrial R&D            [3.23]             [3.24]              [2.67]              [2.67]
per capita in the state
Previous year’s t-bill return            -0.1332            -0.1337             -0.1294             -0.1295
                                         [-5.44]            [-5.48]             [-1.83]             [-1.83]
Previous year’s equity market            0.0386             0.0235              1.4166              1.3983
return                                   [0.15]             [0.09]              [1.98]              [1.99]
Was ERISA’s prudent man rule             1.1713             1.1830              1.6815              1.6948
clarified?                               [6.45]             [6.70]              [3.32]              [3.41]
State capital gains tax rate             -2.5838                                -5.0675
                                         [-0.91]                                [-0.61]
Federal capital gains tax rate           -3.4408                                -6.2439
                                         [-5.14]                                [-3.37]
Sum of the state and Federal                                -3.3684                                 -6.1480
capital gains tax rate                                      [-5.45]                                 [-3.61]
Overall R2                                0.425                0.425             0.188               0.425
p-value of χ2-statistic                   0.000                0.000             0.000               0.000
Number of observations                     765                  765               765                 765




                                                          47
                                                      Table 5

Summary statistics for funds in database. The sample is all funds raised by independent venture organizations
included in the Venture Economics Venture Intelligence database. The first panel indicates the completeness of the
records of independent venture partnerships in the corrected database. The second panel presents summary
information for each venture organization.

                                      Panel A: completeness of records in corrected database
Items in record                                                                              Observations
Month and year of closing and fund size                                                               826
Year of closing and fund size                                                                          20
Month and year of closing: No size                                                                    428
Year of closing: No month or size                                                                      20
Neither closing date nor fund size                                                                    112
                                       Panel B: Summary Information for each venture organization
                                                  Mean           Median         Minimum        Maximum
Number of funds raised                             2.23                 1                1             25
Total funds raised (millions of 1994 $)a        $126.46           $57.11             $0.46      $2,267.02
Closing date of first fund in sampleb              3/82             7/83              1/63          12/92
Closing date of last fund in sampleb               5/85            12/86              1/63          12/92

a
 This tabulation does not include venture organizations where the size of all funds cannot be determined. It does
include, however, those venture organizations where the size of some funds cannot be determined.
b
 This tabulation does not include venture organizations where the closing date of all funds cannot be determined. It
does include, however, those venture organizations where the closing date of some funds cannot be determined.
Funds whose month of closing cannot be determined are regarded as closing in July.




                                                        48
                                                      Table 6

Venture capital funds by year. The sample is all funds raised by independent venture organizations included in the
Venture Economics Venture Intelligence database. The table indicates the number of independent venture
partnerships that closed each year, as well as the number which have information on the size of the fund. For those
with size data, the distribution of total funds committed each year (in millions of 1994 dollars) is also tabulated.

                                                                   Size of funds (millions of 1994 $s)
Year                  Funds closed     Funds with size data               Average                   Sum
1961                             2                        0
1962                             2                        0
1963                             1                        0
1964                             0                        0
1965                             1                        1                 $41.53                $41.53
1966                             1                        0
1967                             2                        0
1968                            12                        0
1969                            16                        6                  72.95                437.72
1970                            14                        5                  50.25                251.25
1971                            13                        5                  61.32                306.62
1972                            11                        5                  24.22                121.10
1973                            13                        3                  36.47                109.39
1974                            11                        6                  14.41                 86.46
1975                            11                        0
1976                            14                        3                  38.18                113.51
1977                             9                        3                  28.39                 85.18
1978                            23                       14                  30.51                427.09
1979                            27                       11                  43.95                483.46
1980                            57                       26                  47.92              1,245.93
1981                            81                       47                  36.43              1,712.10
1982                            98                       51                  40.96              2,088.79
1983                           147                       99                  55.08              5,452.48
1984                           150                      106                  45.65              4,839.34
1985                            99                       74                  56.63              4,190.56
1986                            86                       61                  72.58              4,427.82
1987                           112                       95                  56.61              5,378.32
1988                            78                       66                  56.33              3,717.95
1989                            88                       70                  49.40              3,457.52
1990                            50                       36                  69.64              2,507.02
1991                            34                       23                  66.47              1,528.73
1992                            31                       30                  67.03              2,010.82
Total                         1294                      846                 $53.22            $45,021.73




                                                        49
                                                                     Table 7

Regressions for individual venture organization fundraising. The sample is all funds raised by independent venture organizations included in
the Venture Economics Venture Intelligence database. The dependent variables are a dummy variable that equals one if the venture organization
raised a fund in that year and the size of funds raised in millions of 1994 dollars. Independent variables include number of years since the venture
organization raised a previous venture fund, the age of the venture organization, the total amount of venture capital raised by the organization in
the past ten years, the dollar value of equity held by the venture organization in firms taken public this year and in the previous year, the market
value of all venture capital-backed firms issuing equity in the previous year (all in millions of 1994 dollars), the previous year’s real growth in
gross domestic product (GDP), the return on t-bills in the previous year, the previous year’s CRSP value weighted stock market return, a dummy
variable that equals one if the Department of Labor clarified the prudent man rule and allowed pension investment in venture capital (equals one
for all years after 1978), and the highest marginal capital gains tax rate effective in that year. All regressions are Heckman two-stage models. [t-
statistics are in brackets.]

                                                                                Dependent Variable
                                                                 Model 1                            Model 2
                                                        Was fund   If so, logarithm of    Was fund     If so, logarithm of
Independent Variables                                    raised?  fund size (1994 $s)       raised?   fund size (1994 $s)
Years since raising last fund                           -0.4560           -21.17           -0.4692            -14.15
                                                        [-15.84]          [-7.55]          [-21.58]           [-7.02]
Square of the number of years since raising last         0.0272              0.8710           0.0291             0.5293
fund                                                     [11.94]             [3.94]           [16.27]            [3.28]

Age of the venture organization (years)                  0.0136              0.9820
                                                         [2.79]              [2.32]
Total venture capital raised during previous ten                                              0.0004             0.1670
years for venture organization                                                                [2.14]             [9.56]
(millions of 1994 $s)
Value of equity held in firms brought public this        0.0037              0.3326           0.0029             0.1124
year (millions of 1994 $s)                               [3.30]              [3.50]           [2.46]             [1.15]
Value of equity held in firms brought public in the      0.0091              1.0310           0.0058             0.3742
previous year (millions of 1994 $s)                      [4.39]              [6.11]           [2.58]             [2.07]
Total value of firms brought public in previous         1.3xE-06           -0.0006           1.7xE-06            -0.0006
year by all venture capitalists (millions of 1994 $s)     [0.23]            [-1.60]            [0.34]             [-1.72]
Real GDP growth in the previous year                    -0.0048                               0.0006
                                                         [-0.72]                              [0.08]
T-bill return in previous year                           0.0724                               0.0759
                                                         [3.84]                               [5.45]
Return on the CRSP value weighted index in the           0.0027                               0.0036
previous year                                            [2.37]                               [2.86]
Capital gains tax rate                                   0.0018            -1.1650            0.0021             -1.8156
                                                         [0.31]             [-3.50]           [0.41]              [-5.50]
Was ERISA’s prudent man rule clarified?                 -0.0382              8.3666           -0.0472            -5.4530
                                                         [-0.37]             [0.96]            [-0.44]            [-0.66]
Constant                                                -0.6230            -0.5752            -0.6357               28.99
                                                         [-2.15]            [-0.04]            [-2.27]              [1.98]
Log Likelihood                                                      -8159.3                               -8197.4
p-value of χ2-statistic                                              0.000                                 0.000
Number of observations                                               5573                                  5573




                                                                        50
                                                                      Table 8

Fixed-effects regressions for individual venture organization fundraising. The sample is all funds raised by independent venture
organizations included in the Venture Economics Venture Intelligence database. The dependent variables are a dummy variable that equals one if
the venture organization raised a fund in that year and the logarithm of the size of funds raised in millions of 1994 dollars. Independent variables
include number of years since the venture organization raised a previous venture fund, the age of the venture organization, the total amount of
venture capital raised by the organization in the past ten years, the dollar value of equity held by the venture organization in firms taken public
this year and in the previous year, the market value of all venture capital-backed firms issuing equity in the previous year (all in millions of 1994
dollars), the previous year’s real growth in gross domestic product (GDP), the return on t-bills in the previous year, the previous year’s CRSP
value weighted stock market return, a dummy variable that equals one if the Department of Labor clarified the prudent man rule and allowed
pension investment in venture capital (equals one for all years after 1978), and the highest marginal capital gains tax rate effective in that year.
Dummy variables for each firm are also included to control for firm fixed-effects. Coefficients on the firm dummies are omitted. The
regressions for whether the venture organization raised a fund or not are logit. The conditional regressions for size of the venture fund are
ordinary least squares estimates. [t-statistics are in brackets.]



                                                                                  Dependent Variable
                                                                     Model 1                               Model 2
                                                          Logit                 OLS              Logit                OLS
                                                        Was fund        If so, logarithm of    Was fund       If so, logarithm of
Independent Variables                                    raised?       fund size (1994 $s)      raised?      fund size (1994 $s)
Years since raising last fund                           -1.1056                -2.903          -1.3034                2.343
                                                        [-18.80]               [-1.02]         [-22.83]              [0.89]
Square of the number of years since raising last         0.1069              0.1526             0.1141             -0.2100
fund                                                     [16.91]             [0.54]             [18.74]             [-0.79]
Age of the venture organization (years)                  -0.2772             4.8364
                                                         [-11.23]            [3.18]
Total venture capital raised during previous ten                                                -0.0049             0.1660
years for venture organization                                                                   [-7.10]            [6.41]
(millions of 1994 $s)
Value of equity held in firms brought public this         0.0049             0.0128             0.0056             -0.0764
year (millions of 1994 $s)                                [2.03]             [0.10]             [2.22]              [-0.59]
Value of equity held in firms brought public in the       0.0138             0.2905              0.213             -0.1417
previous year (millions of 1994 $s)                       [3.06]             [1.38]              [4.09]             [-0.65]
Total value of firms brought public in previous         4.1xE-06             -0.0001           -5.0xE-06            0.0004
year (millions of 1994 $s)                                [0.38]              [-0.21]            [-0.48]            [0.55]
Real GDP growth in the previous year                     -0.0315             -1.875             -0.0037             -2.012
                                                          [-1.42]            [-1.42]             [-0.16]            [-1.57]
T-bill return in previous year                           -0.0160             -1.727             0.1154              -1.782
                                                          [-0.43]            [-0.77]            [3.33]              [-0.93]
Return on the CRSP value weighted index in the            0.0009             -0.1847            0.0061             -0.1959
previous year                                             [0.28]              [-0.80]           [1.94]              [-0.89]
Capital gains tax rate                                    0.0007             -1.153             0.0039              -1.506
                                                          [0.06]             [-1.92]            [0.36]              [-2.45]
Was ERISA’s prudent man rule clarified?                   2.047              0.7768             0.0967              10.22
                                                          [5.75]             [0.04]             [0.35]              [0.67]
Constant                                                  1.434              127.15              1.155              127.60
                                                          [1.62]             [2.77]              [1.26]             [2.89]
Log Likelihood/ Adjusted R2                              -1903.6              0.212             -1939.5             0.252
p-value of χ2/ F-statistic                                0.000               0.000              0.000              0.000
Number of observations                                    5323                1117               5323               1117




                                                                        51
                                                    Table 9

Summaries of venture capital commitments by stage focus. The sample is all funds raised by independent
venture organizations included in the Venture Economics Venture Intelligence database.

                                    Funds that have a      Funds that do not      Significance of the
                                    stated focus on        have a stated focus    difference between
                                    early-stage firms      on early-stage firms   early and non-early
Size of the fund                                 $41.98                  $56.95                  0.000
(millions of 1994 $)                           [$24.66]                [$35.88]                [0.000]
Amount of venture capital raised                $92.20                  $87.58                  0.714
by organization in previous funds             [$39.54]                [$26.64]                [0.000]
Organization age (years)                           4.38                    3.77                 0.140
                                                 [3.08]                  [0.58]               [0.002]
Date of fund closing                      August 1985             August 1983                   0.000
                                           [June 1985]             [May 1984]                 [0.000]
Fraction of funds raised on west                38.3%                   30.3%                   0.017
coast
Fraction of funds raised on east                32.2%                   43.6%                   0.001
coast




                                                          52
                                                       Table 10

Regressions for stage focus of the fund. The sample is all funds raised by independent venture organizations
included in the Venture Economics Venture Intelligence database. The dependent variable is a dummy variable that
equals one if the fund raised explicitly stated a focus on early-stage investments. Independent variables include the
age of the venture organization, the total amount of venture capital raised by the organization in the past ten years in
constant 1994 dollars, a dummy variable that equals one if the firm was located on the West Coast, a dummy
variable that equals one if the Department of Labor clarified the prudent man rule and allowed pension investment in
venture capital (equals one for all years after 1978), and the highest marginal capital gains tax rate effective in that
year. All regressions are logit estimates. [t-statistics are in brackets.]


                                                                           Dependent Variable
                                                       Did the fund raise state a focus on early-stage investments?
Size of the fund                                       -0.0057            -0.0035
(millions of 1994 $s)                                  [-2.82]            [-1.40]
Age of the venture organization                         0.0118                               0.0018
                                                        [0.75]                               [0.13]
Total venture capital raised during previous ten                          0.0247                           -3.24xE-07
years for this venture organization                                       [1.62]                             [-0.71]
Was the fund located on the West Coast?                 0.4026            0.4619             0.2280           0.2786
                                                        [2.35]            [2.70]             [1.44]           [1.79]
Was ERISA’s prudent man rule clarified?                 0.7659            0.9025             1.829            1.871
                                                        [1.78]            [2.11]             [4.39]           [4.52]
Capital gains tax rate                                  0.0208            0.0247             0.0395           0.0404
                                                        [1.36]            [1.62]             [2.70]           [2.80]
Constant                                                -2.244            -2.502             -4.333           -4.401
                                                        [-3.14]           [-3.49]            [-6.25]          [-6.39]
Log Likelihood                                          -455.3             -461.9            -557.4           -571.8
p-value of χ2 statistic                                 0.002              0.001             0.000            0.000
Number of observations                                   818                843               1236             1283




                                                          53
