I. Introduction

       Modern economists generally think about the price level within the
framework of the monetary institutions of the United States and other advanced
economies. The central bank controls the quantity of money. The price level—in
the longer run—equates the demand for money to the supply. But what about
economies without central banks? What determines their price levels? Can an
economy use different principles to control its price level, beside the tried and true
central bank paradigm?
       In modern economies, the government is responsible for determining
standards for weight, volume, distance, and value. It is helpful to think about the
determination of the price level as an exercise of the government's standard-
setting power. The government establishes the national unit of length by a
reference unit. In the United States for many years, a metal bar stored in
Washington determined the length of the yard (now the reference unit is a
multiple of the wavelength of cesium). The government can set a national
standard for the length of the yard without producing and selling yardsticks itself.
The ultimate function of the government in this and other standards is rooted in
contract law: When a contract calls for the delivery of a specified number of yards
of wire, the legal standard to determine if the seller has complied with the contract
is whether the length of wire is the agreed amount in terms of the government's
reference standard.
       The determination of the unit of value operates in precisely the same way.
Article I of the U.S. Constitution grants Congress the power to determine the
monetary unit in the same sentence as it grants the power to determine units of
weight and measure. The government develops a monetary unit as an abstraction.



                                          1
Just as the yard is a certain number of wavelengths of cesium, the dollar—as
originally defined by Congress—was .04838 of an ounce of gold. We teach
today—in the context of modern monetary institutions—that the dollar is both a
unit of value and a store of value. But the functions can be separated. The
government need not produce dollars in order to define the dollar, any more than
it has to produce yardsticks in order to define the yard.
       Once the government has established a monetary unit, the rest of the
economy typically adopts the unit for many different purposes. One central
application is that merchants place prices on goods stated in terms of the
monetary unit. A second is that accounts are kept in the unit. And a third is that
the unit denominates securities that are used to carry out transactions and to store
wealth. In all modern economies, the government provides some of those
securities itself. In particular, governments monopolize the supply of currency
denominated in the national monetary unit. Because all modern governments
issue currency denominated in their own monetary units, monetary economics has
blurred the distinction between the monetary unit as an abstract unit like the yard,
and the store of value, analogous to the yardstick.
       History provides one way to see the distinction. The U.S. government did
not issue any currency until the Civil War. For the first 70 years of the country's
history, the government defined the dollar and controlled the price level without
supplying currency or any other security that had a role in transactions. There is
considerable confusion in many accounts of how the government controlled the
price level in that regime. The confusion arises from trying to answer the question
within the framework of modern institutions where control of the quantity of
money is central to controlling the price level.




                                        2
II. A General Framework

        To define the unit of value, the government makes a definition of the
following generic form:


                        The unit of value is xt units of resource y.


Here are some examples:




   Provenance           Name of unit of Resource           Rule for number of units of
                        value                              resource


   U.S. before the      Dollar         Gold                .04838 oz.
   Civil War

   Modern U.S.          Dollar         Paper dollar:       1
                                       bearer security
                                       issued by the
                                       Federal Reserve

   Proposal by Irving   Dollar         Gold                Amount needed to buy
   Fisher [1913]                                           the cost of living bundle

   Modern Chile         Unidad de      Paper Peso:         Number required to buy
                        Fomento        bearer security     the cost of living bundle
                                       issued by Bank of
                                       Chile

   Argentina, Burma     Peso, FEC      U.S. dollar         1




        Let rt be the value of one unit of the resource relative to the cost of living
bundle. Then the purchasing power of the unit of value is

                                      vt = xt rt



                                        3
and the price level is

                                           1   1
                                    pt =     =
                                           vt xt rt

Note that these relationships are purely definitional. They do not tell us whether a
change in the resource content of the monetary unit, xt , changes the purchasing
power of the resource, rt , or the purchasing power of the monetary unit, vt . They
also do not describe how an intervention in the resource market affects either rt
or other variables in the economy. In particular, nothing in these definitional
equations takes a stand on issues of monetary non-neutrality.
        Monetary policies for controlling the price level fall into three categories:
        1. Passive policies that let a market determine rt without government
intervention and keeps xt at a constant level. The gold standard is a leading
example. the government sets the gold content of the monetary unit once and for
all, and does not intervene in the gold market. Argentina's policy as of 1998 of
defining its monetary unit as one U.S. dollar is another example.
        2. Active policies that let a market determine rt without government
intervention and alter xt in order to keep the price level close to constant. An
example is the compensated dollar advocated by Irving Fisher [1913].
        3. Active policies that keep xt at one and intervene in the market for the
resource so as to stabilize its purchasing power rt . Most modern governments use
this type of policy, where the resource is a security issued by the government
(currency and reserves) and the intervention alters the supply of the security.




                                           4
III. Passive Policies for Controlling the Price Level

        The gold standard as practiced by the United States before the Civil War is
a good example of a completely passive policy. The government did not issue any
transactional securities other than a small volume of gold coins that had full gold
value. The government did not intervene in the gold market. Private securities,
including bank notes, were denominated in dollars, which meant that each dollar
obligation was, ultimately, an obligation to deliver .04838 of an ounce of gold.1
        What controls the price level under the gold standard? A common answer
is the specie flow mechanism. Should the U.S. price level rise above its
equilibrium level, the reasoning goes, the purchasing power of gold would be
lower in here than in, say, Britain. Gold would flow to Britain. With less gold in
the United States, banks would issue less money and the price level would fall
back to equilibrium. Under a gold standard, would the price level be
indeterminate in a completely closed economy, where specie could not flow? The
answer is "no"—the question reveals that the specie flow theory is incomplete.
        Specie flow is just one of many mechanisms involved in the determination
of the equilibrium purchasing power of gold. In addition, with low purchasing
power of gold, more gold would be used for jewelry and less would be mined in
the first place. Standard principles of economics apply to the complicated
question of the equilibrium value of gold in terms of other goods and services.
        One additional complication deserves mention. The involvement of gold
in the monetary system is itself a determinant of the demand for gold and thus of
its purchasing power. The demand for gold arising from its monetary role can


1
  The definition of the dollar was actually a little more complicated, because it involved the
alternative of silver as well. But little is lost by my simplification.




                                            5
change over time—in particular, it may rise during financial panics, when the
public seeks to exchange its financial instruments denominated in gold for gold
itself. Hence it would not be appropriate to look at the behavior of the purchasing
power of gold during a period when the gold standard was not in effect as a guide
to the likely behavior of the purchasing power of gold (and thus the price level)
under the hypothetical alternative of a gold standard.



IV. Policies for Controlling the Price Level Based on
Varying the Resource Content of the Monetary Unit

        Irving Fisher [1913] developed a detailed proposal for price stability based
on systematic variation in the gold content of the dollar. His basic idea was to
define the dollar as enough gold to buy the cost of living bundle. If this definition
could be in effect from day to day, the purchasing power of the dollar would be
exactly constant. Fisher thought carefully about how to apply this idea to achieve
a stable dollar in practice.2
        To stabilize the price level at a level p0 , the rule, in terms of the notation
introduced above, is

                                                   1
                                           xt =
                                                  p0rt

Fisher drew up detailed rules setting forth the mechanics of stabilized money
based on this rule. The steps are, first, measure the cost of living according to the


2
  At all times, the discussion of Fisher's idea has been confused by being embedded in a
framework where the quantity of money was an important variable, in part because Fisher's own
thinking prior to making the proposal emphasized the quantity of money. See Patinkin [1993] for a
thorough discussion.



                                             6
prices quoted by merchants under the most recent definition of the monetary unit.
Second, adjust the resource content of the monetary unit, xt , by the same
proportion that the measured price level misses the target, p0 . Fisher presumed
the use of gold as the resource, so his rule was to adjust the gold content of the
dollar as needed to keep the purchasing power of the dollar constant. Fisher
pioneered measurement techniques for the cost of living in order to make this idea
practical.
        To my knowledge, Fisher’s idea has never been used with a precious
metal as the resource underlying the monetary unit. Most probably the neglect has
been to society’s benefit. Fluctuations in the purchasing power of gold have been
sufficiently large that substantial changes in the gold content of the monetary unit
would have been needed to stabilize prices. Moreover, the nature of the forces
that change the dollar price of gold may be such that anticipatory, discretionary
monetary policy would be less disruptive to economic activity than the
mechanical application of Fisher’s scheme.
        Any credible method for price stabilization, including Fisher’s, will
prevent monetary panics precipitated by fears of coming inflation, when the prices
of gold and other commodities rise sharply. Consequently, the wide swings in the
purchasing power of gold seen during periods, such as 1980, when the credibility
of price stability was in doubt, cannot be used to measure the magnitude of the
changes in the purchasing power of gold that Fisher’s formula would be called
upon to offset. Nonetheless, it appears that other sources of volatility in the
purchasing power of gold would stand in the way of Fisher’s scheme based on
gold as the resource. One such source is financial panics, where the public loses
faith in banks and seeks to hold more wealth in gold and other commodities. In
the face of a panic, the necessary decline in the gold content of the monetary unit
could be achieved under Fisher’s scheme only by waiting for actual deflation to
trigger the appropriate adjustment. Portfolio shifts originating in other countries

                                       7
also put stress on Fisher’s formula—for example, the revolution in Iran coincided
with a large increase in the purchasing power of gold that would have required
months or years of grinding application of the formula before it found the right
decrease in the gold content of the dollar.
       In place of Fisher’s mechanical formula, it appears in retrospect that it
would be better to define the gold content of the dollar, xt , as an instrument of
discretionary monetary policy. Alan Greenspan could probably considerably out-
perform Fisher’s formula, because he could use all available information about
the current and likely future purchasing power of gold and adjust the gold content
of the dollar before deflation or inflation actually occurred.
       Fisher was aware of the practical problems that would attend variations in
the gold content of the dollar. Anticipated and significant changes of the content
would induce large movements between demand instruments denominated in
dollars and the gold which these instruments entitle the holder to obtain on
demand. He proposed a fee on these transactions to limit their magnitude. The
administration of the compensated dollar is similar to the operation of a crawling
peg in foreign exchange markets. Chile has successfully overcome the same
problems in more than 30 years of operation of the Unidad de Fomento, to be
discussed shortly.
       Fisher's discussion of the compensated dollar is marred by his dedication
to monetary institutions as they existed in the United States at the time he wrote.
During the Civil War, the federal government imposed a monopoly on currency
which it has retained to the present. Fisher presumed the continuation of the
monopoly, so that his discussion deals simultaneously with the definitional role of
the government—setting the gold content of the dollar, xt , at each moment—and
with the role of the government as the sole issuer of currency denominated in that
unit. His discussion deals extensively with the question of the credibility of the



                                        8
government's promise to redeem gold certificates with the designated weight of
gold. This is a problem of government finance that is logically separate from the
definition of the monetary unit. Had Fisher placed his discussion in the context of
the monetary institutions existing before the Civil War, his explanation of the idea
would have been vastly simpler. In those institutions, private organizations would
issue securities, including currency, denominated in the dollar. The market value
of the instruments would reflect public knowledge of the creditworthiness of the
issuers, just as for all private securities at all times. The successful issuers of
currency would be the organizations with reputations strong enough to maintain
the market values of their securities at exact par. These topics are no different
under a monetary unit defined as a time-varying amount of a resource than under
a unit defined as a fixed amount of the resource.
       The better application of Fisher’s program for defining a self-stabilizing
monetary unit is to use a resource with more stable purchasing power. The best
idea in theory would be to define the unit of value directly in terms of the cost of
living bundle, but this approach is completely impractical. The resource
underlying the definition must be one in which actual transactions can occur. In
practice, this principle limits the resource to standardized metals and other
commodities, or to securities. Earlier research of mine in Fisher’s framework
demonstrated to my satisfaction that no bundle of commodities would work (Hall
[1982]). This leaves securities. Actual experience, not just armchair research, has
demonstrated beyond doubt that defining the monetary unit as xt units of a
standardized security is a foolproof way to create a self-stabilized monetary unit.
       Though Fisher was regarded during his lifetime and long after as a
crackpot visionary, his idea for self-stabilized money has been a complete success
in actual practice. Since 1967, Chile has had a monetary unit, the Unidad de
Fomento, operated according to Fisher’s principles. The resource underlying the



                                        9
UF is a bearer security of the Bank of Chile. The number xt is published every
day in every newspaper. An elaborate but successful formula changes the peso
content of the UF each day so as to track the best estimate of that day’s cost of
living; the formula is driven by monthly data from the cost of living index. Soon
after the introduction of the UF, essentially all forward contracts in Chile came to
be written in UFs—the country achieved universal cost of living indexation
painlessly. Every apartment lease, mortgage, savings account, and pension is
stated in UFs. The idea is also in practice in Colombia, Ecuador, Mexico, and
Uruguay, but its use is less widespread in those countries.
       Interestingly, the success of the UF has remained unknown, or at least
unremarked upon, among economists in every country of the world outside Latin
America. A notable exception is the recent work of Robert Shiller [1998a and b].
       As I noted earlier, fluctuations in the purchasing power of the resource
underlying the definition of the monetary unit are an inconvenience in Fisher’s
scheme. Could we design a security whose purchasing power is constant? If we
could, it would be unnecessary to distinguish between the security and the
monetary unit. Chile would not need to have a peso and a UF if the terms of the
peso could be altered so that its purchasing power was constant. It turns out to be
straightforward to create such a security. I will discuss it in the second part of the
next section. Shiller [1998a] discusses an interesting alternative, where a
secondary monetary unit along the lines of the UF becomes the standard way to
quote prices and denominate securities and the primary monetary unit lurks in the
background to provide a reference level of value.




                                        10
V. Policies for Controlling the Price Level Based on
Intervening in the Resource Market

       Intervention in a resource market can take the form of altering the supply
of the resource or the return that it pays. The first is the basis of price-level
control in all modern economies and the second is an alternative with certain
potential advantages.

A.     Controlling the supply of the resource
       When the resource is a physical substance, such as gold, the government
can influence its purchasing power by altering the supply of the resource in the
hands of the public. The government raises the purchasing power of gold (and
lowers the price level under a passive gold standard) by purchasing gold and
retiring it to an inactive stockpile. If a stockpile has been built up in the past, the
government lowers the purchasing power of gold and raises the price level by
selling from the stockpile.
       Stabilizing the price level by buying and selling gold or another physical
resource that defines the monetary unit has all the problems of any commodity
price stabilization scheme. In order to guard against deflation, the government
must hold an expensive stockpile of the resource. At all times, there will be
political pressure from producers to purchase more of the resource and opposition
to sales when the policy rule calls for sales. Further, because gold and other
resources typically trade in world markets, the government must act on a scale
large enough to influence the world purchasing power of the resource. Among the
governments that define their monetary units in a particular resource, no more
than one can stabilize the purchasing power of its monetary unit by intervening in
the resource market.
       The use of a financial security as the resource—and stabilization of the
price level through variations in the quantity supplied—forms the basis of the

                                         11
monetary systems of all large modern economies. The security is non-interest-
bearing reserves together with currency. Because the government invariably
stands ready to exchange currency notes of different denominations and reserves
at fixed ratios, the various securities form a Hicksian composite good. I will refer
to the composite as reserves, but currency is actually the larger component by far.
       The purchasing power of a unit of reserves is determined by the standard
considerations of traditional monetary economics. There is a demand for reserves
arising from their usefulness in carrying out transactions. The demand is greater if
there are reserve requirements, but demand is positive even without reserve
requirements.3 The issue can be framed as: In an economy with a given number of
pieces of paper with $1 written on them, useful for carrying out transactions, what
will be the value of those pieces of paper relative to goods and services in
general? The analysis determines the level of the variable rt in the notation
introduced earlier. Since the resource content of the monetary unit, xt , is held at
one in every country except those using the UF, the price level is simply the
                                                                 1
reciprocal of the purchasing power of a unit of reserves: pt =      .
                                                                 rt
       Notice that the analysis is exclusively real. It balances the physical volume
of currency and reserves against other goods and services and finds the relative
price that achieves equilibrium. Building a detailed model of the demand for
reserves involves the contentious issues of standard monetary economics: Does
money belong in the utility function? In the production function? Whatever the
resolution of these issues, it remains the case that there will be an equilibrium
relative price between reserves and other goods and services.




                                       12
        Control over the price level is achieved, in this type of system, by
adjustment of the supply of reserves. The demand for reserves fluctuates
predictably and unpredictably over time. Stability of prices requires that supply be
adjusted to match every movement of demand. Moreover, there is an important
low-frequency random element to money demand as payment institutions evolve.
Because of the instability of demand, a satisfactory price-stabilization policy does
not try to prescribe the supply of reserves, but rather uses a feedback mechanism
to respond automatically to shifts of the demand function.
        Central bankers in all advanced countries have mastered the design of
effective feedback mechanisms through a combination of automatic and human
components. In the short run, the central bank adjusts reserves as needed to keep a
short-term interest rate at a target level. This part is essentially automatic. It
accommodates all of the predictable and random shifts in the demand for reserves.
In the longer run, human decision making adjusts the interest-rate target to keep
inflation at a low level. The central banks of all advanced countries and many
lower-income countries have achieved stable prices over the past 15 years through
this type of policy making.

B.      Controlling the return on the resource
        With the achievement of effective price stability, attention has turned to
second-order objectives of policy design with respect to the control of the price
level. First is the familiar deadweight burden from the lack of interest on currency
and reserves. Second—and less well known—is the churning of the central bank's




3
 The study of the demand for currency or reserves is not fundamental to the determination of the
price level in alternative monetary regimes, but is central when the resource defining the monetary
unit is currency.



                                              13
portfolio associated with responding to shifts in money demand by adjusting the
stock of reserves.
       The deadweight burden from the failure to pay interest on reserves is
approximately proportional to the squared value of the short-term nominal interest
rate. With respect to reserves but not currency, paying interest easily eliminates
the deadweight burden. I will not enter the more complicated issue of the
technical practicality and economic desirability of paying interest on currency.
       The central bank's use of the quantity of reserves as the tool for controlling
the price level inevitably results in a huge volume of trades of reserves for
interest-bearing debt and vice versa. The accommodation of weekly, seasonal, and
weather-related fluctuations in the demand for reserves calls for ceaseless buying
and selling of government securities (generally in the form of repurchase
agreements).
       I have considered this issue earlier in Hall [1983]. Suppose that the central
bank maintained a large fixed volume of reserves and responded to shifts in
demand for reserves by altering the interest rate paid on those reserves.
Specifically, the central bank would pay interest on reserves at a rate that was a
specified differential below the rate on, say, the shortest-term treasury bills. The
differential would be the daily instrument of monetary policy, replacing open-
market operations. The central bank would use its short-term instrument to peg a
short-term interest rate. The operation of monetary policy in the medium term
would remain the same as today—the central bank would adjust the target value
for the short-term interest rate as needed to keep inflation on target.
       Each day, if the short-term interest rate threatened to rise above target, the
central bank would expand as needed to push the rate back down to the target
level. To expand, the central bank would lower the demand for reserves (instead
of raising the supply, as central banks do today). To lower demand, the bank
would increase the interest-rate differential between reserves and treasury bills.

                                         14
Holders of reserves would attempt to trade lower-yielding reserves for higher-
yielding short-term securities, and would lower the yield on those securities in the
process.
        By choosing the normal level of the differential to be small (by creating a
large volume of reserves which would be held widely because they paid interest
close to the treasury bill rate), the central bank could hold the deadweight burden
to a low level. Because the policy eliminates any alteration in the size of the
supply of reserves, churning of the central bank's portfolio would be replaced by
alterations in the interest rate paid on reserves. It is an open question whether this
replacement would result in savings.
        In the monetary policy regime I have sketched, based on the use of the
reserves differential as the daily instrument, the bigger picture of policy would
remain the same. Human beings would determine the interest-rate target and
adjust it as needed to stabilize the price level. There is no reason to expect that the
performance of monetary policy would be different from that achieved in the
recent past using conventional policy.
        Could monetary policy be put on autopilot through the adoption of a
formula for paying interest on reserves? The answer is yes, and the explanation
reveals an interesting connection between paying interest on reserves and the
nature of the resource underlying the monetary unit. What follows is drawn from
Hall [1997].
        Let p(t ) be the price level and let n(t ) be the short-term nominal interest
rate for treasury bills. The autopilot formula for the reserve differential is

                             d (t ) = − p(t ) − 1 n(t ) + p& (t )


The target value for the price level is 1. If the price level rises above 1, the
formula says to lower the differential and contract the economy. In addition, the


                                            15
formula says to accommodate actual inflation by raising the differential by the
amount of current inflation.
        To determine the price level under this policy, I proceed as discussed
earlier in this chapter. From the formula for the differential, one can see that

reserves earn the floating rate n(t ) − d (t ) = p(t ) n(t ) −
                                                                          LM         p&(t )OP
                                                                                            . A simple model
                                                                           N         p(t )  Q
would hold that the purchasing power of the monetary unit in terms of goods and
services, rt , is the nominal present discounted value of future interest earnings
divided by the current price level:

                                       t +τ
                                        z                         LM                            OP
                                 z
                                ∞ − n ( s) ds
                             1                                                      p& (t + τ )
                 r (t ) =          e     t          p(t + τ ) n(t + τ ) −                       dτ       (1)
                            p( t )
                                 t                                 N                p( t + τ )   Q
        Let

                                                       t +τ
                                                         z
                                                     − n ( s) ds
                                     z(t + τ ) = e       t             p( t + τ )                        (2)

Then the nominal value can be written as



                                                       z
                                                      p( t )
                                                             dz                                          (3)
                                                       0


which is just p(t ) . So the nominal value of a unit of reserves is equal to the price
level. Its real value, r (t ) , is one.
        The final step is to calculate the price level from the relationship,

                                                     1      1
                                             pt =        =      =1                                       (4)
                                                    xt rt 1 × 1

                                                      16
According to this analysis, the price level resulting from this policy is always 1.
       The analysis rests on only a single behavioral assumption, the present
value relation of equation 1. There are two reasons to doubt that the relation
would hold at all closely. First, and of lesser importance, the interest earnings of
reserves have different financial risk from treasury bills, so the present value
should use a rate with a suitable risk premium or discount. Second, because
reserves provide monetary services to their holders—even in an economy close to
monetary saturation as proposed here—the valuation should consider these
services. The equilibrium price level would actually be less than one so that the
differential would be wide enough to accommodate the service value of reserves.
       I would not advocate the use of the monetary autopilot. Any feedback rule
for monetary policy has to consider seriously the performance in an economy with
monetary non-neutrality. A policy that tries to lock the price level to a
predetermined target invites serious disturbances to real activity whenever there is
an inflationary shock from import prices, wages, or other sources. A realistic rule
would have to consider unemployment as well as the price level, as proposed by
Taylor [1993], for example. And advocates of such rules generally propose them
as guidelines rather than autopilots.




                                        17
VI. Controlling the Price Level after the Transition to
Cybermoney

        Payment systems are evolving to lessen the public's dependence on
currency and on deposits subject to reserve requirements. Will the central bank
lose control over the price level as this process continues?4
        The general framework of this paper suggests that there will remain a wide
variety of methods for effective control of the price level even if private,
electronic payment methods displace the use of the obligations of the central
bank. The most appropriate method, in my view, would be to pay interest on
reserves. The differential between the reserve rate and the market rate on treasury
bills could decline to make up for the declining demand for reserves derived from
the demand for checking accounts. Eventually, when the last checking account
and the last dollar bill disappeared from use, reserves would be valued almost
entirely from their interest earnings and just a little from the fact that the resource
underlying the monetary unit enjoys a service value from that role.
        In any case, there is little evidence of disappearance of checking accounts
and currency from modern life in any country. Americans in particular cling to the
use of checks despite the widespread availability of electronic alternatives that
seem to be more convenient. And all central banks, especially the Federal
Reserve, enjoy huge markets for their currency because of its anonymity.




4
  Jordan and Stevens [1997] discuss this issue. They foresee large reductions in the demand for
reserves and currency and are concerned whether central banks can continue to maintain price
stability in that setting. Their discussion is entirely limited to current institutions.



                                            18
VII.   The Fiscal Theory of the Price Level

       Sargent and Wallace [1981] began a modern line of thought that examines
the relation between the government budget and the price level. This line of
thought presumes a modern set of monetary institutions in which the monetary
unit and the resource underlying are the same, namely government-issued
currency (including reserves). The issuance of currency is a source of revenue to
the government. Sims [1994] and Woodford [1994, 1995] are other important
contributions in this area. This fiscal theory of the price level presents a view of
price determination seemingly quite different from the one described earlier in
this chapter. Cochrane [1998] gives a simplified presentation of the fiscal theory.
       The fiscal theory of the price level rests on the proposition that, because
the government issues nominal instruments, the present value of its excess
demands depends on the path of the price level. Equilibrium can only occur when
the price level follows a path that results in the government satisfying its
intertemporal budget constraint. The equilibrium would be indeterminate but for
the government's sensitivity to the price level.
       The logic of Sargent and Wallace and the resulting fiscal theory of the
price level surely helps explain why Russia and Ukraine cannot have stable price
levels today. These countries have government deficits that cannot be funded,
apparently, by any method other than the printing of currency.
       There are other, simpler ways to make the price level determinate. In the
fiscal theory model, the public has to look into the indefinite future to see that the
government will eventually go broke unless the price level follows the right path.
But consider the following alternative. If the price level is not at the prescribed
level, the government pays the purchasers of odd-numbered treasury bills enough
at redemption so that their owners earn 5 percent more than they would from
even-numbered, normal treasury bills. The market for odd-numbered bills cannot


                                        19
clear if the price level departs from the prescribed level. The only possible price
level in general equilibrium is the target price level. We do not have to picture the
actors in the economy as gazing into the indefinite future to understand the forces
that make the price level determinate.
        This example shows the connection between the method for controlling
the price level advocated earlier in this chapter and the fiscal theory. A policy for
paying interest on reserves and linking the interest rate adroitly to the price level
seems to be just a variant of standard monetary policy, in which changes in the
demand for reserves substitute for changes in the quantity of reserves. But another
way to see the same arrangement is that the government creates a fiscal
anomaly—paying the wrong interest rate on an important part of the national
debt—unless the price level is on target.



VIII. Concluding Remarks

        A government has a wide choice of methods for defining the national
monetary unit. The unit can be a specified weight of metal or amount of some
other physical resource, it can be a security issued by another government, or a
security issued by itself. With the definition in place, the government also has a
wide choice of methods for controlling the price level. The resource content of the
unit can be adjusted systematically over time, as proposed by Irving Fisher and
implemented by Chile. The government can adjust the supply of the resource to
stabilize its purchasing power, as all advanced economies have done so
successfully in the past decade. Or, the government can adjust the demand for the
resource and achieve the same control without incurring the costs of churning its
portfolio.




                                         20
        My discussion has only hinted at the tough issues of monetary policy,
which are common across all the methods for controlling the price level
considered here. It appears that strict price stabilization may result in unstable
output and employment. It is probably desirable to permit movements of the price
level in the face of some types of macroeconomic shocks and then to reverse these
movements gradually afterwards. The reasons lie in the imperfectly understood
realm of monetary non-neutrality, which may be defined broadly as sensitivity of
real activity to any instrument of monetary policy whose theoretical effect is only
to change the price level. As James Tobin has written recently,

        The tail wags the dog. By gently touching a tiny tail, Alan
        Greenspan wags the mammoth dog, the great American economy.
        Isn't that remarkable? The federal funds rate is the shortest of all
        interest rates, remote from the rates on assets and debts by which
        businesses and households finance real investment and
        consumption expenditures counted in GDP. Why does monetary
        policy [have real effects]? How? It's a mystery, fully understood by
        neither central bankers nor economists.5




5
 Tobin [1998, p. 7]. Tobin wrote "Why does monetary policy work?" rather than "Why does
monetary policy have real effects?" but I believe my interpretation is consistent with his intent.



                                              21
References

Cochrane, John, "A Frictionless View of U.S. Inflation" NBER Working Paper
6646, July 1998 (forthcoming in the NBER Macroeconomics Annual).
Fisher, Irving. "A Compensated Dollar" Quarterly Journal of Economics 27: 213-
235, February 1913.
Hall, Robert E. "Explorations in the Gold Standard and Related Policies for
Stabilizing the Dollar” in Robert E. Hall (ed.) Inflation (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press for the NBER) 1982, pp. 111-122.
_____________“Optimal Fiduciary Monetary Systems,” Journal of Monetary
Economics 12: 33-50, no. 1, July 1983.
_____________, "Irving Fisher's Self-Stabilizing Money" American Economic
Review Papers and Proceedings 107: 436-438, May 1997

Jordan, Jerry L., and Edward J. Stevens, "Money in the 21st Century" in James A.
Dorn (ed.) The Future of Money in the Information Age (Washington, DC: Cato
Institute) 1997.
Leeper, Eric. "Equilibrium under 'Active' and 'Passive' Monetary Policies"
Journal of Monetary Economics 27:129-147, 1991.
Patinkin, Don. "Irving Fisher and His Compensated Dollar Plan" Federal Reserve
Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly 79: 1-33, Summer 1993.
Sargent, Thomas J., and Neil Wallace, "Some Unpleasant Monetarist Arithmetic"
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review Fall 1981.
Shiller, Robert J., "Indexed Units of Account: Theory and Assessment of
Historical Experience" NBER Working Paper 6356, January 1998a.
_____________, "Designing Indexed Units of Account" Cowles Foundation
Discussion Paper 1179, May 1998b.
Sims, Christopher, "A Simple Model for the Determination of the Price Level and
the Interaction of Monetary and Fiscal Policy" Economic Theory 4:381-399, 1994

___________, "Fiscal Foundations of Price Stability in Open Economies" Yale
University, 1997.




                                      22
Taylor, John B. "Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice", Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy 39:195-214, Autumn 1993.
Tobin, James. "Monetary Policy: Recent Theory and Practice" Cowles
Foundation Discussion Paper 1187, July 1998.
Woodford, Michael, "Monetary Policy and Price Level Determinacy in a Cash-in-
Advance Economy" Economic Theory 4: 345-389, 1994.
_____________, "Price-Level Determinacy without Control of a Monetary
Aggregate" Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 43: 1-46,
1995.




                                     23
