Public Policies and Private Saving in Mexico

Martin Feldstein*

Mexico’s moderate level of domestic saving limits the country’s rate of investment,
restrains its rate of economic growth, and makes Mexico more vulnerable than it would otherwise
be to international capital shifts of the type that precipitated the December 1994 crisis.1 Although
Mexico can anticipate continued inflows of foreign capital in the years ahead, it needs a higher
sustained level of domestic saving if it is to fulfill its potential for raising real incomes and the
general standard of living of the Mexican people.
In the long run the level of national output depends not on demand but on Mexico’s

1

My article, “Global Capital Flows: Too Little, Not Too Much”, in the June 24, 1995 issue
of The Economist discusses the relation between Mexico’s saving rate and the collapse of the
peso.
*Professor of Economics, Harvard University, and President of the National Bureau of Economic
Research. I am grateful to Dr. Kathleen Feldstein and Dr. Carlos Sales for their assistance in this
project, to the Mexican Bankers Association for sponsoring a 1995 study on which this paper is
based, and to officials of the IMF and World Bank, the Mexican government, the Bank of
Mexico, and Mexican commercial banks for very helpful discussions. The views expressed here
are my own and should not be attributed to anyone else or to any organization.
An earlier version of this paper, “Public Policies to Increase the Private Saving Rate in
Mexico,” was distributed in 1995 before the introduction of the current Mexican system of
mandatory individual pension savings accounts. Although many of the issues discussed in that
paper about individual pension savings accounts have now been resolved by legislation, a slightly
revised version of that section of the original paper is presented in an appendix to the present
paper. Even those issues that now seem settled may be revisited by Mexican policy makers in the
future. In addition, the analysis in the appendix is relevant not only to Mexico but to other
countries, particularly emerging market countries, that are considering the adoption of such a
system of individual accounts.
Mex.rev.011199

1

capacity to produce. Experience around the world reminds us that the countries with high rates of
capital accumulation are the ones that grow more rapidly and that a high level of domestic saving
is necesAFOREy for more rapid growth of the capital stock. Although international capital flows
can supplement domestic saving, the segmented character of the global capital market limits the
availability of sustained cross-border capital inflows. Only a country with a high saving rate can
maintain a high investment rate.2
The precise level of capital inflow that can be sustained in Mexico is uncertain. But
experience in other countries indicates that a capital inflow in excess of five percent of GDP for
more than a few years is very unusual. The recent crisis in Asia shows that large capital inflows
and current account deficits cannot be sustained and are likely to led to currency crises. If
Mexico wants to sustain a higher rate of gross domestic investment, it will have to raise the
domestic saving rate. Some of that increase in saving may now occur spontaneously because of
the reduced net worth and income expectations of Mexican households and the decreased
availability of credit to household borrowers. But additional policy changes are likely to be needed
to raise saving by as much as four percent of GDP.
Moreover, a return to the investment rate before the 1994-95 crisis would still not reflect
Mexico’s potential. Mexico’s current income level and the investment opportunities in Mexico
now imply that a substantially higher rate of saving would permit a substantially higher rate of
investment and growth. A higher initial rate of domestic saving would also initiate a virtuous

2

For a discussion of the reasons for this segmented global capital market, see M. Feldstein,
“Tax Policy and International Capital Flows,” The 1994 Bernhard Helms Prize Lecture,
Weltwirtschaftsliches Archiv, 1994:4, pp 675-97.
Mex.rev.011199

2

circle in which higher income growth leads to even higher saving and the higher domestic saving
rate makes it possible to attract more investment from abroad.
This paper presents a variety of ideas about ways in which the government of Mexico can
stimulate a higher rate of saving. These ideas are building blocks rather than an overall plan.
Some are mutually exclusive but most are options that could be combined to achieve a higher rate
of saving. Many of these ideas have been adopted in other countries. Although the emphasis is on
policy options that can be helpful, I will also comment on some current proposals that would be
likely to reduce the rate of saving.
This paper does not discuss ways to encourage increased investment in plant and
equipment. International experience shows that countries with high saving rates do not have
difficulty in absorbing those savings in productive investments. Mexico’s own recent experience,
especially since 1989, also shows that the problem in Mexico is finding the savings to finance
investment rather than stimulating investment to absorb available savings. With a 1994 current
account deficit of 7.8 percent of GDP, Mexico’s investments were 50 percent higher than it could
finance from domestic saving. Although changes in taxation and in other government rules could
lead to an improved use of the available savings, that subject lies beyond the scope of this paper.
Individuals save when they have a reason to save, when saving is rewarded, and when the
funds that are saved seem both secure and available for unforeseen needs. Government policies
affect the reasons for saving in many ways. Providing publicly financed retirement annuities and
insurance for health care and for unemployment reduce or eliminate the reason to save for
retirement and for the uncertainties of income and expenditure associated with unemployment and
ill health. In contrast, providing opportunities to buy quality education at the secondary and
Mex.rev.011199

3

university level and to establish new businesses create reasons for higher levels of personal saving.
Mexico has recently replaced its traditional pay-as-you-go social security system with a
system of mandatory individual pension accounts that is likely to increase national saving and
capital accumulation. The present paper focuses on other tax, regulatory and government
financial policy changes that could increase the reward, the security and the liquidity of savings in
ways that would raise the national saving rate. The design of the individual pension accounts (the
AFORE program) is discussed in the Appendix to this paper.
Mexico’s macroeconomic problems during the past two decades are a reminder of the
potential importance for saving of a stable macroeconomic environment. The possibility of very
large unanticipated increases in inflation can mean very negative real rates of return for a large
portion of the saving public. Even sophisticated investors with substantial funds are hurt when a
jump in inflation raises interest rates and depresses the prices of stocks and bonds. The tendency
of most individuals to focus on nominal interest rates (rather than real rates) also means that high
inflation hides important differences in real interest rates that would otherwise act as an incentive
to save. The Mexican government clearly recognizes the importance of achieving and maintaining
a stable macroeconomic environment. Consideration of the monetary and fiscal policies that can
contribute to such greater macroeconomic stability lies outside the scope of this paper.

1. Tax Reforms to Stimulate Saving
Mexico has a very sophisticated tax system that has continued to be improved. There is
now no tax on most investment income at the individual level and the tax rules are designed to
eliminate the distorting effects of inflation on the measurement of real investment income.

Mex.rev.011199

4

Nevertheless, the system still does not fully exempt investment income and therefore
distorts the intertemporal allocation of income in favor of current consumption. The 32 percent
tax on corporate profits reduces the rate of return available to savers. The tax equal to 1.7 percent
of fixed income deposits is equivalent to a high rate of tax on real interest when the real interest
rates are depressed by inflation. The real interest earned on inflation-adjusted deposits (UDIs) are
still taxed at 15 percent. Saving in the form of life insurance gets a low net return because the life
insurance companies pay ordinary corporate tax on the portfolio interest that they receive,
reducing the return that they can give to insurees. The capital gains tax on unlisted corporate
securities and investment real estate distorts the allocation of business investment, reduces the
overall return, and may provide an incentive for dividend distributions that reduce total saving.
The favorable treatment of housing (through INFONAVIT and FOVI) also distorts the allocation
of the nation’s capital stock away from business plant and equipment and toward housing. This
section of the paper discusses a variety of options for reducing these distortions and raising the
national saving rate.
Much of the structure of the Mexican tax treatment of investment income is motivated by
the principle of “tax neutrality.” Although tax neutrality is in general a desirable principle (e.g.,
taxing corporate dividends and corporate retained earnings equally in order not to distort the
corporate dividend decision), it may be counterproductive to be neutral in some aspects of the
tax law when there are substantial non-neutralities in other parts. Thus if the tax system as a
whole reduces saving, this could be balanced by tax rules that tilt the taxation of dividends to
favor increased retained earnings and therefore a higher saving rate. Similarly, if political and
historic reasons cause government rules to favor investment in housing over investment in
Mex.rev.011199

5

business plant and equipment, the tax system would be made more neutral overall if the specific
tax treatment appeared to favor business investment in an offsetting way. These ideas will be
illustrated in more detail by specific examples.
Although the current paper focuses on policies that could encourage private saving, the
structure of the tax system also affects national saving by its impact on total tax revenue. I will
discuss the various ways in which the existing structure of marginal tax rates and corporate taxes
may reduce taxable income and therefore tax revenue and will indicate some possible alternatives
that would raise tax revenue without increasing tax rates.

1.1

The tax treatment of life insurance
Life insurance is a major component of personal saving in many countries, including the

United States. Life insurance provides a discipline on savers. Once the decision is made to
purchase life insurance, the individual feels committed to continue making premium payments.
The unchanging level of life insurance premiums as individuals age and the increasing difficulty of
obtaining insurance in later years (because insurability is based on recent medical history and
physical examinations) also causes individuals to want to keep their insurance coverage. Thus,
unlike much ordinary saving, saving in the form of life insurance is likely to be very long-term and
the additions to the insurance policies’ cash value are likely to be reliable.
Life insurance is also a useful way of increasing national saving because life insurance,
unlike most other forms of saving, is “sold” to individuals. Insurance company advertising and
insurance agents who sell door-to-door create a demand for this type of saving that is very
different from the self-motivated decision to save in bank accounts or mutual funds.
Mex.rev.011199

6

Under the current Mexican tax law, individuals buy life insurance with after-tax dollars.
When insurance benefits are paid, they are not subject to tax. However, the interest received by
the insurance company on its investments is subject to tax at the regular 32 percent corporate tax
rate. Since this reduces the implicit return that insurance companies can offer in calculating their
premiums, this tax rule discourages the use of life insurance in comparison to other forms of
saving and therefore discourages saving overall.
In a neutral tax system, the interest income received by life insurance companies would be
taxed as it would be if the interest were paid to individual savers (e.g., a tax of 1.7 percent of
assets) rather than at the 32 percent corporate tax rate. Although being neutral in this way would
not provide a net incentive to save, it would overcome the relative disadvantage that life insurance
now has and permit it to be sold more successfully,
One approach to stimulating life insurance saving, used in the United States, is to exempt
from tax most of the investment income of life insurance companies. This so-called “tax-free
inside buildup” permits the insurance companies to charge lower premiums and provide a higher
real return than would be available on other saving.
An alternative approach, used in several countries, allows individuals to deduct a portion
of their life insurance premiums from taxable income and does not tax the benefits of the
insurance when they are paid. The premium deduction method of stimulating the demand for life
insurance has the advantage of being more visible to the individual and therefore may make
insurance more attractive. It is important however to distinguish between premiums for insurance
per se (the “term” component of the life insurance) and the saving component of the insurance so
that the direct premium tax subsidy does not increase insurance rather than saving. Moreover,
Mex.rev.011199

7

since individuals with more extensive insurance may save less directly, the effect of the premium
subsidy might actually be to decrease national saving. The reduced tax on the interest income of
insurance companies would therefore be a more cost-effective way to encourage saving through
life insurance rather than the overall consumption of life insurance services.

1.2

Annuities and other non-life insurance products
Life insurance is not the only type of insurance product that can increase the national

saving rate. Annuities provide insurance against “living too long” rather than dying at an early
age. Many life insurance policies pay their benefits in the form of an annuity or combine life
insurance during preretirement years with an annuity (or double life annuity) after retirement age.
Tax neutrality implies that all such arrangements would be given at least the same tax
treatment that is now given to ordinary saving by individuals. But saving through this route, which
has the same advantages of persistence and explicit selling as life insurance, could also be
encouraged explicitly.
Long-term care insurance is a form of conditional annuity policy in which payments are
made to an individual who requires long-term nursing or institutional care. This too involves a
substantial saving component.
Property and casualty insurance also adds to the national saving rate as insurance
companies accumulate reserves and equity against future unpaid claims. Some countries, most
notably Japan, combine property and casualty insurance with explicit tax-favored saving.
Individuals who buy these policies commit to make premium payments for several years and, at
the end of that time, receive a cash sum from the insurance company independent of whether or

Mex.rev.011199

8

not the insured risk occurred. These policies effectively pass through a pretax return to Japanese
households who commit to a multiyear insurance-saving policy. This has been a very effective
vehicle in Japan for encouraging the marketing and purchase of a saving product.

1.3

Cuentas Especiales de Ahorro (Tax Favored Individual Saving Accounts)
The Cuentas Especiales de Ahorro (CEAs) permit tax deductible saving and then tax the

funds when they are withdrawn from the account. The analogous tax-favored saving accounts in
the United States (the Individual Retirement Accounts) and in Canada (the Registered Retirement
Savings Plans) have been very popular and appear to have increased national saving substantially.
In contrast, CEA accounts in Mexico are virtually unknown and little used. One reason for the
lack of interest in CEAs may be that government rules restricted the investment options and
required that a substantial portion of the assets be invested in government bonds. But even with
these restrictions dropped, the CEAs may not in their current form be an effective way of
stimulating private saving.
In general, saving in the form of CEAs does not yield a higher net of tax return than
ordinary saving unless the individual expects to have a lower marginal tax rate in the future than in
the present. More specifically, since dividends and the capital gains on stocks listed on the Bolsa
are already tax free, there is no advantage in holding such assets in CEAs. Interest on government
bonds is also untaxed, or, more accurately, because government bond interest rates reflect this tax
free status, the yield on government bonds is effectively taxed at a single rate with withholding at
source. Again there is no advantage in holding such bonds in CEAs since they have the same
yield in CEAs as they do if held directly. Interest income from nongovernment liabilities like bank

Mex.rev.011199

9

accounts and fixed income funds is the only form of portfolio income that is taxed and the tax rate
on such income is less than the tax rate for other income. It is only for such taxable investments
that the CEAs provide a higher return than ordinary saving.
The most obvious way that the current tax rules could be modified to encourage more
saving in CEAs is to reduce the tax on withdrawals of funds that are kept in CEAs for a
substantial period of time or that are used for certain designated purposes like home purchase or
education. For example, consider an individual in the 30 percent marginal tax rate who deposits
100 pesos in a CEA and withdraws it after five years. Exempting half of such withdrawals from
income tax is equivalent to raising the interest rate in the CEA by approximately 4 percent.3
Although such individual tax favored saving accounts may increase national saving in the
long run, during the early years they may encourage individuals with existing assets to transfer
them into the tax favored accounts. Such individuals would immediately pay less tax but do no
additional saving. Since government saving would decline (because of the reduced tax collection)
while private saving did not increase, national saving would decline. There are several ways that
could reduce this problem and increase the likelihood that the tax favored account will cause a net
increase in national saving in the short term as well as in the longer run:
(1) Shift from an immediate tax deduction of the deposited amount to an incentive at the
time that the funds are withdrawn. For example, instead of allowing a deduction for income

3

If the effective interest rate in the CEA is r under current law, a 100 peso deposit grows
to 100(1+r)5 at the end of five years and therefore to an after-tax income for someone with a 30
percent marginal tax rate of 70(1+r)5. Excluding half of that income from the income tax raises
the net amount to 85(1+r)5. This is equivalent to raising the pretax interest rate from r to s where
70(1+s)5 = 85(1+r)5 so that (1+s) = 1.04 (1+r).
Mex.rev.011199

10

deposited in the CEA, the deposit could be non-deductible but receive more favorable treatment
on withdrawal. Consider again the example described above. The individual in the example
deposited 100 pesos in the CEA and thereby saved 30 pesos in tax. The individual’s foregone
consumption was therefore a net 70 pesos. At the end, the funds were taxed at 15 percent to yield
net consumption of 85 (1+r)5. The same incentive could be achieved by allowing the individual to
deposit after tax income and then reward it when it is withdrawn by a tax credit of 21 percent
(i.e., by giving a net withdrawal equal to 85/70 times the deposited amount). If the individual
deposits 70 pesos of after-tax income, it grows to 70(1+r)5 at the end of five years. If it is
withdrawn at that time and the individual receives a tax credit of 21.4 percent of the withdrawn
amount, the individual has 85(1+r)5 to consume.
Although this does not change the present value of the government’s foregone taxes, it
does postpone the government deficit. Moreover, if the incentive does induce an increase in
total private saving during these five years, some of that saving will be invested in the corporate
sector where it generates profits that are subject to the corporate profits tax. The extra corporate
tax payments may exceed the individual tax credit that the government provides at the end of the
five years. If so, there is an increase in government saving as well as in private saving.4
(2) Have a high ceiling on the amount that can be deposited to the CEA. This is already
true in Mexico with an annual limit of 46,000 pesos per person. The effective limit would be even
higher if the CEA deposits are not tax deductible (i.e., are in after-tax pesos) as described in the

4

On the importance of this incremental corporate tax revenue, see M. Feldstein, “The
Effect of Tax Based Incentives on National Saving and Government Revenue,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, May 1995, pp 475-94
Mex.rev.011199

11

previous two paragraphs. Without a high annual limit, it is more likely that the individual will
receive a tax advantage for saving that would already be done without facing any incentive at the
margin for a higher rate of saving. This is unlikely to be a problem with the Mexican limit.
(3) Restrict the tax incentive to deposits in excess of some threshold amount. For
example, the individual might be required to deposit at least 10 percent of annual income to
receive favored treatment and the favored treatment might only be on amounts in excess of that
10 percent. Like the high limit, this type of rule reduces the risk that an individual will be
rewarded for saving that would otherwise occur.
The maximum incentive effect from the modified CEAs if there is no restriction on the
type of portfolio asset that can qualify for CEA treatment, including bank deposits, mutual funds,
and separate individual brokerage accounts.

1.4

Other tax favored individual savings accounts
The basic idea of encouraging saving through the Cuentas Especiales de Ahorro could be

extended in a variety of ways:
(1) Giving more favorable tax treatment to voluntary deposits in the new mandatory
individual pension accounts (AFORE). This would have the advantage of using an account that
already exists. Funds would have to remain until retirement or job loss. The tax advantage could
come in the form of a government matching contribution to the AFORE account. Although it
would technically be an increase in the budget deficit, it would essentially be self financing.
(2) Encouraging employer-based voluntary additional individual saving contributions to
the AFORE accounts. In the United States, the 401k plans give employers and employees a tax

Mex.rev.011199

12

deduction for funds deposited in retirement accounts. Participation is voluntary for the individual
but employers generally match individual contributions up to a limit in order to increase
participation. Employers are encouraged to do this not only by the tax deductibility of such
matching contributions (treated as deductible wages to the employer but not taxed to the
employee) but also by the fact that senior managers can contribute a similar share of their income
(and therefore a much larger dollar amount). Since 401k plans receive this favorable treatment
only if a high fraction of lower wage employees participate, senior management has an incentive
to educate, encourage and subsidize such participation. The dollar limits on contributions were
much higher when the program began than they are today, providing a stronger incentive for
managements to establish 401k programs..
(3) Permitting medical saving accounts. Health insurance policies in the United States
generally reduce the cost to the patient at the time of care to 20 percent of the market price of
the service or less, thereby greatly increasing the demand for care. Tax deductions for health
insurance premiums stimulate demand for this type of distortionary insurance. Mexico has avoided
the problems created by such incentives but may not be able to do so indefinitely as the existing
health care system is overhauled. An alternative option that could reduce the pressure for
favorable tax treatment of health insurance, yet help individuals with large medical bills and
contribute to national saving is the creation of tax favored medical saving accounts. These
accounts would be like CEAs but would be used to finance medical expenditures. If pretax pesos
are contributed to the medical saving accounts (and deductible from taxable income) and funds
that are withdrawn to finance health care are not subject to tax, individuals would have an
incentive to accumulate funds against the possibility of a large future medical expenditure.
Mex.rev.011199

13

Although this effectively lowers the cost of medical care by the same percentage as the
individual’s marginal tax rate, the distortion in the demand for care is much less than it would be
with insurance policies that reduce the cost of medical care to the patient at the time of care by 80
percent or more. At the cost of some additional administrative complexity, withdrawals from the
medical savings accounts could be made tax free only to the extent that they exceeded a certain
fraction of income, thereby imposing a deductible in the implicit insurance policy and encouraging
individuals to keep funds in the medical saving account until very large expenses are incurred.
(4) Giving special tax treatment for the existing profit sharing bonuses if they are saved in
AFORE accounts or CEAs. The 10 percent mandatory bonuses that individuals receive are a
natural target for a saving inventive since these are irregular and lumpy payments. Individuals
cannot count on them to finance ordinary spending in the same way that they spend wages.

1.5

The differential taxation of dividends and retained earnings
Current Mexican tax rules aim at neutrality between dividends and retained earnings.

Corporate profits are taxed at 32 percent. No further tax is paid by taxpayers with a higher tax
rate. Taxpayers with lower tax rates can gross up the dividend that they receive, include the
grossed up dividend in taxable income, but receive a credit for the tax paid by the firm. For the
majority of shareholders who face marginal tax rates of 37.5 percent, this method is neutral
between retained earnings and dividends. For shareholders with lower marginal tax rates, it
provides an incentive for companies to pay dividends since retained earnings are taxed at the
higher rate until the funds are distributed, i.e., the company provides an interest free loan to the
government of the additional tax that will later be given back in the form of a credit to lower
Mex.rev.011199

14

marginal tax rate shareholders.
Evidence from other countries suggests that private saving would probably be increased
by taxing retained earnings at a lower rate than dividends. That experience shows that differential
taxation increases retained earnings; this is likely to be particularly true in Mexico since the capital
gains that result from increased retained earnings are not subject to tax for either listed or unlisted
companies. Statistical studies of other countries also show that a shift from dividends to retained
earnings reduces current consumption.
A differential taxation of dividends and retained earnings can be done in a revenue neutral
way by reducing the tax on retained earnings and increasing the tax on dividends. Such revenue
neutrality on this type of income is obviously not necessary for overall revenue neutrality. The
discussion of the corporate tax in section 1.7 suggests that a revenue neutral reduction of the total
burden on the corporation is another way to increase total saving..
The current method of treating the corporate tax payment as a withholding of the
individual tax on corporate profits, to be recognized at the individual taxpayer level by a gross up
and credit calculation, is not currently extended to the Cuentas Especiales de Ahorro. Doing so
would mean crediting the corporate tax to the individual CEAs, providing a substantial additional
incentive to save. A similar corporate tax rebate could be given for dividends received in AFORE
accounts.

1.6

Capital gains taxation
The current method of not taxing capital gains on stocks listed on the Bolsa while taxing

capital gains on shares in unlisted companies and in real estate creates an anomalous distortion

Mex.rev.011199

15

between the two classes of assets. It is likely to distort investment in favor of exchange listed
companies and to encourage unlisted companies to distribute more of their earnings than they
otherwise would. To the extent that such distributions rise, total saving is likely to be depressed.
The current method of adjusting the basis of the capital gains tax for unlisted companies
(adding retained earnings and adjusting the resulting basis for the increase in the general price
level) is only a partial remedy. A general increase in the price to book ratio of all companies
would cause a taxable capital gain on the sale of an unlisted company but no tax liability on the
sale of a listed company. The avoidance of such taxes may have kept investors locked into the
shares of their unlisted companies, reducing market efficiency.
A further difference between listed and unlisted companies is in the treatment of capital
losses. An individual who invests in an unlisted company can offset a capital loss only against
capital gains for other unlisted companies. If some investors in unlisted companies have net capital
gains while others have equally large net capital losses, there will be a net capital gain tax liability
even though there is no aggregate capital gain. This biases investments away from unlisted
companies and, more generally, reduces the rate of return on saving.
Since the avowed purpose of the capital gains tax on unlisted companies is not to raise
revenue and since the capital gains tax currently raises relatively little revenue, there would be a
correspondingly small direct revenue loss in the shift to a more neutral capital gains tax rule.

1.7

Pension funds
Voluntary corporate pension funds are a major source of saving in most countries but are

hardly used at all in Mexico. One reason for this is probably the restriction that 30 percent of tax

Mex.rev.011199

16

deductible pension funds must be invested in government bonds. Eliminating this restriction, in
parallel to eliminating the restriction on the investments in Cuentas de Ahorro, might make
pension investing substantially more attractive.
Allowing pension funds to use the gross-up-and-credit method to obtain the corporate tax
paid on the dividends they receive would be a further incentive for the expansion of corporate
pension plans.
The German method of book reserving pensions might also stimulate the introduction of
pensions by companies that have limited capital and a high cost of external funds. In contrast to
the current system in Mexico and in the United States, which grant a tax deduction only for
employer contributions to a separate pension fund that must be invested almost completely in
securities issued by other companies, Germany gives a tax deduction to a company that grants a
pension benefit to its employees if it reserves for that obligation on its books. In effect, this
permits the company to invest its pension contribution in its own company instead of in other
firms and still get the tax advantage.5

1.8

The corporate tax rate
The 32 percent corporate tax rate is an anomaly in a tax system that excludes most other

types of capital income or taxes that income at lower rates than other income. The corporate

5

Although this is effectively an unfunded pension system, it differs in a fundamental way
from an unfunded public system. The company’s unfunded obligation to pay future pension
benefits reduces the market value of the company and therefore the wealth of its shareholders.
Statistical studies of U.S. corporations show that the market value of a company is reduced
essentially dollar for dollar by such unfunded liabilities. The lower market value of the shares
reduces consumption of shareholders and therefore increases saving.

Mex.rev.011199

17

profits tax discriminates against equity in favor of debt and against corporate investments in favor
of other activities like housing and foreign investment. More generally, it reduces the return on
capital and therefore the incentive to save. Reducing the corporate tax rate and substituting a
higher rate of value added tax, payroll tax or personal income tax would increase the incentive to
save.
The higher tax on corporate profits also shifts capital and economic activity from the
formal sector where profits and labor incomes are taxed to the informal sector where no taxes are
paid. To the extent that the high rate of corporate tax shifts activity to the informal sector, the
government may lose more revenue from the reduced tax base (including lower personal income
tax and payroll tax collections as well as reduced profits tax and value added tax revenue) than it
gains from the higher tax rate. A lower corporate tax rate might therefore raise total tax revenue
and therefore national saving. Although this would be a very unusual conclusion in many
countries, the very large untaxed informal sector in Mexico makes this a significant possibility that
deserves careful analysis.

1.9

Income and payroll taxes
The high current rates of personal income tax, payroll tax and value added tax may also

drive economic activity from the formal sector into the informal sector. The combination of a 35
percent marginal rate of personal income tax (reached at a relatively low level of income) and a
substantial payroll tax implies a high combined effective tax rate on wages earned in the formal
sector that are not paid on wage income in the informal sector. The 15 percent value added tax
reduces the demand for the products of the formal sector relative to the informal sector.
Mex.rev.011199

18

This situation, like the effect of the corporate tax described in section 1.7, implies that
reducing the tax rate may actually increase tax revenue by drawing employment and therefore
taxable income from the informal sector to the formal sector. The traditional labor supply
elasticities are less relevant here than the extent to which workers shift between the taxed and
untaxed sectors in response to differences in the tax rate.
There are three possible types of policy actions that could reduce this distortion, thereby
increasing tax revenue and national saving:
(1) Reducing the effective marginal rate of payroll tax by relating incremental benefits to
incremental taxes. The AFORE reforms convert a substantial portion of the previous payroll tax
into benefits that are proportional to the amount of AFORE contribution paid. If this is fully
communicated to employees, what appears to typical employees in the old system as a tax would
now be seen as a way of creating personal wealth. All of this would change if individuals
understood the personal wealth character of the retirement AFORE accounts, if those accounts
pay a high rate of return, if the death and disability benefits are related to the individual’s
contribution, and if the Housing AFORE provides a rate of return comparable to the return on
the retirement AFORE.
(2) Changing the nature of the health insurance financing to reduce the marginal tax rate
beyond the reductions enacted at the end of 1998. There is still a major payroll tax devoted to
financing health care. Although the individual who pays this tax (either directly or through
foregone wges) is entitled to some health services that are not available to those who work only in
the informal sector, the tax is proportional to wages above a floor while the benefits are unrelated
to the amount of tax that is paid. These health care costs could be financed by a different
Mex.rev.011199

19

combination of taxes, employer contributions, and personal charges. A greater reliance on the
value added tax would reduce the discrimination against employment in the formal sector. Over
time, the financing of health care might be directed to greater individual responsibility (through
copayments financed out of pocket or from a medical saving account) or to an employer based
premium system that is not proportional to wages.
(3) Shifting the mixture of taxes from payroll and income taxes to the value added tax.
The payroll and income taxes are collected only from those who work in the formal sector. The
value added tax is borne by anyone who buys products that embody the value added tax. A shift
to a value added tax would therefore shift some of the burden from individuals employed in the
formal sector to those in the informal sector. Greater reliance on the VAT would therefore raise
total tax revenue without increasing taxes on those who currently pay income and payroll taxes.
Reducing the advantage of working in the informal sector would also shift employment and
income from the informal sector to the formal sector, thereby raising the income and payroll
taxes.6

2. Reform of Financial Regulation
The Mexican financial system provides a wide range of financial products and institutions.
Legal reforms in recent years and the introduction of inflation-adjusted UDI accounts have
created improved opportunities for saving. Commercial banks provide large nationwide branch
networks and actively promote saving by a variety of products including saving accounts with

6

The traditional pro-saving case for a value added tax (that a VAT exempts saving) is less
relevant in Mexico since the Mexican tax system already exempts most of the income from saving.

Mex.rev.011199

20

relatively small minimum balances, electronic payroll deposits, debit cards, inflation-adjusted
accounts and a range of mutual funds. This section describes some further reforms that could
stimulate additional saving by increasing the reward for saving and the liquidity of saving deposits.

2.1

Enhancing the liquidity of long-term saving
Most financial deposits and fixed-income assets have very short durations. Although

individuals can obviously do long-term saving using these short-term assets, the absence of longer
term assets makes it impossible to obtain fixed long-term real returns. Individuals might be willing
to save more if they could invest those savings in long-term assets that provide an attractive real
return and that are protected from the risks of unpredictable inflation. Today the longest such
inflation-adjusted assets are three year UDI deposits that pay real yields of varying size,
depending on the size of the deposit. Most time deposits are actually much shorter than this, with
one month and three month deposits the most common form of time deposit.
The absence of longer term UDI time deposits and the preference for very short deposits
do not appear to reflect an unwillingness of banks to supply longer term assets with relatively
attractive real rates of return. Instead, their absence in the market seems to be due to an
unwillingness of individuals to commit funds for longer periods of time despite the UDI inflation
adjustment and the existence of government guarantees of bank deposits. Individuals apparently
value liquidity and are unwilling to place funds beyond reach for long periods of time in order to
get a predictable rate of return.
Although banks could in principle offer a product that combines a long-term guaranteed
real rate with the option of early withdrawal at a penalty (as banks do in the United States), they

Mex.rev.011199

21

are currently prevented from doing so by financial regulations. Government regulations could be
modified to permit such products to be issued.
Any rules that currently prevent the creation of tradable long-term UDI bank certificates
of deposit (backed by UDI denominated mortgages, long-term corporate UDI loans or
government UDI bonds) and corporate UDI denominated bonds could also be eliminated. Doing
so would permit individuals to have a guaranteed real fixed rate if they hold the asset to maturity
while retaining the liquidity of being able to sell the certificate of deposit or bond if funds are
needed before then.

2.2 Reducing asset restrictions
The government’s decision to remove the requirement that 30 percent of the funds in
Cuentas Especiales de Ahorro (CEAs) be invested in government bonds will increase the
attractiveness of those accounts.7 Other restrictions on the assets in these accounts could also be
removed, particularly the restriction precluding investments in equity mutual funds.
Similar restrictions on other types of accounts could also be eliminated, including the rule
requiring company pensions to invest in government bonds.
Banks are currently permitted to offer dollar and other foreign exchange accounts only to
business customers. Some individuals may feel that deposits denominated in dollars or other
foreign currencies would be more secure or would provide a useful hedge as part of an overall
portfolio. Banks could be permitted to create such deposits, subject to appropriate capital

7

See section 1.3 for other changes that could enhance the attractiveness of the Cuentas
Especiales de Ahorro.
Mex.rev.011199

22

requirements if those foreign exchange liabilities are not hedged in the futures market.

2.3

Avoiding excess credit
Recent experience suggests that banks may have a tendency to take considerable risks by

giving large amounts of credit to consumers in the form of credit card balances and mortgages.
Risky lending practices do not raise the banks’ cost of deposit funds because depositors know that
the government guarantees the nominal value of their deposits. Borrowers may even borrow with
the belief that they will be able to restructure their debts if macroeconomic conditions or personal
circumstances make loan repayment particularly burdensome.
Although the internationally agreed risk based capital standards for banks (the Basel
standards) relate each bank’s capital requirement to the composition of its assets, the classification
does not distinguish between a high risk credit card or other consumer loan and a business loan to
a corporation with a strong credit rating. Mortgage loans actually require less capital than high
grade corporate loans.
The Mexican government could introduce higher capital requirements on consumer loans
and home mortgages than are called for by the Basel agreement. Higher capital standards would
cause banks to raise the cost of such loans, restricting their overall use. Capital standards for
mortgages might be related directly to each bank’s average loan to value ratio, thereby inducing
banks to raise the cost of mortgages with high loan to value ratios. That in turn would induce
mortgage borrowers to save more before obtaining a mortgage and to pay down mortgage debt
more quickly. These changes would not only increase the stability of the banking system but

Mex.rev.011199

23

would also reduce the amount of consumer borrowing and would thereby raise net saving.8

2.4

Encouraging small savers
Although commercial banks are already reaching out to small savers in a variety of ways,

the minimum deposits required to open certain types of accounts may deter lower income
individuals from beginning a program of saving. Time deposits with reasonably attractive rates of
return may require a minimum deposit of 2000 pesos and mutual fund accounts that pay market
rates of return may require balances as high as 300,000 pesos. Banks set these minimum deposit
amounts to balance their desire to attract deposits and their cost of servicing small accounts. But
if there is a public policy goal to increase saving, it may be worthwhile to require banks to offer
these products with smaller minimum deposits. Banks in turn could reduce the cost of servicing
these accounts by higher charges for withdrawals and other specific services.

2.4

Encouraging larger home mortgage downpayments
Mexico could raise the national saving rate by encouraging larger downpayments by

mortgage borrowers. An interesting example of how this can be done is the practice in Germany
where the accumulation of downpayment balances for home mortgages is an important
component of household saving. German savings banks offer individuals the opportunity to write
a contract that specifies the amount of a future house purchase and the fraction of that purchase
price that the individual will accumulate as a downpayment. Downpayments must be 50 percent

8

Between 1988 and 1994, the outstanding volume of consumer and mortgage loans rose
from 2 percent of GDP to 12 percent of GDP, an increase that reduced net saving per year by
about two percent of GDP.
Mex.rev.011199

24

or 60 percent of the purchase price. The individual agrees to receive a low rate of interest on the
balance in the housing account while the downpayment is being accumulated. After the
downpayment is accumulated, the individual can obtain a mortgage for the rest of the amount at a
low interest rate. This has the advantage of providing a commitment to accumulate and a reward
for reaching the prespecified goal, with a greater net reward the more quickly the goal is reached.
It would be desirable to see if any banking regulations in Mexico preclude or hinder experiments
with this type of contract.

3. Government Debt Management
Although domestic government debt is now officially only about 20 percent of GDP, the
government can manage its debt in ways that contribute to higher personal saving by providing
assets that make saving more attractive. The government can also initiate securities that private
issuers can copy after the financial markets and household savers become comfortable with them.
If increasing national saving is an explicit goal of national policy, the government’s debt
management should consider that goal and not just seek to minimize the cost of servicing the
debt.

3.1

Taxable and nontaxable long-term indexed (UDI) debt
One example of a new pro-saving instrument would be a range of longer term bonds that

are indexed to the general price level, i.e., that are denominated in UDIs. These could in principle
include maturities of up to 20 years. The relative volume of longer maturities might increase over
time as the market for such securities develops; in the United States about 15 percent of the

Mex.rev.011199

25

government debt has a maturity of 10 years or more.
Since such securities do not currently exist in Mexico, the likely shape of the yield curve is
uncertain. The market might pay a premium for the certainty of an inflation-indexed long term
saving vehicle. Alternatively, there could be a “normal” upward sloping yield curve so that the
government might have to accept a higher total cost of debt service than it could achieve with
shorter maturity debt. But even if the yield is 200 basis points higher on a quarter of the
government debt, the resulting increase in government outlays would be less than one-tenth of
one percent of GDP. This could be more than offset if the availability of these government
securities leads to increased saving and therefore to increased corporate tax revenue.
The current method of issuing government bonds that are not subject to tax is effectively
equivalent to imposing a withholding tax on government interest payments. Market yields on
government paper are lower than they would be if the yield were taxable. Issuing only tax exempt
bonds has three disadvantages:
(1) Lower income savers are charged the same implicit rate of tax as higher income
individuals. A taxable bond which carried a higher interest rate might provide almost the same net
yield to taxpayers with a 35 percent marginal rate as they receive today but would provide a
substantially higher net yield and greater saving incentive to individuals with lower marginal tax
rates.
(2) Tax free bonds are not a desirable investment for tax-free accounts like AFOREs,
CEAs and corporate pensions. The current method works against the basic purpose of creating
tax free accounts: permitting individuals to receive ordinary pretax market yields free of tax.
Taxable corporate debt would dominate comparable government securities if the government
Mex.rev.011199

26

securities have a tax-free yield. If the only long-term indexed debt is issued by the government its
attractiveness for tax favored saving accounts would be diminished by the lower tax-free yield.
(3) Issuing taxable government bonds would permit foreign buyers of Mexican
government debt to receive a higher yield than they do today at no greater cost to the government
of Mexico. Although the interest on Mexican government bonds is not taxable to Mexicans, it is
taxable to American individuals. If the Mexican government issued a taxable bond with a higher
interest rate and withheld tax explicitly, the cost to the government of Mexico would be the same
as it is with the current lower yielding tax free bonds but the American investor could claim a tax
credit for the tax paid in Mexico and therefore receive a higher net of tax yield. This would
increase the foreign demand for Mexican debt and permit a lower overall cost of servicing the
Mexican debt.

3.2

Lottery bonds
The British government has used moderate denomination “lottery bonds” to increase the

demand for its public debt among small savers. A lottery bond is like an ordinary bond except that
bond serial numbers are drawn randomly each week and those individuals whose bonds match the
selected numbers win substantial money prizes. Lottery bonds carry a lower interest rate than
similar maturity and denomination ordinary government debt. In addition to lowering the cost of
debt service, such bonds may induce additional saving by individuals who are attracted by the
potential for a large gain.

3.3

The postal saving system (PAHNAL)
Although a postal saving system might seem like a natural way to accumulate savings from

Mex.rev.011199

27

low income households, the Mexican postal saving system (PAHNAL) has failed to tap this
market. Despite some 240 offices and 45 years of experience, the system now has only 200,000
accounts. That is less than one percent of Mexican households and a remarkably inefficient low
ratio of less than 1000 accounts per office. Any government resource cost used to operate this
system could probably be better deployed in raising saving in other ways.9

3.4

Special purpose government bonds
Although economists generally view saving decisions in purely self-interest terms, some

individuals might be motivated to save if they believed that their saving would directly help to
accomplish some public purpose that they favor. Such sentiments motivate a wide range of
charitable contributions and were used by the U.S. government to motivate saving and the
purchase of government “war bonds” during World War II.
The Mexican government might consider issuing special bonds that finance environmental
projects, or the building of schools and hospitals, or infrastructure in particular regions. Although
government funds obtained by borrowing are fungible, individuals may like to think of their
savings as going to activities that they particularly favor.

4.

Public Education Campaigns and Government Advocacy
Saving and long-term accumulation are socially conditioned forms of behavior. Individuals

learn to save by watching the behavior of their family and their friends. Government programs to
educate people about the need to save and about the benefit from saving can change attitudes and

9

The PAHNAL has recently been reformed so there remains a possibility that it will now
be more successful than it was before the reforms.
Mex.rev.011199

28

raise national saving rates.
Many of the high saving countries have made a high rate of saving a primary national goal.
Education campaigns and simple but widespread advertising have reinforced the advantages of
favorable tax rules and financial regulations. Important government departments have been given
responsibility for developing policies, programs and advertising to raise saving.10
Most individuals do not understand the existing saving opportunities in Mexico, especially
the UDI denominated assets, Cuentas Especiales de Ahorro, AFORE accounts, and mutual funds.
It is difficult for them to see through the high and volatile nominal interest rates to understand the
underlying real rates and to appreciate the substantial cumulative effect of a personal program of
long-term accumulation.
There are too many individual financial institutions for any one of them to benefit
sufficiently from undertaking a general advertising campaign aimed at raising the personal saving
rate. This is an activity that the government might do or my carry out in conjunction with private
institutions that are more accustomed to advertising and marketing activities.

Cambridge, MA
September 1995
Revised December 1998

10

In Japan, the Savings Promotion Department of the Bank of Japan was created in 1946
and the Saving Promotion Center of the Ministry of Finance was established in 1957. Germany
used large scale public campaigns during the 1950s to stimulate saving.
Mex.rev.011199

29

Appendix
Reform of the Retirement Saving Account System11
The reform of the system of Retirement Saving Accounts (Sistema de Ahorro para el
Retiro or AFORE) is the most important policy initiative for raising the Mexican saving rate in the
long-term. An unfunded pay-as-you-go program like the previous Mexican social security
retirement system administered by the IMSS (i.e, the Mexican national Social Security
administration ) reduces national saving by discouraging private saving without doing any public
saving. In contrast, the substitution of a funded program for an unfunded program can eventually
raise national saving by nearly the full amount of the mandatory saving.
The short-run effect on savings of the shift from the IMSS pay-as-you-go system to a
funded program (in addition to the previously existing 2 percent of payroll AFORE contribution)
depends on how the benefits of current retirees and of those who will retire in the near future are
financed. If the government raises taxes or reduces other government spending in order to finance
these existing benefit obligations (as Chile did when it made a similar transition), national saving
can rise by nearly the full amount of the mandatory AFORE contributions. If, however, the
government borrows to finance the existing benefit obligations, the government borrowing in the
short-run may absorb all of the mandatory AFORE contributions, leaving no net short-run
increase in national saving.
Even if the existing benefit obligations are financed by government borrowing, the shift to

11

A version of this appendix was written in the 1995 paper before the legisltive decisoins
about the exisitng AFORE program. The appendix is inclused because all programs evolve over
time and because the issues disscussed here may be of interst to social security reformers and
designeers in other countries.
Mex.rev.011199

30

a funded social security retirement system will substantially raise the long-run saving rate. Over
time, the aggregate annual AFORE contributions will grow with the size of the labor force and
the average level of wages while the benefits to existing retirees will decline as those who earned
benefit rights under the previous unfunded system die. In the end, the shift from an unfunded
system to a fully funded AFORE program with equal annual contributions adds nearly the full
amount of the AFORE saving to the national saving rate.12
In addition to the mandatory AFORE savings, the AFORE system may increase saving by
permitting more individuals to plan an earlier retirement than they otherwise would have. The
planned increase in retirement years will induce individuals to want to accumulate more savings
per year while they are working because they have a shorter working life and a longer retirement
period.
This Appendix now discusses several important practical issues about the AFORE reform
that can affect how much the shift contributes to national saving in both the short-run and the
longer term.

A.1 Public understanding of the AFORE program
The previous system of AFORE accounts that channeled 2 percent of each employee’s
wages from the employer to the government via the Bank of Mexico left little public
understanding of the proposed role of AFORE accounts in the future. Because of past
administrative problems, individuals generally did not know the balance in their own accounts and

12

I say “nearly” because the higher yield on AFORE contributions than on the unfunded
social security taxes has an “income effect” that increases consumption.
Mex.rev.011199

31

each individual typically had more than one account. Employers and employees could easily
regard the AFORE as just another tax.
Achieving the full benefit of the new AFORE system requires that the public be educated
about the nature and value of their accounts, about their investment options, and about the
contribution that their savings make to national capital accumulation and growth. A firm
understanding that the funded accounts offer a substantially higher real rate of return than the
implicit return of an unfunded pay-as-you-go system can counter political pressure to slip back to
an unfunded system, a retreat that could create a windfall gain to existing retirees and older
workers but that would hurt younger employees as well as long-term saving and growth.
A widespread understanding of the high return available on AFORE accounts and of the
direct link between individuals’ AFORE contributions and their subsequent retirement incomes
would also have the advantage of eliminating (or at least attenuating) the perception that the
mandatory contribution is “just another tax.” If individuals recognize their personal gain from
additional AFORE contributions, the mandatory contributions will not discourage work effort and
encourage movement to the informal sector in the way that payroll and income taxes do.
The government and private financial institutions could usefully undertake a public
education campaign designed to promote an understanding of the AFORE accounts among the
general working public. More generally, all aspects of the design and administration of the
AFORE program are not only important in themselves but also because of their impact on the
public’s perception of the AFORE system.

A.2 The magnitude of the AFORE contributions
Mex.rev.011199

32

Early discussions of the AFORE reform assumed that after the transition from the current
system, the AFORE retirement benefits would be funded by a combination of the current 2
percent AFORE contribution and the portion of the IMSS payroll tax currently designated for
retirement (3 percent). It is not clear that this shift of the existing IMSS tax plus the current
mandatory AFORE contribution will be sufficient to fund a level of retirement benefits that policy
officials regard as desirable. Some simplified calculations suggest that a higher level of
contribution would be necesAFOREy to provide a benefit equal to 50 percent or more of the
individual’s preretirement wage.
Consider an individual who works and contributes 5 percent of his wage (the existing 2
percent mandatory AFORE contribution plus the 3 percent that now goes to the IMSS for
retirement) to an AFORE for 40 years. If his real wage increases at a 3 percent per year and the
funds in the AFORE account earn a real return of 6 percent,13 the funds accumulated at the end
of 40 years will equal 3.7 times his final year’s wage. With a real return of 6 percent, each 100
pesos of accumulated assets can generate an annual retirement benefit of 8.7 pesos for 20 years.
The accumulated fund of 3.7 times the final year’s wage can therefore provide a 20 year annuity
equal to 32 percent of the final year’s wage. To provide an annual benefit equal to 50 percent of
an individual’s final wage would require an AFORE contribution of nearly eight percent with
these same assumptions (a 6 percent real yield; a 3 percent annual rate of wage growth; a 40 year
working life; and a twenty year retirement).
A lower real rate of return, a shorter working life or a faster rate of wage growth would

13

A six percent real return is a reasonable assumption if AFORE funds can be invested in a
combination of equity and debt.
Mex.rev.011199

33

require an even higher rate of AFORE contribution to achieve the same ratio of benefits to final
year’s earnings. For example, if the AFORE rate of return were limited to 4 percent real rate and
the individual’s wages grew at 4 percent, it would require a 17 percent AFORE contribution rate
to achieve a retirement benefit equal to 50 percent of the individual’s final year wage.
The rate of contribution required to achieve any desired replacement rate depends on the
likely rate of wage increase, the expected mortality table and the rate of return that the AFORE
can earn. The rate of return to be assumed will of course depend on the types of assets in which
the AFORE funds are invested. To avoid an impossibly high AFORE contribution rate, funds
must be invested in a way that can be expected to earn a relatively high rate of return. I return to
this subject in section A.5.

A.3 Death and disability coverage
The social security institute (IMSS) currently collects payroll taxes of 3 percent of
covered wages for death and disability insurance in addition to the 3 percent that it collects for
retirement benefits. Shifting the death and disability insurance from the current pay-as-you-go
IMSS program to individual funded accounts could increase the saving rate in the same general
way as shifting to funded retirement accounts.
The traditional “whole life” type of life insurance policy accumulates a fund to pay future
death benefits in much the same way that a retirement fund accumulates assets to finance benefits
during retirement years. A group of “whole life” policies will have relatively little payout to
individuals before retirement age and will therefore accumulate a substantial fund. In contrast,
pure term insurance provides death benefits with no capital accumulation. Term insurance

Mex.rev.011199

34

premiums are much lower for younger workers and rise with age. A variety of intermediate forms
exist, typically utilizing an accumulation of funds to slow the age-related rise in premiums.
The key point is that these are actuarially equivalent approaches that will have the same
effect on national saving if the difference between the whole life premium and the lower premium
on other policies is explicitly saved as an addition to the AFORE Retirement Account. There are
however administrative differences that may affect the preferred form of insurance. It might be
possible, for example, to reduce any self selection problems by requiring employers to buy group
term insurance for all employees (instead of making payments to the IMSS), adding the balance
of the life insurance funds to the regular AFORE retirement account of the individual’s choice.
Similarly, the disability insurance could be a term policy or could involve accumulation to
maintain a level annual premium. An employer based term policy would be one way of avoiding
the selection problems associated with individual demand for disability insurance. Again the
excess funds could be added to the regular AFORE retirement account.
Shifting the current social security death and disability programs from the IMSS to private
carriers is likely to provide greater cost and service efficiencies as a result of competition as well
as a more innovative process that offers new insurance options. Private insurers are also likely to
do a better job than a public agency like IMSS of monitoring and controlling the moral hazard
problems that are always present in disability insurance programs.

A.4 The Transition Process
A critical aspect of the AFORE reform is the treatment of current retirees and of
employees who have been contributing to the existing unfunded IMSS retirement program. There

Mex.rev.011199

35

are two separate issues: the benefits that these individuals receive and the way that those benefits
are financed. How these issues are resolved will affect the national saving rate for many years and
may also affect the political viability of the funded AFORE approach.
Existing retirees could continue to receive their current real benefits from the IMSS as
long as they are alive or they could receive compensation related to the present actuarial value of
those benefits instead of a future benefit stream. That compensation could be in the form of
negotiable “recognition bonds” (as in Chile) or could be deposited to the individual’s AFORE
account. Similarly, existing workers could receive future IMSS benefits based on their work
experience to date (in addition to the AFORE benefits that they will accumulate in future years) or
they could be compensated with an appropriate addition to their AFOREs.
A recognition bond or AFORE deposit would be a substantial administrative simplification
since it would eliminate the need for continuing the IMSS bureaucracy that would otherwise make
retirement benefit payments. This is particularly true for current pre-retirement employees for
whom benefits would be a blended combination of the AFORE retirement benefits and the IMSS
benefits. Moreover, any system that continues the IMSS retirement benefits runs a greater risk of
political pressure at some future date to return to an unfunded system with a lower national saving
rate.
The financing of the transition benefits is a separate problem. If the transition is done by
providing compensating deposits to the AFORE accounts (or recognition bonds), the funds
needed to provide that compensation can be obtained by a combination of higher taxes and lower

Mex.rev.011199

36

government spending in some other part of the budget or they can be borrowed14. If the
compensation is financed with additional current taxes and cuts in current spending, all future
AFORE contributions will be available to finance additions to the national capital stock. If,
however, the compensating deposits are financed by issuing new government bonds, the
government will need to raise future taxes or to borrow a portion of future AFORE savings to
pay the interest on those government bonds. If future taxes are not raised, the borrowing to
finance these interest payments will at first absorb all of the new AFORE contributions. Over
time, however, the AFORE contributions will grow while the interest payments remain constant,
permitting a net contribution to national saving.
The effect is similar in principle if the transition involves continued IMSS payments
(instead of explicit issuance of new government debt to finance compensatory contributions to the
AFORE accounts).15 If the government does not increase taxes or cut other spending, the AFORE
contributions (that are diverted from IMSS taxes) will initially all have to be borrowed by the
government to finance the ongoing IMSS payments. Over time, however, the IMSS payments will
eventually decline while the AFORE contributions will grow.
Thus, in the long run the shift to the AFORE method will increase national saving and
capital formation but, in the near term, the effect on saving of the shift to a funded system will
depend on how existing retirees and employees are treated. An end to the IMSS benefits with

14

Only because of the relatively small size of the compensation now required in Mexico is
it possible to contemplate financing this over a few years by tax increases or spending cuts.
15

Although the two approaches are formally equivalent, using explicit recognition bonds
instead of continued IMSS payments reduces the risks of diverting funds from retirement to health
and of returning to a pay-as-you-go system.
Mex.rev.011199

37

compensation financed by increasing some other tax or reducing some other form of government
spending would be most favorable to saving. Moreover, the very young age of the Mexican
population and the extensive “informal” sector of the economy where individuals do not
participate in the existing social security program, imply that such a tax-and-spending-cut
approach to financing the transition payments would be relatively small, currently less than one
percent of GDP per year for the retirement program and just about one percent when death and
disability benefits are included as well.16 Any delay in making such a shift will only make it more
costly as the population ages and the size of the formal sector grows. But even a debt financed
payment of compensation or continuation of the implicit debt in the form of IMSS obligations to
pay future benefits would mean a gradual and permanent increase in national saving over an
extended period of years.17

A.5 AFORE Investment Policy
The increased private capital stock that results from AFORE savings is likely to earn a real
pretax rate of return of at least 10 percent. Because the returns earned in AFORE accounts are
not taxed18, the individual investors would be able to obtain most of this pretax return. Even

16

In 1994, the IMSS paid 9.2 billion pesos in pension benefits and an additional 4.6 billion
pesos in death and disability benefits. GDP in 1994 was 1253 billion pesos.
17

For an explicit analysis of this type of transition, see the appendix to my introductory
chapter in M. Feldstein, Social Security Privatization (Chicago: Chicago University Press, 1998).
18

Withdrawals are currently taxed only if they exceed nine minimum wages. However,
since employers contributions are deductible (like wages) but are not taxed to the individual, the
effective rate of return when withdrawals are taxed is equivalent to a tax-free return on savings
out of after-tax wages.
Mex.rev.011199

38

allowing for a 34 percent corporate tax on the profits accruing to corporate equity, the real net
rate of return available to AFORE accounts that invest in a mix of debt and equity similar to the
corporate financing ratios should exceed 7 percent.
The calculations reported in section A.2 show that a relatively high yield on AFORE
accounts is needed to permit the combination of an acceptable replacement rate at retirement and
an acceptable AFORE contribution rate during working years. Although it is important to avoid
excessive risk in the AFORE investments, a broadly diversified mixture of debt and equity could
provide an appropriate combination of good yield and acceptable risk. Since the investments are
very long term, the year to year volatility should not be a primary consideration. The typical U.S.
corporate pension fund investment of 60 percent equity and 40 percent debt is a useful
benchmark.19
The government might encourage investing in such a diversified debt-equity portfolio by
providing a guarantee that the value of each AFORE account would not be less than would have
occurred with a two percent real return on contributions. Although short run market volatility
might make this guarantee operative in the early years of an AFORE account, over time the value
of the AFORE account would almost certainly become so much larger than the guaranteed
amount that the guarantee would become irrelevant.
AFORE investments in Mexican equities would gradually help to deepen the capital
market, encourage the listing of stocks, and reduce the cost of equity funds. The effect on these

19

On the risk aspects of an investment based system like the AFORE, see M. Feldstein and
E. Ranguelova, “Individual Risk and Intergenerational Risk Sharing in an Investment-Based
Social Security System,” NBER Working Paper, 1998.
Mex.rev.011199

39

financial markets in the short run would not, however, be very large and would certainly not
destabilize the equity market. Even an AFORE contribution of 7 percent of wages would only add
about one percent of GDP a year to AFORE accounts.
Over time, the AFORE investment funds could offer a broader array of options that
increase yield or reduce risk. For example, diversification into U.S. and other foreign securities,
hedged into pesos, can probably reduce risk without lowering expected return. Moreover, such
diversification would not alter the funds available for domestic investment since the hedging
would be effectively equivalent to borrowing abroad those funds that are invested in foreign
securities.
The nature of the investments that are allowed in AFORE accounts is important for
promoting public understanding of the nature of the AFORE program. Continuing the practice of
require (or even of just offering) deposits with the Bank of Mexico that provide a low real yield
convey the wrong impression that AFORE contributions are still just a tax taken by the
government to finance government deficits. The real yield on inflation indexed accounts (UDI
accounts) exceeds the return currently paid by the Bank of Mexico on AFORE accounts .
Similarly, restricting AFORE accounts to investing wholly or partly in government bonds
would also create the impression that the mandatory AFORE contributions are just a disguised
form of taxation and that nothing has really changed from the original pay-as-you-go retirement
system.
The fact that the government has to borrow during the transition (unless taxes are raised
or other spending reduced) to finance retirement benefit obligations to existing retirees and to
employees with past IMSS contributions is not a reason for the government to require that
Mex.rev.011199

40

government bonds be purchased by the AFORE accounts. AFORE purchases of corporate debt
and equity would release funds that could then be used to purchase the government bonds. In a
debt financed transition, these purchases are at first just an offset for government borrowing but
over time the private equity and debt purchases by AFORE accounts directly finance a net
addition to the capital stock.

A.6 Administration of the AFORE accounts
The proposed administrative system requires employers to select an account administrator
to whom the AFORE contributions are paid. Each individual employee can then tell the account
administrator the name of the fund manager (Sociedad de Inversion) to which that employee’s
funds should be sent. It is currently contemplated that each employee will have only a single fund
manager. This general structure seems will reduce record keeping burdens on employers, reduce
the risk of underpayment by employers, and permit a wide range of choice by employees.
Competition among account administrators will encourage cost reduction and quality of service to
employers and employees. Competition among fund managers will encourage product innovation,
cost containment, and the quality of service to employees and retirees.
An official regulatory body like CONAFORE will approve fund managers and their
products.
Each fund manager would eventually be permitted to offer a variety of individual products so that
an employee can select a mixture of investments (stocks, bonds, money market instruments)
within a single fund manager and shift among types of investments without the additional
administrative expense of changing fund managers. The restriction on a single fund manager for
Mex.rev.011199

41

each employee could be reexamined in the future as account balances grow.
The CONAFORE or other agency would presumably require fund managers to provide
the public with comparable information on such things as historic yields, variability, administrative
costs, turnover, etc..
A variety of proposals have been made to provide a role for the IMSS in the AFORE
administration process. An extreme proposal would give the IMSS a monopoly on collecting
funds from employers and choosing the fund managers (instead of allowing each individual to
choose his own fund manager from the approved list.) An IMSS monopoly as account
administrator would eliminate the competitive pressures that would otherwise lead over time to
lower costs and better service. It would also blur the message that the AFORE accounts are
private investment vehicles that are fundamentally different from the existing IMSS pay-as-you-go
system. An IMSS monopoly as account administrator would thus increase the probability of
returning to an unfunded system.
Allowing the IMSS to select fund managers instead of permitting the individuals to do that
would have even more serious adverse effects. Fund managers selling to a government
bureaucracy would not have the same incentives for product innovation, individual client service,
and administrative efficiency that they would have if they were competing for the business of the
individuals themselves. Having the IMSS select fund managers increases the likelihood of
investing to achieve “social” goals (e.g., geographic distribution, industry distribution, etc) rather
than getting the best risk-adjusted returns for the AFORE participants. Selection of fund
managers by government bureaucrats may also be more likely to lead to corruption.
The same arguments against granting a general monopoly to the IMSS are also relevant to
Mex.rev.011199

42

proposals to give IMSS a monopoly for certain classes of employers or employees (e.g.,
temporary employees or employees in particular high-turnover industries.)
Allowing the IMSS to compete with private account administrators (to receive funds from
employers who select them and forward funds to the investment managers chosen by individual
employees) has also been suggested. Although the need to compete with other account
administrators in order to be chosen by employers would normally act to reduce costs and
maintain quality of service, the IMSS could choose to cross-subsidize the AFORE account
administration business in order to obtain a larger share of the market (since the cross-subsidy
would come from the non-AFORE business where IMSS has no competition.) This would permit
a more costly administration. More significantly, it could lead to a large role for IMSS in the
AFORE program, causing confusion among employees about the nature of the AFORE program.

A.7 Payment of AFORE benefits
When employees reach retirement age, withdrawals from AFORE accounts would
presumably be restricted so that individuals do not spend their accumulated savings too quickly
either in error or in order to take advantage of means tested benefits available to older persons
without financial means. A variety of alternative annuity options and other payout schemes are
possible, with different likely effects of self-selection by individuals and of adverse selection by
insurers.
Although annuities are an appealing option, the national saving rate will be higher if
individuals choose a limited withdrawal schedule instead and continue to be able to transfer
balances in AFORE accounts at their death to the AFORE accounts of spouses or children.

Mex.rev.011199

43

A.8

Voluntary contributions to AFORE accounts
Since the required AFORE contributions will finance only a partial replacement of

preretirement wages, individuals and employers could also be encouraged to make voluntary
contributions to the AFORE accounts. These could be made directly by individuals or by
employers in connection with company defined contribution pensions or with voluntary individual
saving plans (similar to the US 401k plans). These possibilities and the use of tax rules to
encourage them are discussed in more detail in section 1.4 of the text.

A.9

Miscellaneous AFORE issues
Providing increased protection for the population in old age and increasing national saving

would both be enhanced by expanding participation in the AFORE program on a voluntary basis
to individuals who are currently working outside the formal structure. If in the process of
contributing to the AFORE accounts they could also be induced to join the formal sector, their
payments of taxes and other IMSS contributions would significantly increase government revenue
and therefore national saving.
Some individuals with low lifetime earnings or low earnings in the formal sector will
inevitably reach retirement age with too little in their AFORE to finance even a minimal level of
consumption. The government safety net for these individuals could be either a means tested
program that provides a flat benefit financed like other welfare programs or part of a universal flat
benefit for all individuals beyond a certain age. A universal pay-as-you-go benefit (rather than a
means tested benefit) would encourage higher income individuals to save less and could create

Mex.rev.011199

44

political pressures to educe the standard required AFORE contribution.20

Cambridge , Massachusetts
September 1995

20

The AFORE system is linked in practive with the INFONAVIT system of housing
finance. A variety of alternative changes could lead to a more productive use of those funds: (1)
Adding the current annual Housing AFORE contribution (five percent of payroll) to the
individual’s Retirement AFORE, to be used wither for downpayments in the purchase of a home
or for additional retirement income. (2) Eliminating the INFONAVIT’s role in funding individual
mortgages while continuing its other funding activities, with the Housing AFORE contributions
that now fund individual mortgages going instead go to the Retirement AFORE and therefore to
the general capital market. (3) Continuing to give all of the Housing AFORE funds to
INFONAVIT but shifting INFONAVIT’s role with respect to individual mortgages from an
originator of mortgages under the current complex point system to a financer of mortgages in the
secondary market that are originated by banks and other private mortgage lenders. (4) Shifting
the indexing of mortgages from the minimum wage to some average market wage or to the price
index used for UDI calculations in order to reduce the randomness of the current subsidy. Raising
the real return on Housing AFORE accounts and charging the mortgage borrowers a
correspondingly higher rate to finance that return would also increase overall national saving and
reduce the bias in favor of housing. The incentive to save would also increase if individuals could
make voluntary contributions to the Housing AFORE accounts and if the point system used to
qualify borrowers for INFONAVIT mortgages gave more weight to the funds accumulated in the
Housing AFORE.

Mex.rev.011199

45

