        In the 1950s and 1960s, sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) held great promise. Countries

in the region had natural resources, extensive land, and in many cases peasant agriculture

that seemed to fit well with capitalist development. Two world wars had left SSA

generally unscathed, destructive civil wars had been uncommon and independence brought

a wave of optimism that anything could be achieved. But the promise has gone unfulfilled.

Modern economic growth has succeeded in raising the well-being of hundreds of millions

of people in many developing economies throughout the world, but it has sputtered

throughout most of Africa. Why has economic growth taken hold in many Asian and

Latin American countries? Why not in Africa?

       SSA has had periods of moderate economic growth. In 1996 GDP grew by 4.4

percent, a rate unprecedented in recent decades. Some observers cited this achievement

as the long-awaited turnaround in the region's economic fortunes (Madavo and Sarbib

1997). But 1997 brought another downturn, with growth estimated at under 4 percent.

Short fleeting spurts of growth, following extended periods of economic decline, cannot

catapult countries into the modern economic world. A longer term perspective reveals

that even with recent improvements in GDP, Africans have lost immense ground in the

past several decades. Of SSA's 1997 population, 94 percent live in countries where

income per capita has retrogressed over extended periods (Table 1).

       For some Africans the extent of economic decline has been cataclysmic.

Most SSA economies achieved positive growth in the 1960s and 1970s, but many reached

their peak GDP per capita levels before 1980. In the ensuing decades, economic decline

has overwhelmed prior advances. Thirty-six percent of the region's population live in

economies that in 1995 had not regained the per capita income levels first achieved before

1960. Another 6 percent are below levels first achieved by 1970, 41 percent below 1980

                                             1
levels and 11 percent below 1990 levels. Only 35 million out of SSA's population of

almost six hundred million people reside in nations that had higher per capita incomes in

1995 than they had ever achieved before.1

        Other indicators also show substantial economic retrogression: massive drops in

modern sector employment as a share of the labor force; real wages of urban workers

falling to subsistence levels; reverse migration from cities to rural areas; loss of shares of

world trade and of foreign investment; absolute poverty rates climbing above 50 percent;

and declines in food production per capita. All this has happened while SSA received the

largest influx of foreign aid relative to GDP in the world, repeated IMF and World Bank

programs, and a sizable increase in expenditures on schooling.

        Many economists have analyzed SSA's poor economic performance. One group of

explanations focuses on factors associated with more rapid growth in other regions that

SSA appears to lack. Among these factors, three stand out: (1) low levels of human

capital; (2) a lack of openness to trade and foreign capital; and (3) urban bias and high

income inequality. Another set of explanations focuses on features which are SSA-

specific: high degrees of ethnic fractionalization, frequency of land-locked states and high

concentration of land in the tropics.

        These explanations are not compelling in explaining SSA's failure to achieve more

rapid economic growth. The stress on investments in education as a prerequisite for more

rapid growth is misplaced. Many developing nations have progressed with limited

investments in schooling. Others have failed to progress with substantial investments.

Trade and foreign capital inflows are important to growth but are far from a sufficient

condition for economic progress. Inward-looking policies have failed, but simply lowering

trade barriers or properly realigning exchange rates does not guarantee prosperity. As for

                                               2
urban bias and inequality, the urban bias that once characterized SSA has disappeared and

income inequality, though high in some SSA countries, is not so extreme as to foreclose

successful growth and poverty alleviation. Similarly, the Africa-specific explanations

reveal real constraints but are not the core explanation for SSA's growth tragedy.



Is SSA's Economic Growth Constrained by Too Little Human Capital?

       SSA's low stock of human capital – reflected in relatively high rates of adult

illiteracy and low school enrollment rates (Table 2) – would seem a natural cause for

SSA's lack of economic growth. A great deal of micro and macro evidence has been

accumulated linking education, productivity and growth. But closer inspection of the

micro evidence on the returns to education in the region and of cross-country growth

regressions which include schooling as an independent variable suggests another

interpretation. An expansion in human capital is neither sufficient for more rapid growth

nor is SSA's lack of human capital necessarily a barrier to accelerated growth.

The Equivocal Effect of Educational Investments in Sub-Saharan Africa

       Economists have changed their assessment of the returns to schooling in SSA.

Estimates reviewed by Psacharopolous (1994) indicate that rates of return to education in

Africa are high relative to the social opportunity cost of capital and to rates prevailing in

other regions. The highest returns are for primary school education. If the claim that

educational investment is a sufficient condition for growth were true, this would have

produced sizeable growth in SSA since most African countries have increased lower level

school enrollments rapidly. But SSA's economies retrogressed. Something evidently is

wrong about the claim that investments in primary education have a high return in Africa.

       Bennell (1996) suggests one solution. Carefully examining the studies that form

                                               3
the basis of the average rates of return for education in SSA reported by Psacharopolous,

Bennell concludes that these studies are seriously flawed in data and methodology, and

cannot be relied upon. He argues that social rates of return to education have fallen over

the period of economic retrogression and, especially at the primary level, may now be

lower than the social opportunity cost of capital.

       Detailed econometric analysis by Glewwe (1991) on Ghana, based on the 1988-89

GLSS (Ghana Living Standards Survey), confirms this view. Glewwe has a rich data set

that includes direct measures of acquired cognitive skills in reading and mathematics, as

well as test scores on innate ability. The results indicate private returns to primary

education of only a few percentage points, far lower than those usually cited for SSA and

other regions. Nielsen and Westergard-Nielsen (1998) similarly report low or negligible

returns to schooling in their study of Zambia, as do Bigsten et al. (1997) for a number of

other African countries.

       Glewwe also reports returns for secondary and tertiary education that are higher

than at the primary level. This "convexity" of returns by education level has been found in

many other studies of SSA2 and contrasts with patterns elsewhere. It also is inconsistent

with the notion that investments at the primary level will greatly raise productivity in

Africa. Little or no returns at the primary level, on the other hand, is consistent with

observed stagnation or decline in school enrollment rates in Ghana and several other SSA

countries.3 Because of low economic returns, parents may decide that the costs of

schooling outweigh the benefits and elect not to send their children to school.

       Studies of the rate of return to education tend to focus on wage earners, who in

SSA are an increasingly small segment of the labor force. The majority of Africans are

self-employed, either on small family plots or in the informal sector. What impact does

                                              4
more education have on these workers? The conventional result, that education enhances

farm productivity, is based primarily on non-African results. According to Collier and

Gunning (1997), statistically significant findings of education raising farm productivity are

rare in SSA. With the majority of the region's labor force still engaged in agriculture, the

lack of such productivity enhancing effects might explain why the accumulation of human

capital has done little for economic growth.

       Why has primary education yielded so low a return in Africa? One possible

explanation is the low quality of schooling. Counting years of schooling is a rough

approximation for the accumulation of productive human capital. If teachers know little

more than their students, or if the curriculum is irrelevant to employment opportunities

and market realities, then years of schooling produce little educational capital. Concern

over school quality is raised throughout the world. Rapidly expanding school systems, as

in Africa, suffer from quality problem, but we know of no study that shows that poor

school quality reduces the return on education to zero!4

       Rosenzweig (1995) presents another possible explanation: "Schooling investments

are not a universal panacea; reaping returns from such investments requires that the scope

for productive learning be expanded via either technical innovation or changes in market

and political regimes." In the SSA context, there has been no analogue to Asia's Green

Revolution or to East Asia's outward-orientation and market liberalizations. This may

explain the pattern of low returns that have constrained the region's accumulation of years

of schooling from contributing more to the region's economic growth.5 The problem has

been a lack of opportunities rather than a lack of schooling.

       Another explanation that fits the African experience is that the return to schooling

requires stable property relations and a safe economic environment, which have been

                                               5
lacking in most African states. Wars, corruption, revolutions, and other instabilities that

disturb or distort the normal functioning of markets make the value of schooling less than

it would be in a more stable world. If your country is riven with strife, better to pick up a

gun than pick up a book.

What do growth regressions say?

       From the pioneering work of Denison (1967) to recent analyses of the East Asian

Economic Miracle (World Bank 1993), analysts have identified education as an important

determinant of aggregate economic growth. Many economists believe that modern

growth regressions show that education is a sufficient factor for increasing per capita

incomes. This conclusion is derived from a production function approach to growth

accounting which implicitly assumes a technological relationship where increases in the

stock of human capital, ceteris paribus, yield economic growth. If this were true, SSA's

low stock of human capital could readily explain at least some of the region's poor growth

record. But regressions relating human capital to growth across countries do not tell a

clear and convincing story.

       Regression results differ depending on the functional form of the equation linking

education to growth; the inclusion/exclusion of other potential growth determinants; and

whether the regression focuses on changes in human capital or its level. Some studies

(such as Levine and Renelt (1992)) measure schooling by enrollment rates. These studies

generally find that initial secondary-school enrollment rates are positively correlated with

growth rates, but that schooling is much more weakly connected to growth than

investment in physical capital. Coefficients on enrollments, unlike the ones on physical

capital, turn insignificant when other variables -- including regional dummies, measures of

political stability, and/or measures of openness -- are entered.6

                                              6
       But enrollment rates are a poor proxy for the accumulation of education: they

measure initial conditions, not the increasing stock of educated manpower available to an

economy.7 According to most growth theories, it is the accumulation of factors of

production, both physical and human capital, along with the increasing productivity of

these factors, that determines how quickly an economy will grow. Accordingly, other

studies have used a perpetual inventory of enrollment rates to estimate the stock of human

capital. Using this measure, Barro (1997) finds that the level of human capital for men has

a positive effect on growth while that for women has a negative effect. Pritchett (1997)

directly incorporates the accumulation of years of schooling by regressing growth in GDP

per worker on growth of physical and human capital, and finds that physical capital

dominates the growth equation while growth in the education levels of the work force is

weakly and negatively correlated with economic growth!8

       An alternative way to specify the accumulation of schooling is to relate growth in

GDP per capita (or per worker) to absolute changes in the years of schooling rather than

to percentage changes. This approach is based on micro foundations where the logarithm

of wages is related to absolute levels of schooling.9 Employing absolute rather than

relative changes in schooling raises the education coefficient in growth regressions, in part,

because countries with few years of schooling, such as those in Africa, invariably have

much smaller changes in absolute years than in the percentage growth in years of

schooling. For example, a country that increased education from 2 to 4 years has a two

year increase rather than a 100% increase, while one that increased education from 10 to

12 years would also have a 2 year increase rather than a 20% increase.

       Topel (1998) adopts this approach and regresses growth rates on absolute changes

in schooling. He also observes that the estimated coefficient on the growth of capital is

                                              7
extremely high, suggesting an alternative specification in which the coefficient on capital is

set at capital's share of GDP. With these two changes, he finds a positive coefficient on

both the level and the growth of schooling in a growth equation, though he cautions that

analysts should focus on the micro-studies not macro growth regressions. Krueger and

Lindahl (1998) carry the analysis a step further. They show that another problem in the

macro growth regressions is that the schooling variable is measured with considerable

error, imparting a downward bias on measures of changes in schooling. Correcting for

this bias and predetermining the coefficient on the growth of capital, yields a large

coefficient on changes in education in their growth regressions. But when they allow the

capital coefficient to be unconstrained, they find that schooling has a moderate coefficient

with weak statistical significance.10

        In sum, the equivocal effects of education on productivity found in the micro

evidence for SSA reappear in the macro studies on all countries. Changes in the level of

absolute years of schooling of workers seem to have some positive link to growth, but the

link varies with specification and, at best, is far from overwhelming; changes in the

percentage growth of schooling are not positively related to growth; while countries with

high initial levels of schooling generally grow faster than others. In all calculations

investments in physical capital are more strongly and robustly related to economic growth

than are investments in human capital.

        Looking at specific countries, there are many counter-cases to the claim that

education per se produces economic growth. In 1965, Indonesia and Thailand had

enrollment rates in primary school that were not much greater than those in Ghana and

Zaire, yet the Southeast Asian nations grew and the two African states did not (Perkins

and Roemer 1994). Despite effectively destroying much of its human capital during the

                                               8
Cultural Revolution and having a very low rate of return to schooling during the 1980s

(Freeman 1999), China has managed to grow extremely rapidly.

        The good news for Africa from the diverse studies is that investment in physical

capital is well correlated with growth, and physical capital can be more readily

accumulated than can human capital. In the right environment, domestic and foreign

savings can be redirected toward productive opportunities rapidly. By comparison, it may

take a decade or more to produce a significant increase in the mean education level of the

labor force.

       This does not mean that African countries should not invest in schooling. With a

resumption of economic growth parents in Africa will find schooling a worthwhile

investment and will send their children to school. Schooling has significant benefits that

do not show up in national accounts. Education, especially of girls, reduces own and child

mortality. It may also foster the evolution of democratic institutions. But the expansion

of education should not be viewed as a sufficient condition for achieving individual or

economy-wide prosperity, nor should slow expansion of education be seen as an absolute

barrier to SSA's growth.



Savior or Threat: Globalization and SSA

        Is greater openness to trade and foreign capital the key to economic growth in

Africa? Or is the opposite true -- that African prospects have been diminished by

globalization of the world economy?

       The view that openness is the key to economic prosperity is part of the

“Washington Consensus” about economic development. This view gains some support

from cross-country growth regressions. Sachs and Warner (1995,1997) identify openness

                                             9
to world markets for capital, goods and technology as "crucial elements of any pro-growth

package." Their measure of openness captures a number of dimensions of trade and

exchange rate policy, is of the expected sign and is highly significant in equations that

include standard measures of investment in human and physical capital.11 These findings

provide econometric backing to the policy advice contained in many prescriptions for

Africa, namely, to liberalize markets for foreign exchange and traded goods.

       But not all measures of openness are correlated with growth: Harrison (1995)

finds that some measures of openness are related to growth but that the trade share of

GDP and some other commonly used measures are not so related; Harrison (1998)

indicates that several measures, including the Sachs and Warner (1995) measure of

openness, are not robust to differences in specification; and Pritchett (1996) confirms the

tenuous nature of some of the cross country regressions linking openness to growth, by

finding little correlation among alternative indices of openness and the stance of trade

policy. Once again the growth regression literature is not sufficiently compelling. There

are results that an advocate of openness can cite, and results that a skeptic can cite.

Openness has the potential to increase investment, improve resource allocation and

facilitate the transmission of new ideas and technology. But even in the growth

regressions that lend most support for the role of greater openness, the lion's share of the

variance in cross-country growth rates is not explained by openness. The implication is

that domestic markets and policies matter as well.

       This claim is consistent with considerable evidence that even in the exemplar

capitalist economy, the United States, trade is not the major determinant of economic

outcomes. Most researchers have concluded that increased North-South trade is not the

main reason for growing wage inequality/falling real wages among unskilled workers in

                                              10
the United States nor of rising unemployment in Europe (Freeman 1995), though some

disagree (Wood 1994). The vast majority of workers are engaged in non-traded goods,

and supply and demand conditions in these markets have a strong influence on labor

market outcomes. For this same reason, factor market dislocations from NAFTA and

other new trading arrangements have been relatively small. If trade only has a limited

impact on factor rewards, then its impact on GDP must be limited too.

        Although global flows of capital are much in the news, there is strong evidence,

beginning with Feldstein and Horioka (1980), that domestic investment is correlated with

domestic savings.12 This home country bias in investment highlights the importance of

domestic market conditions and institutions in capital accumulation. Relative to other

regions, moreover, SSA displays less home country bias in investment. Collier and

Gunning (1997) compare the portfolio choices of wealth holders across regions by

combining data on capital flight and domestic capital stocks. They find that despite a

lower level of wealth per worker than in any other region, Africa's wealth owners have

relocated 37 percent of their wealth outside the continent. This compares to a ratio of 17

percent in Latin America and only 3 percent in East Asia. They note, "If Africa reduced its

capital flight to that of Asia, its capital stock would increase by a half." Protection of

property rights and an overall reduction in the riskiness of the domestic economic

environment are probably more important factors in encouraging domestic savings to be

invested in SSA's economies than more open economies, though the latter might help as

well.

        In any case, most SSA countries have moved toward greater openness. The

import substitution strategies of the past, including reliance on highly over-valued

exchange rates, failed. Today black market premiums on foreign exchange have almost

                                              11
disappeared and some of the region's recent positive growth rates may be linked to the

gradual abandonment of inward-looking strategies and the policies that supported them.

Still, Africa remains marginalized in the world economy (Table 3). All of SSA accounted

for only 1.4 percent of world trade (exports plus imports) in 1995 and only 5.9 percent of

net foreign private capital flowing into the low and middle income economies. But this is

not because SSA's economies trade too little. As Rodrik (1997) points out, relative to

their size, income level and geographical location, the economies of SSA exhibit normal

trade ratios.13 If trade policies have not repressed trade volumes below cross-country

benchmarks they cannot be “the” cause of Africa’s current economic problems.

       There is also a different view about the relation between world trade and African

economic progress. This is the argument that competition from other low-income

economies today forecloses African countries from advancing through the global trading

system. In the 1960s and 1970s a low-income SSA nation could have prospered by

exporting labor-intensive goods. But today, the argument goes, the entry of China, India

and other large labor abundant economies, has depressed the prices of labor-intensive

goods and thus cut-off the chances for SSA's labor force of about 200 million.

       Concern about the limits to the absorptive capacity of markets in the North for

labor-intensive exports from the South is not new. In the early 1980s Cline (1982) asked

the question, "Can the East Asian Model of Development Be Generalized?", and

concluded that it would be a fallacy of composition to believe the export-led strategy

followed by Hong-Kong, Korea, Singapore and Taiwan could be replicated. But Cline

was proven wrong by the subsequent success of exports from China, Indonesia, Thailand

and other low wage Asian economies. There was greater scope for import penetration in

the North than he assumed plus intra-Asian trade grew in importance. If the global

                                             12
economy has managed to accommodate China's entry, there will be room for the much

smaller economies of SSA to participate. Recent simulations of China's impact on world

markets reinforces this view. The World Bank (1997) employs a set of assumptions about

regional growth trends, future international trade agreements, falling global transport

costs, etc., and projects resulting regional export shares. By 2020 China's share of world

exports (including Hong Kong) is estimated to rise from 4.3 percent (1992) to 11.3

percent. China will become a greater force in the global economy. But these simulations

show that China will not capture nor dominate global markets.14 The entry of China, India

and other labor abundant economies may make it more difficult for SSA to export labor-

intensive commodities but a growing world economy will also provide new market

opportunities for goods from SSA.

       Openness to trade and the outside world can help Africa develop. Foreign savings

can finance much needed investments. Ideas, information and technology from abroad can

increase the returns to schooling, physical capital and infrastructure. But openness alone

is not sufficient to guarantee growth.



Is There Too Much Inequality in Sub-Saharan Africa?

       At one stage growth economists believed that inequality contributed to growth.

Kaldor (1955-56) and Lewis (1954) saw income inequality as a source of added savings

for investment and growth. The Harris-Todaro (1970) model, developed with SSA in

mind, was driven by assumptions about the rural-urban income gap which fueled rural to

urban migration, exacerbated urban unemployment and generated a misallocation of

resources that inhibited economic growth. For Lipton (1977), "urban bias" drained the

rural economy's surplus, regressively allocated government expenditures to the minority of

                                             13
the population living in cities and was the core reason, as the title of his book suggests,

Why Poor People Stay Poor.

        Recent empirical analysis of the impact of inequality on growth suggests the

opposite: that high levels of inequality adversely affect economic growth. Beginning with

Alesina and Rodrik (1994) and Persson and Tabellina (1994), analysts have entered

measures of inequality in standard growth regressions and found that their effect is

negative. Benabou (1996) lists twenty-three studies that link inequality either to growth

of GDP per capita or to investment. The regressions give a consistent message: low

inequality improves growth with a fairly robust coefficient. “A one standard deviation

decrease in inequality raises the annual growth rate of GDP per capita by 0.5 to 0.8

percentage points.” The divergent growth performance of the Philippines with its high

level of inequality and Korea, with its low inequality, or between East Asia and Latin

America underlie these regression results. One possible reason for this outcome is that

lower inequality can increase political and macroeconomic stability, hence investment and

growth. When the interests of rich and poor are closer together, policies stand a better

chance of avoiding the wide swings caused by trying to serve the needs of one group

versus another.

        If Africa had extremely high levels of inequality and suffered from excessive urban

bias, inequality could be a substantial drag on growth. But while Africa does not have

East Asia’s low levels of inequality, neither is it an area of consistently high inequality.

Data compiled by Deininger and Squire (1996) permit a comparison of income inequality

both within SSA and between SSA and other regions (Table 4). The quality of data on

income distribution is variable and the coverage, especially in Africa, is incomplete. With

these limitations in mind, the data indicate that inequality in SSA varies a great deal.

                                               14
Some economies (Guinea Bissau, South Africa) have income inequality comparable to the

highly regressive outcomes in Brazil and other countries in Latin America. But SSA also

has its share of more equal distributions with Ghana, Niger and Tanzania falling within the

inequality range associated with East Asia.

       The traditional criticism of African countries as suffering from extreme urban bias

also does not hold up today, if it was ever true. Jamal and Weeks (1993) provide

compelling evidence contradicting the conventional wisdom on African inequality. They

show that the extent of urban bias in SSA, even in the immediate post-independence

period, was probably exaggerated due to failure to adjust for differences between rural and

urban prices; and that the subsequent macroeconomic decline in SSA has eroded much of

whatever urban bias once existed. The decline of urban bias in SSA is evident in some of

the policy reversals that have accompanied structural adjustment. In the past, overvalued

exchange rates and high export taxes on cash crops favored urban over rural areas; but

devaluation and a move toward paying farmers border prices has narrowed the earlier gap.

Economic retrogression has affected all groups of Africans – farmers and professionals,

wage earners and informal sector traders – but it has disproportionately hurt those who

depended on the modern sector. There have been precipitous declines in earnings of

government employees, in the real value of legislated urban minimum wages and in the

growth of modern wage employment.

       Africa might do better if it had lower levels of inequality, but there is nothing

exceptional in its levels to serve as a barrier to economic growth.



Is Sub-Saharan Africa Different?

       No other world region has suffered the sustained economic retrogression that has

                                              15
plagued SSA. Does this mean that SSA is structurally different and has faced some

inherent constraint on its ability to achieve long-term economic growth?

       Some analysts suggest this might be true. Easterly and Levine (1997) focus on

SSA's high degree of ethnic diversity. They argue that ethnic fractionalization resulted in

social polarization and elevated rent-seeking in policy making which inhibited growth.

Sachs and Warner (1997) emphasize the region's geographic and natural endowments.

The prevalence of landlocked economies and tropical climates, independent of rates of

factor accumulation, slowed SSA growth rates. Diamond (1997) offers an explanation for

the constraints imposed by Africa's geography. Unlike most other continents, Africa has a

North-South orientation which has limited the continent's rate of agricultural productivity

growth. This is because agricultural and other technological innovations cannot easily

spread from one climate zone to another as they can on continents with an East-West

orientation.

       Taken together, these explanations suggest that economies in SSA may not be able

to attain the high growth rates achieved in East and Southeast Asia. But there is empirical

evidence to counter this view. SSA economies have realized high rates of GDP growth in

the past: Cameroon, Congo, Cote D'Ivoire, Gabon, Nigeria and Togo have enjoyed high

growth periods. Ghana and Uganda have done so recently. The problem has been that

most SSA countries have been unable to sustain periods of rapid growth. Front-runners

in SSA seem to stumble and fall back. Structural explanations, like climate, are less

adequate in accounting for such variability in economic performance.

       And there are the exceptions to SSA's economic retrogression. Table 1 reveals a

few positive growth stories in Africa. Botswana, Lesotho and Mauritius all have had long

term per capita growth rates in excess of 3 percent. The answer to the question about

                                             16
which economy has had the world's fastest growth rate over the thirty year period, 1965-

1995, is not one of East Asian tigers, but ... Botswana. What does Botswana's

extraordinary achievement imply for the rest of SSA?



Africa's Economic Miracle: Botswana

       Botswana's record of GDP growth is not an empty statistical result, due to poorly

measured GDP or its particular sectoral distribution of output. Its growth rate is matched

by improvements in other development indicators (Table 5). Infant mortality has declined

sharply, and adult literacy and school enrollment rates have increased. Rapid economic

growth in Botswana has improved the quality of life for a substantial fraction of the

population.

       If Botswana has succeeded while the rest of the region declined, does this

exception prove that Africa can grow? Or can Botswana be dismissed as an outlier, too

different from its neighbors to serve as a prototype?

       Some may dismiss an economy with only 1.5 million people as too small. But

Singapore (population 3 million) is often cited as a model. Size should not rule Botswana

out as a case worthy of scrutiny for the rest of SSA. Botswana displays many of the

features that have been raised as explanations for Africa's growth problems. Botswana is

landlocked and mineral dependent (diamonds) – parameters that consistently are negative

and significant in Sachs and Warner (1997) growth regressions. At independence in 1966,

and prior to its economic take-off, its stock of well-educated citizens was infinitesimally

low – an estimated 40 university graduates and about 100 people with secondary school

certificates (Harvey and Lewis 1990). Apart from a rail link to South Africa, the country's

physical infrastructure was equally limited. By international standards, its Gini coefficient

                                              17
of .54 (Deininger and Squire 1996) indicates a high degree of inequality. For most of the

past thirty years, Botswana has been surrounded by wars of independence and civil unrest

in Angola, Mozambique, Namibia, South Africa and Zimbabwe, which limited access to

ports and created a host of problems from harboring refugees to playing regional politics.

But unlike most SSA countries, Botswana did not regress. It thrived.

        The major lesson from Botswana is that nations in SSA can grow at rapid rates.

Why Botswana succeeded is not well understood. Unlike its East Asian counterparts,

Africa's economic miracle has not been as rigorously studied and debated. EconLit, the

authoritative index of books and journal articles in economics, identifies only 18 citations

on "Botswana, economic growth" while a similar subject search on Korea yields 271.

From the limited work on Botswana, especially the comprehensive study by Harvey and

Lewis (1990), some inferences can be made.

       One inference is that economic policies matter. Botswana chose prudent fiscal and

macroeconomic directions. Heavily dependent on revenues from its diamond mines,

Botswana's officials avoided "Dutch disease". They did not engage in excessive spending

of export windfalls which would have led to an appreciation of the real exchange rate, and

hurt both agricultural and non-mining industrial growth. Nominal exchange rates were

adjusted to maintain a competitive and stable real exchange rate. Participation in the South

Africa Customs Union limited lobbying for favors in the trade arena and spared Botswana

from some of the rent-seeking and inefficiency that characterized import substitution

schemes elsewhere in SSA (Rodrik 1997). The public sector pursued few "white

elephants" and allocated resources based on economic and social returns. Successful

negotiations with large foreign investors and state investment in education, especially in

the primary levels, are further examples of the good economic management of the nation's

                                              18
leadership.

       A second inference one might draw from Botswana is that it has succeeded as a

small democracy with a strong and independent civil service whereas neighboring

countries have failed under various forms of dictatorship (Holm 1994). Perhaps

democratic regimes are more necessary for growth in Africa than in other parts of the

world because African dictators (for whatever reason) tend to try to improve their

incomes by raising their share of output rather than by gaining a constant share of an

increased level of GDP. Perhaps smaller countries are more conducive for growth in a

continent with ethnic diversity.

       Success usually attracts imitation, and one wonders why countries nearby did not

emulate Botswana's approach and why the development community drew Africa's

attention to role models thousands of miles away in the Pacific rather than to one in SSA's

own backyard. Whatever the reasons, Botswana stands as an important example of the

possibility for economic success in SSA and of the importance of good governance in

overcoming the obstacles to sustained economic growth.15




Reviving Economic Growth in Sub-Saharan Africa

       The preceding analysis suggests that the standard reasons given for poor growth in

SSA do not constitute iron-clad barriers. The region may have a poorly educated labor

force but the activity of African traders, or the success of African immigrants in advanced

economies, demonstrates the labor skills that are waiting to be called upon, given capital

and a modern economic environment. African capital flight and the resource rents of its

mineral wealth offer large pools of latent savings for productive investments at home.



                                             19
Africa may not have an ideal set of “building blocks” for successful growth, but neither do

most other developing economies. Why then has Africa failed to grow?

       African growth has been stifled by political turmoil, often the result of non-

democratic unstable regimes, and by the accompanying absence of protection of property

and capital. We hypothesize that there is a lexicographic ordering to the determinants of

growth and that first and foremost is political stability and the security of property.

Without this base, investments in education, openness, and levels of income equality have

little effect on growth. The reason returns to schooling are low in Africa, that capital

flight is high, and that the shift toward free trade has not created growth miracles is that

schooling, investment, and trade operate successfully only in a peaceful, stable,

environment for economic activity.

       Consider first the most extreme form of political turmoil, war. War plagues the

region. By our count, twelve SSA countries representing one quarter of the region's total

population, were war-torn usually for prolonged periods, between 1975-1995. The

Economist (1998) reports "nearly a third of sub-Saharan Africa's 42 countries [today] are

embroiled in international or civil wars." The burden of war is reflected in another

statistic. SSA accounts for 10 percent of the world's population but harbors 46 percent of

the world's refugees and those internally displaced by war (Haughton 1997).

       Just as war discourages the productive accumulation that SSA needs, corruption

plays a similar role. According to a study of corruption in 54 countries, including 30 low

and middle income economies, the four SSA nations in the sample (Nigeria, Kenya,

Cameroon and Uganda) ranked 1st, 3rd, 6th and 12th, respectively.16 Dictatorships need not

be inimical to economic growth. But African dictators have a particularly poor record in

choosing policies that are growth-augmenting. They are among the world’s best examples

                                               20
of rent-seeking political actors.

        The result of war, corruption, dictatorship is that sub-Saharan Africa ranks low in

the basic economic protections that are necessary for economic growth. The Heritage

Foundation/Wall Street Journal has developed an Index of Economic Freedom that

demonstrates this proposition. In 1998, just three African countries ranked in the top 50

countries by economic freedom – Botswana, Namibia, and Swaziland – while 50 percent

of African countries fit in the lowest grouping of countries. One need not accept the

details of the Index to appreciate the overall validity of the picture.

        There is no simple nor single recipe for achieving economic growth, but there is

one way to prevent growth: though instability and absence of property rights. SSA needs

peace, less corruption, and secure property rights so that its people can invest in

productive activities. Capitalism is a sturdy economic system, permissive of a variety of

permutations. If African countries can establish a stable political environment which

enables people to gain the rewards of investment in physical or human capital, the alleged

barriers to growth – education, trade, inequality, geography, and climate – will, in our

view, prove surmountable.




                                               21
                                       References


Alesina, Alberto and Dani Rodrik. 1994. "Distributive Politics and Economic Growth."
Quarterly Journal of Economics 109:465-90.

Azariadas, Costas and Allan Drazen. 1990. "Threshold Externalities in Economic
Development." Quarterly Journal of Economics 105:501-26.

Barro, Robert J. 1997. Determinants of Economic Growth: A Cross-Country Empirical
Study. Cambridge, Mass.: The MIT Press.

Barro, Robert J. and Xavier Sala-I-Martin. 1995. Economic Growth. New York: McGraw
Hill.

Behrman, Jere and Nancy Birdsall. 1983. "The Quality of Schooling: Quantity Alone is
Misleading." American Economic Review 73:938-46.

Benabou, Roland. 1996. "Inequality and Growth." In Ben S. Bernanke and Julio S.
Rotemberg, eds. NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1996. Cambridge, Mass.:The MIT
Press.

Benhabib, Jess and Mark M. Spiegel. 1994. "The Role of Human Capital and Political
Instability in Economic Development." In Mario Baldassarri, Luigi Paganetto and Edmund
S. Phelps, eds., International Differences in Growth Rates. New York: St. Martin's Press.

Bennell, Paul. 1996. "Rates of Return to Education: Does the Conventional Pattern
Prevail in sub-Saharan Africa?" World Development 24: 183-99.

Bigsten, Arne and Sue Horton. 1997. "Labour Markets in Sub-Saharan Africa."
Processed.

Bigsten, Arne et al. 1998. "Rates of Return on Physical and Human Capital in Africa's
Manufacturing Sector." Working Paper 98-12. Centre for the Study of African
Economies, Institute of Economics and Statistics, Oxford University, Oxford. Processed.

Cline, William R. 1982. "Can the East Asian Model of Development Be Generalized?"
World Development 10:81-90.

Collier, Paul and Jan Willem Gunning. 1997. "Explaining African Economic Performance."
Working Paper 97-2. Centre for the Study of African Economies, Institute of Economics
and Statistics, Oxford University, Oxford. Processed.

Deininger, Klaus and Lyn Squire. 1996. "A New Data Set Measuring Income Inequality."
World Bank Economic Review10:565-91.

Denison, Edward E. 1967. Why Growth Rates Differ. Washington, D.C.: Brookings

                                            22
Institution.

Diamond, Jared M. 1997. Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies. New
York: W.W. Norton and Company.

Dollar, David. 1992. "Outward-Oriented Developing Economies Really Do Grow More
Rapidly: Evidence from 95 LDCs, 1976-1985." Economic Development and Cultural
Change 40:523-44.

Easterly, William and Ross Levine. 1997. "Africa's Growth Tragedy: Policies and Ethnic
Divisions." Quarterly Journal of Economics 112:1203-50.

Economist. 1998. "A Continent Goes to War." (October 3): 47-8.

Feldstein, Martin and Charles Horioka. 1980. "Domestic Saving and International Capital
Flows." Economic Journal 90:314-29.

Freeman, Richard B. 1995. "Are Your Wages Set in Beijing?" Journal of Economic
Perspectives 9:15-32.

Freeman, Richard B. 1999. The Labor Market Comes to China.

Glewwe, Paul. 1991. "Schooling, Skills, and the Returns to Government Investment in
Education." Living Standards Measurement Study Working Paper 76. World Bank,
Washington, D.C. Processed.

Harris, John R. and Michael P. Todaro. 1970. "Migration, Unemployment and
Development: A Two-Sector Analysis." American Economic Review 60:126-42.

Harrison, Ann. 1995. "Openness and Growth: A Time Series Cross Section Analysis for
Developing Countries." National Bureau of Economic research Working Paper 5221.
Cambridge, Mass. Processed.

Harrison, Ann. 1998. "Who Gains from Trade Reforms? Some Remaining Puzzles." New
York: Columbia University. Processed.

Harvey, Charles and Stephen R. Lewis, Jr. 1990. Policy Choice and Development
Performance in Botswana. New York: St. Martin's Press.

Haughton, Jonathan. 1997. "The Reconstruction of War-Torn Economies." Harvard
Institute for International Development, Cambridge, Mass. Processed.

Holm, John D. 1994. "Botswana: One African Success Story." Current History 93:
198-202.

Jamal, Vali and John Weeks. 1993. Africa Misunderstood (Or Whatever Happened to the
Rural-Urban Gap?). London: MacMillan Press.

                                           23
Kaldor, Nicholas. 1955-56. "Alternative Theories of Distribution." Review of Economic
Studies

Krueger, Alan and Mikall Lindahl. 1998. "Education for Growth: Why and For Whom?"
Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University. Processed.

Levine, Ross and David Renelt. 1992. "A Sensitivity Analysis of Cross-Country Growth
Regressions." American Economic Review 82:942-63.

Lewis, W. Arthur. 1954. "Economic Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labour."
The Manchester School 22:139-91.

Lipton, Michael. 1977. Why Poor People Stay Poor: A Study of Urban Bias in World
Development. London: Temple Smith.

Madavo, Callisto and Jean-Louis Sarbib. 1997. "Africa on the Move: Attracting Private
Capital to a Changing Continent." The SAIS Review 17:111-26.

Nielsen, Helena S. and Niels Westergard-Nielsen. 1998. "Returns to Schooling in LDC's:
New Evidence from Zambia." Centre for Labour Market and Social Research Working
Paper WP98-010. University of Aarhus and the Aarhus School of Business, Aarhus,
Denmark. Processed.

Obstfeld, Maurice. 1995. "International Capital Mobility in the 1990s." In Peter Kenen,
ed. Understanding Interdependence: The Macroeconomics of the Open Economy.
Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press.

Perkins, Dwight H. and Michael Roemer. "Differing Endowments and Historical
Legacies." In David L. Lindauer and Michael Roemer, eds., Asia and Africa: Legacies
and Opportunities in Development. San Francisco: Institute for Contemporary Studies for
the International Center for Economic Growth and the Harvard Institute for International
Development.

Persson, T. and G. Tabellini. 1994. "Is Inequality Harmful for Growth?: Theory and
Evidence." American Economic Review 48:600-21.

Pritchett, Lant. 1996. "Measuring Outward Orientation in LDCs: Can It Be Done?"
Journal of Development Economics 49:307-35.

Pritchett, Lant. 1997. "Where Has All the Education Gone?" Policy Research Working
Paper 1581. World Bank, Policy Research Department, Washington, D.C. Processed.

Psacharopoulos, George. 1994. "Returns to Investment in Education: A Global Update."
World Development 22: 1325-43.

Rodrik, Dani. 1997. "Trade Policy and Economic Performance in Sub-Saharan Africa."
Cambridge, Mass. Processed.

                                            24
Rosenzweig, Mark. 1995. "Why Are There Returns to Schooling?" American Economic
Review 85:153-58.

Sachs, Jeffrey D. and Andrew M. Warner. 1995. "Economic Reform and the Process of
Global Integration." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity n.1:1-118.

Sachs, Jeffrey D. and Andrew M. Warner. 1997. "Sources of Slow Growth in African
Economies." Journal of African Economies 6:335-76.

Topel, Robert H. 1999. "Labor Markets and Economic Growth." In Orley Ashenfelter and
David Card, eds. Handbook of Labor Economics. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Wood, Adrian. 1994. North-South Trade, Employment and Inequality. Oxford: Clarendon
Press.

World Bank. 1993. The East Asian Miracle. New York: Oxford University Press for the
World Bank.

World Bank. 1995. "A Continent in Transition." Africa Region, World Bank, Washington,
D.C. Processed.

World Bank. 1997. "China Engaged: Integration With the Global Economy." In World
Bank, China 2020. Washington, D.C.




                                          25
                                            TABLE 1

 When Did Countries in SSA First Reach Their Current GDP/N Level?

                  ECONOMIC DECLINE: 94% of Population
                                                       Between 1970-1979
                                                       236,381,000 people (41%)
Before 1960’s:                                                                    YEAR
205,342,000 people (36%)                               Cameroon                     79
Angola                                                 Gambia                       71
Benin                                                  Ghana                        70
Burkina Faso                                           Kenya                        79
Burundi                                                Malawi                       78
Central African Republic                               Mauritania                   74
Chad                                                   Namibia                      71
Comoros                                                Nigeria                      71
Cote d'Ivoire                                          South Africa                 70
Madagascar                                             Swaziland                    70
Mali                                                   Zimbabwe                     71
Mozambique
Niger                                                  Between 1980-1989:
Rwanda                                                 65,628,000 people (11%)
Sierra Leone                                                                      YEAR
Somalia                                                Congo                        80
Sudan                                                  Ethiopia                     82
Zaire                                                  Guinea                       80
Zambia
                                                       In the 90’s:
Between 1960-1969:                                     73,500 people (0.01%)
36,601,000 people (6%)                                                            YEAR
                                YEAR                   Seychelles                   92
Gabon                             68
Guinea-Bissau                     69
Liberia                           63
Senegal                           64
Togo                              67
Uganda                            66



                   ECONOMIC GROWTH: 6% of Population
Countries Experiencing Growth:
34,584,000 people
Botswana
Cape Verde
Lesotho
Mauritius
Tanzania

Note: Equatorial Guinea and Eritrea are excluded because of lack of data.
Source: See Appendix 1 for derivation.




                                                  26
                                            Table 2: Schooling by Region
                                                                          School Enrollment Rate (%)
    Region                         Adult Illiteracy (%)               Primary                   Secondary
                                 1995
                                                               1970           1992         1970         1992
    Sub-Saharan Africa                     43                   50             72            7           24
    East Asia                              17                   88             117          24           52
    South Asia                             51                   67             101          25           39
    Middle East/                           39                   68             97           24           59
    North Africa
    Latin America/                         13                   95            110           28              51
    Caribbean

Source: World Bank Indicators (1997)




                                                     27
                                      Table 3: Regional Participation in International Trade and Capital Flows, 1995 (percent)
            Region              Share of World GDP       Share of World Tradea Share of Trade in GDPa             Average Annual     Share of Net Private
                                                                                                                  Growth in Tradea     Capital Flowsb
                                                                                                                    (1980-1995)
     Sub-Saharan Africa                  1.1                       1.4                        50.7                       0.3                 5.9
     East Asia                           4.8                       7.0                        54.3                      12.8                54.6
     South Asia                          1.6                       1.0                        24.4                       7.3                 3.4
     Middle East/                        1.5                       2.1                        51.0                      -0.0                 0.9
     North Africa
     Latin America/                     6.1                        4.4                      27.2                       5.9                  35.2
     Caribbean

a.      Trade equals exports plus imports.

b.      Flows to low and middle income economies excluding those to Europe and Central Asia.


Source: World Development Indicators (1997)




                                                      28
                                                            Table 4: Income Inequality by Region
                                                     (ratio of income shares of top 20% to bottom 20%)
                        Latin America/               Sub-Saharan            Middle East/            East Asia                          South Asia
                        Caribbean                    Africa                 North Africa
    High                Guatemala                    South Africa   (32.1)                          Thailand                (15.8)
    Inequality          (30.0)                       Guinea Bissau (28.6)
                        Panama                       Botswana       (20.9)
                        (29.9)                       Kenya          (18.2)
                        Brazil                       Senegal        (16.8)
                        (26.3)                       Lesotho        (16.4)
                        Puerto Rico                  Zimbabwe       (15.7)
                        (18.3)
                        Chile
                        (17.3)
                        Venezuela
                        (16.2)
                        Colombia
                        (15.1)
                        Honduras
                        (14.7)
                        Mexico
                        (13.4)
    Medium              Dominican Rep.               Mauritania       (13.1)    Tunisia           (7.9)    Malaysia         (11.7)
    Inequality          (13.3)                       Nigeria          (12.4)    Jordan            (7.4)    Philippines      (10.1)
                        Nicaragua                    Zambia           ( 8.9)    Morocco
                        (13.1)                       Madagascar       ( 8.5)    (7.0)
                        Costa Rica                   Uganda           ( 7.1)
                        (12.7)
                        Peru
                        (10.3)
                        Ecuador            (
                        9.8)
                        Bolivia            (
                        8.6)
                        Guyana             (
                        7.5)
    Low                 Jamaica            (         Tanzania         (6.6)     Algeria           (6.8)    China            (   6.9)   Pakistan        (     4.7)
    Inequality          6.3)                         Cote d’lvoire    (6.5)     Egypt             (4.7)    Korea            (   5.7)   India           (     4.7)
                                                     Mauritius        (6.5)                                Vietnam          (   5.5)   Sri Lanka       (     4.4)
                                                     Niger            (5.9)                                Taiwan           (   5.4)   Bangladesh      (     4.0)
                                                     Ghana            (5.3)                                Indonesia        (   4.7)
                                                                                                           Laos             (   4.2)


Note: High, medium and low inequality categories were determined by rank ordering all countries in the sample and dividing into thirds. Data refer to most
recent year available. Only countries with estimates since 1985 are included. World regions are ordered horizontally from highest to lowest mean level of
regional inequality.

Source: Deininger and Squire (1996)


                                                      29
30
                                        Table 5: Botswana Then and Now
                                                                                          Sub-Saharan
Development Indicator                                             Botswana                   Africa
                                                           1970                 1995         1995
GNP per capita (1995 US $) a                                458                 3020          490
Infant Mortality Rate (per 1000 live births)                95                   56            92
Life Expectancy at Birth (years)                            50                   68            52
Total Fertility Rate (number of children)                   6.9                  4.4           5.7
Adult Literacy Rate (percent)                              35%b                 70%           57%
Primary School Enrollment Rate                             65%                 115%c         73%c
(percent of age group)
Secondary School Enrollment Rate                            7%                 57%c          25%c
(Percent of age group)

a. World Bank Atlas Method, Botswana, 1970. Adjusted to 1995 US $ using U.S.
implicit GDP price deflator.

b. For 1976. World Bank (1981)

c. For 1992-93.

Source: African Development Indicators (1997), World Bank Development Indicators (1997)




                                                                    31
                                     APPENDIX 1:

Table 1 was derived using the RGDPL variable (Real GDP per Capita (Laspeyres Index-
1985IP) in the Penn World Tables 5.6. The Penn Tables contain income per capita data
through 1992 except for Ethiopia and Liberia (1986); Angola, Botswana,
Niger, Somalia, and Zaire (1989); and Benin, Mali, Senegal, Sudan, and Zambia(1991).

GDP per Capita data was projected until 1995 using the annual GDP and population
growth rates from the World Development Indicators 1997 on CD-ROM. When growth
data were unavailable until 1995, we assumed zero growth for the country. Countries that
had missing growth data include: Liberia (87); Somalia(87); Zaire(93); and Sudan,
Seychelles, Angola, and Cape Verde(94).

Population totals were taken from the World Development Indicators 1997 CD-ROM
published by the World Bank.




                                                             32
                                          Endnotes

Richard B. Freeman is the Ascherman Professor of Economics at Harvard University and
Director of the Labor Studies Program at the National Bureau of Economic Research.
David L. Lindauer is Professor of Economics at Wellesley College and Faculty Associate
of the Harvard Institute for International Development. This paper received support from
the World Bank and from the Mary A. Hildreth Fund of Wellesley College. We wish to
thank Giselle Nevada for her careful research assistance. The views presented are those of
the authors and not necessarily those of the World Bank.



1
   Even this figure exaggerates the positive record. In addition to the successful growers –
Botswana, Cape Verde, Lesotho and Mauritius – the total includes Tanzania. Tanzania,
accounting for 30 of the 35 million people in the economic growth category, is one of the five
poorest nations in the world yet joins this group because after decades of economic
stagnation, it has achieved about one percent real economic growth per annum over the last
decade.
2
  Bigsten and Horton (1997) cite several other studies of education and earnings in SSA,
covering Cote d'Ivoire, Kenya, South Africa, Zambia and Zimbabwe, that reach a similar
conclusion.
3
  World Bank (1995), Table 2, lists 11 countries in SSA that experienced stagnation or
decline in school enrollments during the 1980s.
4
   One of the better studies on school quality and returns to education is Behrman and
Birdsall (1983). The authors find that by including a proxy for school quality the
estimated rate of return to years of schooling in Brazil was cut in half.
5
  See Pritchett (1997), pp. 34-57, for additional hypotheses reconciling the accumulation
of schooling with low (or negative) growth outcomes.
6
   Collier and Gunning (1997), Sachs and Warner (1995), and others generate similar
findings.
7
   An example from Pritchett (1997) illustrates this point. "Korea's secondary enrollment
rate in 1960 was 27 percent while Great Britain's was 66 percent. But the level of
schooling of Britain's labor force in 1960 was 7.7 years while Korea's was 3.2 years.
Subsequently, Great Britain's enrollment increased to 83 percent by 1975 and then
remained relatively constant; Korea's enrollment rate increased from 27 to 87 percent by
1983. Given these differences in initial stocks and the large changes in enrollment rates,
Korea's years of schooling expanded massively from 3.2 to 7.8 by 1985 while Britain's
expanded only from 7.7 to 8.6."



                                                                 33
8
   These results are replicated in other studies, including Benhabib and Spiegel 1994.
Barro and Sala-I-Martin 1997 report insignificant coefficients on the change in schooling
attainment in their growth regressions.
9
   According to the human capital model, the logarithm of earnings depends on absolute
years of schooling. Percentage changes in earnings (GDP per worker), therefore, should
be regressed on absolute changes in schooling years. What the logarithmic transformation
accomplishes is to change the metric of schooling (units of time) into the metric of
earnings (dollar units). The equivalent of a percentage change in physical capital in a
growth equation, thus, is the absolute change in years of schooling.
10
   There are still other issues regarding the specification of education in growth
regressions. A prerequisite for growth may be achievement of some minimum threshold
level of education of the work force, for example, a minimum percentage of the labor
force must have attended the primary grades. Such thresholds may be necessary to take
advantage of available technologies and facilitate the process of economic catch-up
(Azariadis and Drazen 1990). But econometric support for this position is limited, and
given the quality of the education data, is unlikely to be readily forthcoming.
11
   Openness is measured as the proportion of years in which an economy passes the
following four tests of openness: (1) average tariff rates fall below 40 percent; (2) average
quota and licensing coverage of imports is less than 40 percent; (3) the black market
exchange rate premium is less than 20 percent; and (4) no extreme controls on exports, in
the form of state monopolies or prohibitive duties, exist. Levine and Renelt (1992)
employ other measures of trade policy distortion, including black-market exchange rate
premiums and Dollar's (1992) index of real exchange-rate distortion, and while these
variables are of the expected sign, the results, unlike those of Sachs and Warner, are not
robust.
12
     Obstfeld (1995) provides further evidence confirming this tendency.
13
   Rodrik (1997) regresses the ratio of exports plus imports to GDP on population, per
capita income and distance from the world's major trading economies. A dummy variable
for SSA proves insignificant.
14
   Further results from World Bank (1997) suggest that China will account for less than a
quarter of all exports from what are today's low and middle income economies. SSA will
see its share of world exports rise from 1.7 to 2.4 percent.
15
  Botswana's recent experience highlights this point. Between 1965-1990, growth in
GNP per capita averaged 8.4 percent per annum, fast enough for per capita income to
double in less than a decade. In the 1990s, Botswana's growth rate has slowed to 1.7%,
due in part to excessive growth in government spending and a decline in the productivity
of public expenditures. Like East Asia, although not necessarily for the same reasons,



                                                                 34
Botswana is learning that continued rapid growth cannot be taken for granted.
16
 International Corruption Ranking is a joint initiative of Transparency International and
Gottingen University.




                                                               35
