In recent years a growing consensus has emerged for price stability as the overriding, long-run
goal of monetary policy. However, despite this consensus, the following question still remains: how
should monetary policy be conducted to achieve the price stability goal? To shed light on this
question, this paper examines the experience with different monetary policy regimes currently in use
in a number of countries.
A central feature of all of the monetary regimes discussed here is the use of a nominal anchor
in some form, so first we will examine what role a nominal anchor plays in promoting price stability.
Then we will examine four basic types of monetary policy regimes: 1) exchange-rate targeting, 2)
monetary targeting, 3) inflation targeting, and 4) monetary policy with an implicit but not an explicit
nominal anchor. The paper then concludes with an overall assessment of the different monetary
regimes and draws some policy conclusions. The basic theme that comes out of this analysis is that
the success of different monetary regimes depends on their ability to constrain discretionary
policymaking so that long-run price stability is more likely to result.

I.

The Role of a Nominal Anchor
A nominal anchor is a constraint on the value of domestic money, and in some form it is a
necessary element in successful monetary policy regimes. Why is a nominal anchor needed? First,
from a purely technical viewpoint, a nominal anchor provides conditions that make the price level
uniquely determined, which is obviously necessary for price stability. Indeed, it helps promote price
stability because it helps tie down inflation expectations directly through its constraint on the value
of domestic money.
However, a nominal anchor can be thought of more broadly as a constraint on discretionary
policy that helps weaken the time-inconsistency problem described by Kydland and Prescott (1977),
Calvo (1978) and Barro and Gordon (1983) so that in the long run, price stability is a more likely to
be achieved. The time-inconsistency problem arises because there are incentives for a policymaker
to pursue short-run objectives even though the result is poor long-run outcomes which result from
1

forward-looking behavior on the part of economic agents.

Expansionary monetary policy will

produce higher growth and employment in the short-run, and so policymakers will be tempted to
pursue this policy even though it will not produce higher growth and employment in the long-run
because economic agents adjust their wage and price expectations upward to reflect the expansionary
policy. Unfortunately, however, the expansionary monetary policy will lead to higher inflation in the
long-run, with its negative consequences for the economy.
McCallum (1995) points out that the time-inconsistency problem by itself does not imply that
a central bank will pursue expansionary monetary policy which leads to inflation. Simply by
recognizing the problem that forward-looking expectations in the wage- and price-setting process
creates for a strategy of pursuing expansionary monetary policy, central banks can decide not to play
that game. However, even if the central bank recognizes the problem, there still will be pressures
on the central bank to pursue overly expansionary monetary policy by the politicians. Thus overly
expansionary monetary policy and inflation may result, so that the time-inconsistency problem
remains: the time-inconsistency problem is just shifted back one step. Thus even if the source of time
inconsistency is not within central banks, a nominal anchor may be needed to limit political pressures
to pursue overly expansionary, time-inconsistent, monetary policies.

II.
Exchange-Rate Targeting
Targeting the exchange rate is a monetary policy regime with a long history. It can take the
form of fixing the value of the domestic currency to a commodity such as gold, the key feature of the
gold standard. More recently, fixed exchange-rate regimes have involved fixing the value of the
domestic currency to that of a large, low-inflation country. As another alternative, instead of fixing
the value of the currency to that of the low-inflation anchor country, which implies that the inflation
rate will eventually gravitate to that of the anchor country, some countries adopt a crawling target
or peg in which its currency is allowed to depreciate at a steady rate so that its inflation can be higher
than that of the anchor country.
2

Exchange-rate targeting has several advantages. First, the nominal anchor of an exchangerate target fixes the inflation rate for internationally traded goods, and thus directly contributes to
keeping inflation under control. Second, if the exchange-rate target is credible, it anchors inflation
expectations to the inflation rate in the anchor country to whose currency it is pegged. Third, an
exchange-rate target provides an automatic rule for the conduct of monetary policy that avoids the
time-inconsistency problem. It forces a tightening of monetary policy when there is a tendency for
the domestic currency to depreciate or a loosening of policy when there is a tendency for the domestic
currency to appreciate. Monetary policy no longer has the discretion that can result in the pursuit of
expansionary policy to obtain employment gains which lead to time-inconsistency. Fourth, an
exchange-rate target has the advantage of simplicity and clarity, which make it easily understood by
the public. A "sound currency" is an easy-to-understand rallying cry for monetary policy. This has
been important in France, for example, where an appeal to the "franc fort" is often used to justify tight
monetary policy.
Given its advantages, it is not surprising that exchange-rate targeting has been used
successfully to control inflation in industrialized countries. Both France and the United Kingdom,
for example, successfully used exchange-rate targeting to lower inflation by tying the value of their
currencies to the German mark. In 1987, when France first pegged their exchange rate to the mark,
its inflation rate was 3%, two percentage points above the German inflation rate. By 1992 its
inflation rate had fallen to 2%, a level that can be argued is consistent with price stability, and was
even below that in Germany. By 1996, the French and German inflation rates had converged, to a
number slightly below 2%. Similarly, after pegging to the German mark in 1990, the United Kingdom
was able to lower its inflation rate from 10% to 3% by 1992, when it was forced to abandon the
Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM).
Exchange-rate targeting has also been an effective means of reducing inflation quickly in
emerging market countries. An important recent example has been Argentina, which in 1990
established a currency board arrangement, requiring the central bank to exchange U.S. dollars for new
pesos at a fixed exchange rate of 1 to 1. The currency board is an especially strong and transparent
commitment to an exchange-rate target because it requires that the note-issuing authority, whether
the central bank or the government, stands ready to exchange the domestic currency for foreign
3

currency at the specified fixed exchange rate whenever the public requests it. In order to credibly
meet these requests, a currency board typically has more than 100% foreign reserves backing the
domestic currency and allows the monetary authorities absolutely no discretion. The early years of
Argentina's currency board looked stunningly successful. Inflation which had been running at over
a one-thousand percent annual rate in 1989 and 1990 fell to under 5% by the end of 1994, and
economic growth was rapid, averaging almost 8% at an annual rate from 1991 to 1994.
Despite the inherent advantages of exchange-rate targeting, it is not without its serious
problems, as the international experience demonstrates. There are several serious criticisms of
exchange-rate targeting. First is that an exchange-rate target results in the loss of independent
monetary policy.1 With open capital markets, an exchange-rate target causes domestic interest rates
to be closely linked to those of the anchor country. The targeting country thus loses the ability to use
monetary policy to respond to domestic shocks that are independent of those hitting the anchor
country. Furthermore, an exchange-rate target means that shocks to the anchor country are directly
transmitted to the targeting country because changes in interest rates in the anchor country lead to
a corresponding change in interest rates in the targeting country.
A striking example of these problems occurred when Germany reunified in 1990. Concerns
about inflationary pressures arising from reunification and the massive fiscal expansion required to
rebuild East Germany led to rises in German long-term interest rates until February 1991 and to rises
in short-term rates until December 1991. This shock to the anchor country in the Exchange Rate
Mechanism (ERM) was transmitted directly to the other countries in the ERM whose currencies were
pegged to the mark because their interest rates now rose in tandem with those in Germany. As
pointed out in Clarida, Gali and Gertler (1997), monetary policy in countries such as France and the
United Kingdom was far tighter than would have been the case if monetary policy in these countries
was focused on domestic considerations. The result was that continuing adherence to the exchangerate target produced a significant slowing of economic growth and rising unemployment, which is
exactly what France experienced when it remained in the ERM and adhered to the exchange-rate peg.
A second problem with exchange-rate targets has been pointed out forcefully in Obstfeld and

1

See Obstfeld and Rogoff (1995) for additional discussion of this criticism.

4

Rogoff (1995): exchange-rate targets leave countries open to speculative attacks on their currencies.
Indeed, one aftermath of German reunification was the foreign exchange crisis of September 1992.
As we have seen, the tight monetary policy in Germany resulting from German reunification meant
that the countries in the ERM were subjected to a negative demand shock that led to a decline in
economic growth and a rise in unemployment. It was certainly feasible for the governments of these
countries to keep their exchange rates fixed relative to the mark in these circumstances, but
speculators began to question whether these countries' commitment to the exchange rate peg would
weaken because these countries would not tolerate the rise in unemployment that would result from
keeping interest rates sufficiently high to fend off speculative attacks on their currencies.
At this stage, speculators were in effect presented with a one-way bet: the exchange rates for
currencies such as the French franc, the Spanish peseta, the Swedish krona, the Italian lira and the
British pound could only go in one direction, depreciate against the mark. Selling these currencies
thus presented speculators with an attractive profit opportunity with potentially high expected returns
and yet little risk. The result was that in September 1992, a speculative attack on the French franc,
the Spanish peseta, the Swedish krona, the Italian lira and the British pound began in earnest. Only
in France was the commitment to the fixed exchange rate strong enough, so that France did not
devalue. The governments in Britain, Spain, Italy and Sweden were unwilling to defend their
currencies at all costs and so allowed their currencies to fall in value.
The attempted defense of these currencies did not come cheaply. By the time the crisis was
over, the British, French, Italian, Spanish and Swedish central banks had intervened to the tune of an
estimated $100 billion, and the Bundesbank alone had laid out an estimated $50 billion for foreign
exchange intervention. It is further estimated that these central banks lost $4 to $6 billion as a result
of their exchange-rate intervention in the crisis, an amount that was in effect paid by taxpayers in
these countries.
The different response of France and the United Kingdom after the September 1992 exchange
rate crisis illustrates the potential cost of an exchange-rate target. France, which continued to peg
to the mark and thereby was unable to use monetary policy to respond to domestic conditions, found
that economic growth remained slow after 1992 and unemployment increased. The United Kingdom,
on the other hand, which dropped out of the ERM exchange-rate peg and adopted inflation targeting
5

(discussed later), had much better economic performance: economic growth was higher, the
unemployment rate fell, and yet inflation performance was not much worse than France's.
The aftermath of German reunification and the September 1992 exchange rate crisis
dramatically illustrate two points: 1) an exchange-rate target does not guarantee that the commitment
to the exchange-rate based, monetary policy rule is sufficiently strong to maintain the target, and 2)
the cost to economic growth from an exchange-rate regime with its loss of independent monetary
policy can be high.
For emerging market countries, it is far less clear that these countries lose much by giving up
an independent monetary policy when they target exchange rates. Because many emerging market
countries have not developed the political or monetary institutions that result in the ability to use
discretionary monetary policy successfully, they may have little to gain from an independent monetary
policy, but a lot to lose. Thus, they would be better off by, in effect, adopting the monetary policy
of a country like the United States through targeting exchange rates than in pursuing their own
independent policy. Indeed, this is one of the reasons that so many emerging market countries have
adopted exchange-rate targeting.2
Nonetheless, as is emphasized in Mishkin (1997, 1998), there is an additional disadvantage
from an exchange-rate target in emerging market countries that suggests that for them this monetary
policy regime is highly dangerous. Exchange-rate targeting in emerging market countries is likely
to promote financial fragility and possibly a full-fledged financial crisis that can be highly destructive
to the economy.
To see why exchange-rate targets in an emerging market country make a financial crisis more
likely, we must first understand what a financial crisis is and why it is so damaging to the economy.
In recent years, an asymmetric information theory of financial crises has been developed which
provides a definition of a financial crisis [Bernanke (1983), Calomiris and Gorton (1991), and Mishkin
(1991, 1994, 1996).] A financial crisis is a nonlinear disruption to financial markets in which

2

This also explains why of all the countries entering the European Monetary Union, Italy has the most
public support for EMU. In the past, monetary policy in Italy has not been too successful and therefore
adopting the monetary policy of the European Central Bank, which is patterned after the Bundesbank, seems
particularly attractive.

6

asymmetric information problems (adverse selection and moral hazard) become much worse, so that
financial markets are unable to efficiently channel funds to economic agents who have the most
productive investment opportunities. A financial crisis thus prevents the efficient functioning of
financial markets, which therefore leads to a sharp contraction in economic activity.
Because of uncertainty about the future value of the domestic currency, many nonfinancial
firms, banks and governments in emerging market countries find it much easier to issue debt if the
debt is denominated in foreign currencies. This tendency can be further encouraged by an exchangerate targeting regime which may encourage domestic firms and financial institutions to issue foreign
denominated debt. The substantial issuance of foreign denominated debt was a prominent feature of
the institutional structure in the Chilean financial markets before the financial crisis in 1982, in Mexico
before its financial crisis in 1994 and in East Asian countries before their recent crisis.
With an exchange-rate target regime, depreciation of the currency when it occurs is a highly
nonlinear event because it involves a devaluation. In most developed countries a devaluation has little
direct effect on the balance sheets of households, firms and banks because their debts are denominated
in domestic currency.3 This is not true, however, in emerging market countries with their very
different institutional structure. In these countries, but not in developed countries, a foreign exchange
crisis can trigger a full-scale financial crisis in which financial markets are no longer able to move
funds to those with productive investment opportunities, thereby causing a severe economic
contraction.
With debt contracts denominated in foreign currency as in emerging market countries, when
there is a devaluation of the domestic currency, the debt burden of domestic firms increases. On the
other hand, since assets are typically denominated in domestic currency, there is no simultaneous
increase in the value of firms' assets. The result is a that a devaluation leads to a substantial
deterioration in firms' balance sheets and a decline in net worth, which, in turn, means that effective
collateral has shrunk, thereby providing less protection to lenders. Furthermore, the decline in net

3

Indeed, a devaluation in developed countries can actually stimulate economic activity because it makes the
country's goods more competitive internationally, thereby increasing its net exports and hence aggregate
demand. Indeed, this was exactly the experience of the United Kingdom after the September 1992 foreignexchange crisis when it was forced to devalue its currency. Its economic performance after the devaluation was
substantially better than that of countries which remained in the ERM after 1992.

7

worth increases moral hazard incentives for firms to take on greater risk because they have less to
lose if the loans go sour. Because lenders are now subject to much higher risks of losses, there is now
a decline in lending and hence a decline in investment and economic activity. The damage to balance
sheets from devaluation in the aftermath of the foreign exchange crisis was a major source of the
contraction of the economies of Chile in 1982, Mexico in 1994 and 1995 and East Asia in 1997-98.
In addition, the depreciation of the domestic currency can lead to deterioration in the balance
sheets of the banking sector. In emerging market countries, banks typically have many short-term
liabilities denominated in foreign currency which increase sharply in value when a depreciation occurs.
On the other hand, the problems of firms and households mean that they are unable to pay off their
debts, also resulting in loan losses on the assets side of the banks' balance sheets. Once there is a
deterioration in bank balance sheets, with the substantial loss of bank capital, banks have two choices:
either 1) they can cut back on their lending in order to shrink their asset base and thereby restore their
capital ratios, or 2) they can try to raise new capital. However, when banks experience a
deterioration in their balance sheets, it is very hard for them to raise new capital at a reasonable cost.
Thus, the typical response of banks with weakened balance sheets is a contraction in their lending,
which slows economic activity. In the extreme case in which the deterioration of bank balance sheets
leads to a banking crisis which forces many banks to close their door, thereby directly limiting the
ability of the banking sector to make loans, the affect on the economy is even more severe.
An additional danger from using an exchange-rate target in emerging market countries is that
although the exchange-rate target is initially successful in bringing inflation down -- for example,
Mexican inflation fell from over a 100% annual rate before it adopted exchange-rate targets in 1988
to inflation rates in the single digits by 1994 -- a successful speculative attack can lead to a resurgence
of inflation. Because many emerging market countries have previously experienced both high and
variable inflation, their central banks are unlikely to have deep-rooted credibility as inflation fighters.
Thus, a sharp depreciation of the currency after a speculative attack that leads to immediate upward
pressure on prices can lead to a dramatic rise in both actual and expected inflation. Indeed Mexican
inflation surged to 50% in 1995 after the foreign exchange crisis in 1994 and a similar phenomenon
has been occurring in Indonesia.
A rise in expected inflation after a successful speculative attack against the currency of an
8

emerging market country is another factor exacerbating the financial crisis because it leads to a sharp
rise in interest rates as occurred in Mexico and the East Asian crisis countries. The interaction of the
short duration of debt contracts and the rise in interest rates leads to huge increases in interest
payments by firms, thereby weakening firms' cash flow position and further weakening their balance
sheets. Then, as we have seen, both lending and economic activity are likely to undergo a sharp
decline.
Another potential danger from an exchange-rate target is that by providing a more stable value
of the currency, it might lower perceived risk for foreign investors and thus encourage capital inflows.
Although these capital inflows might be channeled into productive investments and thus stimulate
growth, they might promote excessive lending, manifested by a lending boom, because domestic
financial intermediaries such as banks play a key role in intermediating these capital inflows [Calvo,
Leiderman and Reinhart (1994)]. Indeed, Folkerts-Landau, et. al (1995) found that emerging market
countries in the Asian-Pacific region with the large net private capital inflows also experienced large
increases in their banking sectors. Furthermore, if the bank supervisory process is weak, as it often
is in emerging market countries, so that the government safety net for banking institutions creates
incentives for them to take on risk, the likelihood that a capital inflow will produce a lending boom
is that much greater. With inadequate bank supervision, the likely outcome of a lending boom is
substantial loan losses and a deterioration of bank balance sheets.4
The deterioration in bank balance sheets can damage the economy in two ways. First, the
deterioration in the balance sheets of banking firms leads them to restrict their lending in order to
improve their capital ratios or can even lead to a full-scale banking crisis which forces many banks
into insolvency, thereby directly removing the ability of the banking sector to make loans. Second,
the deterioration in bank balance sheets can promote a foreign exchange crisis because it becomes
very difficult for the central bank to defend its currency against a speculative attack. Any rise in
interest rates to keep the domestic currency from depreciating has the additional effect of weakening

4

Gavin and Hausman (1996) and Kaminsky and Reinhart (1996) do find that lending booms are a predictor
of banking crises, yet it is less clear that capital inflows will necessarily produce a lending boom which causes
a deterioration in bank balance sheets. Kaminsky and Reinhart (1996), for example, find that financial
liberalization, rather than balance of payments developments inflows, appears to be a more important predictor
of banking crises.

9

the banking system further because the rise in interest rates hurts banks' balance sheets. This negative
effect of a rise in interest rates on banks' balance sheets occurs because of their maturity mismatch
and their exposure to increased credit risk when the economy deteriorates. Thus, when a speculative
attack on the currency occurs in an emerging market country, if the central bank raises interest rates
sufficiently to defend the currency, the banking system may collapse. Once investors recognize that
a country's weak banking system makes it less likely that the central bank will take the steps to
successfully defend the domestic currency, they have even greater incentives to attack the currency
because expected profits from selling the currency have now risen. The outcome is a successful
attack on the currency, and the resulting foreign exchange crisis causes a collapse of the economy for
the reasons already discussed.
The recent events in Southeast Asia and Mexico, in which the weakness of the banking sector
and speculative attack on the currency tipped their economies into full-scale financial crises, illustrate
how dangerous exchange-rate targeting can be for emerging market countries. Indeed, the fact that
an exchange-rate target in these countries leaves them more prone to financial fragility and financial
crises, with potentially catastrophic costs to their economies, suggests that exchange-rate targeting
in emerging market countries is highly problematic.
An additional disadvantage of an exchange-rate target is that it can weaken the accountability
of policymakers, particularly in emerging market countries, because it eliminates an important signal
that can help keep monetary policy from becoming too expansionary. In industrialized countries, and
particularly in the United States, the bond market provides an important signal about the stance of
monetary policy. Overly expansionary monetary policy or strong political pressure to engage in
overly expansionary monetary policy produces an inflation scare of the type described by Goodfriend
(1993) in which long-term bond prices tank and long-term rates spike upwards. In many countries,
particularly emerging market countries, the long-term bond market is essentially nonexistent. In these
countries, the daily fluctuations of the exchange rate can, like the bond market in the United States,
provide an early warning signal that monetary policy is overly expansionary. Thus, like the bond
market, the foreign exchange market can constrain policy from being too expansionary. Just as the
fear of a visible inflation scare constrains central bankers from pursuing overly expansionary monetary
policy and also constrains politicians from putting pressure on the central bank to engage in overly
10

expansionary monetary policy, fear of exchange rate depreciations can make overly expansionary
monetary policy less likely.
An exchange-rate target has the important disadvantage that it removes the signal that the
foreign exchange market provides about the stance of monetary policy on a daily basis. Under an
exchange-rate-target regime, central banks often pursue overly expansionary policies that are not
discovered until too late, when a successful speculative attack has gotten underway. The problem
of lack of accountability of the central bank under an exchange-rate-target regime is particularly acute
in emerging market countries where the balance sheets of the central banks are not as transparent as
in developed countries, thus making it harder to ascertain the central bank's policy actions. Although,
an exchange-rate peg appears to provide rules for central bank behavior that eliminates the timeinconsistency problem, it can actually make the time-inconsistency problem more severe because it
may actually make central bank actions less transparent and less accountable.
One solution to this problem is to strengthen the transparency and commitment to the
exchange-rate target by adopting a currency board as has been done in Argentina. Although the
stronger commitment to a fixed exchange rate may mean that a currency board is better able to stave
off a speculative attack against the domestic currency than an exchange-rate peg, it is not without its
problems. In the aftermath of the Mexican peso crisis, concern about the health of the Argentine
economy resulted in the public pulling their money out of the banks (deposits fell by 18%) and
exchanging their pesos for dollars, thus causing a contraction of the Argentine money supply. The
result was a sharp contraction in Argentine economic activity with real GDP dropping over 5% in
1995 and the unemployment rate jumping to above 15%. Only in 1996, with financial assistance from
international agencies such as the IMF, the World Bank and the Inter-American Development Bank,
which lent Argentina over $5 billion to help shore up its banking system, did the economy begin to
recover, and in recent years Argentina's economy has been performing quite well. Because the central
bank of Argentina had no control over monetary policy under the currency board system, it was
relatively helpless to counteract the contractionary monetary policy stemming from the public's
behavior. Furthermore, because the currency board does not allow the central bank to create money
and lend to the banks, it limits the capability of the central bank to act as a lender of last resort, and

11

other means must be used to cope with potential banking crises.5
Although a currency board is highly problematic, it may be the only way to break a country's
inflationary psychology and alter the political process so that it no longer leads to continuing bouts
of high inflation. This indeed was the rationale for putting a currency board into place in Argentina,
where past experience had suggested that stabilization programs with weaker commitment
mechanisms would not work. Thus, implementing a currency board might be a necessary step to
control inflation in countries that require a very strong disciplinary device.

III.
Monetary Targeting
In many countries, exchange-rate targeting is not an option because the country (or bloc of
countries) is too large or has no obvious country whose currency can serve as the nominal anchor.
Exchange-rate targeting is therefore clearly not an option for the United States, Japan or the
European Monetary Union. Thus these countries, by default, must look to other monetary policy
regimes, one of which is monetary targeting.
A major advantage of monetary targeting over exchange-rate targeting is that it enables a
central bank to adjust its monetary policy to cope with domestic considerations. It enables the central
bank to choose goals for inflation that may differ from those of other countries and allows some
response to output fluctuations. Also, like an exchange-rate target, information on whether the
central bank is achieving its target is known almost immediately -- announced figures for monetary
aggregates are typically reported periodically with very short time-lags, within a couple of weeks.
Thus, monetary targets can send almost immediate signals to both the public and markets about the
stance of monetary policy and the intentions of the policymakers to keep inflation in check. These
signals then can help fix inflation expectations and produce less inflation. Monetary targets also have
the advantage of being able to promote almost immediate accountability for monetary policy to keep
inflation low and so help constrain the monetary policymaker from falling into the time-inconsistency
5

See Mishkin (1998a) for a further discussion of what steps need to be taken to make the success of a
currency board more likely.

12

trap.
All of the above advantages of monetary aggregate targeting depend on two big ifs. The
biggest if is that there must be a strong and reliable relationship between the goal variable (inflation
or nominal income) and the targeted aggregate. If there is velocity instability, so that the relationship
between the monetary aggregate and the goal variable is weak, then monetary aggregate targeting
will not work. The weak relationship implies that hitting the target will not produce the desired
outcome on the goal variable and thus the monetary aggregate will no longer provide an adequate
signal about the stance of monetary policy. Thus, monetary targeting will not help fix inflation
expectations and be a good guide for assessing the accountability of the central bank. The breakdown
of the relationship between monetary aggregates and goal variables such as inflation and nominal
income certainly seems to have occurred in the United States (Stock and Watson, 1989, Friedman,
1995, Friedman and Kuttner, 1993 and 1996, and Estrella and Mishkin, 1997) and may also be a
problem even for countries that have continued to pursue monetary targeting.
The second if is that the targeted monetary aggregate must be well controlled by the central
bank. If not, the monetary aggregate may not provide as clear signals about the intentions of the
policymakers and thereby make it harder to hold them accountable. Although narrow monetary
aggregates are easily controlled by the central bank, it is far from clear that this is the case for broader
monetary aggregates like M2 or M3 (see B. Friedman [1995]).
These two problems with monetary targeting suggest one reason why even the most avid
monetary targeters do not rigidly hold to their target ranges, but rather allow undershoots and
overshoots for extended periods of time. Moreover, an unreliable relationship between monetary
aggregates and goal variables calls into question the ability of monetary targeting to serve as a
communications device that both increases the transparency of monetary policy and makes the central
bank accountable to the public.
In the 1970s, monetary targeting was adopted by several countries but its form was quite
different from Milton Friedman's suggestion for a constant-money-growth-rate rule in which the
chosen monetary aggregate is targeted to grow at a constant rate. Indeed, as emphasized by
Bernanke and Mishkin (1992), in all these countries the central banks never adhered to strict, ironclad
rules for monetary growth and in some of these countries monetary targeting was not pursued terribly
13

seriously. For example, the United States, Canada and the especially the United Kingdom, engaged
in substantial gameplaying in which they targeted multiple aggregates, allowed base drift, did not
announce targets on a regular schedule, used artificial means to bring down the growth of a targeted
aggregate (the corset in the U.K.), often overshot their targets without reversing the overshoot later
and often obscured why deviations from the monetary targets occurred.
Monetary targeting in the United States, Canada and the United Kingdom did not prove to
be successful in controlling inflation and there are two interpretations for why this was the case. One
is that because monetary targeting was not pursued seriously, it never had a chance to be successful.
Second is that growing instability of the relationship between monetary aggregates and goal variables
such as inflation (or nominal income) meant that this strategy was doomed to failure and indeed was
not pursued seriously because to do so would have been a mistake. By the early 1980s, it was
becoming very clear that the relationship between monetary aggregates and inflation and nominal
income had broken down and all three countries formally abandoned monetary targeting. Or as
attributed to John Crow, but actually said by Gerald Bouey, both former governors of the Bank of
Canada, "We didn't abandon monetary aggregates, they abandoned us."
The two countries which have officially engaged in monetary targeting for over twenty years
starting at the end of 1974 have been Germany and Switzerland. The success of monetary policy in
these two countries in controlling inflation is the reason that monetary targeting still has strong
advocates and is under consideration as the official policy regime for the European Central Bank.
The key fact about monetary targeting regimes in Germany and Switzerland is that the
targeting regimes are very far from a Friedman-type monetary targeting rule in which a monetary
aggregate is kept on a constant-growth-rate path and is the primary focus of monetary policy. As
Otmar Issing, currently the Chief Economist of the Bundesbank has noted (Issing 1996, p. 120), "One
of the secrets of success of the German policy of money-growth targeting was that ... it often did not
feel bound by monetarist orthodoxy as far as its more technical details were concerned." Monetary
targeting in Germany and Switzerland should instead be seen primarily as a method of communicating
the strategy of monetary policy that focuses on long-run considerations and the control of inflation.

As is emphasized in Neumann and von Hagen (1993), Bernanke and Mishkin (1992), Mishkin
14

and Posen (1997) and our forthcoming book, Bernanke, Laubach, Mishkin and Posen (1999), the
calculation of monetary target ranges is a very public exercise. First and foremost, a numerical
inflation goal is prominently featured in the setting of target ranges. Then with estimates of potential
output growth and velocity trends, a quantity-equation framework is used to back out the target
growth rate for the monetary aggregate.

Second, monetary targeting, far from being a rigid

policy rule, has been quite flexible in practice. The target ranges for money growth are missed on the
order of fifty percent of the time, often because the Bundesbank's and the Swiss National Bank's
concern about other objectives, including output and exchange rates.6 Furthermore, the Bundesbank
has demonstrated its flexibility by allowing its inflation goal to vary over time and to converge slowly
to the long-run inflation goal quite gradually.
When the Bundesbank first set its monetary targets at the end of 1974, it announced a
medium-term inflation goal of 4%, well above what it considered to be an appropriate long-run goal
for inflation. It clarified that this medium-term inflation goal differed from the long-run goal by
labelling it the "unavoidable rate of price increase". Its gradualist approach to reducing inflation led
to a period of nine years before the medium-term inflation goal was considered to be consistent with
price stability. When this occurred at the end of 1984, the medium-term inflation goal was renamed
the "normative rate of price increases" and was set at 2% and has continued at this level since then.
The Bundesbank has also responded to supply shocks by raising its medium-term inflation goal:
specifically it raised the unavoidable rate of price increase from 3.5% to 4% in the aftermath of the
second oil price shock in 1980.
Third, the monetary targeting regimes in both Germany and Switzerland have demonstrated
a strong commitment to the communication of the strategy to the general public. The money-growth
targets are continually used as a framework for explanation of the monetary policy strategy and both
the Bundesbank and the Swiss National Bank expend tremendous effort, both in their publications
and in frequent speeches by central bank officials, to communicate to the public what the central bank
is trying to achieve. Indeed, given that both central banks frequently miss their money-growth targets
by significant amounts, their monetary-targeting frameworks are best viewed as a mechanism for

6

See Von Hagen (1995), Neumann (1996), Bernanke and Mihov (1996), Clarida and Gertler (1997),
Mishkin and Posen (1997) and Bernanke, Laubach, Mishkin and Posen (1999).

15

transparently communicating how monetary policy is being directed to achieve their inflation goals
and as a means for increasing the accountability of the central bank.
Germany's monetary-targeting regime has been quite successful in producing low inflation and
its success has been envied by many other countries, explaining why it was chosen as the anchor
country for the Exchange Rate Mechanism. An important success story, discussed extensively in
Mishkin and Posen (1997) and Bernanke, Laubach, Mishkin and Posen (1999), occurred in the
aftermath of German reunification in 1990. Despite a temporary surge in inflation stemming from the
terms of reunification, high wage demands and the fiscal expansion, the Bundesbank was able to keep
these one-off effects from becoming embedded in the inflation process, and by 1995, inflation fell
back down below the Bundesbank's normative inflation goal of 2%.
One potentially serious criticism of German monetary targeting, however, is that, as
demonstrated by Clarida and Gertler (1997), the Bundesbank has reacted asymmetrically to target
misses, raising interest rates in response to overshooting of the money-growth target, but choosing
not to lower interest rates in response to an undershooting. This suggests that the Bundesbank may
not be sufficiently concerned about undershoots of its normative inflation goal. Arguably this might
have caused the Bundesbank to be overly tight in its monetary policy stance in the mid 1990s when
German inflation fell below the 2% normative goal, which not only led to an unnecessary increase in
unemployment in Germany, but also in countries tied to the deutsche mark, such as France.
Monetary targeting in Switzerland has been more problematic in Switzerland than in Germany,
suggesting the difficulties of targeting monetary aggregates in a small open economy which also
underwent substantial changes in the institutional structure of its money markets. In the face of a
40% trade-weighted appreciation of the Swiss franc from the fall of 1977 to the fall of 1978, the
Swiss National Bank decided that the country could not tolerate this high a level of the exchange rate.
Thus, in the fall of 1978 the monetary targeting regime was abandoned temporarily, with a shift from
a monetary target to an exchange-rate target until the spring of 1979, when monetary targeting was
reintroduced although it was not announced. Furthermore, when the return to monetary targeting
was formally announced in 1980, the Swiss National Bank deemed it necessary to switch the
monetary aggregate targeted from M1 to the monetary base.
The period from 1989 to 1992 was also not a happy one for Swiss monetary targeting because
16

as stated by the Chief Economist of the Swiss National Bank, Georg Rich, "the SNB [Swiss National
Bank} failed to maintain price stability after it successfully reduced inflation," (Rich 1997, p. 115,
emphasis in original). The substantial overshoot of inflation from 1989 to 1992, reaching levels above
5%, was due to two factors. The first is that the strength of the Swiss franc from 1985 to 1987
caused the Swiss National Bank to allow the monetary base to grow at a rate greater than the 2%
target in 1987 and then raised the money-growth target to 3% for 1988. The second arose from the
introduction of a new interbank payment system, the Swiss Interbank Clearing (SIC) and a wideranging revision of the commercial banks' liquidity requirements in 1988. The result of the shocks
to the exchange rate and the shift in the demand for monetary base arising from the above institutional
changes created a serious problem for its targeted aggregate. As the 1988 year unfolded, it became
clear that the Swiss National Bank had guessed wrong in predicting the effects of these shocks so that
the demand for monetary base fell by more than the predicted amount, resulting in monetary policy
that was too easy even though the monetary target was undershot. The result was a subsequent rise
in inflation to above the 5% level.
The result of these problems with monetary targeting has resulted in a substantially loosening
of the monetary targeting regime in Switzerland. The Swiss National Bank recognized that its
money-growth targets were of diminished utility as a means of signaling the direction of monetary
policy. As a result its announcement at the end of 1990 of the medium-term growth path of was quite
ambiguous because it did not specify a horizon for the target or the starting point of the growth path.
Eventually the Bank specified the time horizon of the horizon was a period of three to five years and
it was not till the end of 1992 that the Bank specified the basis of the starting point for the expansion
path. Finally at the end of 1994, the Bank announced a new medium-term path for money base
growth for the period 1995 to 1999, thus retroactively revealing that the horizon of the first path was
also five years. Clearly, the Swiss National Bank has moved to a much more flexible framework in
which hitting one-year targets for money base growth has been abandoned. Nevertheless, Swiss
monetary policy has continued to be successful in controlling inflation, with inflation rates falling back
down below the 1% level after the temporary bulge in inflation from 1989-1992.
There are two key lessons our discussion of German and Swiss monetary targeting. First, a
targeting regime can restrain inflation in the longer run, even when the regime permits substantial
17

target misses. Thus adherence to a rigid policy rule has not been found to be necessary to obtain
good inflation outcomes. Second, the key reason why monetary targeting has been reasonably
successful in these two countries, despite frequent target misses, is that the objectives of monetary
policy are clearly stated and both the Bundesbank and the Swiss National Bank actively engage in
communicating the strategy of monetary policy to the public, thereby enhancing transparency of
monetary policy and accountability of the central bank.
As we will see in the next section, these key elements of a successful targeting regime -flexibility, transparency and accountability - are also important elements in inflation-targeting regimes.
Thus, as suggested by Bernanke and Mishkin (1997), German and Swiss monetary policy is actually
closer in practice to inflation targeting than it is to Friedman-like monetary targeting, and thus might
best be thought of as "hybrid" inflation targeting.

IV.
Inflation Targeting
Given the breakdown of the relationship between monetary aggregates and goal variables such
as inflation, many countries have recently adopted inflation targeting as their monetary policy regime.
New Zealand was the first country to formally adopt inflation targeting in 1990, with Canada
following in 1991, the United Kingdom in 1992, Sweden in 1993, Finland in 1993, Australia in 1994
and Spain in 1994. Israel and Chile have also adopted a form of inflation targeting.
Inflation targeting involves several elements: 1) public announcement of medium-term
numerical targets for inflation; 2) an institutional commitment to price stability as the primary, longrun goal of monetary policy and to achievement of the inflation goal; 3) an information inclusive
strategy, with a reduced role for intermediate targets such as money growth; 4) increased
transparency of the monetary policy strategy through communication with the public and the markets
about the plans and objectives of monetary policymakers; and 5) increased accountability of the

18

central bank for attaining its inflation objectives.7
Inflation targeting has several important advantages. In contrast to exchange-rate targeting,
but like monetary targeting, inflation targeting enables monetary policy to focus on domestic
considerations and to respond to shocks to the domestic economy. Inflation targeting also has the
advantage that velocity shocks are largely irrelevant because the monetary policy strategy no longer
relies on a stable money-inflation relationship. Indeed, an inflation target allows the monetary
authorities to use all available information, and not just one variable, to determine the best settings
for monetary policy.
Inflation targeting, like exchange-rate targeting, also has the key advantage that it is readily
understood by the public and is thus highly transparent. Monetary targets are less likely to be easily
understood by the public than inflation targets, and if the relationship between monetary aggregates
and the inflation goal variable is subject to unpredictable shifts, as has occurred in many countries
including a long-standing monetary targeter such as Switzerland, then monetary targets lose their
transparency because they are no longer able to accurately signal the stance of monetary policy.
Because an explicit numerical inflation target increases the accountability of the central bank,
inflation targeting also has the potential to reduce the likelihood that the central bank will fall into the
time-inconsistency trap in which it tries to expand output and employment by pursuing overly
expansionary monetary policy. But since time-inconsistency is more likely to come from political
pressures on the central bank to engage in overly expansionary monetary policy, a key advantage of
inflation targeting is that it can help focus the political debate on what a central bank can do in the
long-run -- that is, control inflation -- rather than what it cannot do -- raise economic growth and the
number of jobs permanently through expansionary monetary policy. Thus inflation targeting has the
potential to reduce political pressures on the central bank to pursue inflationary monetary policy and
thereby reduce the likelihood of time-inconsistent policymaking.
Despite the rhetoric about pursuing "price stability", in practice all the inflation-targeting
countries have chosen to target the inflation rate rather than the level of prices per se. In addition,

7

Detailed analyses of experiences with inflation targeting can be found in Goodhart and Vinals (1994),
Leiderman and Svensson (1995), Haldane (1995), McCallum (1996), Mishkin and Posen (1997) and Bernanke,
Laubach, Mishkin and Posen (1999).

19

all the inflation targeters have chosen midpoints for their inflation target to be substantially above
zero, and above reasonable estimates of possible upward measurement bias in the inflation rates
calculated from consumer price indices. For example, currently New Zealand has the lowest midpoint
for an inflation target, 1.5%, while Canada and Sweden set the midpoint of their inflation target at
2%; the United Kingdom, Australia and Spain currently have their midpoints at 2.5%, while Israel
is at 8.5%. It is important to note that even Germany, considered to be one of the most resolute
opponents of inflation in the world, sets its long-run inflation goal at 2% for many years (changed to
1.5 to 2% in December 1996), right in the middle of the pack for inflation targeters.
The decision by inflation targeters (and hybrid targeters like Germany) to choose inflation
targets well above zero and not price level targets reflects monetary policymakers concerns that too
low inflation, or particularly low inflation, can have substantial negative effects on real economic
activity.8 There are particularly valid reasons for fearing deflation, including the possibility that it
might promote financial instability and precipitate a severe economic contraction (see Mishkin, 1991
and 1997). Indeed, deflation has been associated with deep recessions or even depressions, as in the
1930s, and the recent deflation in Japan has been one factor that has weakened the financial system
and the economy. Targeting inflation rates of above zero makes periods of deflation less likely. The
evidence on inflation expectations from surveys and interest rate levels (Almeida and Goodhart, 1998,
Laubach and Posen (1997) and Bernanke, Laubach, Posen and Mishkin, 1999) suggest that
maintaining a target for inflation above zero (but not too far above) for an extended period does not
lead to instability in inflation expectations or to a decline in the central bank's credibility.
Another key feature of inflation-targeting regimes is that they do not ignore traditional
stabilization goals. Central bankers responsible in inflation-targeting countries continue to express
their concern about fluctuations in output and employment, and the ability to accommodate short-run
stabilization goals to some degree is built into all inflation-targeting regimes. All inflation-targeting

8

For example, Akerlof, Dickens and Perry (1996) argue that inflation below 2% can lead to higher
unemployment because of downward rigidities in wages. However, as pointed out in Groshen and Schweitzer
(1996), Akerlof, Dickens and Perry (1996) do not take into account forces that operate in the opposite
direction, that is, that high and variable inflation rates may increase the noise in relative wages, reducing their
information content and hence the efficiency of the process by which workers are allocated across occupations
and industries. In other words, higher inflation can represent "sand" as well as "grease" in the labor market.

20

countries have been willing to take a gradualist approach to disinflation in order to minimize output
declines by lowering medium-term inflation targets towards the long-run goal slowly over time.
In addition, many inflation targeters, particularly the Bank of Canada, have emphasized that
the floor of the target range should be emphasized every bit as much as the ceiling, thus helping to
stabilize the real economy when there are negative aggregate demand shocks. Indeed, inflation
targets can increase the flexibility of the central bank to respond to declines in aggregate spending
because declines in aggregate demand that cause the inflation rate to fall below the floor of the target
range will automatically stimulate the central bank to loosen monetary policy without fearing that its
action will trigger a rise in inflation expectations.
Another element of flexibility in inflation-targeting regimes is that deviations from inflation
targets are routinely allowed in response to supply shocks. First, the price index on which the official
inflation targets are based is often defined to exclude or moderate the effects of "supply shocks;" for
example, the officially targeted price index may exclude some combination of food and energy prices,
indirect tax changes, terms-of-trade shocks, and the direct effects of interest rate changes on the index
(for example, through imputed rental costs). Second, following (or in anticipation) of a supply shock,
such as a rise in the value-added tax, the normal procedure is for the central bank first to deviate from
its planned policies as needed and then to explain the reasons for its action to the public. New
Zealand, on the other hand, has an explicit escape clause in its targeting regime which the central bank
uses to justify such actions, although it has also permitted target deviations on a more ad hoc basis.
Inflation-targeting regimes also put great stress making policy transparent -- policy that is
clear, simple, and understandable -- and on regular communication with the public. The central banks
have frequent communications with the government, some mandated by law and some in response
to informal inquiries, and their officials take every opportunity to make public speeches on their
monetary policy strategy. These channels are also commonly used in countries that have not adopted
inflation targeting, Germany and the United States being prominent examples, but inflation-targeting
central banks have taken public outreach a step further: not only have they engaged in extended
public information campaigns, even engaging in the distribution of glossy brochures, but they have
engaged in publication of Inflation Report type documents (originated by the Bank of England).
The publication of Inflation Reports is particularly noteworthy because these documents
21

depart from the usual, dull-looking, formal reports of central banks to take on the best elements of
textbook writing (fancy graphics, use of boxes) in order to better communicate with the public. An
excellent description of the shift in emphasis in these reports is reflected in the following quote from
the Bank of Canada.

The new Monetary Policy Report will be designed to bring increased transparency
and accountability to monetary policy. It will measure our performance in terms of
the Bank's targets for controlling inflation and will examine how current economic
circumstances and monetary conditions in Canada are likely to affect future inflation.
(Bank of Canada, 1995, p. 7)

The above channels of communication are used by central banks in inflation-targeting
countries to explain the following to the general public, financial market participants and the
politicians: 1) the goals and limitations of monetary policy, including the rationale for inflation targets;
2) the numerical values of the inflation targets and how they were determined, 3) how the inflation
targets are to be achieved, given current economic conditions; and 4) reasons for any deviations from
targets. These communication efforts have improved private-sector planning by reducing uncertainty
about monetary policy, interest rates and inflation; they have promoted public debate of monetary
policy, in part by educating the public about what a central bank can and cannot achieve; and they
have helped clarify the responsibilities of the central bank and of politicians in the conduct of
monetary policy.
Another key feature of inflation-targeting regimes is the tendency toward increased
accountability of the central bank. Indeed, transparency and communication go hand in hand with
increased accountability. The strongest case of accountability of a central bank in an inflationtargeting regime is in New Zealand, where the government has the right to dismiss the Reserve Bank's
governor if the inflation targets are breached, even for one quarter. In other inflation-targeting
countries, the central bank's accountability is less formalized. Nevertheless, the transparency of policy
associated with inflation targeting has tended to make the central bank highly accountable to both the
public and the government. Sustained success in the conduct of monetary policy as measured against
22

a pre-announced and well-defined inflation target can be instrumental in building public support for
a central bank's independence and for its policies. This building of public support and accountability
occurs even in the absence of a rigidly defined and legalistic standard of performance evaluation and
punishment.
Two remarkable examples illustrate the benefits of transparency and accountability in the
inflation-targeting framework.9 The first occurred in Canada in 1996, when the president of the
Canadian Economic Association made a speech criticizing the Bank of Canada for pursuing monetary
policy that he claimed was too contractionary. His speech sparked off a widespread public debate.
In countries not pursuing inflation targeting, such debates often degenerate into calls for the
immediate expansion of monetary policy with little reference to the long-run consequences of such
a policy change. In this case, however, the very existence of inflation targeting channeled the debate
into a substantive discussion over what should be the appropriate target for inflation, with both the
Bank and its critics obliged to make explicit their assumptions and estimates of the costs and benefits
of different levels of inflation.

Indeed, the debate and the Bank of Canada's record and

responsiveness led to increased support for the Bank of Canada, with the result that criticism of the
Bank and its conduct of monetary policy was not a major issue in the 1997 elections as it had been
before the 1993 elections.
The second example occurred upon the granting of operational independence to the Bank of
England on May 6, 1997. Prior to that date, it was the government, as represented by the Chancellor
of the Exchequer (equivalent to the finance minister or the secretary of the treasury), that controlled
the decision to set monetary policy instruments, while the Bank of England was relegated to acting
as the government's counterinflationary conscience.

On May 6, the new Chancellor of the

Exchequer, Gordon Brown, announced that the Bank of England would henceforth have the
responsibility for setting both the base interest rate and short-term exchange-rate interventions. Two
factors were cited by Chancellor Brown that justify the government's decision: first was the Bank's
successful performance over time as measured against an announced clear target; second was the
increased accountability that an independent central bank is exposed to under an inflation-targeting

9

Both are discussed more extensively in Mishkin and Posen (1997) and Bernanke, Laubach, Mishkin and
Posen (1999).

23

framework, making the Bank more responsive to political oversight. The granting of operational
independence to the Bank of England occurred because it would now be operating under a monetary
policy regime that ensures that monetary policy goals cannot diverge from the interests of society for
extended periods of time, yet monetary policy can be insulated from short-run political considerations.
An important benefit of an inflation-targeting regime is therefore that it makes it more palatable to
have an independent central bank which focuses on long-run objectives, but which is consistent with
a democratic society because it is accountable.
The performance of inflation-targeting regimes has been quite good. Inflation-targeting
countries seem to have significantly reduced both the rate of inflation and inflation expectations
beyond that which would likely have occurred in the absence of inflation targets.10 Furthermore, once
inflation is down, it has stayed down; following disinflations, the inflation rate in targeting countries
has not bounced back up during subsequent cyclical expansions of the economy.
Also inflation targeting seems to ameliorate the effects of inflationary shocks. For example,
shortly after adopting inflation targets in February 1991, the Bank of Canada was faced with a new
goods and services tax (GST) -- an indirect tax similar to a value-added tax -- an adverse supply
shock that in earlier periods might have led to a ratcheting up in inflation. Instead the tax increase
led to only a one-time increase in the price level; it did not generate second- and third-round rises in
wages in prices that would led to a persistent rise in the inflation rate. Another example is the
experience of the United Kingdom and Sweden following their departures from the ERM exchangerate pegs in 1992. In both cases, devaluation would normally have stimulated inflation because of
the direct effects on higher export and import prices and the subsequent effects on wage demands and
price-setting behavior. Again it seems reasonable to attribute the lack of inflationary response in
these episodes to adoption of inflation targeting, which short-circuited the second- and later-round
effects and helped to focus public attention on the temporary nature of the devaluation shocks.
Indeed, one reason why inflation targets were adopted in both countries was to achieve exactly this

10

Laubach and Posen (1997) and Bernanke, Laubach, Mishkin and Posen (1999) find that inflation
expectations fell subsequent to adoption of inflation targeting and that inflation remained lower after adoption
of inflation targeting than would have been forecast using VARs estimated with data from the period before
inflation targeting started.

24

result.
Although inflation targeting does appear to be successful in moderating and controlling
inflation, the likely effects of inflation targeting on the real side of the economy are more ambiguous.
Economic theorizing often suggests that a commitment by a central bank to reduce and control
inflation should improve its credibility and thereby reduce both inflation expectations and the output
losses associated with disinflation. Experience and econometric evidence (e.g., see Almeida and
Goodhart, 1998, Laubach and Posen, 1997, Bernanke, Laubach, Mishkin and Posen, 1999) does not
support this prediction, however. Inflation expectations do not immediately adjust downward
following the adoption of inflation targeting. Furthermore, there appears to be little if any reduction
in the output loss associated with disinflation, the sacrifice ratio, among countries adopting inflation
targeting.
A common concern raised about inflation targeting is that it will lead to low and unstable
growth in output and employment. Although inflation reduction is associated with below-normal
output during disinflationary phases in inflation-targeting regimes, once low inflation levels have been
achieved, output and employment return to levels at least as high as they were previously. A
conservative conclusion is that, once, low inflation is achieved, inflation targeting is not harmful to
the real economy. Given the strong economic growth after disinflation was achieved in many
countries that have adopted inflation targets, New Zealand being one outstanding example, a case can
even be made that inflation targeting promotes real economic growth in addition to controlling
inflation.
Some economists, such as Friedman and Kuttner (1996), have criticized inflation targeting
because they believe that it imposes a rigid rule on monetary policymakers that does not allow them
enough discretion to respond to unforeseen circumstances. This criticism is one that has featured
prominently in the rules-versus-discretion debate. For example, policymakers in countries that
adopted monetary targeting did not foresee the breakdown of the relationship between these
aggregates and goal variables such as nominal spending or inflation. With rigid adherence to a
monetary rule, the breakdown in their relationship could have been disastrous. However, the
interpretation of inflation targeting as a rule is incorrect and stems from a confusion that has been
created by the rules-versus-discretion debate. In my view, the traditional dichotomy between rules
25

and discretion can be highly misleading. Useful policy strategies exist that are "rule-like" in that they
involve forward-looking behavior which constrains policymakers from systematically engaging in
policies with undesirable long-run consequences, thereby avoiding the time-inconsistency problem.
These policies would best be described as "constrained discretion."
Indeed, inflation targeting can be described exactly in this way. As emphasized above,
inflation targeting as actually practiced is very far from a rigid rule. First, inflation targeting does not
provide simple and mechanical instructions as to how the central bank should conduct monetary
policy. Rather, inflation targeting requires that the central bank use all available information to
determine what are the appropriate policy actions to achieve the inflation target. Unlike simple policy
rules, inflation targeting never requires the central bank to ignore information and focus solely on one
key variable. Second, inflation targeting as practiced contains a substantial degree of policy
discretion.

As we have seen, inflation targets have been modified depending on economic

circumstances. Furthermore, central banks under inflation-targeting regimes have left themselves
considerable scope to respond to output growth and fluctuations through several devices.
However, despite its flexibility, inflation targeting is not an exercise in policy discretion as
subject to the time-inconsistency problem. The strategy of hitting an inflation target, by its very
nature, forces policymakers to be forward looking rather than narrowly focused on current economic
conditions. Further, through its transparency, an inflation-targeting regime increases the central
bank's accountability, which constrains discretion so that the time-inconsistency problem is
ameliorated.

V.
Monetary Policy With an Implicit
But not an Explicit Nominal Anchor
Several countries in recent years, most notably the United States, have achieved excellent
macroeconomic performance (including low and stable inflation) without using an explicit nominal
anchor such as a target for the exchange rate, a monetary aggregate target, or inflation. Although in
26

the U.S. case, no explicit strategy has been articulated, a coherent strategy for the conduct of
monetary policy exists nonetheless. This strategy involves an implicit, but not an explicit nominal
anchor in the form of an overriding concern by the Federal Reserve to control inflation in the long
run. In addition it involves forward-looking behavior in which there is careful monitoring for signs
of future inflation, coupled with periodic "preemptive strikes" by monetary policy against the threat
of inflation.
As has been emphasized by Milton Friedman, monetary policy effects have long lags. In
industrialized countries with a history of low inflation, the inflation process seems to have tremendous
inertia: estimates from large macroeconometric models of the U.S. economy, for example, suggest
that monetary policy takes over a year to affect output and over two years to have a significant
impact on inflation. For other countries whose economies respond more quickly to exchange rate
changes or that have experienced highly variable inflation, and therefore have more flexible prices,
the lags may be shorter.
The presence of long lags means that monetary policy can not wait until inflation has already
reared its ugly head before responding. If the central bank waited until overt signs of inflation
appeared, it would already be too late to maintain stable prices, at least not without a severe
tightening of policy: inflation expectations would already be embedded in the wage- and price-setting
process, creating an inflation momentum that will be hard to halt. Indeed, inflation becomes much
harder to control once it has been allowed to gather momentum because higher inflation expectations
become ingrained in various types of contracts and pricing agreements.
In order to prevent inflation from getting started, monetary policy therefore needs to be
forward-looking and preemptive: that is, depending on the lags from monetary policy to inflation,
monetary policy needs to act well before inflationary pressures appear in the economy. For example,
if it takes roughly two years for monetary policy to have a significant impact on inflation, then, even
if inflation is quiescent currently and yet, with an unchanged stance of monetary policy, policymakers
see inflation rising over the next two years, actions need to be taken today to tighten monetary policy
to prevent the inflationary surge.
This preemptive monetary policy strategy is clearly also a feature of inflation-targeting
regimes because monetary policy instruments are adjusted to take account of the long lags in their
27

effects in order to hit future inflation targets. However, the policy regime in the United States, which
does not have a nominal anchor and so might best be described as a "just do it" policy regime, differs
from inflation targeting in that it does not officially have a nominal anchor and is much less
transparent in its monetary policy strategy.
The main argument for the "just do it" strategy is, simply its demonstrated success. The
Federal Reserve has been able to bring down inflation in the United States from double digit levels
in 1980 to around the 3% level by the end of 1991; since then, inflation has been stable at about that
level or a bit below it. The Fed conducted a successful preemptive strike against inflation from
February 1994 until early 1995, when in several steps it raised the federal funds rate for 3% to 6%
even though inflation was not increasing during this period. The subsequent lengthy expansion has
brought unemployment down below 5%, a level not seen since the 1960s, and despite the business
expansion, CPI inflation actually has even fallen to a level near 2%. In addition, the overall growth
rate of the U.S. has continued to remain strong. Indeed, the performance of the U.S. economy has
become the envy of the industrialized world in the 1990s.

Given the success of the "just do it"

strategy, a natural question to ask is why countries such as the United States should consider other
monetary policy strategies which would change something that has already worked well, especially
given the inability to know what types of challenges will confront monetary policy in the future: In
other words, "If it ain't broke, why fix it?" The answer is that the "just do it" strategy has some
disadvantages that may cause it to work less well in the future.
An important disadvantage of the "just do it" strategy is a lack of transparency. The constant
guessing game about the Fed's intentions created by its close-mouthed approach creates unnecessary
volatility in financial markets and arouses uncertainty among producers and the general public about
the future course of inflation and output as well. Furthermore, the opacity of its policymaking is
hardly conducive to making the Federal Reserve accountable to Congress and the general public,
because there are no predetermined criteria for judging its performance.
As a result, the central bank is more susceptible to the time-inconsistency problem, whereby it may
pursue short-term objectives at the expense of long-term ones.
The lack of an explicit nominal anchor is also a potential problem for the "just do it" strategy:
For example, it may be that the Fed risks greater exposure than is necessary to "inflation scares" -28

the spontaneous increases in inflation fears described by Goodfriend (1993) that can become selfjustifying if accommodated by the Fed. In addition, this strategy may make it harder for the Fed to
contain the medium-term effects of a supply shock because the absence of a nominal anchor makes
inflation expectations more susceptible to rise in the face when this occurs.
Probably the most serious problem with the "just do it" approach is strong dependence on the
preferences, skills, and trustworthiness of the individuals in charge of the central bank. In the United
Sates, Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan and other Federal Reserve officials have
emphasized forward-looking policies and inflation control, with great success so far. The Fed's
prestige and credibility with the public have risen accordingly. But the Fed's leadership will eventually
change, and there is no guarantee that the new team will be committed to the same approach. Nor
is there any guarantee that the relatively good working relationship now existing between the Fed and
the executive branches will continue. In a different economic or political environment, the Fed might
face strong pressure to engage in over expansionary policies, raising the possibility that timeinconsistency may become a more serious problem. In the past, after a successful period of low
inflation, the Federal Reserve has reverted to inflationary monetary policy -- the 1970s are one
example -- and without an explicit nominal anchor, this could certainly happen again in the future.
The political problem with the U.S. regime in which there is no explicit nominal anchor is
illustrated by events during the spring of 1997. At that time, following several previous reductions
of the federal funds rate, the Federal Reserve reversed its policy and hiked the target for the funds
rate by 25 basis points (one-quarter of a percentage point). Although that rise was quite modest,
particularly given the strong growth of the U.S. economy and the tight labor market at the time, it
provoked a storm of criticism, in Congress and elsewhere. Yet at about the same time, increases in
interest rates engineered by the Bank of England, an established inflation targeter, were received quite
calmly by the British public. Because of inflation targeting, it is plausible that the British public had
a better understanding of the long-run objectives being pursued by the monetary authorities, and
hence of the reason for their policy action, than the U.S. public. The absence of an explicit nominal
anchor and the accompanying transparency, may thus make it harder for the Federal Reserve to
contain inflation in the future if it undesirable shocks begin to propel inflation upward.

29

VI.
An Overall Assessment of the Different Monetary Regimes
In examining international experiences with different monetary policy regimes, we have
looked at four basic types of frameworks: 1) exchange-rate targeting, 2) monetary targeting, 3)
inflation targeting, and 4) monetary policy with an implicit but not an explicit nominal anchor. How
do these different monetary policy regimes stack up against each other? When might one monetary
regime be more effective in producing desirable economic outcomes than another?
Our discussion of exchange-rate targeting suggests that despite its advantages -- its ability to
directly lower inflation and inflation expectations, its provision of an automatic rule and a nominal
anchor that can avoid the time-inconsistency problem, and its simplicity and clarity -- this strategy can
be highly problematic. The usual criticisms are that exchange-rate targeting implies a loss of
independent monetary policy to respond to domestic considerations, increased transmission of shocks
from the anchor, foreign country to the domestic economy, and increased likelihood of costly
speculative attacks. However, for emerging market countries there are two additional major
disadvantages that make exchange-rate targeting potentially dangerous: it increases the likelihood
of a full-fledged financial crisis stemming from a successful speculative attack that can be devastating
to the economy, and it can weaken accountability of policymakers because signals from the foreign
exchange market are no longer available.
Given the above disadvantages, when might exchange-rate targeting make sense? In
industrialized countries, the biggest cost to exchange-rate targeting is the loss of an independent
monetary policy to deal with domestic considerations. If an independent, domestic monetary policy
can be conducted responsibly, this can be a serious cost indeed, as the comparison between the
experience of France and the United Kingdom indicate. However, not all industrialized countries
have found that they are capable of conducting their own monetary policy successfully, either because
of the lack of independence of the central bank or because political pressures on the central bank lead
to an inflation bias in monetary policy. In these cases, giving up independent control of domestic
monetary policy may not be a great loss when the exchange-rate is targeted, and yet the gain from
an exchange-rate target of having monetary policy determined by a better performing central bank
30

in the anchor country can be substantial. The case of Italy immediately comes to mind. It is not an
accident that the Italian public is the most favorable of all those in Europe to european monetary
union. The past record of Italian monetary policy has not been good and the Italian public recognizes
that having monetary policy controlled by more responsible outsiders has benefits that far outweigh
the costs of losing the ability to focus monetary policy on domestic considerations.
A second reason why industrialized countries might find it useful to target exchange rates is
because it serves another purpose, such as encouraging integration of the domestic economy with its
neighbors. Clearly this is the rationale for long-standing pegging of the exchange rate to the deutsche
mark by countries such as Austria and the Netherlands, and the more recent exchange-rate pegs in
the run-up to the European Monetary Union. The key point is that exchange-rate targeting for
industrialized is probably not the best monetary policy strategy for stabilization purposes unless
domestic monetary and political institutions are not conducive to good monetary policymaking or if
there are other important benefits of an exchange rate target that have nothing to do with
stabilization.
In the case of emerging market countries, exchange-rate targeting is highly problematic
because it can promote financial fragility. As we have seen recently in Mexico and East Asia,
exchange-rate targeting has been followed by disastrous financial crises which have devastated their
economies. However, in countries whose political and monetary institutions are particularly weak
and therefore have been experiencing continued bouts of hyperinflation, exchange-rate targeting may
be the only way to break inflationary psychology and stabilize the economy.

In this situation,

exchange-rate targeting is the stabilization policy of last resort.
However, targeting the exchange rate with only a weak and nontransparent commitment
mechanism, as most emerging market countries have done, has the potential to be disastrous. If
exchange-rate targeting is believed to be the only route possible to stabilize the economy, then an
emerging market country is probably best served by going all the way and adopting a currency board
in which the commitment to the fixed exchange rate is extremely strong and there is total transparency
to monetary policy because the actions of the central bank are automatic. However, as is discussed
further in Mishkin (1998a), a currency board is still a potentially dangerous monetary policy regime
which requires important institutional reforms in order to make it viable.
31

The second monetary policy regime discussed here, monetary targeting, has several attractive
features: in contrast to exchange-rate targeting, it allows a focus of monetary policy on domestic
considerations; it provides a nominal anchor that can help avoid the time-inconsistency problem; and
it can send almost immediate signals about the stance of monetary policy which can enhance
accountability. Supporters of monetary targeting also point out that Germany and Switzerland have
used this approach to control inflation over a substantial period of time.
The consideration of monetary targeting is not just academic since the Governing Council of
the European Central Bank (ECB) announced in October, 1998, that a component of its monetary
policy strategy is "a prominent role for money with a reference value for the growth of a monetary
aggregate." One of the key reasons why some form of monetary targeting is an element in the ECB's
announced strategy is that it European policymakers believe that it will enable the European Central
Bank to inherit some of the Bundesbank's credibility. This view has been expressed by the European
Monetary Institute (1997, p. 11), the precursor to the ECB: "the adoption of monetary targeting in
Stage Three (of the unification process) would offer the advantage of ensuring continuity with the
strategy of the EU central bank which has performed an anchor function in the ERM, in view of its
long-term track record of fighting inflation. Following a monetary targeting strategy might therefore
help the ESCB [European System of Central Banks] to inherit credibility from the start of its
operations."
However, our earlier discussion suggests several reasons why monetary targeting, especially
for the EMU may not work well. First, monetary aggregates are not a particularly useful guide for
monetary policy unless the relationship between monetary aggregates and inflation is strong and
reliable. A stable relationship between money and inflation is, in fact, quite unlikely to exist in the
fledgling EMU, since this relationship has not been particularly reliable in the past in most of the
constituent countries of the Union, including even Germany (Estrella and Mishkin, 1996).

The

Bundesbank has not been unaware of the instability of the money-inflation relationship, which helps
to explain why it has been willing to tolerate misses of its money-growth targets in half of the years
for which the targets have been set. Furthermore, the creation of the European Monetary Union and
the European System of Central Banks at the start of Stage Three, together with ongoing financial
deregulation and innovation, will cause major change in the operation of the European financial
32

system in coming years. Those changes will affect money and asset demands in unpredictable ways,
making it likely that the relationship between monetary aggregates and inflation in the Union as a
whole will be even more unstable than it has been in the individual member countries.
The second objection to the adoption of monetary targeting by the European Monetary Union
is that monetary targets are likely to prove a less effective vehicle of communication for the EMU
than they have for Germany and Switzerland. Despite frequent target misses, both the Bundesbank
and the Swiss National Bank are held in such high regard that they lose little by using the
announcement of monetary targets as the framework in which they explain their policy strategy,
despite the fact that their actual inflation targeting leads them to miss their stated monetary targets
so frequently. The European Central Bank, which will be starting from scratch, will not at the outset
command the credibility and anti-inflation reputation of the Bundesbank and the Swiss National Bank,
which are based primarily on strong political support for low inflation in those two countries and on
the demonstrated success of the two central banks in fighting inflation. Missing announced targets
for money growth may thus be far more problematic for the European Central Bank than it was for
the Bundesbank and the Swiss National Bank, because the public will be less willing to accept the
European Central Bank's explanations for these misses and declarations of anti-inflationary
determination at face value. Furthermore, in many European countries the public will have no
experience with a monetary policy focused on monetary aggregates, and thus may find the targets
harder to understand and less relevant to their daily lives than targets for inflation.
Inflation targeting, which is the newest of the monetary regimes studied here, has been gaining
popularity in recent years and has several major strengths. It enables monetary policy to focus on
domestic considerations as does monetary targeting, but is not subject to velocity shock problems;
it is readily understood and highly transparent; it allows flexibility and discretion in the conduct of
monetary policy , but because it increases the accountability of the central bank it constrains
discretion so that the time-inconsistency problem is ameliorated; and it helps shift the public debate
to a focus what monetary policy can do in the long run and thus helps reduce political pressure to
engage in time-inconsistent policies.
Inflation targeting is not without its problems, however. In contrast to exchange-rate and
monetary targeting, inflation is not easily controlled by the monetary authorities. This can be a
33

particularly severe problem for an emerging market country that is trying to bring down inflation from
a previously high level and so is more likely to experience large inflation forecast errors. This
suggests that hard targets from inflation might be worth phasing in only after there has been some
successful disinflation. This is exactly the strategy followed by Chile (see Morande and SchmidtHebbel, 1997) which adopted a weak form of inflation targeting in September 1990. Initially,
inflation targets were announced and interpreted as official inflation projections, rather than as hard
targets. However, over time as inflation fell, this procedure was changed and inflation targets came
to be viewed by the central bank and the markets as hard targets. Waiting to harden targets until after
some success has already been achieved on the inflation front, is also consistent with what inflationtargeting industrialized countries have done: in every case, inflation targeting was not implemented
until after substantial disinflation has previously been achieved (see Mishkin and Posen, 1997, and
Bernanke, Laubach, Mishkin and Posen, 1999).
Another potential problem with inflation targeting is that, because of the long lags of
monetary policy, inflation outcomes are revealed only after a substantial lag; thus inflation targeting
does not provide immediate signals to both the public and the markets about the stance of monetary
policy. However, we have seen that exchange-rate targets remove the ability of the foreign exchange
market to signal that overly expansionary monetary policies might be in place, while the signals
provided by monetary aggregates are unlikely to be very strong because of the instability of the
relationship between money and inflation.
In addition to "reference values" for monetary aggregates, the announced strategy of the
European Central Bank also includes a numerically explicit inflation goal of a year-on-year increase
of below 2%. Because the signals from monetary aggregates are even more likely to be weak when
the European Monetary Union comes into existence and a key element of any successful targeting
strategy is transparency and effective communication with the public, the European Central Bank is
likely to be better served by downgrading the attention to monetary aggregates and putting inflation
targets at the forefront instead.
But what about the need of the European Central Bank to inherit the mantle of the
Bundesbank, a monetary targeter of long standing? Doesn't this suggest that the European Central
Bank should adopt monetary targeting in order to provide continuity with the policies of the
34

Bundesbank, thereby inheriting the Bundesbank's credibility? There are indeed benefits for the
European Central Bank to be seen as following in the footsteps of the Bundesbank. However, as the
discussion here and the more detailed discussion in Mishkin and Posen (1997) and in our forthcoming
book, Bernanke, Laubach, Mishkin and Posen (1999) demonstrates, the Bundesbank's policy
framework is actually quite close to inflation targeting. Both frameworks have many characteristics
in common, including: a strong commitment to price stability; the specification of numerical inflation
goals (both in the medium term and the long term); accountability of the central bank for meeting the
goals; transparency of policy and effective communication with the public; a forward-looking
approach that takes into account the lags inherent in monetary policy; and flexibility to respond to
short-run economic developments. In short, in practice an inflation-targeting European Central Bank
would function very much like the monetary targeting Bundesbank, and the public could be actively
educated to understand this basic continuity. The differences that exist -- notably, the deemphasis
on money growth as the key piece of information for forecasting inflation -- favor the inflationtargeting approach.
The performance of inflation-targeting countries has been very good up to now, enabling them
to maintain low inflation rates, something they have not always been able to do in the past, while it
seems to improve the climate for economic growth after the initial disinflation phase is past.
However, inflation targeting is no panacea: it does not seem to enable countries to eliminate inflation
from their systems without cost, and anti-inflation credibility is not achieved immediately upon the
adoption of an inflation target. The evidence seems to suggest that the only way for an inflationtargeting central bank to earn credibility is the hard way: they have to earn it.
Another potential criticism of inflation targeting is that too much of a focus on inflation may
lead to excessive output fluctuations. For this reason, several economists have proposed that central
banks should target the growth rate of nominal GDP rather than inflation (Taylor, 1985; Hall and
Mankiw, 1994). Relative to inflation, nominal GDP growth has the advantage that it does put some
weight on output as well as prices in the policymaking process (although, as Hall and Mankiw, 1994,
pointed out, there is no reason that the one-to-one weighting of output growth and inflation implicit
in a nominal GDP target has to be the socially optimal one). With a nominal GDP target, a decline
in projected real output growth would automatically imply an increase in the central bank*s inflation
35

target, which would tend to be stabilizing because it would automatically lead to an easier monetary
policy. Cecchetti (1995) has presented simulations suggesting that policies directed to stabilize
nominal GDP growth should give better overall economic performance than targeting inflation would,
in part because of the difficulty of forecasting and controlling inflation.
Nominal GDP targeting is close in spirit to inflation targeting and might provide a reasonable
alternative. There are four reasons, however, why I believe that inflation targeting has advantages
over nominal GDP targeting. First, a nominal GDP target forces the central bank or the government
to announce a number for potential GDP growth. Such an announcement is highly problematic
because estimates of potential GDP growth are far from precise and change over time. Announcing
a specific number for potential GDP growth may thus indicate a certainty that policymakers may not
have and may also cause the public to mistakenly believe that this estimate is actually a fixed target
for potential GDP growth. Announcing a potential GDP growth number is likely to be political
dynamite because it opens policymakers to the criticism that they are willing to settle for growth rates
that the public many consider to be too low. Indeed, a nominal GDP target may lead to an accusation
that the central bank or the targeting regime is anti-growth, when the opposite is true because a low
inflation rate is a means to promote a healthy economy with high growth. In addition, if the estimate
for potential GDP growth is too high and becomes embedded in the public mind as a target, it can
lead to a positive inflation bias, as demonstrated in the model of Barro and Gordon (1983).
Second, information on prices is more timely and more frequently reported than data on
nominal GDP (and could be made even more so) -- a practical consideration that offsets some of the
theoretical appeal of nominal GDP as a target. Although collection of data on nominal GDP also
could be improved, measurement of nominal GDP requires data on current quantities as well as
current prices and this is perhaps intrinsically more difficult to accomplish in a timely manner.
Third, the concept of inflation in consumer prices is much better understood by the public than
the concept of nominal GDP, which can easily be confused with real GDP. Consequently, it seems
likely that communication with the public and accountability would be better served by using an
inflation rather than a nominal GDP growth target. While a significant number of central banks have
adopted inflation targeting, none to our knowledge has seriously considered adopting a nominal GDP
target.
36

Finally, as argued above, inflation targeting as it is actually practiced allows considerable
flexibility for policy in the short run. Thus it is doubtful that, in practice, nominal GDP targeting
would be more effective than inflation targeting in achieving short-run stabilization, and elements of
monetary policy tactics based on nominal GDP targeting could easily be built into an inflationtargeting regime. Inflation targeting, therefore, has almost all the benefits of nominal GDP targeting,
but does not suffer from the problems with nominal GDP targeting arising from potential confusion
about what nominal GDP is or political complications because nominal GDP requires announcement
of a potential GDP growth path.
The final monetary regime discussed in this paper is the "just do it" approach followed by the
United States in which there is an implicit, but not an explicit nominal anchor. The key argument for
this approach is that it has worked in the past and so "if it ain't broke, why fix it?. There are several
answers to this question.
First, the "just do it" strategy suffers from a lack of transparency which both leads to
confusion in the market place, a lack of accountability of the central bank, and a missed opportunity
to focus the public and politicians on the need for a long-run orientation of monetary policy. What
we have seen is that the existence of a targeting framework has more than once nudged the political
debate toward a longer-run perspective, in which the benefits of price stability are recognized. The
result has been less pressure on the monetary authorities to pursue ill-advised policies that provide
some temporary stimulus, but at the cost of higher inflation and impaired economic performance in
the long run.
Second, replacement of the "just do it" with an inflation-targeting approach would help to
depersonalize U.S. monetary policy. True, monetary policy has been excellent in recent years under
the tutelage of chairmen Volcker and Greenspan. Moreover, the current members of the FOMC have
demonstrated that they are convinced of the value of forward-looking monetary policy that focuses
on price stability. This state of affairs has not always prevailed, however, and may not always exist
in the future. Monetary policymakers are quite capable of "falling off the (anti-inflationary) wagon",
as the experience of the 1970s in the United States illustrates. Adoption of inflation targeting would
strengthen the central bank's commitment to the long-run goal of price stability and would make the
achievement of low inflation less dependent on the competence or convictions of a few individuals.
37

Third, the "just do it" approach has some inconsistencies with democratic principles.
Certainly there are good reasons, notably insulation from short-term political pressures, for the central
bank to have some degree of independence as the Federal Reserve currently does, and the evidence
does generally support central bank independence.11 Yet the practical economic arguments for central
bank independence coexist uneasily with the presumption that government policies should be made
democratically, rather than by an elite group (see Mishkin, 1998b). Indeed, some recent criticisms
of the Federal Reserve may have been prompted by the impression that the Fed, and particularly its
chairman, have become too powerful. Moving toward inflation targeting can make the U.S.
institutional framework for the conduct of monetary policy more consistent with democratic
principles and avoid some of the above problems. The inflation-targeting framework promotes the
accountability of the central bank to elected officials, who now have some responsibility for setting
the goals for monetary policy and then monitoring the economic outcomes. However, under inflation
targeting, as it has generally has been practiced, the central bank has complete control over
operational decisions, a requirement for it to be accountable for achieving its assigned objectives.
Thus inflation targeting helps to promote operational independence of the central bank. The example
of what happened in the United Kingdom in 1997 indicates how inflation targeting can reduce the
tensions between central-bank independence and democratic principles and promote central-bank
independence. When operational independence was granted to the Bank of England in May 1997,
the Chancellor of the Exchequer made it clear that this action had been made possible by the adoption
of an inflation-targeting regime, which had increased the transparency of policy and the accountability
of the Bank for achieving policy objectives set by the government.
It seems likely that U.S. monetary policy performance in the future could be improved by the
adoption of inflation targeting. Inflation targeting is not too far from the current policymaking
philosophy at the Federal Reserve, which has stressed the importance of price stability as the
overriding, long-run goal of monetary policy. Also a move to inflation targeting is consistent with

11

See Alesina and Summers (1988), Cukierman (1992) and Fischer (1994) among others. However, there
is some question whether causality runs from central bank independence to low inflation, or rather, whether
a third factor is involved such as the general public's preferences for low inflation that create both central bank
independence and low inflation (Posen, 1995).

38

recent steps by the Fed to increase the transparency of monetary policy, such as shortening the time
before the minutes of the FOMC meeting are released and the practice of announcing the FOMC's
decision about whether to change the target for the federal funds rates immediately after the
conclusion of the FOMC meeting. The current conditions for adoption of inflation targeting are
propitious: inflation has been low and stable for over five years; the public sees that the benefit of
a low inflation environment which has helped produce a balanced, long-lived economic expansion;
and the success of inflation targeting regimes in other industrialized countries is becoming increasingly
apparent. Moving to a more explicit nominal anchor, as with an inflation targeting regime, can help
lock in the low and stable inflation rate that the United States is currently experiencing, promoting
a more stable and successful monetary policy regime in the future.

VII.
Conclusions
This overview of the international experiences with different monetary policy regimes suggests
that transparency and accountability are crucial to constraining discretionary monetary policy so that
it produces desirable long-run outcomes. Because the devil is in the details in achieving transparency
and accountability, what strategy will work best in a country depends on its political, cultural and
economic institutions and its past history. The discussion here of the different international
experiences with monetary policy strategies will hopefully help provide guidance for policymakers
in particular countries as to which monetary policy strategy is more likely to produce low inflation,
a stable economic environment, and a healthy economy.

39

References

Akerlof, George, William Dickens, and George Perry. 1996. "The Macroeconomics of Low
Inflation." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, no. 1: 1-59.

Alesina, Alberto, and Lawrence H. Summers. 1993. "Central Bank Independence and
Macroeconomic Performance: Some Comparative Evidence." Journal of Money, Credit, and
Banking 25, no. 2 (May): 151-62.

Almeida, Alvaro, and Charles A. E. Goodhart. 1998. Does the Adoption of Inflation Targets Affect
Central Bank Behaviour? Unpublished paper, London School of Economics, January.

Bank of Canada. 1995. Monetary Policy Report.

Barro, Robert J., and David Gordon. 1983. "A Positive Theory of Monetary Policy in a Natural Rate
Model." Journal of Political Economy 91, no. 4 (August): 589-610.

Bernanke, B.S. 1983. "Non-Monetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the Propagation of the Great
Depression", American Economic Review, Vol. 73, pp. 257-76.
Bernanke, Ben S. 1983.

Bernanke, Ben S., and Ilian Mihov. 1997. "What Does the Bundesbank Target?" European Economic
Review 41, no. 6 (June): 1025-53.

Bernanke, Ben S., Thomas Laubach, Adam S. Posen and Frederic S. Mishkin. 1999. Inflation
Targeting: Lessons from the International Experience (Princeton University Press: Princeton, N.J.)

Bernanke, Ben S., and Frederic S. Mishkin. 1992. "Central Bank Behavior and the Strategy of
40

Monetary Policy: Observations from Six Industrialized Countries." In Olivier Blanchard and Stanley
Fischer, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 1992, 183-238. Cambridge: MIT Press.

Bernanke, Ben S., and Frederic S. Mishkin. 1997. "Inflation Targeting: A New Framework for
Monetary Policy?" Journal of Economic Perspectives 11, no. 2 (spring): 97-116.

Calomiris, Charles W. and Gorton, Gary. 1991. "The Origins of Banking Panics: Models, Facts and
Bank Regulation"in Hubbard, R.G. (ed.) Financial Markets and Financial Crises. University of
Chicago Press, Chicago, pp. 109-173.

Calvo, Guillermo. 1978. "On the Time Consistency of Optimal Policy in the Monetary Economy."
Econometrica 46, no. 6 (November): 1411-28.

Calvo, Guillermo A., Leiderman, Leonardo and Carmen M. Reinhart, 1994. "The Capital Inflows
Problem:

Concepts and Issues," Contemporary Economic Policy 12, July: 54-66.

Cecchetti, Stephen G. 1995. Inflation Indicators and Inflation Policy. In Ben S. Bernanke and Julio
J. Rotemberg, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 1995, 189-219. Cambridge: MIT Press.

Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gal, and Mark Gertler. 1997. Monetary Policy Rules in Practice: Some
International Evidence. NBER Working Paper No. 6254, November.

Clarida, Richard, and Mark Gertler. 1997. "How the Bundesbank Conducts Monetary Policy." In
Christina D. Romer and David H. Romer, eds., Reducing Inflation: Motivation and Strategy,
363-406. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Cukierman, Alex. 1992. Central Bank Strategy, Credibility, and Independence: Theory and
Evidence. Cambridge: MIT Press.
41

Debelle, Guy. 1997. Discussion. In Philip Lowe, ed., Monetary Policy and Inflation Targeting,
118-23. Sydney: Reserve Bank of Australia.

Estrella, A. and F.S. Mishkin, 1997. Is There a Role for Monetary Aggregates in the Conduct of
Monetary Policy. Journal of Monetary Economics, 40:2, (October): 279-304.

European Monetary Institute. 1997. The Single Monetary Policy in Stage Three: Specification of
the Operational Framework.

Fischer, Stanley. 1994. "Modern Central Banking." In Forrest Capie, Charles A. E. Goodhart, Stanley
Fischer, and Norbert Schnadt, The Future of Central Banking: The Tercentenary Symposium of the
Bank of England, 262-308. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Folkerts-Landau, D., Schinasi, G.J., Cassard, M., Ng, V.K., Reinhart, C.M., and M.G. Spencer,
1995. "Effect of Capital Flows on the Domestic Financial Sectors in APEC Developing Countries,"
in M.S. Khan and C.M. Reinhart, eds. Capital Flows in the APEC Region (International Monetary
Fund: Wash. D.C. 1995): 31-57

Friedman, Benjamin M. 1995. "The Rise and Fall of the Money Growth Targets as Guidelines for
U.S. Monetary Policy." Paper prepared for the Bank of Japan Seventh International Conference.
Preliminary draft.

Friedman, Benjamin M. and Kenneth N. Kuttner. 1993. Another Look at the Evidence on MoneyIncome Causality. Journal of Econometrics 57: 189-203.

Friedman, Benjamin M., and Kenneth Kuttner. 1996. "A Price Target for U.S. Monetary Policy?
Lessons from the Experience with Money Growth Targets." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
no. 1: 77-125.
42

Gavin, M. and R. Hausman, 1996. "The Roots of Banking Crises: the Macroeconomic Context," in
R. Hausman and L. Rojas-Suarez, eds., Banking Crises in Latin America (Interamerican Development
Bank and Johns Hopkins University Press: Baltimore): 27-63.

Goodfriend, Marvin. 1993. Interest Rate Policy and the Inflation Scare Problem: 1979-1992.
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly 79, no. 1 (Winter): 1-24.

Goodhart, Charles A. E., and Jos Vials. 1994. "Strategy and Tactics of Monetary Policy: Examples
from Europe and the Antipodes." In Jeffrey C. Fuhrer, ed., Goals, Guidelines, and Constraints
Facing Monetary Policymakers. Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Conference Series 38: 139-87.

Groshen, Erica L., and Mark E. Schweitzer. 1996. "The Effects of Inflation on Wage Adjustments
in Firm-Level Data: Grease or Sand?" Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports, no. 9.

Haldane, Andrew G., ed. 1995. Targeting Inflation. London: Bank of England.

Hall, Robert E., and N. Gregory Mankiw. 1994. Nominal Income Targeting. In N. Gregory
Mankiw, ed., Monetary Policy, 71-94. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Issing, Otmar. 1996. Is Monetary Targeting in Germany Still Adequate? In Horst Siebert, ed.,
Monetary Policy in an Integrated World Economy: Symposium 1995, page numbers. Tbingen:
Mohr.

Kaminsky, G.L. and C.M. Reinhart, 1996. "The Twin Crises: The Causes of Banking and Balanceof-Payments Problems," Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, International Finance
Discussion Papers No. 544 (March).

Kydland, Finn, and Edward Prescott. 1977. "Rules Rather than Discretion: The Inconsistency of
Optimal Plans." Journal of Political Economy 85, no. 3 (June): 473-92.
43

Leiderman, Leonardo, and Lars E. O. Svensson. 1995. Inflation Targeting. London: Centre for
Economic Policy Research.

Laubach, Thomas and Adam S. Posen. 1997. "Some Comparative Evidence on the Effectiveness of
Inflation Targeting," Federal Reserve Bank of New York Working Paper #97-14 (May).

McCallum, Bennett T. 1995. Two Fallacies Concerning Central-Bank Independence. American
Economic Review 85, no. 2 (May): 207-11.

McCallum, Bennett T. 1996. Inflation Targeting in Canada, New Zealand, Sweden, the United
Kingdom, and in General. NBER Working Paper No. 5579, May.

Mishkin, Frederic S. 1991. Asymmetric Information and Financial Crises: A Historical Perspective.
In Glenn R. Hubbard, ed., Financial Markets and Financial Crises, 69-108. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.

Mishkin, Frederic S. 1996. "Understanding Financial Crises: A Developing Country Perspective,"
in Michael Bruno and Boris Pleskovic, eds., Annual World Bank Conference on Development
Economics 1996 (World Bank: Washington D.C. 1996): 29-62.

Mishkin, Frederic S. 1997. The Causes and Propagation of Financial Instability: Lessons for
Policymakers. In Maintaining Financial Stability in a Global Economy, 55-96. Kansas City: Federal
Reserve Bank of Kansas City.

Mishkin, Frederic S. 1998a. "Exchange-Rate Pegging in Emerging-Market Countries? International
Finance, forthcoming.

44

Mishkin, Frederic S. 1998b. "The Role of a Central Bank in a Democratic Society," paper prepared
for the Fourth Dubrovnik Conference on Transition Economies, June 24-26, 1998.

Mishkin, Frederic S. and Adam Posen. 1997. "Inflation Targeting: Lessons from Four Countries,"
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Economic Policy Review, 3 (August): 9-110.

Morande, Felipe, and Klaus Schmidt-Hebbel. 1997. Inflation Targets and Indexation in Chile.
Unpublished paper, Central Bank of Chile, August.

Neumann, Manfred. 1996. "Monetary Targeting in Germany." Paper prepared for the Bank of Japan
Seventh International Conference.

Neumann, Manfred J.M., and Jurgen von Hagen. 1993. "Germany." In M. Fratianni and D. Salvatore,
eds., Handbook of Monetary Policy in Industrialized Countries. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood.

Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff. 1995. "The Mirage of Fixed Exchange Rates." Journal of
Economic Perspectives 9, no. 4 (fall): 73-96.

Posen, Adam S. 1995. Declarations Are Not Enough: Financial Sector Sources of Central Bank
Independence. In Ben S. Bernanke and Julio J. Rotemberg, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual,
1995, 253-74. Cambridge: MIT Press.

Rich, Georg. 1997. Monetary Targets as a Policy Rule: Lessons from the Swiss Experience.
Journal of Monetary Economics 39, no. 1 (June): 113-41.

Stock, James H. and Mark W. Watson. 1989. Interpreting the Evidence on Money-Income
Causality. Journal of Econometrics 40: 161-182.

Taylor, John B. 1985. What Would Nominal GNP Targeting Do to the Business Cycle? Carnegie45

Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 22: 61-84.

von Hagen, Jrgen. 1995. "Inflation and Monetary Targeting in Germany." In Leonardo Leiderman
and Lars E. O. Svensson, eds., Inflation Targets, 107-21. London: Centre for Economic Policy
Research.

46

