1. Introduction


International asset pricing research has taken two directions. On one hand, sensitivities to
economic variables are used in the framework of a traditional multibeta capital asset
pricing model (CAPM) to explain both the time-series and cross-section of expected
returns [see Ferson and Harvey (1993, 1994b)]. On the other hand, the fundamental
characteristics approach of Fama and French (1992, 1993) and others, has been
implemented in an international context [see Fama and French (1998)].


Ferson and Harvey (1998) argue that there is a link between the characteristics and the
asset pricing model approaches. They hypothesize that the characteristics are likely
proxying for dynamic risk functions. Ferson and Harvey offer evidence that variables,
like price to book ratios, are important in explaining variation in betas.


This paper offers three insights that are relevant for asset allocation and risk analysis, in
and out of the EMU. First, we implement a multiple beta international capital asset
pricing model that is simplified by the introduction of the Euro. In standard
specifications, like Adler and Dumas (1983), each currency unit enters the asset pricing
equation. As a result, studies, such as Dumas (1994), Dumas and Solnik (1995) and De
Santis, Gerard and Hillion (1998), are able to look at only a few countries at a time in
conducting global asset pricing tests. We combine a synthetic Euro currency excess
return with a Yen excess return to conduct asset pricing tests with two currency return
factors. We present evidence that this three-factor model has advantages over a single
factor CAPM, and that the Euro risk factor is an important explanatory variable.


Second, we use the model simplifications allowed by the Euro to test the incremental
ability of a world price to book factor to explain the cross-sectional and time-series of
expected returns. Fama and French (1998) find that the world price to book factor has the
ability to explain the cross-section of average returns over and above the traditional beta
from a single-factor CAPM. However, they do not test whether the price to book factor
has incremental power to explain expected returns over and above a model with



                                               2
additional economic factors. We find that there is little difference in explanatory power
between a model using the Euro and other economic risk factors and one that includes a
world price to book measure. This evidence suggests that the world price-to-book factor
reflects risk that is also captured by world economic variables.


Third, we explore the sources of the explanatory power of the price to book factor.
Following Ferson and Harvey (1998), we propose a model where the price to book factor
is an instrument for time-varying economic risk. Griffin (1998) argues that the
explanatory power of the Fama and French (1998) world price-to-book ratio is driven by
domestic price-to-book ratios. We explore the relative information in both local price-to-
book ratios and the world price-to-book factor. We find that, in a number of countries,
there is incremental information in price to book factors, both local and world, that helps
explain variation in beta.


Our paper is organized as follows. The second section details the asset pricing
frameworks that we employ. The data are described in the third section. Our empirical
results are presented in the fourth section and some concluding remarks are offered in the
final section.




2. The asset pricing framework


2.1 The risk factors
Much of the debate about international asset pricing models concerns the specification of
the relevant risk factors. We consider four groups of risk variables. The first is the world
excess market return suggested by a world CAPM [Sharpe (1964) and Lintner (1965)].
Our second model adds two currency excess returns, the Euro and the Yen. This three
factor model is designed to capture the theoretical framework presented in Adler and
Dumas (1983) and implemented in Dumas and Solnik (1995). With the advent of the
Euro, the number of currency risk factors is reduced and the model is simplified. The
currency excess returns are the change in the currency value in U.S. dollar terms, plus the



                                              3
foreign deposit rate minus the U.S. Treasury bill rate. The Euro is constructed with
weights that represent the 1996 GDPs weight of the member countries, as described in
section 3 and the Appendix B.


Our third set of factors is motivated by the price-to-book issue. This is the observation that
stocks with low price-to-book ratios have earned higher returns than stocks with high ratios.
A large number of US studies have tried to explain the result since Fama and French (1992)
drew wide attention to it. Fama and French (1993, 1996) claim that price-to-book represents
exposure to a risk factor. Lakonishok et al. (1994) claim it represents systematic pricing
errors by the markets, and therefore potential profit opportunities for investors. Other
suggest that the price-to-book effect is a chance or spurious relation that was mined from the
data. However, out-of-sample evidence in the US [e.g. Davis (1994), Davis, Fama and
French (1998)] and evidence for markets outside the US [e.g. Chan, et al. (1991), Capaul,
Rowley and Sharpe (1993), Arshanapalli, Coggin and Doukas (1998), and Fama and French
(1998)], reduces the likelihood of pure data mining.


The appropriate role of price-to-book in an international asset pricing model is not well
understood. Fama and French (1998) find that it has explanatory power as a risk factor,
relative to a CAPM that includes only the world market portfolio and assumes constant
betas. Griffin (1998) argues that the factor used by Fama and French adds explanatory
power only through the local country book-to-market effects. Ferson and Harvey (1998)
show that local book-to-market factors contain information about time-varying exposures to
a world market risk factor.


The advent of the Euro simplifies the currency risk factors in international asset pricing
models. Using the simpler models we can explore the role of both local-country and global
price-to-book factors in asset-pricing models that account for currency risks. The global
price-to-book factor is an excess return of low price-to-book stocks over high price-to-book
stocks, similar to Fama and French (1998), as described in Section 3. We also study the
aggregate price-to-book ratios for the stock markets of the individual countries as potential
instruments for time-varying risk exposures.



                                               4
The final group of risk factors is the set of global factors studied in Ferson and Harvey
(1993, 1994). These include the weighted unexpected inflation in the G-7 countries, the
change in weighted expected long-term inflation in the G-7 countries, the change in the
Eurodollar-Treasury yield spread, the weighted real interest rate in the G-7 countries, the
change in the oil price, and the change in G-7 industrial production. Each weighted
variable uses the GDP weights for the G-7 countries.




2.2 The unconditional framework
We conduct two exercises. First, we estimate linear factor models that examine the
explanatory power of the different groups of factors.


                       ri ,t = β i ,0 + β i ,1 f 1,t + ... + β i , k f k ,t + ε i ,t                (1)


Where ri,t represents the excess returns on country i’s equity market, fi,t are the world risk
factors, and εi,t are the errors. Country stock returns are measured in a common currency,
the U.S. dollar, and are net of a one-month Treasury bill return. We do not study bond
returns. The βi are the country risk exposures, or betas, on the factors. The unconditional
framework assumes that the betas are fixed parameters over time. We examine both the
explanatory power of different groups of factors and the significance level of each factor
across the countries in our sample.


Next we test global asset pricing models. A global asset pricing model using a set of risk
factors, {f1, ,,, fk}, asserts that the expected excess returns of the countries differ only as a
function of their betas on those factors, {βi1,...,βik}. Associated with each beta is a global
risk premium, the increment to the expected return per unit beta. In an unconditional model
the risk premiums, like the betas, are assumed to be fixed parameters over time. Following
the framework of Ferson and Harvey (1994a), we report estimates of the unconditional betas
and the unconditional risk premiums associated with each factor.




                                                               5
2.3 Price-to-book and conditional models
The assumption that risk exposures and risk premiums are constant parameters over time
is likely to be restrictive. This motivates a conditional model, in which they are time
varying. Many studies have found that conditional models provide a more accurate
representation of expected returns in both domestic and international markets [see, for
example, the review article by Ferson (1995)]. In a conditional model the betas and
expected risk premiums are conditional moments, based on information that is available
when prices are set at the beginning of the period, say at time t-1, before the securities'
returns are realized at time t. The price-to-book ratio, using prices at time t-1 and
previous book values, is available information at the beginning of each month. We are
interested, in particular, in the role of the price-to-book ratio in an asset pricing model
that includes the Euro as a currency risk factor. We consider price to book value both as a
potential risk factor and as an instrument for risk. First, we consider the incremental
power of adding a world price to book factor in the linear factor model. Second, we test
whether price to book significantly impacts the time-variation in conditional betas.


The conditional beta model follows Ferson (1989) and Shanken (1990). We estimate a
linear factor model with interaction terms. The one factor version is

                       ri ,t = β i ,0 + (bi , 0 + bi ,1 Z i ,t −1 ) f 1,t + ε i ,t            (2)


where Zi,t-1 represents conditioning information that is available at time t-1. In our
application, the conditioning information is either the world price to book ratio or the
country specific (local) price to book ratio. The conditional beta is



                              β i ,1,t = bi ,0 + bi ,1 Z i ,t −1                          (3)


We test whether there is significant variation in the betas that is related to the price to
book value ratios, by checking for significant bi,1 coefficients. As explained by Ferson



                                                             6
and Harvey (1998), the conditional model allows for time-varying factor risk premiums,
but it does not restrict their functional form.




2.4 Testing conditional models
Preliminary regression diagnostics help determine the specification of the conditional
models; that is, the choice of factors and lagged instruments, Zt-1. We then move on to
examine the empirical performance of the models. An asset pricing model should explain
differences in the average returns across countries. In addition, a conditional model should
explain any predictability in the returns using the lagged instruments. Ferson and Harvey
(1999) find that predictability using lagged instruments provides a powerful challenge for
US models based on the Fama-French (1993) factors, which include the market and a price-
to-book factor. Our tests are designed to address both average returns and the predictability
in returns. The details of the econometric methods are in appendix A.


To assess the ability of a model to explain differences in the average returns we introduce an
average pricing error parameter, α, into the model for each country. The alpha is the
difference between the average return for a country and the average return predicted by the
model, using the country's betas and the global risk premiums.


To assess the ability of a model to explain the predictability in the returns we form a ratio,
VR1, for each country. This measures the fraction of the predictable variance that a model
explains. The numerator of the ratio is the variance of the time-varying expected return
predicted by the model, using the time-varying country betas and global risk premiums. The
denominator is the variance of the predictable part of the return, obtained without reference
to an asset pricing model, by simply regressing the return on the lagged instruments. If the
ratio is one, it implies that the model can explain all of the variation in the statistically
predicted expected returns. If the ratio is zero, none of the predictability can be explained.


We estimate the models with a number of different combinations of the world risk
factors. Our goal is to determine how much the currency, price to book, and economic



                                                  7
factors add to the explanatory power of a simple world CAPM. In addition, we are
particularly interested in how the price to book ratio should enter the asset pricing model.
We conduct experiments using both world and local price to book ratios to determine
whether these ratios explain variation in the conditional betas.




3. Data


We study equity returns for 18 developed markets from January 1975 through December
1997 from Morgan Stanley Capital International (MSCI). All returns are measured in
U.S. dollars and are calculated in excess of the 30-day U.S. Treasury bill rate from
Ibbotson Associates.




3.1 Specification of Risk Factors
Our measure of the world risk factor is the MSCI world market excess return. The Euro
risk factor is constructed back in time using the countries that will be included on January
1, 1999. We use the 1996 GDP weights that Datastream has used to synthetically create a
historical Euro series. In addition to the currency change we add a weighted
Eurocurrency return (same weights as Euro construction). Finally, we make this an
excess return by subtracting the U.S. 30-day Treasury bill rate. The excess Yen return is
similarly constructed. The Euroyen return is added to the currency change minus the
short-term U.S. bill return. (See Appendix B for more details.)


Our price-to-book factor is the high minus low (HML) portfolio studied by Fama and
French (1998). This variable is from Fama and French (1998) for the 1975-1989 period
and updated through 1997 using Morgan Stanley Capital International data. In each
country, both high price to book and low price to book portfolios are constructed. Using
each market’s total capitalizations, a value-weighted world price to book hedge return is
constructed. This is the return of the value-weighted portfolio of low price-to-book (high
book-to-market) stocks minus the return of the portfolio of high price-to-book (low book-



                                             8
to-market) stocks. The price-to-book factor may be related to the firm size effect [e.g.
Hawawini and Keim (1997)]. However, the stocks included in the MSCI database are
primarily the large firms. For this reason, we do not study firm size separately.
Finally, we consider a number of macroeconomic risk factors that were studied in Ferson
and Harvey (1993, 1994). These factors include the change in the Eurodollar Treasury
yield spread, unexpected G-7 inflation, change in long-term expected G-7 inflation,
change in the price of oil, change in G-7 industrial production and the G-7 real interest
rate. These variables are described in Appendix B.




3.2 Specification of the Instrumental Variables
We follow Ferson and Harvey (1993) and consider two types of instrumental variables,
global and local. The global instrumental variables include the lagged world dividend
yield, the lagged Treasury-Eurodollar spread, the lagged G-7 weighted term structure of
interest rates (long-short spread), and the lagged G-7 short-term interest rate. We also
include a lagged world price to book value ratio. The lagged price-to-book is used as an
instrument for time-series variation in U.S. equity returns by Kothari and Shanken (1997)
and Pontiff and Schall (1998). Its usefulness in a global asset pricing model context has
not been widely studied. Ferson and Harvey (1998) is one exception. They study local
country price-to-book ratios, not a world price-to-book ratio.


We also consider a set of local instruments that mirror the world instruments. These
include: the lagged local dividend yield, the lagged local term structure, the lagged local
short term interest rate and the lagged local price to book ratio.




4. Results


4.1 Summary statistics
The summary statistics are presented in Table 1. The world risk factors that are returns
are reported in monthly percentage terms. Notice that the world price to book excess



                                              9
return has a slightly lower mean than the world market return - but the standard deviation
is almost half that of the world market return. Other notable features include the
persistence, as reflected in the autocorrelations, of the change in long-term expected
inflation and the G-7 real interest rate. Interestingly, there are no remarkable correlations
between any of the world risk factors. The highest cross-correlation is the -61%
correlation between the change in G-7 unexpected inflation and the G-7 real interest rate.


Persistence is also evident in the instrumental variables. Notice that four of the five world
instrumental variables have autocorrelation coefficients greater than 0.9. The
autocorrelation patterns of the world price to book ratio and the world dividend yield are
very similar. Ferson et al. (1999) provide an analysis of spurious regression bias when
highly persistent instruments are used. The similarity of these is also evident in the cross-
correlation analysis. The world price to book ratio and the world dividend yield have a
-95% correlation, indicating that there is limited information in the price to book ratio
over and above the dividend yield.




4.2 Linear factor models
Table 2 presents estimates of regressions of each asset’s excess return on all of the world
risk factors. Interestingly, only one of the 18 intercepts is significantly different from zero
(not more than one would expect by chance) and this lone intercept, for Spain, is only
two standard errors from zero. When the factors are excess returns the intercepts are the
alphas, which measure the average mispricing. Thus, the regressions suggest that the
world risk factors we have chosen should be sufficient to capture the cross-section of
average returns.


In this unconditional analysis, the world market return is by far the most important risk
factor. The beta on the world market is significant in 17 of 18 countries, with the
exception being Austria. There are two other risk factors that are often significant: the
Euro excess return (12 of 18 countries) and the world price to book excess return (10 of
18 countries). The yen excess return is significant for five countries (Canada, France,



                                              10
Japan, Norway and the United States). Only a few of the macroeconomic variables
produce significant coefficients. The change in the price of oil is significant in four
countries. The change in the Eurodollar-Treasury spread is significant in two countries.


The R2s reported in the far column suggest that most of the explanatory power is driven
by the world market factor. The currency factors add explanatory power in all but one
country and sizable explanatory power in a number of countries. Interestingly, neither the
world price to book excess return nor the macroeconomic variables add a lot of
explanatory power to these regressions. This is also evident from Figure 1.


The unconditional asset pricing tests are presented in Table 3. Three models are
presented: the world CAPM, a world CAPM with two currency factors, and a seven
factor model that nests the CAPM with two currency factors and adds the world price to
book excess return as well as the three most important economic factors.


None of these models is rejected at standard significance levels. By far, the dominant risk
premium is the world market return. The currency excess returns enter with positive
coefficients but are not significant at traditional levels (the yen excess return is more than
one standard error from zero and the Euro excess return is less than one standard error
from zero). In the extended model, the world price to book return enters with a positive
coefficient that is slightly greater than one standard error from zero. The real G-7 short
term interest rate is close to two standard errors from zero. The insignificant risk
premiums in the unconditional models is similar to previous studies, and suggests a lack
of statistical power in these models [see Ferson and Harvey (1994a) for discussion].


To augment the unconditional asset pricing tests, we report the average pricing errors and
and the standard deviations of these errors. These average error decreases for 12 of 18
countries when one moves from a one factor model to a three factor model. The errors are
further reduced in all but two countries when the seven factor model is considered.




                                              11
One weakness of this analysis is that the coefficients are held constant over the 1975-
1997 period. This is partially addressed by repeating the regression analysis using 60-
month rolling regression estimates. We test whether the beta coefficients are individually
equal to zero and whether the beta coefficients taken jointly across countries are equal to
zero. In both of these cases, it is unlikely that the risk factor will be useful in explaining
the cross-sectional variation in asset returns. These tests confirm that the two most
important factors are the world market return and the Euro excess return. The yen excess
return is the third most important, closely followed by the world price to book excess
return. Of the economic variables, the most significant are: the change in the price of oil,
the change in the G-7 unexpected inflation and the G-7 real short-term interest rate.




4.3 Time-varying risk
Table 4 examines a model that allows, in a simple way, for risk to shift through time. The
rolling estimates of the betas for the three factor model are presented in Figure 2. These
figures also highlight five important dates for our analysis:
•     1986 Single European Act
•     July 1990, Stage one of EMU begins
•     February 1992, Ratification of Maastricht
•     January 1993, Establishment of the Single Market
•     January 1994, Creation of the European Monetary Institute (forerunner of the
      European Central Bank)
•     May 1998, Announcement of participating countries and target fixed rates specified.


Of course, another important date for our analysis is January 1999 when the irrevocable
fixed rates take effect, the Euro begins. However, this date lies outside of our sample
period.1 Surprisingly, the figures present no evidence that any of these events are
associated with shifts in the structure of equity markets’ systematic risks.




1
    Another relevant date is January 2002 when Euro notes and coins are introduced.


                                                     12
While Figure 2 presents no evidence that any of the discrete events associated with EMU
cause jumps in the risk exposures, the time-series plots do suggest some patterns. The betas
on the Euro risk factor falls for all of the EMU countries (except Spain) from near unity in
the early 1990s, to near zero at the end of the sample in 1998. For the European countries
that have remained outside the EMU there is little systematic change, and the Euro betas
remain sizeable in some cases (e.g. Sweden and Norway in 1998, the beta is about 0.5).
These patterns suggest that anticipation of the EMU and its membership has influenced
equity risks in European markets. For countries outside of Europe, such as the US and
Canada, the Euro beta is close to zero for much of the period.


Table 5 explores the variation in betas more formally. In particular, we investigate the
role of the price to book ratios as instruments for the time-varying betas. We use three
different definitions of price to book. The first is the world price to book excess return
(which we also use as a risk factor in the seven-factor model). The second is the world
price to book ratio. As mentioned earlier, this is a highly persistent measure and has some
similarity to dividend yields. The final version is the local price to book ratio. All three of
these measures are lagged.


The first panel of Table 5 examines the world price to book return. We assume that each
of the conditional betas in the three-factor model is a linear function of the lagged price-
to-book factor’s excess return. In the far right columns, we report the adjusted R2s of
these regressions along with the R2 from Table 2 for the three-factor model. The
increments to the R2s may be evaluated, as in a step-down F test, for the significance of
the additional variables. Since the power of the test may vary with the number of factors,
we compare the alternative specifications for price-to-book using the three-factor model.
The world price-to-book return contributes little to the explanatory power of the factor
model. In only four countries do the adjusted R2s increase. Even the magnitudes of the
increases are very small. For example, Hong Kong increases from 0.235 to 0.244.


The second panel examines the world price to book ratio. This ratio may have some
advantages as an instrumental variable for risk, because a ratio of market price to the



                                              13
magnitude of earnings potential is related to risk in most [e.g. Berk (1995)]. It is
analogous to using a yield to maturity as an instrumental variable rather than a bond
return. Indeed, using the world price-to-book ratio as an instrument for time-varying
betas increases the explanatory power of all the country factor regressions except for
Norway.


The third panel examines the importance of the local price to book ratio. Compared to the
constant beta regression, explanatory power increases in 13 of 18 countries. Compared to
the world price to book ratio, the local version produces a smaller improvement in the
explanatory power for 13 of 18 countries. We conclude that a lagged price-to-book factor
may be a good instrument for time-varying, systematic risk. Of the three specifications,
the lagged world price-to-book ratio appears the most promising, but this result varies
across countries.




4.4 Predictability
Regressions of the asset returns over time on the instrumental variables are presented in
Table 6. The explanatory power ranges from less than one percent (Austria, Denmark,
France, Hong Kong and Sweden) to more than nine percent (Singapore). In general, the
degree of predictability is less than reported in Ferson and Harvey (1993). This is likely
explained by the different sample. Their sample began in 1970 and ended in 1989. It is
also the case that we use a slightly different instrument set. We do not include a dummy
variable for January. In addition, we replace the lagged world return in their study with
the lagged world price to book ratio.


Table 7 examines the incremental information contained in the local instrumental
variables as well as the role of the price to book variable in the regressions. The first two
columns show the impact of including the world price to book variable in the prediction
regression. There is no country where the adjusted R2 decreases when the world price to
book ratio is added. However, the improvement in explanatory power is minor. The




                                              14
average adjusted R2 increases from 0.032 to 0.035. The weak additional explanatory
power is also reflected in the F-test reported in the final column of Table 7.


The third and fourth columns investigate the role of the local price to book ratio in the
predictability regressions. In each country, the explanatory power of the regressions
increases. However, in contrast to the world price to book ratio, the change in R2 is more
substantial. The R2 increases from 0.026 to 0.035. This is also evident in the F-tests where
we are able to reject the null hypothesis that the coefficient on the local price to book
ratio is zero in 10 countries at the 5% level of significance.




4.5 Conditional asset pricing models
A number of different asset pricing specification are examined in Table 8: the one factor
world CAPM (panel A), a three-factor model with the world return plus the two currency
factors (panel B), a two factor model (world return plus price to book return), a four
factor model (three factors plus the world price to book return), a six factor model (three
factor model plus three macroeconomic, factor mimicking portfolios) and a seven factor
model (six factor model plus the world price to book return).


The first panel, the world CAPM, presents more detail than the other panels. In particular,
we conduct tests on the specification of the conditional beta functions. We examine a
beta that is a function of local information, the local information plus the world price to
book return and the local information plus the local price to book ratio. χ2 tests of
whether the coefficients on the non-constant part of the beta function are zero are
presented. In addition, we present the analysis of variance ratios (how much of the
predictability is accounted for by the asset pricing model) and average pricing errors.


With respect to the conditional beta function, the evidence in panel A supports the first
specification with the “local information”. The addition of the world price to book return
increases the variance ratio in only two of 18 countries. The specification that adds the
local price to book ratio increases the explanatory power in only four of 18 countries.



                                              15
Now consider the one factor model versus the three factor model. The variance ratios
dramatically increase with the three factor model. The average variance ratio for the
world CAPM is 0.506 and it increases to 0.822 with the addition of the two currency
factors. The variance ratio increases in each of the 18 countries which is evident in Figure
3.


The next columns show the impact of the world book to market return as an additional
factor in the world CAPM. The variance ratios increase from 0.506 with the one factor
model to 0.598 when the world price to book return is added as an additional factor. The
marginal explanatory power is small compared to the increase associated with the
currency factors.


The next question is whether the information in the world price to book return is
subsumed by the two currency risk factors. When a four factor model is estimated, the
average variance ratio increases to 0.895 from the three factor base case of 0.822. Hence,
the incremental information in the world price to book return is small. Given the standard
errors, the difference is not significant.


Our final tests ask how well the macroeconomic risk factors fare. Including these factors,
the average variance ratio is 0.913 compared to 0.822 for the three-factor model. Again,
we can test whether the information in the world price to book return is accounted for by
the economic factors. When the world price to book return is added to the specification,
the variance ratio increases to 0.938 (compared to 0.913). While the variance ratios
increase in all but one country, the increment (0.025) is economically small. This
suggests that most of the information in the world price to book return is being captured
by other economic variables.


The conditional tests show that most of the explanatory power is driven by the world
market return and the two currency factors. The extra information in the world price to
book return and other economic factors is small. The analysis of average pricing errors in



                                             16
Table 3 and Figure 4 also supports this analysis. The pricing errors decrease moving from
one to three factors. The incremental reduction in pricing errors when going to additional
factors is limited.




5. Conclusions


We study the global forces that determine both the cross-section and time-series of
average returns as well as the predictability in returns. We assess the importance of two
world currency factors, a Euro and a yen-based factor, relative to a simple CAPM. We
also study a model that includes a world price to book return and a model that includes
additional world economic risk factors. With the advent of the Euro, currency risk
modeling is simplified. This allows us, for the first time, to explore the role of book-to-
market in a model that accounts for currency risks in and out of the EMU.


Our results suggest that most of the improvement over the CAPM comes from the model
that includes the world market portfolio and the two currency excess returns. After the
world market factor, the Euro currency risk factor is the next most important source of
global risk in the world equity markets. While the price to book return offers some
incremental explanatory power, our results suggest that the information in the world price
to book return is mostly captured by world economic risk variables.




                                             17
References

Adler, Michael, and Bernard Dumas, 1983, International portfolio selection and corporation finance: A
synthesis, Journal of Finance 38, 925--984.

Arshanapalli, Balla, T. Daniel Coggin and John Doukas, 1998, Multifactor asset pricing analysis of
international value investment strategies, Journal of Portfolio Management 24 (4), 10-23 (Summer).

Berk, Jonathan, 1995, A critique of size related anomalies, Review of Financial Studies 8, 275-286.

Chan, Louis, Yasushi Hamao and Josef Lakonishok, 1991, Fundamentals and stock returns in Japan,
Journal of Finance 46, 1739-1764.

Davis, James L., Eugene F. Fama and Kenneth R. French, 1998, Characteristics, covariances and average
returns: 1929-1997, Unpublished working paper, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL.

Davis, James L., 1994, The cross-section of realized stock returns: The pre-COMPUSTAT evidence,
Journal of Finance 50, 1579-1593.

De Santis, Giorgio, Bruno Gerard and Pierre Hillion, 1998, The relevance of currency risk in the EMU,
(this volume).

Dumas, Bernard, 1994, A test of the international CAPM using business cycles indicators as instrumental
variables, in Jeffrey Frankel, ed.: The Internationalization of Equity Markets, (University of Chicago Press,
Chicago, IL), 23--50.

Dumas, Bernard and Bruno Solnik, 1995, The world price of foreign exchange rate risk, Journal of
Finance.

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1989, Business conditions and the expected returns on stocks
and bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 25, 23--50.

Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 1992, The cross-section of expected stock returns, Journal of
Finance, 427-465.

Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds,
Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3-56.

Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 1995, Size and book-to-market factors in earnings and returns,
Journal of Finance, 427-465.

Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 1996, Multifactor explanations of asset pricing anomalies,
Journal of Finance 51, 55-84.

Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 1998, Value versus growth: The international evidence, Journal
of Finance, forthcoming.

Ferson, W. E., 1989, Changes in expected returns, risk and the level of interest rates, Journal of Finance
44, 1191-1217.

Ferson, W. E., 1995, Theory and empirical testing of asset pricing models,'' in R. A. Jarrow, W. T. Ziemba
and V. Maksimovic (eds.), North Holland.




                                                     18
Ferson, Wayne E. and Campbell R. Harvey, 1991, The variation of economic risk premiums, Journal of
Political Economy 99, 285--315.

Ferson, Wayne E., and Campbell R. Harvey, 1993, The risk and predictability of international equity
returns, Review of Financial Studies 6, 527--566.

Ferson, Wayne E., and Campbell R. Harvey, 1994a, Sources of risk and expected returns in global equity
markets, Journal of Banking and Finance 18, 775--803.

Ferson, Wayne E., and Campbell R. Harvey, 1994b, An exploratory investigation of the fundamental
determinants of national equity market returns, in Jeffrey Frankel, ed.: The Internationalization of Equity
Markets, (University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL), 59--138.

Ferson, Wayne E., and Campbell R. Harvey, 1998, The fundamental determinants of national equity
market returns: A perspective on country risk in asset pricing, Journal of Banking and Finance 21, 1625-
1665.

Ferson, Wayne E. and Campbell R. Harvey, 1999, “Conditioning variables and the cross-section of stock
returns, Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

Ferson, W.E, Sergei Sarkissian and Timothy Simin, 1998, The Alpha Factor Asset Pricing Model: A Parable,
Journal of Financial Markets (forthcoming v.2, no. 1, 1999).

Ferson, W.E, Sergei Sarkissian and Timothy Simin, 1999, Spurious regressions in Financial Economics?
Working paper, University of Washington.

Griffin, John, 1998, Are the Fama and French Factors Global or Country Specific? working paper, Arizona
State University.

Hansen, Lars P., 1982, Large sample properties of generalized method of moments estimators,
Econometrica 50, 1029--1054.

Harvey, Campbell R., 1989, Time-varying conditional covariances in tests of asset pricing models,
Journal of Financial Economics 24, 289--317.

Harvey, Campbell R., 1991, The world price of covariance risk, Journal of Finance 46, 111--157.

Harvey, Campbell R., 1995, Predictable risk and returns in emerging markets, Review of Financial Studies
8, 773--816.

Hawawini, G. and D. Keim, 1997, The cross-section of common stock returns: A review of the evidence and
some new findings, INSEAD working papers 97/66/FIN, May, 40 pages.

Jorion, Philippe, 1991, The pricing of exchange rate risk in the stock market, Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis 26, 363--376.

Kothari, S.P. and Jay Shanken, 1997, Book-to-market, dividend yields and expected market returns: A time-
series analysis, Journal of Financial Economics 44, 169-203.

Kothari, S. P., Jay Shanken and Richard G. Sloan, 1995, Another look at the cross-section of expected
returns, Journal of Finance 50, 185-224.

Lakonishok, Josef, Andrei Schleifer and Robert W. Vishny, 1994, Contrarian investment, extrapolation and
risk, Journal of Finance 49, 1541-1578.




                                                     19
Lintner, John, 1965, The valuation of risk assets and the selection of risky investments in stock portfolios
and capital budgets, Review of Economics and Statistics 47, 13--37.

Lombard, Odier & Cie, 1992, Introduction to the Bond Indices of Lombard, Odier & Cie, Geneva,
Switzerland.

Kandel, Shmuel and Robert Stambaugh, 1996, On the predictability of stock returns: An asset allocation
perspective, Journal of Finance 51, 385-424.

Korajczyk, Robert and Claude Viallet, 1989, An empirical investigation of international asset pricing,
Review of Financial Studies 2, 553--585.

Maroney, Neal and Aris Protopapadakis, The information content of the book-to-market ratio and market
value for pricing equities internationally: Evidence from seven national markets, Unpublished working
paper, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA.

Pontiff, Jeffrey and Lawrence D. Schall, 1998, Book-to-market ratios as predictors of market returns,
Journal of Financial Economics 49:2, 141-160.

Shanken, Jay, 1990, Intertemporal asset pricing: An empirical investigation, Journal of Econometrics 45,
99--120.

Sharpe, William, 1964, Capital asset prices: A theory of market equilibrium under conditions of risk,
Journal of Finance 19, 425--442.

Solnik, Bruno, 1974a, An equilibrium model of the international capital market, Journal of Economic
Theory 8, 500--524.

Solnik, Bruno, 1974b The international pricing of risk: An empirical investigation of the world capital
market structure, Journal of Finance 29, 48--54.

Solnik, Bruno, 1977, Testing international asset pricing: Some pessimistic views, Journal of Finance 32
(1977), 503--511.

Solnik, Bruno, 1983, The relationship between stock prices and inflationary expectations: The
international evidence, Journal of Finance 38, 35--48.

Solnik, Bruno, 1993, The unconditional performance of international asset allocation strategies using
conditioning information, Journal of Empirical Finance.

Stulz, Rene, 1984, Pricing capital assets in an international setting: An introduction, Journal of
International Business Studies, Winter, 55--73.




                                                      20
Appendix A: Econometric methods


A. Unconditional Models


We estimate the unconditional asset pricing models by the Generalized Method of Moments
[GMM, see Hansen (1982)]. This allows for nonnormality and conditional
heteroskedasticity, both likely features of the country stock return data. The unconditional
models follow the econometric framework set out in Ferson and Harvey (1994a). There are
two formulations. One is used when the risk factors are excess returns on traded assets. The
second is used when the factors are macroeconomic variables.


When the world risk factors are excess returns, we estimate a system of equations, each
representing a country. For example, with the world CAPM, we estimate with the
generalized method of moments the following:



                                u i ,t = ri ,t − β i rm ,t                                (A.1)


where ui,t is a disturbance term. When the factors are not traded assets, we estimate


                     u i ,t = ri ,t − β 1,i rm ,t − β 2,i ( f j ,t + λ j )               (A.2)


where fj,t is the demeaned value of the factor and λj is the risk premium associated with
the factor. We report estimates of the unconditional risk exposures, the unconditional risk
premiums associated with each factor as well as a test of the overidentifying conditions.
The regression models are overidentified because the intercepts, or alphas, are restricted
to be zero according to the asset pricing models.




                                                             21
B. Conditional Models


Our conditional asset pricing tests focus on the following system. For simplicity, we
present the one-factor version of the set of equations:

                         u1,t = rt − α − (b0 + b1 Z t −1 )rm ,t


                         u 2 ,t = (b0 + b1 Z t −1 )rm,t − δ ′Z t −1


                         u 3,t = rt − δ r Z t −1                                           (A3)


                         u 4 ,t = δ r Z t −1 − c0 − c1δ ′Z t −1


                         u 5,t = rt − µ


                         u 6 ,t = σ u2 − u 42,t


                         u 7 ,t = σ r2 − (δ r Z t −1 − µ ) 2


The system is estimated by the GMM. The first equation defines the linear factor model
with time-varying betas. We make u1,t orthogonal to a vector of ones, Zt-1 and rm,t. The
second equation defines the asset pricing model’s expected return. We impose that u2,t is
orthogonal to Zt-1 which includes a vector of ones. The third equation tells us the
statistically expected returns by regressing the asset returns on the information variables.
We impose that u3,t is orthogonal to Zt-1. The fourth equation measures the relation
between the statistically fitted returns and the expected returns from the asset pricing
restrictions. We impose that u4,t is orthogonal to the fitted values from the asset pricing
model and a constant. The fifth equation simply measures the unconditional mean return.
The disturbance is orthogonal to a vector of ones. The sixth equation defines the variance
of the part of the statistical expected returns that cannot be explained by the model. This
disturbance, u6,t , is also orthogonal to a vector of ones. Finally, the last equation defines
the variance of the statistical model predictions. As with the previous equation, this
disturbance, u6,t , is also orthogonal to a vector of ones. Interestingly, each of these


                                                      22
equations is exactly identified. Hence, we can estimate this system of equations
sequentially.


We are interested in the variance ratio:


                                       σ u2
                              VR1 = 1 − 2                                                   (A4)
                                       σr


This tells us what fraction of the variance in the statistical expected returns the model
expected returns are explaining. We calculate a standard error for the variance ratio using
the delta method. Ratios similar to VR1 are presented in Ferson and Harvey (1993). Our
formulation insures that 0≤VR1≤1. Ferson and Harvey found estimates of VR1>1, which
are difficult to interpret.




                                              23
Appendix B: Data sources


A. WORLD RISK FACTORS:

WDRET is the arithmetic return on the MSCI world equity index less the Ibbotson Associates one-month
US Treasury bill rate.

dTED is the difference between the 90-day Euro dollar yield (from Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis,
FRED) and the 90-day T-bill yield (from FRED, secondary market, converted from discount to true yield to
maturity)

Euroret is the Euro currency excess return based on the synthetic Euro to US$ exchange rate created by
Datastream. Documentation for the construction of their synthetic Euro is available on-line at
www.datastream.com. The synthetic Euro/US exchange rate is constructed as follows: The EMU-in
national currencies are weighted by 1996 national GDP levels, and then expressed in Deutschmark terms
using the bilateral rates set by the EU (implicitly taken as the best approximation to the fixed bilateral rates
that will prevail on December 31, 1998). The individual components are each converted to Deutschmarks at
current exchange rates using the Reuters Closing Spot Rates. Finally, by multiplying the series by the fixed
Deutschmark/Euro rate, we have a Deutschemark/Euro exchange rate that reflects both the changing
relative strengths of the EMU-in countries over time and the presumed fixed local to Euro bilateral rates.
By converting the series using the appropriate US/Deutschmark rate, also taken from Reuters, we have a
synthetic Euro/US rate. To construct a currency return, we take the change in the US/Euro exchange rate,
and add it to an appropriately (as above) weighted average of the EMU-in countries’ local one-month rates,
and then convert it to an excess return by the subtracting the one-month Ibbotson and Associates US
Treasury bill rate. The one-month local rates used in the construction of the appropriately weighted “Euro”
interest rate are as follows: Austria Treasury bill (IFS 60C), Belgium Treasury bill (IFS 60C) 1975-1981
and Datastream London Euro-currency 1981-1997, Finland Treasury bill 1975-1987 and HELIBOR rate
(1987-1997), France Lombard Odier & Cie 1975-1979 and Datastream London Euro-currency 1980-1997,
Germany France Lombard Odier & Cie 1975-1979 and Datastream London Euro-currency 1980-1997,
Ireland Treasury bill (IFS 60C) 1975-1979 and Datastream London Euro-currency 1980-1997, Italy
Treasury bill (IFS 60C) 1975-1992) and Datastream London Euro-currency 1992-1997, Netherlands
Lombard Odier & Cie 1975-1979 and Datastream London Euro-currency 1980-1997, Portugal Treasury bill
(IFS 60C) 1975-1992 and Datastream London Euro-currency 1992-1997, Spain Treasury bill (IFS 60C).

Yenret is the currency return based on the Yen/US exchange rate from Reuters. As above, the change in the
US/Yen exchange rate is added to the one-month Euro-yen interest rate (Lombard Odier & Cie 1975-1979
and Datastream London Euro-currency 1980-1997), and then converted to an excess return by the
subtracting the one-month Ibbotson and Associates US Treasury bill rate.

dG7UI is derived from a time-series model applied to the log difference of the G-7 weighted CPI’s. The
time-series model is a VAR on the G-7 weighted CPI’s, the G7 weighted real bill rates (G7RTB), and the
log change in the G-7 weighted industrial production index (dG7IP, specified below) The residuals from
the first equation in this estimation structure are taken as unanticipated inflation (dG7UI). From OECD.

dG7ELT is the result of projecting the four-year moving average of the G-7 inflation on the lagged global
information variables specified below.

G7RTB is calculated by aggregating individual countries' short-term interest rates (same as those in



                                                      24
country-specific information variables-- weighted by using countries' previous quarters share in G-7 GDP,
then subtract the G-7 inflation rate to get a real rate). The following interest rates are employed: Canada 90-
day Treasury bill (IFS 60C), France 90-day bill (IFS 60C), Germany 90-day bill (IFS 60C), Italy 180-day
bill (IFS 60B), Japan commercial paper from 1975-1976 (IFS 60B) and the Gensaki rate from 1977-1997
(IFS GBD3M), United Kingdom 90-day bill (IFS 60C), and the United States 90-day bill (IFS 60C).

dOil is the log change in the price (US$) per barrel at the well head, from Datastream.

dG7IP is the log difference in the G-7 aggregate industrial production index. From OECD.

WRPBRET is the return from a portfolio long in the first fractile (low b/m assets) and short in the third
fractile (high b/m assets) from Fama for the period 1975-90 and updated using FACTSET for the period
1990-97.



B. GLOBAL INSTRUMENTS:

LTED is the lagged spread between the Eurodollar and Treasury yield used in the construction of dTED
above.

LTERM is the lagged spread (slope of the term structure) between the US 10-year Treasury bond yield and
the 90-day-bill yield. From FRED.

TB1 is the US Treasury bill one-month yield. This variable is not lagged, because the nominal one-month
yield is known at the end of the previous month.

LWRDIVY is the lagged dividend yield on the MSCI world index. The numerator is a 12-month moving
sum of the dividends, and the denominator is the current index level.

LWRPB is the lagged price to book ratio on the MSCI world index.

LDELTB3 is the lagged difference between the three-month T-bill rate. From FRED.



C. LOCAL INSTRUMENTS (country specific):

LDIVY is the lagged local MSCI dividend yield. The numerator is a 12-month moving sum of the
dividends, and the denominator is the current index level.

LSHORT is the lagged local short interest rate. The short-term interest rates for the various countries are
listed together with their series codes from IFS. These are as follows: Australia 13-week T-bill (IFS 60C),
Austria money market rate (IFS 60B), Belgium 3-month bill (IFS 60C), Canada 3-month bill (IFS 60C),
Denmark call money rate (IFS 60B), France 3-month interbank (IFS 60B), Germany Frankfurt 90-day rate
(IFS 60B), Hong Kong, no data, US 3-month bill used, Italy 6-month bill (IFS 60C), Japan commercial
paper from 1975-1976 (IFS 60B) and the Gensaki rate from 1977-1997 (IFS GBD3M), Netherlands call
money rate 1975-1978 (IFS 60B) and 3-month bill 1978-1997 (IFS 60C), Norway call money rate (IFS
60B), Singapore, no data, US 3-month bill used, Spain call money rate (IFS 60B), Sweden 3-month bill
(IFS 60C), Switzerland call money rate (IFS 60B), United Kingdom 3-month bill (IFS 60C), United States
3-month bill (IFS 60C).

LTERMLOC is the lagged local term premium: the difference between the long-term interest rates and the
above short-term interest rates. These are as follows: Australia 15-year Treasury bond (IFS 61), Austria
government bond (IFS 61), Belgium government bond (IFS 61), Canada government bond (IFS 61),
Denmark government bond (IFS 61), France government bond (IFS 61), Germany government bond (IFS


                                                      25
61), Hong Kong, no data, US Treasury bond used, Italy government bond (IFS 61), Japan government bond
(IFS 61), Netherlands government bond (IFS 61), Norway call money rate (IFS 61), Singapore, no data, US
Treasury bond used, Spain government bond (IFS 61), Sweden government bond (IFS 61), Switzerland
government bond (IFS 60B), United Kingdom government bond (IFS 61), United States Treasury bond
(IFS 61).


D. Euro construction

DATASTREAM uses the following formula is for the Euro.

DM/Euro = (.03139*7.03552*DM/AUSTSCH + .03866*20.6255*DM/BELGLUX +
           .02339*3.04001*DM/FINMARK + .22064*3.35386*DM/FRENFRA +
          .01132*.0402676*DM/IPUNTER+.20039*990.002*DM/ITALIRE +
          .05596*1.12674*DM/GUILDER + .01255*102.505*DM/PORTESC +
         .09257*85.07722*DM/SPANPES + .31315)*1.97738

For each currency item, the first figure is the 1996 GDP EMU-in country weighting (percentage of GDP to
total EMU-in GDP), i.e. .03139 is the GDP weighting of Austria, .22064 is the weighting of France,
and .31315 is the weighting of Germany. The second factor is the fixed exchange rate to 1 Deutschemark,
i.e 7.03552 Austrian schillings and 3.35386 French francs. This formula gives DM to one Euro. It is
important to understand how they do this. They take the exchange rates for each of these countries to the
ECU for May 4, 1998 (instead of Jan 1, 1999), imagining that the monetary union took place on
that day with those rates as the official/announced rates. These fixed cross rates, the second weighting
factor above, are computed from the currency to ECU for May 4, for example the DM to
EURO is 1.99738 and the AUSTSCH to EURO is 13.9119, so the imagined ‘fixed’ cross rate is the
7.03552 used above. The idea is that since one ECU will become one EURO on Jan 1, 1999, those rates are
the best guess as to what the official conversion rates will be. Finally, the rates such as
DM/AUSTSCH are the actual historical exchange rates between these two countries for
the time period of interest.




                                                   26
                                                                       Figure 1
        Proportion of Unconditional Variation Explained by Linear
                             Factor Models
                  1-Factor                  2-Factor                   3-Factor                  6-Factor                  7-Factor



    1

 0.8

 0.6

 0.4

 0.2

    0




                                                                                                m
                                                                                               nd
             a



          um




             k




                                                                                                 s
            ia




           ng
 Ho any




                                                                                                e
           ce




                                                                        ly




                                                                                               en
                                                                                               ds
                                                                                 Ne pan




                                                                                              ain
                                                                                               ay
   De a




                                                                                             ate
         ali




                                                                                              or
          ar
          d
        str




                                                                                             do
                                                                     Ita




                                                                                            rla
                                                                                           lan
       an




      Ko




                                                                                            ed
                                                                                           rw
       na
      lgi



     nm




                                                                                          ap

                                                                                          Sp
      str




     rm




                                                                                          Ja




                                                                                          St
     Au




                                                                                         ng
     Fr




                                                                                       tze
                                                                                      Sw
    Ca




                                                                                      No
                                                                                        er
    Be




                                                                                      ng
   Au




   ng
   Ge




                                                                                       d
                                                                                     Ki
                                                                                     th




                                                                                      i



                                                                                   ite
                                                                                   Si




                                                                                 Sw

                                                                                  d

                                                                                Un
                                                                               ite
                                                                             Un
R2 from linear factor model regressions. 1-Factor is the world market return. 2-Factor is the world market plus the world price to book return. 3-Factor is the
world market return plus two currency excess returns. 4-Factor is the three factor plus the world price to book return.
                         Figure 2

                    Australia
              January 1975 to June 1998
         2
                          Single         Stage 1   Ratification of   Creation
       1.5             European Act      EMU       Maastricht        of EMI


         1

       0.5
Beta




         0

       -0.5
                                                    Establishment of    Target Fixed
        -1                                          Single Market       Rates Announced


       -1.5
       19 5
       19 6
       19 7
         78

       19 9
       19 0
       19 1
       19 2
       19 3
       19 4
       19 5
       19 6
       19 7
       19 8
       19 9
         90

       19 1
       19 2
       19 3
       19 4
       19 5
       19 6
       19 7
         98
         7
         7
         7

         7
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8

         9
         9
         9
         9
         9
         9
         9
       19




       19




       19         Market              Euro         Yen




                         Figure 2

                     Austria
              January 1975 to June 1998
         2
                          Single         Stage 1   Ratification of   Creation
       1.5             European Act      EMU       Maastricht        of EMI


         1

       0.5
Beta




         0

       -0.5
                                                    Establishment of    Target Fixed
        -1                                          Single Market       Rates Announced


       -1.5
       19 5
       19 6
       19 7
         78

       19 9
       19 0
       19 1
       19 2
       19 3
       19 4
       19 5
       19 6
       19 7
       19 8
       19 9
         90

       19 1
       19 2
       19 3
       19 4
       19 5
       19 6
       19 7
         98
         7
         7
         7

         7
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8

         9
         9
         9
         9
         9
         9
         9
       19




       19




       19




                  Market              Euro         Yen




                                                                                          1
                         Figure 2

                    Belgium
              January 1975 to June 1998
         2
                          Single         Stage 1   Ratification of   Creation
       1.5             European Act      EMU       Maastricht        of EMI


         1

       0.5
Beta




         0

       -0.5
                                                    Establishment of    Target Fixed
        -1                                          Single Market       Rates Announced

       -1.5
       19 5
       19 6
       19 7
         78

       19 9
       19 0
       19 1
       19 2
       19 3
       19 4
       19 5
       19 6
       19 7
       19 8
       19 9
         90

       19 1
       19 2
       19 3
       19 4
       19 5
       19 6
       19 7
         98
         7
         7
         7

         7
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8

         9
         9
         9
         9
         9
         9
         9
       19




       19




       19         Market              Euro         Yen




                         Figure 2

                     Canada
              January 1975 to June 1998
         2
                          Single         Stage 1   Ratification of   Creation
       1.5             European Act      EMU       Maastricht        of EMI


         1

       0.5
Beta




         0

       -0.5
                                                    Establishment of    Target Fixed
        -1                                          Single Market       Rates Announced

       -1.5
       19 5
       19 6
       19 7
         78

       19 9
       19 0
       19 1
       19 2
       19 3
       19 4
       19 5
       19 6
       19 7
       19 8
       19 9
         90

       19 1
       19 2
       19 3
       19 4
       19 5
       19 6
       19 7
         98
         7
         7
         7

         7
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8

         9
         9
         9
         9
         9
         9
         9
       19




       19




       19




                  Market              Euro         Yen




                                                                                          2
                         Figure 2

                    Denmark
              January 1975 to June 1998
         2
                          Single         Stage 1   Ratification of   Creation
       1.5             European Act      EMU       Maastricht        of EMI


         1

       0.5
Beta




         0

       -0.5
                                                    Establishment of    Target Fixed
        -1                                          Single Market       Rates Announced

       -1.5
       19 5
       19 6
       19 7
         78

       19 9
       19 0
       19 1
       19 2
       19 3
       19 4
       19 5
       19 6
       19 7
       19 8
       19 9
         90

       19 1
       19 2
       19 3
       19 4
       19 5
       19 6
       19 7
         98
         7
         7
         7

         7
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8

         9
         9
         9
         9
         9
         9
         9
       19




       19




       19         Market              Euro         Yen




                         Figure 2

                     France
              January 1975 to June 1998
         2
                          Single         Stage 1   Ratification of   Creation
       1.5             European Act      EMU       Maastricht        of EMI


         1

       0.5
Beta




         0

       -0.5
                                                    Establishment of    Target Fixed
        -1                                          Single Market       Rates Announced

       -1.5
       19 5
       19 6
       19 7
         78

       19 9
       19 0
       19 1
       19 2
       19 3
       19 4
       19 5
       19 6
       19 7
       19 8
       19 9
         90

       19 1
       19 2
       19 3
       19 4
       19 5
       19 6
       19 7
         98
         7
         7
         7

         7
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8

         9
         9
         9
         9
         9
         9
         9
       19




       19




       19




                  Market              Euro         Yen




                                                                                          3
                         Figure 2

                    Germany
              January 1975 to June 1998
         2
                          Single         Stage 1   Ratification of   Creation
       1.5             European Act      EMU       Maastricht        of EMI


         1

       0.5
Beta




         0

       -0.5
                                                    Establishment of    Target Fixed
        -1                                          Single Market       Rates Announced

       -1.5
       19 5
       19 6
       19 7
         78

       19 9
       19 0
       19 1
       19 2
       19 3
       19 4
       19 5
       19 6
       19 7
       19 8
       19 9
         90

       19 1
       19 2
       19 3
       19 4
       19 5
       19 6
       19 7
         98
         7
         7
         7

         7
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8

         9
         9
         9
         9
         9
         9
         9
       19




       19




       19         Market              Euro         Yen




                         Figure 2

                  Hong Kong
              January 1975 to June 1998
         2
                          Single         Stage 1   Ratification of   Creation
       1.5             European Act      EMU       Maastricht        of EMI


         1

       0.5
Beta




         0

       -0.5
                                                    Establishment of    Target Fixed
        -1                                          Single Market       Rates Announced


       -1.5
       19 5
       19 6
       19 7
         78

       19 9
       19 0
       19 1
       19 2
       19 3
       19 4
       19 5
       19 6
       19 7
       19 8
       19 9
         90

       19 1
       19 2
       19 3
       19 4
       19 5
       19 6
       19 7
         98
         7
         7
         7

         7
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8

         9
         9
         9
         9
         9
         9
         9
       19




       19




       19




                  Market              Euro         Yen




                                                                                          4
                         Figure 2

                       Italy
              January 1975 to June 1998
         2
                          Single         Stage 1   Ratification of   Creation
       1.5             European Act      EMU       Maastricht        of EMI


         1

       0.5
Beta




         0

       -0.5
                                                    Establishment of    Target Fixed
        -1                                          Single Market       Rates Announced

       -1.5
       19 5
       19 6
       19 7
         78

       19 9
       19 0
       19 1
       19 2
       19 3
       19 4
       19 5
       19 6
       19 7
       19 8
       19 9
         90

       19 1
       19 2
       19 3
       19 4
       19 5
       19 6
       19 7
         98
         7
         7
         7

         7
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8

         9
         9
         9
         9
         9
         9
         9
       19




       19




       19         Market              Euro         Yen




                         Figure 2

                      Japan
              January 1975 to June 1998
         2
                          Single         Stage 1   Ratification of   Creation
       1.5             European Act      EMU       Maastricht        of EMI


         1

       0.5
Beta




         0

       -0.5
                                                    Establishment of    Target Fixed
        -1                                          Single Market       Rates Announced

       -1.5
       19 5
       19 6
       19 7
         78

       19 9
       19 0
       19 1
       19 2
       19 3
       19 4
       19 5
       19 6
       19 7
       19 8
       19 9
         90

       19 1
       19 2
       19 3
       19 4
       19 5
       19 6
       19 7
         98
         7
         7
         7

         7
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8

         9
         9
         9
         9
         9
         9
         9
       19




       19




       19




                  Market              Euro         Yen




                                                                                          5
                         Figure 2

              The Netherlands
              January 1975 to June 1998
         2
                          Single         Stage 1   Ratification of   Creation
       1.5             European Act      EMU       Maastricht        of EMI


         1

       0.5
Beta




         0

       -0.5
                                                    Establishment of    Target Fixed
        -1                                          Single Market       Rates Announced

       -1.5
       19 5
       19 6
       19 7
         78

       19 9
       19 0
       19 1
       19 2
       19 3
       19 4
       19 5
       19 6
       19 7
       19 8
       19 9
         90

       19 1
       19 2
       19 3
       19 4
       19 5
       19 6
       19 7
         98
         7
         7
         7

         7
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8

         9
         9
         9
         9
         9
         9
         9
       19




       19




       19         Market              Euro         Yen




                         Figure 2

                    Norway
              January 1975 to June 1998
         2
                          Single         Stage 1   Ratification of   Creation
       1.5             European Act      EMU       Maastricht        of EMI


         1

       0.5
Beta




         0

       -0.5
                                                    Establishment of    Target Fixed
        -1                                          Single Market       Rates Announced

       -1.5
       19 5
       19 6
       19 7
         78

       19 9
       19 0
       19 1
       19 2
       19 3
       19 4
       19 5
       19 6
       19 7
       19 8
       19 9
         90

       19 1
       19 2
       19 3
       19 4
       19 5
       19 6
       19 7
         98
         7
         7
         7

         7
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8

         9
         9
         9
         9
         9
         9
         9
       19




       19




       19




                  Market              Euro         Yen




                                                                                          6
                         Figure 2

                   Singapore
              January 1975 to June 1998
         2
                          Single         Stage 1   Ratification of   Creation
       1.5             European Act      EMU       Maastricht        of EMI


         1

       0.5
Beta




         0

       -0.5
                                                    Establishment of    Target Fixed
        -1                                          Single Market       Rates Announced

       -1.5
       19 5
       19 6
       19 7
         78

       19 9
       19 0
       19 1
       19 2
       19 3
       19 4
       19 5
       19 6
       19 7
       19 8
       19 9
         90

       19 1
       19 2
       19 3
       19 4
       19 5
       19 6
       19 7
         98
         7
         7
         7

         7
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8

         9
         9
         9
         9
         9
         9
         9
       19




       19




       19         Market              Euro         Yen




                         Figure 2

                      Spain
              January 1975 to June 1998
         2
                          Single         Stage 1   Ratification of   Creation
       1.5             European Act      EMU       Maastricht        of EMI


         1

       0.5
Beta




         0

       -0.5
                                                    Establishment of    Target Fixed
        -1                                          Single Market       Rates Announced

       -1.5
       19 5
       19 6
       19 7
         78

       19 9
       19 0
       19 1
       19 2
       19 3
       19 4
       19 5
       19 6
       19 7
       19 8
       19 9
         90

       19 1
       19 2
       19 3
       19 4
       19 5
       19 6
       19 7
         98
         7
         7
         7

         7
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8

         9
         9
         9
         9
         9
         9
         9
       19




       19




       19




                  Market              Euro         Yen




                                                                                          7
                         Figure 2

                    Sweden
              January 1975 to June 1998
         2
                          Single         Stage 1   Ratification of   Creation
       1.5             European Act      EMU       Maastricht        of EMI


         1

       0.5
Beta




         0

       -0.5
                                                    Establishment of    Target Fixed
        -1                                          Single Market       Rates Announced

       -1.5
       19 5
       19 6
       19 7
         78

       19 9
       19 0
       19 1
       19 2
       19 3
       19 4
       19 5
       19 6
       19 7
       19 8
       19 9
         90

       19 1
       19 2
       19 3
       19 4
       19 5
       19 6
       19 7
         98
         7
         7
         7

         7
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8

         9
         9
         9
         9
         9
         9
         9
       19




       19




       19         Market              Euro         Yen




                         Figure 2

                  Switzerland
              January 1975 to June 1998
         2
                          Single         Stage 1   Ratification of   Creation
       1.5             European Act      EMU       Maastricht        of EMI


         1

       0.5
Beta




         0

       -0.5
                                                    Establishment of    Target Fixed
        -1                                          Single Market       Rates Announced

       -1.5
       19 5
       19 6
       19 7
         78

       19 9
       19 0
       19 1
       19 2
       19 3
       19 4
       19 5
       19 6
       19 7
       19 8
       19 9
         90

       19 1
       19 2
       19 3
       19 4
       19 5
       19 6
       19 7
         98
         7
         7
         7

         7
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8

         9
         9
         9
         9
         9
         9
         9
       19




       19




       19




                  Market              Euro         Yen




                                                                                          8
                         Figure 2

              United Kingdom
              January 1975 to June 1998
         2
                          Single         Stage 1   Ratification of   Creation
       1.5             European Act      EMU       Maastricht        of EMI


         1

       0.5
Beta




         0

       -0.5
                                                    Establishment of    Target Fixed
        -1                                          Single Market       Rates Announced

       -1.5
       19 5
       19 6
       19 7
         78

       19 9
       19 0
       19 1
       19 2
       19 3
       19 4
       19 5
       19 6
       19 7
       19 8
       19 9
         90

       19 1
       19 2
       19 3
       19 4
       19 5
       19 6
       19 7
         98
         7
         7
         7

         7
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8

         9
         9
         9
         9
         9
         9
         9
       19




       19




       19         Market              Euro         Yen




                         Figure 2

                 United States
              January 1975 to June 1998
         2
                          Single         Stage 1   Ratification of   Creation
       1.5             European Act      EMU       Maastricht        of EMI


         1

       0.5
Beta




         0

       -0.5
                                                    Establishment of    Target Fixed
        -1                                          Single Market       Rates Announced

       -1.5
       19 5
       19 6
       19 7
         78

       19 9
       19 0
       19 1
       19 2
       19 3
       19 4
       19 5
       19 6
       19 7
       19 8
       19 9
         90

       19 1
       19 2
       19 3
       19 4
       19 5
       19 6
       19 7
         98
         7
         7
         7

         7
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8
         8

         9
         9
         9
         9
         9
         9
         9
       19




       19




       19




                  Market              Euro         Yen




                                                                                          9
                                                                     Figure 3a
      Proportion of Predictable Variation Unexplained by Models
                               4-Factor                  3-Factor                  2-Factor                  1-Factor



    1

 0.8

 0.6

 0.4

 0.2

    0




                                                                                                d

                                                                                               m
          um
             a




                                                                                                s
             k




           ng
            ia




 Ho any




                                                                                               e
                                                                        ly




                                                                                              en
                                                                                               n




                                                                                             ain
           ce




                                                                                              ds

                                                                                              ay
  De a




                                                                                            ate
         ali




                                                                                            lan
                                                                                             or
          ar
          d




                                                                                            pa
        str




                                                                                            do
                                                                     Ita




                                                                                         lan
       an




      Ko




                                                                                           ed
                                                                                          rw
       na
      lgi




     nm




                                                                                         Sp
                                                                                         ap
      str




     rm




                                                                                         Ja




                                                                                         St
                                                                             Un itzer
    Au




                                                                                        ng
     Fr




                                                                                      Sw
    Ca




                                                                                     No
   Be




                                                                                       er




                                                                                      ng
   Au




   ng
  Ge




                                                                                      d
                                                                                     Ki
                                                                                    th




                                                                                   ite
                                                                                   Si




                                                                                  Sw
                                                                                 Ne




                                                                                  d

                                                                               Un
                                                                               ite
Bars represent one minus the variance ratios reported in Table 8. 1-Factor is the world market return. 2-Factor is the world market plus the world price to
book return. 3-Factor is the world market return plus two currency excess returns. 4-Factor is the three factor plus the world price to book return.
                                                                     Figure 3b
      Proportion of Predictable Variation Unexplained by Models
                                                7-Factor               6-Factor              3-Factor



    1

 0.8

 0.6

 0.4

 0.2
    0




                                                                                                                                      d

                                                                                                                                      m
          um
             a




                                                                                                                                       s
             k




           ng
            ia




             y




                                                                                          e
                                                                          ly




                                                                                                                                     en
                                                                                          n




                                                                                                                 ain
           ce




                                                                                         ds

                                                                                         ay
          da




                                                                                                                                   ate
         ali




                                                                                                                                    an
                                                                                        or
          ar




         an




                                                                                       pa
        str




                                                                                                                                   do
                                                                       Ita




                                                                                     lan
       an




      Ko




                                                                                                                                  ed
                                                                                      rw
       na
      lgi




     nm




                                                                                                               Sp
                                                                                     ap




                                                                                                                                 erl
      str




     rm




                                                                                    Ja




                                                                                                                                 St
     Au




                                                                                                                                ng
     Fr




                                                                                                                              Sw
    Ca




                                                                                  No
    Be




                                                                                   er




                                                                                  ng
   Au




                                                                                                                              itz
   ng
  De




  Ge




                                                                                                                               d
                                                                                                                             Ki
                                                                                 th




                                                                                                                           ite
                                                                                Si




                                                                                                                          Sw
 Ho




                                                                               Ne




                                                                                                                          d

                                                                                                                        Un
                                                                                                                       ite
                                                                                                                     Un
Bars represent one minus the variance ratios reported in Table 8. 3-Factor is the world market return plus two currency excess returns. 6-Factor is the 3-Factor
plus three economic factors. 7-Factor is the 6-Factor model plus world price to book return.
                                                                     Figure 4a
     Average Pricing Errors of Conditional Asset Pricing Models
                                     4-Factor              3-Factor              2-Factor               1-Factor



  15

  10

    5

    0

  -5




                                                                                               d

                                                                                              m
          um
             a




                                                                                               s
             k




           ng




                                                                                              e
            ia




 Ho any




                                                                        ly




                                                                                             en
                                                                                              n




                                                                                            ain
           ce




                                                                                             ay
                                                                                             ds
  De a




                                                                                           ate
         ali




                                                                                           lan
                                                                                            or
          ar
          d




                                                                                           pa
        str




                                                                                           do
                                                                     Ita




                                                                                         lan
       an




      Ko




                                                                                          ed
                                                                                          rw
       na
      lgi




     nm




                                                                                         ap

                                                                                         Sp
      str




     rm




                                                                                         Ja




                                                                                         St
                                                                             Un itzer
    Au




                                                                                        ng
     Fr




                                                                                      Sw
    Ca




                                                                                     No
   Be




                                                                                       er




                                                                                      ng
   Au




   ng
  Ge




                                                                                      d
                                                                                     Ki
                                                                                    th




                                                                                   ite
                                                                                   Si




                                                                                  Sw
                                                                                 Ne




                                                                                  d

                                                                               Un
                                                                               ite
Bars represent annualized percentage average pricing errors reported in Table 8. 3-Factor is the world market return plus two currency excess returns. 6-Factor
is the 3-Factor plus three economic factors. 7-Factor is the 6-Factor model plus world price to book return.
                                                                      Figure 4b
     Average Pricing Errors of Conditional Asset Pricing Models
                                                 7-Factor               6-Factor               3-Factor



  15

  10

    5

    0

  -5




                                                                                                                                        d

                                                                                                                                        m
          um
             a




                                                                                                                                         s
             k




           ng
            ia




             y




                                                                                           e
                                                                           ly




                                                                                                                                       en
                                                                                           n




                                                                                                                  ain
           ce




                                                                                          ds

                                                                                          ay
          da




                                                                                                                                     ate
         ali




                                                                                                                                      an
                                                                                         or
          ar




         an




                                                                                        pa
        str




                                                                                                                                     do
                                                                        Ita




                                                                                      lan
       an




      Ko




                                                                                                                                    ed
                                                                                       rw
       na
      lgi




     nm




                                                                                                                Sp
                                                                                      ap




                                                                                                                                   erl
      str




     rm




                                                                                     Ja




                                                                                                                                   St
     Au




                                                                                                                                  ng
     Fr




                                                                                                                                Sw
    Ca




                                                                                   No
    Be




                                                                                    er




                                                                                   ng
   Au




                                                                                                                                itz
   ng
  De




  Ge




                                                                                                                                 d
                                                                                                                               Ki
                                                                                  th




                                                                                                                             ite
                                                                                 Si




                                                                                                                            Sw
 Ho




                                                                                Ne




                                                                                                                            d

                                                                                                                          Un
                                                                                                                         ite
                                                                                                                       Un
Bars represent annualized percentage average pricing errors reported in Table 8. 1-Factor is the world market return. 2-Factor is the world market plus the
world price to book return. 3-Factor is the world market return plus two currency excess returns. 4-Factor is the three factor plus the world price to book return.
Table 1
Summary statistics for the world risk factors and instrumental variables
January 1975 to December 1997

Variable                                         Symbol      Mean x 100 Std. Dev. x 100                ρ1              ρ2           ρ3            ρ4             ρ12           ρ24
World risk factors
World excess return                              wdret              0.692           4.027           0.029          -0.032       -0.029       -0.039            0.011        0.082
Euro currency excess return                      euroret            0.067           3.035           0.031           0.118        0.039        0.014            0.000        0.016
Yen currency excess return                       yenret             0.243           3.494           0.096           0.061        0.105        0.054            0.089       -0.057
World Price-book high-low return                 wrpbret            0.527           2.132           0.137           0.063        0.044       -0.115            0.153        0.066
Change in Eurodollar-Treasury yield              dted              -0.001           0.034          -0.080          -0.092       -0.061       -0.126            0.042       -0.085
Unexpected G7 inflation                          dg7ui             -0.007           0.170           0.108          -0.028        0.002       -0.045            0.046        0.104
Change in long-term G7 expected inflation        dg7elt             0.484           0.199           0.978           0.962        0.951        0.937            0.846        0.746
Change in price of oil                           doil               0.345           7.035           0.368           0.021       -0.021       -0.050           -0.069       -0.051
Change in G7 industrial prod.                    dg7ip              0.207           0.677          -0.063           0.154        0.231        0.078           -0.053       -0.128
G7 real interest rate                            g7rtb              0.206           0.264           0.576           0.389        0.393        0.442            0.618        0.445

Instrumental variables
Lagged world dividend yield                      lwrdivy           0.285            0.093          0.982           0.967        0.955         0.942           0.844        0.749
Lagged Euro-dollar Treasury spread               lted              0.049            0.047          0.839           0.683        0.554         0.496           0.372        0.282
Lagged slope of US term structure                lterm             0.131            0.123          0.942           0.854        0.784         0.722           0.487        0.200
30-day US Treasury bill rate                     tb1               0.568            0.233          0.939           0.889        0.854         0.819           0.672        0.399
Lagged world price-book ratio*                   lwrpb*            1.819            0.540          0.976           0.956        0.933         0.913           0.762        0.617

Correlations among world risk factors
                                                 wdret      euroret       yenret             wrpbret        dted            dg7ui        dg7elt        doil            dg7ip         g7rtb
                                      wdret           1.000
                                     euroret          0.258         1.000
                                      yenret          0.327         0.593            1.000
                                     wrpbret         -0.190       -0.136            -0.127          1.000
                                        dted         -0.045       -0.021            -0.074         -0.011           1.000
                                      dg7ui          -0.041       -0.014            -0.013          0.023          -0.064        1.000
                                      dg7elt          0.036       -0.080            -0.115          0.038          -0.024       -0.024        1.000
                                        doil         -0.179       -0.015            -0.045          0.059           0.015        0.268        0.078            1.000
                                      dg7ip          -0.140       -0.070            -0.053          0.037          -0.033        0.029       -0.092           -0.012        1.000
                                       g7rtb          0.052         0.057            0.001         -0.103          -0.001       -0.605       -0.305           -0.272       -0.086            1.000

Correlations among world instruments
                                                 lwrdivy    lted            lterm            tb1            lwrpb
                                     lwrdivy          1.000
                                          lted        0.623         1.000
                                        lterm        -0.440        -0.402            1.000
                                           tb1        0.612         0.470           -0.692          1.000
                                       lwrpb         -0.953        -0.490            0.275         -0.481          1.000
Table 2
Regressions of the asset returns on the world risk factors
January 1975 to December 1997
                                                                                                                               Adj. R2   Adj. R2   Adj. R2   Adj. R2    Adj. R2   Adj. R2   Adj. R2
     Country  intercept         wdret    euroret    yenret   wrpbret    dg7ui   dg7elt      dted    g7rtb      doil    dg7ip   1factor   3factor   2factor   9factor   10factor   6factor   7factor
Australia        0.002          1.041    -0.238      0.056     0.446    4.020   -0.698     5.486   -0.320    0.096    -0.056    0.273     0.277     0.291     0.292      0.302     0.291     0.305
                 0.012          0.166     0.143      0.133     0.184    3.046    1.944    16.464    1.976    0.055     0.544
Austria         -0.003          0.388     0.758     -0.049     0.456    2.835   -1.123   -27.854    2.445   -0.099     0.969    0.096     0.195     0.105     0.235      0.242     0.205     0.223
                 0.011          0.393     0.136      0.111     0.148    2.776    1.545     9.730    1.455    0.081     0.536
Belgium         -0.001          0.794     0.601     -0.099     0.306    1.300   -0.497    -0.987    1.905   -0.060     0.406    0.391     0.467     0.397     0.479      0.482     0.473     0.485
                 0.008          0.082     0.097      0.078     0.100    1.665    1.330    11.946    1.283    0.037     0.368
Canada          -0.005          1.050    -0.108     -0.260     0.143   -0.655    0.417    -1.969   -0.382    0.079     0.272    0.460     0.497     0.464     0.500      0.501     0.503     0.505
                 0.008          0.073     0.106      0.098     0.105    2.030    1.411    10.200    1.379    0.034     0.353
Denmark          0.014          0.624     0.456     -0.043     0.084   -2.589   -2.343     0.835   -0.170    0.059    -0.006    0.265     0.322     0.262     0.321      0.320     0.325     0.324
                 0.009          0.066     0.113      0.086     0.143    2.003    1.396     9.651    1.413    0.041     0.411
France          -0.008          0.992     0.632     -0.077     0.258    1.958    1.375   -10.197    0.549   -0.060     0.341    0.406     0.459     0.406     0.458      0.459     0.457     0.461
                 0.010          0.086     0.128      0.125     0.162    2.237    1.783    13.412    1.569    0.034     0.440
Germany         -0.003          0.743     0.783     -0.196     0.484   -0.809    0.055   -30.403    1.097   -0.084     0.122    0.315     0.415     0.331     0.430      0.462     0.424     0.452
                 0.009          0.089     0.115      0.097     0.145    1.997    1.388    11.343    1.402    0.045     0.435
Hong Kong        0.013          1.244    -0.197     -0.028     0.731   -2.251   -0.622   -28.917   -2.825    0.031    -0.995    0.234     0.235     0.262     0.235      0.258     0.231     0.256
                 0.018          0.172     0.207      0.198     0.229    4.375    3.088    25.302    2.702    0.065     0.751
Italy           -0.002          0.813     0.259     -0.043     0.205   -4.744   -0.078   -13.281    0.851   -0.090    -0.121    0.205     0.206     0.204     0.217      0.218     0.218     0.219
                 0.014          0.094     0.195      0.142     0.225    3.348    2.230    14.720    1.988    0.065     0.565
Japan           -0.006          0.949    -0.247      0.911    -0.002    1.236    1.010    -5.707    0.311   -0.046    -0.411    0.507     0.667     0.506     0.663      0.663     0.665     0.664
                 0.007          0.083     0.096      0.091     0.139    1.817    1.156     8.836    1.093    0.046     0.385
Netherlands      0.000          0.968     0.360     -0.132     0.345   -0.589    0.139     1.463    0.854    0.050     0.147    0.566     0.591     0.581     0.595      0.608     0.591     0.612
                 0.007          0.061     0.084      0.069     0.118    1.673    1.156     8.662    1.186    0.028     0.314
Norway           0.001          1.199     0.530     -0.484     0.560    2.207   -1.606     3.228    0.278    0.232     0.977    0.284     0.319     0.303     0.368      0.385     0.365     0.383
                 0.011          0.107     0.143      0.141     0.171    2.978    2.038    19.755    2.013    0.044     0.556
Singapore        0.001          1.255    -0.085     -0.116     0.765   -3.222    0.671    -7.611   -3.686    0.135    -0.957    0.313     0.315     0.360     0.350      0.383     0.340     0.381
                 0.012          0.166     0.159      0.149     0.241    3.073    1.995    17.048    2.135    0.059     0.616
Spain            0.023          0.772     0.365     -0.068     0.083    0.743   -4.909    -4.389    0.027   -0.125    -0.102    0.251     0.268     0.248     0.291      0.289     0.299     0.297
                 0.011          0.113     0.154      0.121     0.188    2.882    1.767    13.258    1.901    0.055     0.533
Sweden           0.004          0.919     0.094     -0.034     0.171    1.198   -0.914   -24.623    1.554   -0.057     0.254    0.321     0.317     0.320     0.319      0.320     0.317     0.317
                 0.012          0.090     0.122      0.108     0.191    2.572    1.872    14.225    1.833    0.059     0.490
Switzerland      0.007          0.844     0.601     -0.116     0.293   -2.724   -1.122   -15.022    0.170    0.002    -0.290    0.456     0.536     0.463     0.540      0.552     0.535     0.549
                 0.008          0.072     0.095      0.079     0.128    1.756    1.196     8.493    1.144    0.032     0.409
United Kingdom -0.002           1.244     0.409     -0.179     0.604   -3.348    1.485     2.838   -1.796    0.056    -0.517    0.464     0.476     0.492     0.482      0.511     0.480     0.511
                 0.008          0.139     0.113      0.103     0.256    3.157    1.505    16.843    1.847    0.042     0.632
United States    0.006          0.960    -0.149     -0.349    -0.167   -0.939   -0.676     3.402    0.028    0.026     0.128    0.636     0.746     0.637     0.747      0.750     0.746     0.751
                 0.004          0.041     0.054      0.052     0.071    0.961    0.669     5.080    0.588    0.029     0.212

       χ2                  82.562       160.441    184.304   94.230    15.793   18.186   19.873    66.944   5.658     15.601
 β i = 0, all I             0.000         0.000      0.000    0.000     0.607    0.443    0.340     0.000   0.997      0.620
Table 3
Unconditional asset pricing tests
January 1975 to December 1997
                                One Factor Model       Three Factor Model                           Seven Factor Model
                                            Average                                      Average                                                                                 Average
                  Average           β       pricing       β          β          β        pricing       β           β          β          β          β         β         β        pricing
Country            return         wdret      error       wdret     euroret    yenret      error       wdret     euroret     yenret     wrpbret    dg7elt     g7rtb     doil       error
Australia             0.013         1.098    -0.0002       1.036     -0.266      0.024    -0.0006       1.111      -0.267      0.064      0.452     -0.749    -2.016     0.113    -0.0003
                                    0.117     0.0610       0.136      0.122      0.115     0.0600       0.145       0.128      0.123      0.149      1.502     0.970     0.045     0.0586
Austria              0.009          0.447     0.0007       0.316      0.781     -0.016     0.0003       0.355       0.702     -0.001      0.404     -2.019     0.486    -0.094     0.0002
                                    0.104     0.0610       0.118      0.134      0.111     0.0570       0.105       0.149      0.110      0.143      1.420     0.767     0.082     0.0554
Belgium              0.014          0.942     0.0021       0.814      0.599     -0.068     0.0015       0.803       0.578     -0.100      0.309     -0.688     1.165    -0.067    -0.0003
                                    0.065     0.0430       0.073      0.099      0.072     0.0400       0.074       0.103      0.077      0.088      1.241     0.762     0.028     0.0394
Canada               0.011          0.994    -0.0021       1.047     -0.097     -0.363    -0.0023       1.050      -0.118     -0.259      0.117      0.100    -1.050     0.062     0.0005
                                    0.073     0.0400       0.077      0.095      0.092     0.0380       0.072       0.096      0.097      0.087      1.139     0.669     0.036     0.0376
Denmark              0.013          0.661     0.0026       0.556      0.512     -0.075     0.0023       0.615       0.445     -0.041      0.075     -1.971     0.725     0.055     0.0004
                                    0.057     0.0450       0.056      0.107      0.074     0.0430       0.058       0.111      0.074      0.119      1.160     0.801     0.033     0.0425
France               0.014          1.183     0.0004       1.029      0.626     -0.042    -0.0003       1.006       0.584     -0.083      0.242      0.928     0.799    -0.043     0.0010
                                    0.078     0.0530       0.071      0.131      0.115     0.0500       0.072       0.135      0.118      0.147      1.610     0.720     0.034     0.0496
Germany              0.013          0.867     0.0012       0.719      0.731     -0.121     0.0009       0.762       0.749     -0.196      0.424      0.306     0.945    -0.083     0.0003
                                    0.090     0.0490       0.103      0.107      0.090     0.0450       0.090       0.116      0.092      0.138      1.191     0.716     0.047     0.0433
Hong Kong            0.021          1.208     0.0068       1.164     -0.243      0.051     0.0061       1.367      -0.227     -0.057      0.725      1.294    -1.104     0.052     0.0009
                                    0.145     0.0830       0.173      0.175      0.178     0.0820       0.166       0.184      0.178      0.199      2.791     1.410     0.059     0.0805
Italy                0.012          0.870    -0.0001       0.802      0.306     -0.042    -0.0008       0.809       0.282     -0.056      0.123      0.800     1.372    -0.142    -0.0020
                                    0.096     0.0690       0.093      0.159      0.131     0.0690       0.080       0.171      0.132      0.183      1.926     1.002     0.071     0.0677
Japan                0.012          1.039    -0.0006       0.921     -0.245      0.927    -0.0032       0.949      -0.204      0.864     -0.020      0.860    -0.434    -0.041    -0.0006
                                    0.082     0.0470       0.085      0.085      0.079     0.0390       0.084       0.090      0.076      0.145      1.136     0.736     0.042     0.0384
Netherlands          0.017          1.040     0.0043       0.935      0.361     -0.116     0.0040       0.993       0.328     -0.115      0.314      0.364     0.755     0.043    -0.0001
                                    0.060     0.0340       0.067      0.073      0.053     0.0320       0.055       0.072      0.054      0.109      0.968     0.633     0.026     0.0314
Norway               0.012          1.114    -0.0011       1.045      0.612     -0.594    -0.0007       1.196       0.472     -0.453      0.504     -2.622    -1.654     0.226     0.0001
                                    0.105     0.0640       0.117      0.130      0.106     0.0620       0.105       0.135      0.128      0.146      1.961     1.219     0.040     0.0587
Singapore            0.014          1.143     0.0001       1.099     -0.119     -0.062    -0.0004       1.315      -0.065     -0.143      0.780      2.246    -2.469     0.138    -0.0003
                                    0.150     0.0660       0.173      0.146      0.128     0.0650       0.148       0.141      0.125      0.203      1.889     1.182     0.057     0.0617
Spain                0.010          0.818    -0.0016       0.763      0.362     -0.064    -0.0023       0.783       0.361     -0.084      0.109     -4.251     0.288    -0.123     0.0000
                                    0.102     0.0590       0.112      0.136      0.116     0.0580       0.110       0.139      0.110      0.205      1.607     1.026     0.065     0.0562
Sweden               0.016          0.886     0.0044       0.894      0.034      0.052     0.0032       0.957       0.089     -0.067      0.185     -2.026     0.375    -0.040     0.0014
                                    0.085     0.0540       0.094      0.093      0.100     0.0540       0.095       0.102      0.096      0.155      1.441     0.816     0.045     0.0539
Switzerland          0.015          0.923     0.0026       0.817      0.605     -0.092     0.0020       0.868       0.579     -0.120      0.291     -0.008     1.014    -0.003    -0.0003
                                    0.065     0.0400       0.075      0.086      0.071     0.0370       0.068       0.085      0.070      0.116      1.185     0.610     0.033     0.0361
United Kingdom       0.018          1.236     0.0036       1.209      0.378     -0.221     0.0027       1.308       0.385     -0.167      0.667      3.373     0.015     0.052    -0.0009
                                    0.142     0.0520       0.151      0.101      0.098     0.0510       0.143       0.105      0.087      0.212      1.438     0.930     0.037     0.0494
United States        0.014          0.914     0.0015       0.986     -0.168     -0.339     0.0013       0.956      -0.159     -0.338     -0.161     -0.711     0.545     0.024     0.0006
                                    0.044     0.0260       0.047      0.053      0.046     0.0210       0.044       0.053      0.043      0.070      0.545     0.470     0.025     0.0208

                                    λ         χ2           λ          λ         λ         χ2            λ          λ          λ           λ          λ         λ        λ         χ2
                                  wdret   p-value/df     wdret     euroret    yenret  p-value/df      wdret     euroret     yenret     wrpbret    dg7elt     g7rtb     doil   p-value/df
                                   0.0069    18.795       0.0080     0.0013    0.0030    13.401        0.0064    -0.0068     0.0035      0.0120    -0.0003    0.0046   0.0186      5.165
                                   0.0004      0.405      0.0004     0.0021    0.0024      0.571       0.0012     0.0070     0.0055      0.0102     0.0010    0.0027   0.0245      0.923
                                             18.000                                      15.000                                                                                  11.000
Table 4
Proportion of times that the right-tail probability value is less than 10% for the statistic testing whether
the beta coefficients are equal to zero or equal across all countries
January 1975 to December 1997

Country               wdret     euroret   yenret   wrpbret      dted      dg7ui     dg7elt       doil    dg7ip   g7rtb   Adj. R2
Australia             1.000       0.245   0.255     0.454      0.000      0.222     0.120      0.116     0.000   0.222    0.334
Austria               0.389       0.713   0.097     0.412      0.389      0.319     0.426      0.204     0.009   0.329    0.384
Belgium               1.000       0.782   0.241     0.130      0.120      0.046     0.019      0.037     0.417   0.106    0.484
Canada                1.000       0.093   0.519     0.185      0.106      0.065     0.125      0.130     0.097   0.111    0.529
Denmark               1.000       0.639   0.065     0.065      0.065      0.236     0.380      0.120     0.176   0.157    0.344
France                1.000       0.764   0.222     0.065      0.310      0.093     0.134      0.167     0.046   0.097    0.502
Germany               1.000       0.991   0.171     0.523      0.389      0.157     0.171      0.204     0.079   0.019    0.511
Hong Kong             0.935       0.037   0.333     0.292      0.074      0.102     0.255      0.093     0.069   0.139    0.234
Italy                 0.977       0.255   0.111     0.185      0.046      0.259     0.194      0.375     0.009   0.218    0.303
Japan                 1.000       0.486   1.000     0.370      0.042      0.088     0.282      0.028     0.134   0.171    0.716
Netherlands           1.000       0.731   0.264     0.407      0.213      0.250     0.079      0.102     0.343   0.259    0.626
Norway                1.000       0.444   0.491     0.625      0.361      0.111     0.074      0.477     0.204   0.088    0.451
Singapore             0.968       0.000   0.264     0.269      0.079      0.102     0.065      0.130     0.023   0.153    0.348
Spain                 0.704       0.259   0.417     0.199      0.014      0.083     0.176      0.287     0.037   0.264    0.371
Sweden                0.940       0.014   0.157     0.009      0.222      0.148     0.106      0.218     0.171   0.060    0.330
Switzerland           1.000       0.815   0.167     0.356      0.324      0.060     0.134      0.051     0.236   0.088    0.574
United Kingdom        1.000       0.523   0.097     0.634      0.250      0.037     0.241      0.241     0.250   0.319    0.560
United States         1.000       0.222   0.995     0.449      0.000      0.093     0.222      0.125     0.222   0.130    0.745

βi = 0, all i         1.000      1.000    0.991      0.769     0.231      0.185     0.315      0.509     0.134   0.296
βi = β, all i         0.912      0.940    0.824      0.639     0.264      0.190     0.273      0.509     0.134   0.255
Table 5
Price to book value and time-varying risk
January 1975 to December 1997

A. Using high-low world price to book return
                                                                                             Conditional   Constant
                                        wdrett *          eurorett *            yenrett *       beta         beta
               intercept wdrett     wrpbrett-1 eurorett   wrpbrett-1 yenrett    wrpbrett-1       Adj. R2     Adj. R2
Australia            0.001    0.809    11.928      -0.176     -6.403      0.096     -6.611        0.276       0.277
                     0.004    0.104      7.604      0.143      5.799      0.122      6.591
Austria              0.001    0.344      4.786      0.739      3.293     -0.051     -2.428         0.192       0.195
                     0.004    0.144      3.797      0.159      6.658      0.128      5.413
Belgium              0.003    0.710      6.575      0.611      2.185     -0.090     -5.107         0.459       0.467
                     0.002    0.075      2.510      0.098      3.899      0.079      3.437
Canada              -0.002    0.994      0.099     -0.099     -4.463     -0.247     -0.311         0.481       0.497
                     0.002    0.086      2.244      0.106      3.928      0.101      3.853
Denmark              0.003    0.590      2.130      0.490      1.518     -0.064      0.046         0.315       0.322
                     0.003    0.077      2.547      0.115      6.384      0.088      4.135
France               0.001    0.938      0.901      0.598      0.313     -0.046     -2.224         0.435       0.459
                     0.003    0.074      3.264      0.129      6.176      0.126      5.673
Germany              0.002    0.702      2.980      0.766     -3.100     -0.185      0.792         0.403       0.415
                     0.003    0.114      4.073      0.124      5.029      0.102      4.164
Hong Kong            0.008    0.941    19.005      -0.132     -9.417      0.075    -11.820         0.244       0.235
                     0.005    0.164      5.354      0.210      8.295      0.195      7.767
Italy                0.000    0.855      0.612      0.222      8.999     -0.037     -6.454         0.198       0.206
                     0.004    0.118      3.442      0.202      9.017      0.146      6.602
Japan               -0.002    1.044     -3.356     -0.280      1.958      0.886      4.200         0.675       0.667
                     0.002    0.082      2.504      0.101      3.667      0.091      3.556
Netherlands          0.005    0.875      1.063      0.354     -0.115     -0.121     -2.081         0.572       0.591
                     0.002    0.062      2.109      0.086      3.280      0.070      3.248
Norway               0.001    0.999      6.549      0.555     -1.250     -0.500     -1.127         0.313       0.319
                     0.004    0.118      4.051      0.163      5.230      0.136      4.947
Singapore            0.000    0.908    13.036      -0.077     -4.187     -0.014     -9.618         0.307       0.315
                     0.004    0.133      6.045      0.165      6.652      0.149      7.001
Spain               -0.001    0.783      7.015      0.393    12.140      -0.080    -11.265         0.289       0.268
                     0.003    0.115      3.958      0.149      7.627      0.117      5.350
Sweden               0.004    0.908      2.462      0.111     -0.606     -0.013     -5.357         0.309       0.317
                     0.003    0.118      3.329      0.128      4.809      0.116      4.337
Switzerland          0.003    0.762      3.790      0.600      5.925     -0.076    -10.337         0.531       0.536
                     0.002    0.073      2.501      0.090      4.021      0.076      3.259
United Kingdom       0.004    0.978      9.025      0.370      3.366     -0.114     -4.843         0.484       0.476
                     0.003    0.074      3.887      0.109      4.351      0.099      4.532
United States        0.002    0.946      1.606     -0.112     -2.160     -0.341     -2.077         0.740       0.746
                     0.001    0.050      1.325      0.056      1.998      0.051      1.704
Table 5 (continued)

January 1975 to December 1997

B. Using world price to book ratio
                                                                                                                     Constant
                                              t                       eurorett *                   t       beta        beta
                               wdrett         wrpb
                                              t-1                     wrpb                    wrpb          Adj. R     Adj. R
Australia              0.001                         0.167   0.385                   0.932        -0.488                0.277
                       0.004                         0.289   0.529                   0.459         0.262
                       0.001         -0.141                  1.233         -0.244                 -0.328     0.208
                       0.004          0.203                  0.548          0.337                  0.225
Belgium                               0.491        0.133                   -0.422     0.086                  0.480       0.467
                                      0.221        0.114                    0.175     0.258
Canada                -0.001                      -0.322     0.331                   -0.387        0.078                 0.497
                       0.002                       0.130     0.409                    0.347        0.183
                       0.002         0.296                   0.025          0.269                 -0.284     0.324
                       0.003         0.190                   0.418          0.218                  0.155
France                               0.897           0.026                 -0.334    0.477                   0.472       0.459
                                     0.303           0.139                  0.256    0.450
Germany                0.002                         0.316   0.991                   0.789        -0.542                 0.415
                       0.003                         0.119   0.437                   0.278         0.172
                       0.007         0.708                   0.205         -0.206                 -0.700     0.251
                       0.005         0.689                   0.915          0.453                  0.397
Italy                                0.457           0.203                  0.273    1.056                   0.213       0.206
                                     0.292           0.144                  0.349    0.414
Japan                 -0.002                         0.285   -0.611                  1.030        -0.066                 0.667
                       0.002                         0.141    0.344                  0.264         0.160
                       0.005         1.082                    0.648        -0.167                 -0.077     0.594
                       0.002         0.259                    0.339         0.178                  0.141
Norway                               0.905         0.059                   -0.351    -0.470                  0.316       0.319
                                     0.375         0.184                    0.312     0.517
Singapore              0.000                      -0.058      0.107                   0.873       -0.545                 0.315
                       0.004                       0.389      0.722                   0.571        0.298
                      -0.002         -0.523                  -0.155          0.376                -0.697     0.322
                       0.003          0.280                   0.538          0.276                 0.187
Sweden                                0.291          0.338                   0.271   0.707                   0.326       0.317
                                      0.252          0.133                   0.253   0.344
Switzerland            0.004                         0.068   1.422                   0.254        -0.198                 0.536
                       0.002                         0.133   0.316                   0.261         0.147
                       0.004         1.900                   0.342         -0.015                 -0.079     0.487
                       0.003         0.703                   0.442          0.219                  0.216
United States                        1.188        -0.125                   -0.111    -0.265                  0.752       0.746
                                     0.121         0.064                    0.103     0.146
Table 5 (continued)
Price to book value and time-varying risk
January 1975 to December 1997

C. Using local price to book ratio
                                                                                             Conditional   Constant
                                     wdrett *             eurorett *            yenret
                                                                                t*              beta         beta
               intercept wdrett     locpbt-1   eurorett   locpbt-1   yenret_t   locpbt-1         Adj. R2     Adj. R2
Australia            0.002   -0.087      0.675      0.202     -0.282      1.467     -0.986        0.328       0.277
                     0.004    0.466      0.304      0.768      0.576      0.530      0.356
Austria              0.002   -0.386      0.421      0.057      0.452      1.177     -0.776         0.231       0.195
                     0.003    0.251      0.163      0.492      0.325      0.379      0.269
Belgium              0.004    0.543      0.160      1.197     -0.463      0.041     -0.113         0.477       0.467
                     0.002    0.208      0.150      0.290      0.207      0.222      0.164
Canada              -0.002    1.048     -0.026     -0.944      0.542      0.418     -0.449         0.498       0.497
                     0.002    0.414      0.265      0.877      0.580      0.531      0.358
Denmark              0.003    0.312      0.196      0.569     -0.035      0.119     -0.138         0.327       0.322
                     0.003    0.122      0.067      0.224      0.144      0.157      0.110
France               0.002    0.959      0.014      0.685     -0.038      0.359     -0.338         0.462       0.459
                     0.003    0.261      0.149      0.480      0.322      0.391      0.262
Germany              0.002    0.272      0.240      0.693      0.064      0.544     -0.411         0.424       0.415
                     0.003    0.323      0.190      0.571      0.339      0.332      0.211
Hong Kong            0.008    0.654      0.264      0.293     -0.286      0.652     -0.343         0.244       0.235
                     0.005    0.459      0.216      0.698      0.369      0.815      0.411
Italy                0.000    0.791      0.036      0.154      0.068     -0.095      0.034         0.198       0.206
                     0.004    0.296      0.203      0.603      0.427      0.405      0.321
Japan               -0.002    0.815      0.053      0.099     -0.146      0.695      0.099         0.666       0.667
                     0.002    0.229      0.078      0.318      0.123      0.287      0.126
Netherlands          0.005    0.972     -0.054      0.551     -0.175     -0.190      0.041         0.589       0.591
                     0.002    0.163      0.111      0.214      0.153      0.155      0.108
Norway               0.000    1.298     -0.140      0.855     -0.199     -0.569      0.034         0.316       0.319
                     0.004    0.318      0.152      0.519      0.276      0.365      0.203
Singapore            0.001    0.844      0.164      0.453     -0.295     -0.530      0.206         0.311       0.315
                     0.004    1.291      0.616      0.915      0.469      0.845      0.423
Spain               -0.002    0.587      0.188      0.387      0.034      0.350     -0.471         0.274       0.268
                     0.004    0.262      0.229      0.372      0.335      0.249      0.244
Sweden               0.004    0.563      0.219     -0.171      0.206      0.337     -0.250         0.324       0.317
                     0.003    0.163      0.092      0.277      0.158      0.200      0.110
Switzerland          0.003    0.800     -0.002      1.029     -0.295      0.025     -0.091         0.544       0.536
                     0.002    0.214      0.134      0.263      0.180      0.205      0.136
United Kingdom       0.004    1.929     -0.467      0.408     -0.075     -0.024     -0.091         0.505       0.476
                     0.003    0.582      0.298      0.362      0.199      0.351      0.179
United States        0.002    1.194     -0.128      0.052     -0.106     -0.463      0.059         0.750       0.746
                     0.001    0.094      0.046      0.152      0.075      0.118      0.060
Table 6
Regression of asset returns on world instrumental variables
January 1975 to December 1997

               intercept    lwrdivy      lted        lterm         tb1         lwrpb         Adj. R2
Australia             0.206       -0.284      27.072        -6.919      -6.383      -0.047    0.020
                      0.144       23.493      13.671         7.034       3.380       0.038
Austria              -0.045        4.123      -3.719         3.575       0.816       0.016    0.006
                      0.103       18.442      11.497         4.843       2.392       0.029
Belgium               0.135      -25.327      26.960         5.372      -1.711      -0.035    0.040
                      0.090       15.820      10.789         4.679       2.398       0.025
Canada                0.065       -3.469      26.855        -6.147      -7.119      -0.008    0.050
                      0.099       17.406       9.253         4.707       2.551       0.027
Denmark               0.009       -5.142      13.869         1.616      -0.298       0.003    0.003
                      0.088       15.773       7.375         3.594       2.173       0.024
France               -0.034       14.055       0.630         0.814      -3.794       0.012    0.008
                      0.139       27.083      16.502         5.317       3.303       0.037
Germany               0.044       -4.301      -0.809         1.213      -1.570      -0.010    0.010
                      0.113       20.051      12.588         4.657       2.461       0.031
Hong Kong             0.202      -17.500       7.131        -9.022      -8.056      -0.046    0.005
                      0.195       33.459      21.655         8.341       4.680       0.054
Italy                -0.052       11.693       7.493         2.163      -2.330       0.017    0.013
                      0.146       26.595      12.441         5.700       3.192       0.039
Japan                 0.254      -39.834      18.823         1.746      -1.387      -0.075    0.027
                      0.117       21.552      11.080         4.276       2.495       0.032
Netherlands           0.022        3.381      12.737         0.825      -4.756       0.000    0.019
                      0.100       17.627      11.642         4.323       2.608       0.027
Norway                0.037       -5.485       5.814        -5.395      -1.765       0.000    0.012
                      0.125       22.292      14.742         6.374       3.453       0.033
Singapore             0.263      -29.782      49.826       -16.789     -12.711      -0.055    0.094
                      0.153       25.749      18.068         6.431       4.044       0.042
Spain                 0.171      -41.721      17.102        -0.027       2.822      -0.040    0.012
                      0.118       21.251       9.848         4.688       2.808       0.033
Sweden                0.170      -33.078      26.096        -2.720      -0.372      -0.040    0.001
                      0.119       21.868      13.303         5.173       2.796       0.033
Switzerland           0.105      -14.012      13.781         0.087      -3.813      -0.023    0.014
                      0.100       17.620      12.265         4.614       2.520       0.027
United Kingdom       -0.050       22.395      22.780        -2.869      -8.722       0.022    0.037
                      0.106       18.347      20.584         5.697       4.106       0.028
United States         0.062       -8.239      23.429        -0.328      -3.739      -0.011    0.040
                      0.085       14.976       8.764         3.608       1.809       0.024
Table 7
Incremental Explanatory Power of local information variables in predicting 18 countries' excess returns
January 1975 to December 1997
                                                                                       F-test
                      Adj. R2       Adj. R2    Adj. R2       Adj. R2      F-test    world + local    F-test
                       world         world       local         local      world      (no pbs)         local
                     excluding     including  excluding     including   excluding     exclude       exclude
                       lwrpb         lwrpb      llocpb        llocpb      lwrpb         local        llocpb
Australia                 0.031         0.038       0.018         0.026       1.879        5.100         2.449
                                                                              0.172        0.025         0.119
Austria                    0.011       0.012        0.011         0.011       0.273        0.652         0.027
                                                                              0.602        0.420         0.869
Belgium                    0.052       0.058        0.014         0.016       1.777        3.928         0.523
                                                                              0.184        0.049         0.470
Canada                     0.067       0.068        0.024         0.035       0.116        0.259         3.202
                                                                              0.734        0.611         0.075
Denmark                    0.015       0.015        0.003         0.005       0.027        0.272         0.545
                                                                              0.869        0.602         0.461
France                     0.010       0.010        0.014         0.014       0.136        4.234         0.027
                                                                              0.712        0.041         0.868
Germany                    0.008       0.008        0.008         0.012       0.109        1.685         1.290
                                                                              0.742        0.195         0.257
Hong Kong                  0.020       0.024        0.071         0.083       0.995       17.043         3.755
                                                                              0.319        0.000         0.054
Italy                      0.005       0.006        0.017         0.030       0.190        5.583         3.603
                                                                              0.663        0.019         0.059
Japan                      0.026       0.045        0.023         0.023       5.456        3.850         0.000
                                                                              0.020        0.051         1.000
Netherlands                0.037       0.037        0.042         0.044       0.000        4.961         0.397
                                                                              1.000        0.027         0.529
Norway                     0.007       0.007        0.001         0.009       0.000        2.011         2.435
                                                                              1.000        0.157         0.120
Singapore                  0.103       0.110        0.070         0.081       2.245        9.462         3.184
                                                                              0.135        0.002         0.075
Spain                      0.025       0.030        0.022         0.053       1.448       10.455         8.697
                                                                              0.230        0.001         0.003
Sweden                     0.013       0.019        0.004         0.008       1.513        3.299         1.011
                                                                              0.220        0.070         0.316
Switzerland                0.029       0.031        0.003         0.009       0.753        0.747         1.640
                                                                              0.386        0.388         0.201
United Kingdom             0.053       0.055        0.111         0.142       0.429       35.819         9.566
                                                                              0.513        0.000         0.002
United States              0.057       0.058        0.016         0.023       0.315        0.284         1.998
                                                                              0.575        0.594         0.159
Table 8
A Decomposition of the Predictable Variation in International Equity Returns
January 1975 to December 1997


A. One factor: wdret
                                    Beta is function of local information             Beta is function of wrpbret and local information   Beta is function of locpb and local information
                                          Average                                           Average                                             Average
                                         pricing          Variance         χ2               pricing       Variance        χ2                    pricing       Variance          χ2
                       Average            error             ratio    constant beta           error          ratio    constant beta               error          ratio      constant beta
                        return           (alpha)           (VR1)      (local info.)         (alpha)        (VR1) (lagged lwrpbret)              (alpha)        (VR1)     (lagged local pb)
Australia                  0.0130               0.0013         0.855          8.766                0.0021      0.836          2.031                    0.0022      0.935             4.230
                                                0.0033         0.176          0.033                0.0034      0.172          0.154                    0.0035      0.120             0.040
Austria                   0.0094                0.0007         0.000          1.126                0.0005      0.006          0.365                    0.0008      0.020             0.398
                                                0.0041         0.011          0.771                0.0043      0.070          0.546                    0.0041      0.145             0.528
Belgium                   0.0140                0.0024         0.689          0.474                0.0029      0.698          2.842                    0.0025      0.699             0.002
                                                0.0029         0.215          0.925                0.0029      0.205          0.092                    0.0029      0.216             0.966
Canada                    0.0110               -0.0007         0.749        12.661                -0.0013      0.744          0.125                   -0.0014      0.751             0.015
                                                0.0021         0.168          0.005                0.0021      0.173          0.724                    0.0022      0.175             0.903
Denmark                   0.0130                0.0025         0.124          0.322                0.0027      0.068          0.220                    0.0026      0.084             0.811
                                                0.0028         0.294          0.956                0.0027      0.242          0.639                    0.0028      0.263             0.368
France                    0.0140                0.0004         0.297          1.500                0.0011      0.290          0.020                    0.0011      0.282             0.460
                                                0.0032         0.526          0.682                0.0033      0.543          0.889                    0.0034      0.535             0.498
Germany                   0.0130                0.0016         0.216          0.850                0.0011      0.082          0.130                    0.0013      0.098             0.026
                                                0.0029         0.372          0.837                0.0030      0.257          0.718                    0.0030      0.273             0.873
Hong Kong                 0.0210                0.0098         0.700          5.357                0.0083      0.579          4.081                    0.0077      0.586             2.804
                                                0.0048         0.425          0.147                0.0051      0.637          0.043                    0.0049      0.623             0.094
Italy                     0.0120               -0.0001         0.605          1.159               -0.0003      0.488          0.218                   -0.0002      0.491             0.011
                                                0.0041         0.631          0.763                0.0041      0.752          0.640                    0.0041      0.760             0.916
Japan                     0.0120               -0.0020         0.554          5.268               -0.0019      0.450          0.779                   -0.0015      0.476             0.006
                                                0.0029         0.245          0.153                0.0029      0.258          0.377                    0.0029      0.255             0.939
Netherlands               0.0170                0.0052         0.772          4.444                0.0046      0.713          0.296                    0.0047      0.722             0.029
                                                0.0019         0.175          0.217                0.0019      0.210          0.586                    0.0019      0.206             0.864
Norway                    0.0120               -0.0002         0.016          0.356                0.0006      0.009          4.346                   -0.0009      0.004             1.507
                                                0.0048         0.173          0.949                0.0047      0.128          0.037                    0.0048      0.090             0.220
Singapore                 0.0140                0.0010         0.732          2.354                0.0001      0.611          0.782                    0.0028      0.566             5.032
                                                0.0036         0.230          0.502                0.0038      0.271          0.377                    0.0035      0.278             0.025
Spain                     0.0098               -0.0020         0.126        15.089                -0.0009      0.022          4.304                   -0.0015      0.037             0.845
                                                0.0035         0.216          0.002                0.0036      0.108          0.038                    0.0035      0.136             0.358
Sweden                    0.0160                0.0041         0.465          6.186                0.0042      0.305          0.055                    0.0043      0.377             2.940
                                                0.0030         0.367          0.103                0.0032      0.372          0.814                    0.0031      0.387             0.086
Switzerland               0.0150                0.0029         0.572          1.376                0.0026      0.555          0.004                    0.0026      0.541             0.140
                                                0.0026         0.220          0.711                0.0026      0.237          0.947                    0.0026      0.234             0.708
United Kingdom            0.0180                0.0036         0.725          7.117                0.0030      0.509          0.817                    0.0028      0.520             2.078
                                                0.0028         0.239          0.068                0.0027      0.299          0.366                    0.0028      0.301             0.149
United States             0.0140                0.0021         0.919          2.656                0.0023      0.882          1.075                    0.0021      0.910             0.458
                                                0.0015         0.086          0.448                0.0014      0.101          0.300                    0.0015      0.098             0.499
Table 8 (continued)
A Decomposition of the Predictable Variation in International Equity Returns
January 1975 to December 1997


B. Three factor: wdret, euroret, yenret                                         C. Two factor: wdret, wrpbret                      D. Four factor: wdret, euroret, yenret, wrpbret

                                    Average                                          Average                                            Average
                                    pricing         Variance         χ2              pricing       Variance           χ2                pricing       Variance              χ2
                   Average           error            ratio    constant beta          error          ratio      constant beta            error          ratio         constant beta
                    return          (alpha)          (VR1)      (local info.)        (alpha)        (VR1)        (local info.)          (alpha)        (VR1)           (local info.)
Australia              0.0130              0.0015        0.910        24.862               -0.0009      0.856            12.593               -0.0010      0.937                34.778
                                           0.0033        0.214          0.003               0.0034      0.171              0.050               0.0034      0.148                 0.001
Austria                0.0094              0.0029        0.791        19.202               -0.0008      0.225            14.100                0.0001      0.970                36.800
                                           0.0038        0.951          0.024               0.0041      0.516              0.029               0.0038      0.267                 0.000
Belgium                0.0140              0.0040        0.720        26.562                0.0012      0.704              4.105               0.0022      0.727                33.999
                                           0.0023        0.201          0.002               0.0029      0.254              0.662               0.0022      0.247                 0.001
Canada                 0.0110              0.0000        0.904        28.889               -0.0021      0.773            17.672               -0.0009      0.954                35.719
                                           0.0021        0.117          0.001               0.0022      0.158              0.007               0.0022      0.108                 0.000
Denmark                0.0130              0.0027        0.622        12.977                0.0021      0.329              1.785               0.0019      0.961                17.713
                                           0.0027        0.549          0.164               0.0030      0.522              0.938               0.0028      0.238                 0.125
France                 0.0140              0.0013        0.631        19.400               -0.0003      0.435              8.897               0.0001      0.696                29.769
                                           0.0028        0.558          0.022               0.0031      0.589              0.179               0.0027      0.497                 0.003
Germany                0.0130              0.0039        0.772        23.429               -0.0004      0.326              3.667               0.0014      0.871                22.402
                                           0.0028        0.575          0.005               0.0030      0.502              0.722               0.0027      0.701                 0.033
Hong Kong              0.0210              0.0114        0.952        26.448                0.0054      0.689              7.486               0.0068      0.991                37.687
                                           0.0048        0.155          0.002               0.0049      0.470              0.278               0.0047      0.086                 0.000
Italy                  0.0120             -0.0005        0.613        32.591               -0.0018      0.641              4.484              -0.0025      0.693                52.243
                                           0.0038        0.704          0.000               0.0044      0.752              0.611               0.0041      0.633                 0.000
Japan                  0.0120             -0.0026        0.854        20.724               -0.0029      0.591            15.884               -0.0033      0.883                31.379
                                           0.0023        0.149          0.014               0.0032      0.216              0.014               0.0024      0.121                 0.002
Netherlands            0.0170              0.0058        0.921        23.779                0.0035      0.849            13.931                0.0040      0.924                49.326
                                           0.0018        0.142          0.005               0.0019      0.196              0.030               0.0018      0.149                 0.000
Norway                 0.0120              0.0009        0.880          4.000              -0.0034      0.058              8.309              -0.0029      0.910                10.965
                                           0.0044        0.361          0.911               0.0049      0.336              0.216               0.0046      0.345                 0.532
Singapore              0.0140              0.0001        0.871        17.784               -0.0023      0.891              7.332              -0.0027      0.995                22.731
                                           0.0037        0.197          0.038               0.0039      0.137              0.291               0.0040      0.034                 0.030
Spain                  0.0098             -0.0012        0.672        39.723               -0.0027      0.438            23.093               -0.0019      0.800                57.628
                                           0.0035        0.516          0.000               0.0033      0.329              0.001               0.0034      0.300                 0.000
Sweden                 0.0160              0.0046        0.835        15.188                0.0028      0.524            12.719                0.0032      0.886                20.361
                                           0.0030        0.284          0.086               0.0034      0.376              0.048               0.0033      0.300                 0.061
Switzerland            0.0150              0.0041        0.956        26.600                0.0017      0.591              4.729               0.0024      0.948                33.138
                                           0.0023        0.139          0.002               0.0028      0.262              0.579               0.0025      0.146                 0.001
United Kingdom         0.0180              0.0025        0.906        14.322                0.0030      0.894            12.165                0.0017      0.992                19.253
                                           0.0028        0.150          0.111               0.0031      0.214              0.058               0.0030      0.074                 0.083
United States          0.0140              0.0024        0.979        24.180                0.0027      0.953              2.955               0.0035      0.980                34.640
                                           0.0013        0.038          0.004               0.0016      0.089              0.814               0.0012      0.043                 0.001
Table 8 (continued)
A Decomposition of the Predictable Variation in International Equity Returns
January 1975 to December 1997

                               E. Six factor: wdret, euroret, yenret,           F. Seven factor: wdret, euroret, yenret,
                                                     economic mimicking                             economic mimicking, wrpbret
                                     Average                                          Average
                                    pricing         Variance         χ2              pricing       Variance            χ2
                 Average             error            ratio    constant beta          error          ratio       constant beta
                  return            (alpha)          (VR1)      (local info.)        (alpha)        (VR1)         (local info.)
Australia            0.0130               -0.0002        0.959        15.865               -0.0024      0.975             32.001
                                           0.0037        0.149          0.198               0.0036      0.131               0.006
Austria               0.0094               0.0030        0.907        18.093                0.0001      0.960             54.452
                                           0.0037        0.623          0.113               0.0041      0.245               0.000
Belgium               0.0140               0.0057        0.973        24.798                0.0039      0.971             32.462
                                           0.0027        0.075          0.016               0.0025      0.076               0.006
Canada                0.0110              -0.0021        0.995        28.506               -0.0026      0.999             42.649
                                           0.0023        0.029          0.005               0.0021      0.010               0.000
Denmark               0.0130               0.0026        0.946        31.505                0.0018      0.958             34.716
                                           0.0027        0.365          0.002               0.0027      0.225               0.003
France                0.0140               0.0005        0.877        39.388               -0.0008      0.894             53.254
                                           0.0028        0.492          0.000               0.0027      0.395               0.000
Germany               0.0130               0.0057        0.771        22.648                0.0028      0.864             27.781
                                           0.0027        0.711          0.031               0.0028      0.679               0.023
Hong Kong             0.0210               0.0119        0.968        25.139                0.0061      0.999             39.523
                                           0.0051        0.153          0.014               0.0052      0.030               0.001
Italy                 0.0120               0.0017        0.976        39.637               -0.0005      0.994             87.213
                                           0.0041        0.245          0.000               0.0043      0.124               0.000
Japan                 0.0120              -0.0029        0.975        28.066               -0.0032      0.987             40.739
                                           0.0025        0.118          0.005               0.0025      0.046               0.000
Netherlands           0.0170               0.0048        0.923        25.217                0.0031      0.929             61.984
                                           0.0020        0.175          0.014               0.0017      0.135               0.000
Norway                0.0120              -0.0068        0.824        25.383               -0.0097      0.866             52.947
                                           0.0033        0.441          0.013               0.0035      0.275               0.000
Singapore             0.0140              -0.0021        0.995        37.473               -0.0038      0.999             49.000
                                           0.0040        0.054          0.000               0.0039      0.001               0.000
Spain                 0.0098              -0.0006        0.604        47.526               -0.0018      0.648             76.230
                                           0.0033        0.779          0.000               0.0033      0.419               0.000
Sweden                0.0160               0.0056        0.837        14.030                0.0041      0.874             19.625
                                           0.0034        0.384          0.299               0.0034      0.350               0.187
Switzerland           0.0150               0.0050        0.990        19.980                0.0035      0.995             34.511
                                           0.0023        0.075          0.067               0.0026      0.069               0.003
United Kingdom        0.0180               0.0020        0.936        17.099                0.0012      0.994             25.007
                                           0.0029        0.314          0.146               0.0029      0.066               0.050
United States         0.0140               0.0029        0.981        30.858                0.0038      0.988             42.935
                                           0.0014        0.061          0.002               0.0014      0.290               0.000
