                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          THE TIEBOUT HYPOTHESIS AND MAJORITY
                               RULE: AN EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS


                                              Dennis Epple
                                             Thomas Romer
                                              Holger Sieg




                                          Working Paper 6977
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w6977

                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 First Draft: February 1999
                                        October 1999



We would like to thank Steve Berry, Ron Gallant, Tom Nechyba, Ed Olson, Ariel Pakes, Ian Preston,
Richard Romano, Stuart Rosenthal and Kerry Smith for comments and discussions about this and related
research. We would also like to thank Katherine Bradbury and Robert Caroll, each of whom kindly
provided data used in the analysis. We are grateful to the National Science Foundation and the
MacArthur Foundation for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 1999 by Dennis Epple, Thomas Romer, and Holger Sieg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The Tiebout Hypothesis and Majority Rule:
An Empirical Analysis
Dennis Epple, Thomas Romer, and Holger Sieg
NBER Working Paper No. 6977
February 1999 (first draft), October 1999
JEL No. C51, H31, R12

                                               ABSTRACT


    The paper provided a comprehensive empirical analysis of majority rule and Tiebout sorting within a
system of local jurisdictions. The idea behind the estimation procedure is to investigate whether observed
levels of public expenditures satisfy necessary conditions implied by majority rule in a general equilibrium
model of residential choice. The estimator controls for both observed and unobserved heterogeneity among
households, observed and unobserved characteristics of communities, the potential endogeneity of prices
and expenditures as well as the self-selection of households into communities of their choice. We estimate
the structural parameters of the model using data from the Boston Metropolitan Area. The empirical
findings are by and large supportive of our approach.


Dennis Epple                                                          Holger Sieg
Graduate School of Industrial Administration                        Department of Economics
Carnegie Mellon University                                            Duke University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213                                                 Durham, NC 27708-0097
and NBER                                                            hs25@econ.duke.edu
epple@cmu.edu

Thomas Romer
Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
romer@princeton.edu
1 Introduction

Local governments play a key role in the institutional setting in the United States. Lo-
cal governments are responsible for providing a variety of services including education and
public safety. These rank among the most important services provided by governments at
any level in the U.S. These also are surely two of the most important factors in uencing
household location in metropolitan areas. Analysis of public good provision is increasingly
based on models that characterize self-selection of households into municipalities and col-
lective choice via majority rule within municipalities. These models typically presume that
tax-expenditure policies within jurisdictions are based on majority rule.1 Yet this entire
framework has not been subject to rigorous empirical analysis in an equilibrium setting.
Additionally, there are only a few empirical studies that analyze whether observed local
expenditures for public goods are consistent with majority rule.2 The goal of this paper
is to investigate whether levels of local public good provision observed within a system of
jurisdictions satisfy the restrictions implied by majority rule and rational voting in a general
equilibrium model of residential choice.

      Testing the hypothesis of majority rule in a system of local jurisdictions is not a straight-
forward exercise for at least three reasons. First, preferences for local public goods are
unobserved and vary among households. We only observe expenditure levels that are out-
  1
     See, for example, Epple, Filimon, and Romer (1984), Goodspeed (1989), Epple and Romer (1991),
Nechyba (1997b) and Fernandez and Rogerson (1996, 1998).
   2
     Romer and Rosenthal (1979, 1982) and Romer, Rosenthal, and Munley (1992) analyze spending and
voting in school budget referenda. Inman (1978) was the rst to propose and implement a test of the
hypothesis that allocations are determined by the voter with median income.


                                                 1
comes of collective choices and already re ect the aggregation of household preferences.
Second, majority rule implies that the level of public good provision depends on the tastes
and endowments of all residents within a community. However, households are mobile and
choose among a number of di erent communities within a metropolitan area when making
residential decisions. Mobility therefore implies that the composition of the population of
a community and hence the decisive voters within a community are jointly determined in
equilibrium. Households will therefore sort themselves in equilibrium according to tastes
and endowments. Households with similar (unobserved) preferences will reside in the same
community as rst suggested by Tiebout (1956). This process causes some severe economet-
ric problems for any empirical analysis. It implies that a sample drawn from any community
is not a random sample of the underlying population due to this self-selection process. Es-
timation procedures that ignore this problem are likely to be inconsistent, a problem that
is also referred to as the \Tiebout Bias" problem in public economics (Goldstein and Pauly,
1981). Finally, observed characteristics of communities, like housing prices and expenditure
levels, are potentially correlated with unobserved characteristics, giving rise to endogene-
ity problems in estimation. This problem is closely related to the endogeneity problems
encountered in demand and supply models with di erentiated products (Berry, 1994).

   In a previous study, Epple and Sieg (1999) develop and implement a locational equi-
librium estimator to study spatial sorting in equilibrium models of local jurisdictions. The
approach taken in that paper focuses primarily on the decision problem of households,
which involves discrete decisions about the choice of residence and continuous decisions
about housing consumption. While Epple and Sieg (1999) provide a rigorous test of the

                                             2
underlying framework and estimation of most parameters of interest, that paper does not
exploit restrictions implied by collective choices determined by majority rule. Hence it
does not allow researchers to investigate whether public expenditures can be rationalized
by majority rule. The current paper focuses on the collective choice problem faced within
each community and shows how to test this hypothesis by pursuing a new approach for
identi cation and estimation.

   We develop a general equilibrium model of residential choice in which expenditure levels
and property tax rates of local jurisdictions are chosen by majority rule. Under reasonable
restrictions about the admissible set of preferences, the model yields strong predictions
about the distribution of households by income within and across jurisdictions. These
distributions can be matched with empirical income distributions observed in a sample of
communities. The key insight of this paper is that matching income distributions allows
us to characterize boundary indi erence loci of adjacent communities, as well as loci of
pivotal voters within each community in equilibrium. Under additional assumptions on
voting behavior and housing markets, we can then investigate whether the levels of public
good provision implied by the loci characterizing decisive voters under majority rule explain
observed expenditure levels in our sample.

   The estimator proposed in this paper controls for both observed and unobserved het-
erogeneity among households, observed and unobserved characteristics of communities, the
potential endogeneity of prices and expenditures and the self-selection of households into
communities of their choice. We estimate the structural parameters of the model using data


                                             3
of the Boston Metropolitan Area. The empirical ndings are by and large encouraging for
our approach. The paper thus provides a comprehensive empirical investigation of majority
rule within a model of a system of local jurisdictions.

       The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides information about the
data set and discusses property tax legislation in Massachusetts that is relevant for our
study. Section 3 presents the general equilibrium model on which our analysis is based
and derives optimality conditions that public expenditures must satisfy if they are deter-
mined by majority rule. We then introduce a parameterization of the model and show
how to approximate the slope of the government service possibility frontier under di erent
assumptions on voter sophistication. The estimation strategy is derived in Section 4. The
empirical results are discussed in Section 5, and Section 6 presents the conclusions of the
analysis.



2 The Data Set

The data set used in this paper includes the communities that constitute the Boston
Metropolitan Area. Massachusetts is interesting to study because cities and school dis-
tricts are coterminous.3 Hence a single tax rate applies within a community's boundary.
   3
    This important property of Massachusetts municipalities and school districts was rst emphasized by
Brueckner (1982), who proposed and implemented a strategy for testing public sector eciency by exploiting
implications of property value maximization.




                                                    4
We therefore avoid problems that may arise due to overlapping jurisdictions.4 Property
taxes are also the primary source of local revenues in Massachusetts, which avoids the need
to model other revenue sources.

   Our data set is from the 1980 US Census. This time period predates a Massachusetts law
that restricts property taxation (usually referred to as Proposition 2 12 ). This law was passed
in 1981 and limited property tax rates to two-and-a-half percent (after some adjustment
period). Since many jurisdictions had property taxes in the period leading up to 1981
that were higher than the limits set in Proposition 2 12 , the law imposed for all practical
purposes a binding constraint on these communities. We model the political process within
each community as unconstrained choices determined by majority rule. We would need to
modify the framework to accommodate constraints on tax rates if we were to use data from
the 1990 Census. Binding constraints on tax rates are also likely to result in less variation in
local public good levels. This in turn may lead to multicollinearity, reducing the precision of
parameter estimates. For these reasons, it is preferable to base our empirical examination
on data for the period prior to passage of Proposition 2 21 .

   Table 1 reports some descriptive statistics of the most important variables in the sam-
ple. The sample size is 92, which equals the number of cities and townships in the Boston
Metropolitan Area. These communities di er substantially along many dimensions of in-
terest. The city of Boston is, as expected, the largest community in the sample with a
population of approximately 563,000 inhabitants. The smallest community, Boxborough,
   4
     Nechyba (1997a, 1997b) analyzes residential decisions in a framework with both local and state
governments.

                                                5
                         Table 1: Descriptive Statistics of the Sample
     Variable                       Mean         Std. Deviation        Minimum      Maximum
     Population size                30036             59719              3126        562994
     Mean income                    27402             8024              13912         60730
     Median income                  24108             6481              11201         47646
     Education expenditure a         1479              435                702         2724
     Property tax rate              0.031             0.009              0.014        0.065
     Crime rateb                    42.13             18.91              15.00       134.60
     Population density              3026             3744                220         19343
     Distance to Boston             16.13              8.01               0.0         37.00
     Median property value          64923             21515             35600        143500
     Median gross rent              314.35            58.22             116.00       501.00
     Fraction of renters             0.28              0.16               0.06         0.73
     Notation: a on per capita basis, b number of crimes per 100,000 inhabitants.

has only 3,126 inhabitants. Median household income ranges from $11,201 in Chelsea to
$47,646 in Weston. Mean income is, as expected, signi cantly higher than median income
indicating a skewed income distribution. There is a strong negative correlation between
community size and median income level. If we rank communities according to income,
most of the larger communities are at the bottom of that ranking. The only exception
is Newton, which has a relatively high median income and falls in the upper third of the
size ranking. Di erences in income are also re ected in median property values, which
range from $35,600 in Chelsea to $143,500 in Weston. Similar di erences, although less
pronounced, are found for the median gross rent.

   For our empirical investigation, we need the annual implicit rent per unit of housing
services in each community. These implicit prices are unobserved but can be imputed from
observed rental expenditures and housing values. The U.S. Census also reports the joint dis-
tribution of incomes and housing values within each community. Following Poterba (1992),

                                                  6
we convert housing values into imputed rents. We then t a simple demand model (implied
by our speci cation of the indirect utility) to the aggregate Engel curves. This allows us to
estimate housing prices for each community. The basic idea behind this procedure is that
housing prices are proportional to imputed rents once one controls for the income e ect.
The point estimates for these housing prices are of reasonable magnitude and indicate that
there is a signi cant amount of heterogeneity in housing markets among communities.5

    In the empirical analysis we focus on education expenditures per household, which range
from $702 to $2,724. There is a strong positive correlation between this measure and both
income and housing values. Other amenities that may have an in uence on residential
choices include crime levels, which range from 134.6 crimes per 100,000 inhabitants down
to 42.13. Smaller communities have typically lower crime rates than larger ones. Crime is
also negatively correlated with income, as one may expect. The main source of revenue for
these communities is property taxation. E ective property taxes (which adjust for di erent
de nitions of the tax base) range from 1.3 percent to 6.5 percent. Tax rates are negatively
correlated with income, indicating that poorer communities with smaller tax bases choose
higher tax rates to nance public good provision.

    The large number of communities and di erences in size and other attributes discussed
above make the Boston Metropolitan Area in 1980 an ideal candidate for studying public
good provision, collective and individual choices. The empirical analysis of Tiebout sorting
and majority rule is dicult without specifying an analytical framework which suggests
   5
     A detailed discussion of how to construct housing price estimates from the available data can be found
in Epple and Sieg (1999).

                                                    7
the identifying restrictions for estimation (Rubinfeld, Shapiro, and Roberts, 1987).6 Our
empirical strategy therefore involves the following steps: First, we specify an equilibrium
model and derive some properties of equilibrium allocations. We then introduce a param-
eterization of the model, and develop a strategy to identify and estimate the structural
parameters of the model. We implement the empirical approach using the data discussed
above. Finally, we investigate whether the parameter estimates and the empirical results
are supportive of majority rule and Tiebout sorting.



3 The Theoretical Framework

3.1 A General Equilibrium Model of Residential Choices

The economy consists of a continuum of households, C , living in a metropolitan area. The
homogeneous land in the metropolitan area is divided among J communities, each of which
has xed boundaries. Jurisdictions may di er in the amount of land contained within their
boundaries. We also assume that households behave as price takers. A household living
in community j has preferences de ned over a local public good, g , a local housing good,
h, and a composite private good, b. Denote by p the relative gross-of-tax price of a unit
of housing services in community j , ph the net-of-tax price, and let y be the household's
endowment of the composite private good. Households pay taxes that are levied on the
  6
      See also Bergstrom, Rubinfeld, and Shapiro (1982).


                                                     8
consumption of housing services. Let t be an ad valorem tax on housing in community j .
Individuals di er in their endowed income, y , and in a taste parameter, , which re ects
the household's valuation of the public good. The continuum of households, C , is implicitly
described by the joint distribution of y and . We assume that this distribution has a
continuous density, f ( ; y ), with respect to Lebesgue measure. We refer to a household
with taste parameter and income y as ( ; y ).

    The preferences of a household are represented by a utility function, U ( ; g; h; b), which
is strictly quasi-concave and twice di erentiable in its arguments. Households maximize
their utility with respect to the budget constraint which is given by:


                                      (1 + t) ph h = y , b                                            (3.1)


and choose their preferred location of residence by comparing maximum attainable utility
levels among communities. Alternatively, we can represent the preferences of a household
by specifying the indirect utility function. Let


                      V ( ; g; p; y) = U ( ; g; h(p; y; ); y , p h(p; y; ))                           (3.2)


denote the indirect utility function of a household, where p = (1 + t) ph .7 We assume
that the indirect utility function satis es standard single-crossing properties. In particular,
indi erence curves in the (g; p) plane have slopes increasing in y for given and increasing
   7
     Here we anticipate a simpli cation adopted in our empirical analysis. Preferences are assumed separable
in g and (h,b) so that housing demand does not depend on g.


                                                     9
in for given y .

       Public goods are provided by a nite number of local communities. Let Cj  C denote
the population living in community j . Researchers also typically assume that the budget
of community j must be balanced.8 This implies that:

                            Z                                  .
                     t ph         h(p; y; ) f ( ; y) dy d          P (Cj ) = c(g )                 (3.3)
                             Cj


where c(g ) is the per capita cost for providing g and

                                                 Z

                                     P (Cj ) =            f ( ; y ) dy d                           (3.4)
                                                   Cj


is the size of community j .

       Voters in each community decide about the level of provision of the public good, g , and
the tax level, t. Mobility among communities is costless and in equilibrium every household
lives in his or her preferred community. To close the model we assume that there is housing
supply function, H s(ph ), in each community.9 Having speci ed all components of a (generic)
equilibrium model, we de ne an intercommunity equilibrium as follows:


De nition 1 An intercommunity equilibrium consists of a set of communities,
   8
      We impose this assumption for simplicity to close the model. The analysis can be easily extended to
incorporate lump sum transfers, for example, from the state government to the local governments. The
estimator developed in Section 4 exploits rst-order conditions implied by optimal household demands for
public goods, which are una ected by lump sum transfers.
    9
      The housing market does not need to be speci ed like this. The only assumptions we need for the
empirical analysis are that (a) households behave as price takers and (b) the e ect of housing prices on
income is negligible, i.e. household income is exogenous.

                                                     10
f1; :::; J g, a continuum of households, C , a distribution, P , of household characteristics
and y , and a partition of C across communities fC1; :::; CJ g, such that every community has
a positive population, i.e. 0 < P (Cj ) < 1, a vector of prices and taxes, (p1; t1 ; :::; pJ ; tJ ), an
allocation of public goods, (g1; :::; gJ ), and an allocation, (h ; b), for every household ( ; y ),
such that:


   1. Every household ( ; y ), living in community j maximizes its utility subject to the
       budget constraint:10


                                     (h ; b) = arg max U ( ; gj; h; b)
                                                            (h;b)
                                                       s:t: pj h =     y,b


       No household wants to move to a di erent community:


                                  V ( ; gj; pj ; y )  max
                                                         i=
                                                          6 j
                                                              V ( ; gi; pi ; y )                      (3.5)


   2. The housing market clears in every community:

                       Z                                     .                     p
                             h(pj ; y; ) f ( ; y ) dy d        P (Cj ) = Hjs ( 1 +j t )              (3.6)
                        Cj                                                             j


   3. The level of provision of the public good, gj, and the property tax rate, tj , in community
       j are determined by majority rule in each community j .
  10
     Strictly speaking, all statements only have to hold for almost every household, deviations of behavior of
sets of households with measure zero are possible.

                                                       11
   4. The budget of every community is balanced:

                       tj    
                                  Z                                       .

                     1 + tj pj            h(pj ; y; ) f ( ; y ) dy d       P (Cj ) = c(gj)        (3.7)
                                      Cj


       If household preferences satisfy single-crossing properties, the existence of an intercom-
munity equilibrium has been shown in somewhat simpler versions of this model. e.g. models
without taste variation. Equilibria have also been computed for parameterizations of mod-
els with taste heterogeneity, similar to the one used in this paper (Epple and Platt, 1998).
We assume that an equilibrium exists and we test necessary conditions for an allocation to
be an equilibrium. Necessary conditions for equilibrium in this model impose a number of
restrictions on the equilibrium allocation that apply quite broadly.

       Consider an equilibrium allocation in which no two communities have the same housing
prices and assume that preferences satisfy the single-crossing properties. It can be shown
that for such an allocation to be a locational equilibrium | no-one wishes to move | there
must be an ordering f(g1; p1); :::; (gJ ; pJ )g of community public-good and housing- price
pairs that satis es the following three properties: (a) boundary indi erence: households
on the \boundary" between two adjacent communities are indi erent between the two
communities; (b) strati cation: the distribution of households across communities exhibits
strati cation by income and tastes; and (c) increasing bundles: the levels of public good
provision and housing prices are both monotonic functions of the rank of the community.11
  11
    See Epple, Filimon, and Romer (1984) and Epple and Platt (1998). The \boundary" referred to in
property (a) is, of course, not a spatial boundary, but a boundary on the set of household types who live in
a community.


                                                         12
       Consequently, an equilibrium allocation exhibits incomplete income strati cation of
households across communities. Communities can be ranked according to the desirabil-
ity of their amenities. Higher-amenity communities must have higher housing prices to
prevent other households from moving into these communities. Conditions (a), (b) and
(c) must hold in equilibrium, regardless of the collective choice mechanism that determines
public good levels and tax rates within communities.

       Following most previous positive studies in the literature, we assume that the pair (t; g )
in each community is chosen by majority rule. In each community, voters take the (t; g )
pairs in all other communities as given when making their decisions. One can make a
variety of assumptions about voter sophistication regarding anticipation of the way changes
in the community's own (t; g ) pair a ect their community housing prices and migration
into or out of the community. For example, voters might take the net-of-tax price and
community tax base as given and then deduce from the budget constraint the link between
gross-of-tax price and expenditures on local public goods. This is the simplest and most
commonly adopted approach (Epple, Filimon, and Romer, 1984).12 Alternatively, voters in
a community might take the (t; g ) pairs in other communities as given and then predict how
changes in their community's tax and expenditure policy will a ect the price of housing in
their community.13

       The community budget constraint, housing market clearing, and perceived migration ef-
  12
     Fernandez and Rogerson (1996) provide a formalization of the timing of moving and voting that ratio-
nalizes this assumption on the part of the voters.
  13
     This approach is developed in Epple and Romer (1991) and also adopted in Epple and Platt (1998).


                                                   13
                  Figure 1: The Government-services Production Frontier
                                  GPF1
             p1




                             increasing t1


                                                                               g1
       This gure illustrates the shape of the GPF for the rst community in a simple two
       community model.

fects de ne a locus of (g; p) pairs that determine the government-services possibility frontier
(GPF). For given tax and expenditure policies in other communities, a point on the GPF
that cannot be beaten in a majority vote is a majority equilibrium. Figure 1 illustrates a
possible relationship between housing prices and government services in a community. In
this example, the GPF is increasing over a range of low and medium tax levels. Higher
taxes yield higher revenues and therefore higher levels of public good provision. However,
at some level of taxation the reduction in revenue due to the shrinking of the tax base
caused by outward migration o sets the e ect caused by the increased tax rates. At that

                                              14
point the GPF slopes backward and the tax revenues decrease as the tax rates increase.

       More formally, the set of border individuals between communities j and j + 1 is char-
acterized by the following expression:


                      Ij = f( ; y ) j V ( ; gj ; pj ; y) = V ( ; gj+1; pj+1; y)g                     (3.8)


Let yj ( ) be the implicit function de ned by equation (3.8). Consider a point (gj; pj ) on
community j's GPF, and let y~j ( ) de ne a set of voters who weakly prefer (gj; pj ) to any
other (gj ; pj ) on the GPF. It follows that (gj; pj ) is a majority voting equilibrium for the
given GPF if

                     j Z y~j ( )                             j Z yj ( )
                                    f ( ; y) dy d = 12
                Z                                        Z

                                                                            f ( ; y ) dy d           (3.9)
                    j yj,1 ( )                               j yj ,1 ( )


where j and  j are, respectively, the lowest and highest values of                      in the community.
Note that y~j ( ) de nes a locus of pivotal voters.14

       So far we have assumed that there is a single public good in the economy. Empirical
implementation leads to consideration of multiple local goods and amenities. Households
typically not only care about expenditures on local public goods, but also other amenities
like proximity to parks and other areas of recreation. Following the literature on di erenti-
ated products, it is useful to measure total public good provision by an index that depends
on both local expenditures on public goods and other amenities of the community. Let
   A formal proof of a similar result is in Epple and Platt (1998) and the same argument applies in this
  14

model.

                                                    15
g (x1; :::; xn) denote this index. Some amenities (e.g., proximity to a central business dis-
trict, proximity to a beach) may be exogenously determined by the physical location of the
community. Others may be endogenous, determined by collective choices in equilibrium.

   Let the function g () be common to all voters, as we assume in our empirical analysis.
Suppose k of the elements of g () are chosen by majority rule. The voting result above
then extends immediately when gj is replaced by x1;j ; x2;j ; :::; xk;j . This speci cation also
implies that the same locus of voters y~j ( ) is pivotal for every locally chosen public good.
The assumption that the function g () is common to all voters circumvents the problems of
existence of equilibrium that are endemic to models where voting is over multi-dimensional
alternatives. Intuitively speaking, the index assumption allows us to split the collective
choice problem in two components: the preferred level of the index and its optimal compo-
sition. The index function is the same for all voters and therefore there is no disagreement
about the optimal composition of public goods given the index level. Since we are in-
terested in empirical implementation, further development of the model is best done in a
parameterized context.



3.2 A Parameterization of the Model

Let the joint distribution of ln( ) and ln(y ) be bivariate normal. Furthermore, assume that
the indirect utility function is given by:

                                                    y1, ,1        Bp+1 ,1 i o 1
                                                              e,
                                      n         h
                    V (g; p; y; ) =       g + e      1,            1+                     (3.10)

                                                16
where  < 0; > 0;  < 0,  > 0 and B > 0. The slope of an \indirect" indi erence curve
in the (g; p) plane is:

                                               y1, ,1              Bp+1 ,1
                 M (g; p; y; ) =    g ,1 [e     1,   ], [   e,     1+    ],   >0   (3.11)
                                                    B p

Given the assumptions about the signs and magnitude of the parameters, an inspection of
equation (3.11) establishes that M () is increasing in y and , satisfying the single-crossing
properties. We assume that ; ;  and B are the same for all agents. Given the utility
function (3.10), the locus of individuals indi erent between communities j and j + 1 can be
written as:

                                         !                                 !
                              1,
                   ln( ) ,  y 1 ,, 1 = ln Qg j+1, ,
                                                     g 
                                                         Qj                     Kj     (3.12)
                                              j        j +1


where

                                                  Bpj +1 ,1
                                   Qj   = e,        1+                                (3.13)


The boundary indi erence conditions in equation (3.12) imply a set of non-intersecting
downward-sloping boundary loci in the (ln(y ); ln( )) plane. These loci have intercepts Kj
on the ln( ) axis, and we refer to these as community-speci c intercepts (Figure 2). The
population living in community j can be obtained by integrating between the loci that go




                                                 17
through Kj ,1 and Kj . Consequently the population in community j is given by:

                                                   ,
                                   1       Kj + y 1,,1
                                                   1
                               Z       Z

                 P (Cj ) =                                 f (ln( ) ln(y )) d ln( ) d ln(y )        (3.14)
                                ,1 Kj,1 + y11,,,1


   Given the distribution of agents across communities, we can also derive expressions for
the quantiles of the income distribution for each community. According to the model, the
q th quantile of the income distribution in community j , j (q ), is implicitly de ned by the
following equation:

          Z    ln(j (q)) Z Kj + y11,,,1
                                                f (ln( ) ; ln(y )) d ln( ) d ln(y) = q P (Cj )      (3.15)
              ,1           Kj,1 + y11,,,1



   Next consider the determination of public good provision and the tax rate in each
community. Let p(g ) be the GPF giving the gross-of-tax housing price as a function of
public services provided in the community. Substituting the GPF into the households'
utility function, the most preferred level of g is then obtained by maximizing the following
expression:

                                               n           h   y1, ,1        Bp(g)+1 ,1 i o 1
                       V (g; p; y; ) =             g + e        1,     e,       1+               (3.16)


The rst-order condition for this maximization problem can be expressed as:

                                                                         !
                                                  1,
                                       ln( ) ,  y 1 ,, 1                    = Lj                  (3.17)


                                                               18
where the intercept, Lj , is given by
                                          2
                                                    Bpj +1 ,1               3

                                          6B e
                                               ,      1+       pj p0j (g ) 77
                             Lj = ln 64                                                (3.18)
                                                       gj,1                 5




   For a given point on the GPF, the expression in equation (3.17) partitions every commu-
nity into two groups. The set of voters preferring lower government services can be obtained
by integrating the joint distribution of (ln( ); ln(y )) between the line given by Kj ,1 and
the line given by Lj . Substituting equations (3.17) and (3.18) into equation (3.9) implies
that the locus of pivotal voters is given by:

               1 Z Lj + y11,,,1
                                     f (ln( ); ln(y )) d ln( ) d ln(y) = 12 P (Cj )
             Z

                                                                                       (3.19)
              ,1 Kj,1 + y11,,,1


Figure 2 illustrates the distribution of households within and across communities in equilib-
rium. The curve which goes through the intercept Kj is the boundary between communities
j and j + 1. The curve through Lj characterizes the pivotal voters in community j . House-
holds below this curve prefer lower levels of public good provision while the opposite holds
for households above the line. Note also that equations (3.19) can be solved for Lj given
values of Kj and the remaining parameters.

   Furthermore, we assume that housing is produced from land and non-land factors with
constant returns to scale:


                                         Hj = Asj Mj1,s                                (3.20)

                                                 19
        Figure 2: The Distribution of Households across and within Communities
                                    ln( )

                             Kj

                                                            community j + 1
                              Lj


                                                community j
                            Kj,1

                  community j , 1
                                                                                         ln(y )




        This gure illustrates the distribution of households within and across communities in
        equilibrium.

where Aj is the xed amount of land area in community j and Mj is a mobile factor used
in production. Assume that pm is the same in all communities. Pro t maximization by
price-taking producers implies that the per capita housing supply function is given by:

                                                       phj (1 , s) (1,s)=s
                                                   "              #

                             Hjs(pj ; tj ) = Aj             pm
                                                               !

                                            = Aj           pj                                   (3.21)
                                                       1 + tj

where     = (1 , s)=s and units of M are chosen such that pm is scaled conveniently to


                                                 20
equal (1 , s). Roy's Identity applied to equation (3.10) implies that the individual housing
demand function can be written B pj y  . Thus per capita housing demand is given by:

                                                         Z       1
                          Hjd(gj ; pj ; tj )    =                    B pj y  fj (y) dy   (3.22)
                                                             0


where

                                         Z
                                                j (y )                       .
                          fj (y) =                           f (y; ) d           P (Cj )   (3.23)
                                               j,1 (y)



denotes the marginal density of income in community j and the j (y ) are de ned by equation
(3.12).



3.3 The Slope of the GPF

In order to characterize pivotal voters in a community, we need to derive an expression
for the slope of the GPF. Recall that the GPF is de ned as the locus of (gj ; pj ) such that
housing markets are in equilibrium:


                    Fj (gj ; pj ; tj ) = Hjd(gj ; pj ; tj ) , Hjs (pj ; tj ) = 0           (3.24)


and the community budget is balanced:


                  Gj (gj ; pj ; tj ) = c(gj ) , pj 1 +tj t Hjd(gj ; pj ; tj ) = 0          (3.25)
                                                          j


                                                         21
given the perceived migration e ects. Totally di erentiating both equations above and
solving for dpj =dgj yields:

                                                   Gjg   ,   Fjg
                                 dpj         =     Gjt       Fjt
                                                                                       (3.26)
                                 dgj   GPF         Gjp
                                                   Gjt   ,   Fjp
                                                             Fjt

The right hand side of the expression above does not have a simple closed form solution in
general. However, there are two cases that have received special attention in the theoretical
literature which yield tractable approximations of this derivative.

   The rst case is typically referred to as the myopic voting model. According to this
hypothesis, voters in each community ignore all e ects of migration; i.e., voters treat the
boundaries of the communities as xed. In addition each voter takes the net-of-tax price of
housing, community population, and the housing quantities as xed. In this simple myopic
voting model, we have:

                                    dpj       = c0 (gj )                               (3.27)
                                    dgj   GPF     Hj

The main advantage of the myopic voting model is that the slope of the GPF is basically
only a function of two variables: the marginal costs of providing the public good and the per
capita housing demand. This formulation is implicit in all prior empirical work estimating
demand functions for local public goods and harks back to the pioneering work by Barr and
Davis (1966) and Bergstrom and Goodman (1973). As we will see in the next section, this
speci cation simpli es the task of estimating the parameters of the model considerably.


                                              22
       The second case draws on modern club theory and assumes that individuals are utility
takers.15 In our context, let voters in community j take public goods and housing prices
elsewhere as given. Then utility attainable in all other communities is given. For individual
( ; y ) that is:


                                  V  ( ; y ) = max
                                                i6=j
                                                     V ( ; pi; gi; y)                                (3.28)


As we noted earlier, the allocation of households across communities will satisfy boundary
indi erence, strati cation and ascending bundles. The utility-taking assumption implies
that voters in community j anticipate the change in Kj and Kj ,1 that results from a
change in pj and gj , taking the (p; g ) in all other communities and hence in the adjacent
communities as given. Under this assumption, we can then derived a closed-form solution
for the slope of the GPF. However, the functional form of this slope is much more complex.
In particular, the slope of the GPF will not only depend on the two variables above, but
also on prices and public good provision in adjacent communities.16

       Summarizing this section, we have introduced a spatial equilibrium model that provides
the basis for the empirical analysis of this paper. We have de ned equilibrium for this model
and derived a number of properties that characterize the allocation of households across
communities and the determination of tax rates and expenditure levels under majority rule.
  15
     The theory of clubs was initiated by Buchanan (1965). See also Ellickson (1973, 1979), Scotchmer and
Wooders (1987), Gilles and Scotchmer (1997) and Ellickson, Grodal, Scotchmer, and Zame (1999).
  16
     Notes specifying the deviation of the slopes of the GPF in both cases are available from the authors.
The derivation entails di erentiating (3.24) and (3.25) using (3.12), (3.14), (3.21) and (3.22) to obtain the
derivative in (3.26). This is straightforward, but tedious.


                                                     23
We have shown how to introduce multiple public goods and amenities into the analysis
without losing the tractability of the model. We have introduced a parameterization of the
model that allows us to characterize the distribution of households across communities and
the income distribution within each community in a computationally tractable way. These
income distributions are characterized by quantiles, which are di erentiable functions of the
underlying parameters of the model. We have also shown that a majority voting equilibrium
implies a locus of pivotal voters in each community. The speci cation of the preferred level
of public good provision depends on the assumptions one is willing to make about the degree
of sophistication of the voters. The next section discusses how to identify and estimate the
parameters of the model.



4 The Estimation Strategy

The structure of the the model suggests implementing the estimation procedure in two
steps. This two-step approach is attractive because the implications of the model regarding
locational equilibrium can be studied separately from implications regarding determination
of public good levels. In the rst step, quantiles of the income distributions predicted by
the model are matched with empirical counterparts observed in the data. This allows us to
identify and estimate a subset of the parameters of interest. The basic idea of the second
stage is to exploit the condition that characterizes the locus of pivotal voters. If the model
is correctly speci ed, the implied levels of public expenditures can be explained by their


                                             24
observed counterparts. The second step completes the estimation procedures and allows us
to recover almost all structural parameters of the underlying model. We will brie y describe
the rst step of the estimation procedure implemented in Epple and Sieg (1999), and focus
more fully on the the second stage.17

    Given a parametric assumption on the joint distribution of income and tastes for the
population of the metropolitan area and the indirect utility function of the households, the
model determines a joint distribution of income and taste parameters for every community.
The estimation strategy is based on the idea that the di erence between the empirical
quantiles of the income distributions observed in the data and the quantiles predicted by
the model should be small if the model is evaluated at the true parameter values. More
formally, the di erence between the empirical and the predicted quantiles should converge
almost surely to zero as the sample size increases for each community and quantile. Equation
(3.12) implies that quantiles of the income distribution of community j depend on (gj ; pj )
only through the community-speci c intercepts Kj . We can treat the Kj 's as unknown
parameters and estimate the model using a minimum distance estimator. The parameters
that are identi ed in this step include the parameters of the underlying distribution of
income, the correlation between income and tastes, the income elasticity of housing, and
the ratio of  to the standard deviation of the taste for public goods.18

    The estimation strategy described so far has ignored information about community
  17
     Note that this approach is similar in spirit to work in the di erentiated products literature by Berry
(1994) and Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes (1995) although the actual implementation di ers signi cantly.
  18
     First step estimation can be simpli ed using simulation techniques. For a discussion of simulation in
estimation see among others Pakes and Pollard (1989), McFadden (1989) and Gourieroux and Monfort
(1993).

                                                    25
populations. This is a drawback for a number of reasons. First, there is fairly accurate
information on community populations, and one would like to incorporate this information
in the estimation procedure. Broadly speaking, adding more information to the estimation
procedure should improve the estimation results. Second, the populations of the com-
munities vary substantially within a metropolitan area. A failure to explain the correct
population of each community would lessen the credibility of the framework. Incorporating
information about community populations into the estimation procedure is easier than one
might expect.

    Equation (3.14) can be solved recursively to obtain the community-speci c intercepts,
Kj , as a function of the parameters of the bivariate distribution of income and tastes,
(y ;  ; ; y ;  ), the parameters (; ) and the community sizes, P (C1); :::; P (CJ ). One
can impose these community size restrictions in the estimation procedure, which e ectively
pins down the values for the community-speci c intercepts, as we noted before. We then
estimate the parameters of the model by matching the quantiles of the income distributions
subject to the constraint that community-speci c intercepts are chosen to replicate observed
community sizes.19

    If we have data on housing prices, tax rates, public expenditures and local amenities for
the sample of communities, we can identify and estimate the remaining structural param-
eters of the model. The biggest problem encountered in the empirical implementation of
the model is that local public good provision is multidimensional and partially unobserved
   19
      An appendix that discusses identi cation and estimation of the parameters of the model more formally
is available upon request from the authors.

                                                   26
by the econometrician. Following the empirical literature on di erentiated products in in-
dustrial organization, we assume that the level of public good provision can be expressed
as an index that consists of observed characteristics of community j denoted xj and an
unobserved characteristic denoted j :


                                         gj = x0j + j                                   (4.1)


where    is a parameter vector to be estimated. j is observed by the households, but
unobserved by the econometrician.

   In this application, we assume that the rst component of the index, x1j , is given by
expenditures for education per capita which is chosen by majority rule. All other observed
components, (x2j ; :::; xkj) of the index are determined exogenously. Since the index has an
arbitrary unit of measurement, we can set 1 = 1, which implies that the index is measured
in educational expenditures per capita. Furthermore the derivative of the index with respect
to educational expenditures is equal to one.

   The basic idea of the second stage estimator is to exploit the condition that characterizes
the locus of pivotal voters. Solving equation (3.18) for the index of public good provision
yields the following equation:
                      82                                3   9 1
                                 Bpj +1 ,1                 = 1 ,
                                              B pj dp
                      <
              gj =    :
                       4  e,       1+
                                                       j 5 ,Lj
                                                    dgj e ;          j = 1; :::; J       (4.2)




                                                   27
Note that Lj can be estimated using the rst step estimates and equation (3.19).20

       In the previous section, we saw that the myopic voting model implies that the slope
of GPF of community j is only a function of the marginal costs of public goods and the
per capita housing stock. Since we measure public goods by expenditures per capita, we
set c0(g ) = 1. This suggests the following approximation of the right hand side of equation
(3.27):

                                        dpj =     1                                               (4.3)
                                        dgj   1 + 2 Hj

This speci cation contains not only the myopic model as a special case, as we have already
seen, but also the case in which the derivative is constant across communities.

       Substituting equation (4.1) and (4.3) into equation (4.2) and solving for j yields the
following orthogonality condition:
                                      8                                       9 1
                                             Bpj +1 ,1                          ,
                                                                              = 1
                                                          B pj  +1 H e,Lj ;
                                      <
                    j = x0j , :e,             1+                                               (4.4)
                                                                 1 2 j


By solving equation (4.2) for j , we have e ectively put the model into a nonlinear regression
framework. Assuming that E [j j xj ; pj ; Hj ] = 0, we can identify and estimate the remaining
structural parameters of the model,  = (; ; ; ln( ); ln( )), using a nonlinear least squares
  20
    Equation (3.19) only allows us to compute L^ j = (Lj , ln( ) )=ln( ) . The second stage estimator,
therefore, depends on ln( ) and ln( ) .




                                                   28
estimator:21

                                                            J
                        ^NLLS = argmin2 J1 mj (xj ; pj ; Hj ; Lj j)2
                                                            X
                                                                                                        (4.5)
                                             j =1

where mj (j) denotes the right-hand side of equation (4.4) and  is the relevant parameter
space.

       The NLLS estimator is consistent only if the error terms are uncorrelated with prices
and expenditures. If this assumption is violated, we need to use an instrumental variable
procedure to estimate the parameters instead. The structure of the model implies that both
housing prices and public good provision should be monotonically increasing functions of
the income rank of the community. This suggests, following an idea originally due to Durbin
(1954), that functions of income rank of communities be used as instruments in a nonlinear
least squares procedure. Other valid instruments are given by exogenously determined
amenities of the community.22 Let zj denote the set of valid instruments that satisfy
E [j jzj ] = 0. Following Hansen (1982), we can then estimate the underlying structural
parameters of the model using a GMM estimator:

                                     J
                                            2
                                                          J
                                                                3 0      2                    3


               ^GMM = argmin2 4 J1 zj mj (j)5 Wj 4 J1 zj mj (j)5
                                     X                    X
                                                                                                        (4.6)
                                                j =1                         j =1

where Wj is a positive de nite weighting matrix. Given the identifying assumptions out-
  21
     ln( ) is not separately identi ed from 1 and 2 and hence set equal to ,2:5 which is a reasonable point
estimate based on the results reported in Epple and Sieg (1999).
  22
     See also Berry (1994) and Berry et al. (1995) who address similar issues in the context of IV estimation
in models of di erentiated products in industrial organization.


                                                       29
lined in this section, this estimator controls for both observed and unobserved heterogeneity
among households, observed and unobserved characteristics of communities, the potential
endogeneity of prices and expenditures, as well as the self-selection of households into com-
munities of their choice.

       Finally, we would like to point out that this estimation procedure generalizes to the case
where voters are more sophisticated as assumed in the utility taking hypothesis. Computa-
tional requirements, however, increase drastically for at least two reasons. First, the slope
of the GPF is more complicated to compute. Second, and more importantly, the slope of
the GPF in a community now depends on the levels of public good provision in adjacent
communities. Consequently, we can no longer solve for gj equation by equation, but need
to solve the system of equations in (4:2) simultaneously.23 While this estimation is still
feasible, it is much more demanding from a programming and computational perspective.



5 Empirical Results

In the rst stage of the estimation procedure, we match select quantiles of the empirical
income distributions of the communities with their predicted counterparts. This part of
the estimation procedure is identical to the one in Epple and Sieg (1999) and hence we
obtain the same results, which are summarized in Table 2. The parameter estimates have
the correct signs and are of reasonable magnitude. The estimated standard errors are small.
  23
    This problem is equivalent to solving a system of nonlinear equations and similar to the share inversion
problem encountered in Berry (1994).

                                                    30
                               Table 2: Estimated Parameters I
             Parameters                                          Estimates
               ln(y)                                               9.790
                                                                  (0.002)
               ln(y)                                               0.755
                                                                  (0.004)
                                                                  -0.019
                                                                  (0.031)
              =ln(    )                                          -0.283
                                                                  (0.013)
                                                                   0.938
                                                                  (0.026)
           Function value                                         0.0368
         Degrees of freedom                                          271
         Estimated standard errors are given in parentheses.

The test of the over-identifying restrictions rejects the model speci cation at conventional
con dence levels, but the di erence between the predicted and estimated quantiles of the
income distributions is reasonably small for most communities.

   Based on these rst stage results, we can estimate the intercept, Lj , for each community
using (3.19). The intercept and the slope parameters,  and  , characterize the locus of the
pivotal voters within a community. Our model implies that this intercept is a function of
the housing price and the level of public good provision (equation (3.18)). The basic idea
of the second stage of the estimation procedure is to invert the functional relationship that
maps the levels of public good provision, gj , into the community intercept, Lj . Inverting
this mapping yields values for the index of public good provision that are consistent with
our model speci cation (equation(4.4)). The estimator chooses the parameter vector to
minimize the distance between these values and an index of observed expenditures and


                                                 31
amenities.

    As explained above, we can estimate the remaining structural parameters of the model
using either a nonlinear least squares estimator, which ignores the potential correlations
between housing prices, expenditure levels and crime rates with the error term, or a GMM
estimator, which uses the income rank and exogenous amenities as instruments. Column I
of Table 2 reports the estimated parameters obtained using NLLS while columns II and III
shows the results from two di erent GMM estimators. The rst one uses functions of income
rank and crime as instruments. The second one uses only functions of income rank since
crime rates may also be endogenous. Column IV adds orthogonality conditions derived from
the locational equilibrium. For comparison, we also report in column V previous results
that are based on orthogonality conditions derived only from the locational equilibrium.24

    The rst three columns report the most important ndings of this study. The di er-
ences between the estimated parameters of the three columns are small. Correcting for
the potential endogeneity of prices and expenditures primarily a ects the point estimates
for ln( ) and . The point estimate for which measures the trade-o between schooling
expenditures and crime is -2.39 (-2.99, -2.62) with an estimated standard error of approxi-
mately 1.8 (1.4, 3.5). This indicates that households perceive the protection from crime as
a public good and are willing to trade o higher crime levels with higher levels of education
expenditures.
   24
      See Epple and Sieg (1999) for a formal derivation of the orthogonality conditions that can be derived
from the boundary indi erence condition. The procedure involves recursively solving equation (3.12) for
gj+1 proceeding from the lowest to the highest ranked community. Then the gj are replaced by the index
in (4.1) and the resulting expressions are solved for the j 's. These conditions are also exploited by the
estimators in columns IV and V.

                                                    32
                               Table 3: Estimated Parameters II
                          I              II              III            IV         V
                       NLLS           GMM             GMM             GMM       GMM
                         VE             VE              VE           VE & LE      LE
                        -2.39          -2.99           -2.62           -1.75     -1.97
                       (1.79)         (1.41)          (3.47)          (1.27)    (4.95)
        ln( )          -2.50          -2.50           -2.50           -1.83     -3.11
                         |{             |{              |{            (0.74)    (1.80)
        ln( )          0.30            0.52            0.48           0.39      0.81
                       (0.15)         (0.18)          (0.15)          (0.21)    (0.34)
                      -0.085          -0.15           -0.14           -0.11     -0.23
                       (0.03)         (0.05)          (0.04)          (0.06)    (0.10)
          1a           3.38            2.83            3.03           1.72
                       (0.53)         (0.88)          (1.16)          (0.98)
          2            -0.28          -0.38           -0.39           -0.18
                       (0.21)         (0.07)          (0.12)          (0.20)
        Estimated standard errors are given in parentheses.
        a coecients and standard errors must be multiplied by 104 .



   If we only exploit orthogonality conditions derived from the voting equilibrium, ln( ) is
not separately identi ed from the 1 and 2 . We therefore set ln( ) = ,2:5 in the estimation
procedure. This is a reasonable estimate based on the previous ndings reported in Epple
and Sieg (1999). The estimates for ln( ) are 0.3 (0.52, 0.48) with a standard error of
approximately 0.15 (0.18, 0.14). These estimates suggest that there is a signi cant amount
of unobserved heterogeneity in tastes for public goods, which provides an explanation for
the fact that income varies quite substantially within communities. The point estimate for
 is -0.09 (-0.15, -0.14).

   We can compute price and income elasticities for local public goods based on the param-
eter estimates of the substitution elasticity, , and the income elasticity of housing,  , as


                                                33
well as the observed income and expenditure levels.25 This approach di ers from previous
studies, because the elasticities are functions of the structural parameters of the indirect
utility function evaluated at observed income and expenditure levels instead of constant
parameters of a log-linear demand system. Hence one should be careful when comparing
the point estimates reported in this study with those found in previous studies. We nd
that the estimated price elasticity is -0.92. The income elasticity is approximately 0.52. Our
results, therefore, suggest that the demand for local public good may be more price-elastic
than previously believed. The estimate of the income elasticity is of a similar magnitude as
the ones reported in previous studies.26

       The point estimates of 1 and 2 indicate that the derivative of housing prices with
respect to public good provisions is almost constant across communities. The derivatives
do not signi cantly depend on the magnitude of the tax base measured by the housing
stock. These results do not lend support for the simple myopic voting model.27 We reject
the null hypothesis that 2 = 1 at any reasonable levels of con dence.

       One of the most interesting ndings of this study is that the estimation results obtained
from orthogonality conditions that exploit the voting equilibrium are in fact quite similar
to the one we found previously based on the locational equilibrium. Comparing the results
in columns I, II and III with the ones reported in column V we nd that point estimates
  25
     Formulas for computing these elasticities are available from the authors.
  26
     For example, in their analysis of survey data Bergstrom et al. (1982) report price elasticities of approx-
imately -0.5 and income elasticities of 0.6. In their analysis of voting behavior in school budget referenda
Romer et al. (1992) nd that the price elasticity is approximately -0.25. The income elasticity is roughly
0.9.
  27
     If we impose the constraints implied by the simple myopic model, we also nd that the point estimates
for  and hence ln( ) are unreasonably small.

                                                      34
                                          Figure 3: Public Good Provision
                              3000




                              2500




                              2000
               public goods




                              1500




                              1000




                              500




                                0
                                     10    20    30    40         50    60   70   80   90
                                                            community
               Notation: . - linear index, - - locational equilibrium, | voting equilib-
               rium


and the estimated standard errors of the structural parameters are not very di erent.

   We investigate this relationship more carefully and estimate the parameters by imposing
both sets of orthogonality conditions. The results are displayed in column IV of Table 3.
The point estimate for is -1.75 which slightly lower than the ones reported in columns
I through III. The estimate of ln( ) falls between those reported in I and V. The point
estimate for ln( ) is slightly lower than the one reported in V. However, the di erences are
well within one standard deviation. This indicates that the di erences are not statistically
signi cant. We therefore conclude that imposing both sets of orthogonality conditions does
not alter the parameter estimates signi cantly.

   We also nd that the levels of public good provision implied by the loci of the pivotal

                                                        35
voters are almost identical to the ones implied by the boundary indi erence condition. This
result is illustrated in Figure 3. We plot the levels of public good provision as predicted by
the loci of the decisive voters, the boundary indi erence conditions and the index. We nd
that the di erences between the rst two lines are negligible for almost all communities in
the sample. The predicted value for the linear index shows more idiosyncratic movements
which the the model attributes to the unobserved characteristics of the communities. We
conclude that observed allocations are compatible with restrictions implied by boundary
indi erence and majority rule.



6 Conclusions

In this paper, we focus on the collective choice mechanism typically imposed in models
of residential choice in a system of local jurisdictions. The estimator of the underlying
structural parameters of the model is based on necessary conditions that allocations must
satisfy in equilibrium under majority rule. One of the main contributions of this paper is
to show that it is in fact possible to estimate consistently the underlying parameters of a
fairly general equilibrium model based on orthogonality conditions derived from majority
rule. As far as we know, our estimator is the only approach available. The ndings of this
paper provide some support for our modeling and estimation strategy, especially in light
of the tight parameterization of the model. The estimates of the structural parameters
have the expected signs and are in most cases of reasonable magnitudes. The estimated


                                             36
elasticities indicate that the demand for local public goods is responsive to both price and
income changes. The parameter estimates characterizing the demand for housing are also
quite reasonable, which lends additional support to our empirical approach.

   This paper highlights the importance that voters' perceptions of trade-o s between
local expenditures and taxes play in the analysis of majority rule within a system of local
jurisdictions. We have shown how to compute these slopes under a number of di erent
scenarios about voter sophistication. Unfortunately, only the most simple speci cations
yield tractable closed-form solutions of this derivative. In the empirical analysis we therefore
follow an approach that tries to approximate the slopes of the GPF's by a exible functional
speci cation which contains the simple myopic model as a special case. The speci cation of
the model, which ts the data the best and produces the most plausible parameter estimates,
has the property that the slopes of the GPF's do not di er much across communities. The
simple myopic voting model seems to impose too much variation in these derivatives. This
 nding, if it should be con rmed by other studies, raises a number of interesting questions
about how to model voting behavior in these type of economies.

   While our empirical approach provides reasonable estimates of the underlying structural
parameters of the model, it is subject to a number of limitations. First, it relies on some
strong assumptions about household preferences, mobility, the cost of providing public goods
and the perceived slopes of the government-services possibility frontiers. However, it should
be pointed out that most assumptions imposed in this paper are quite common in theoretical
work and computational general equilibrium analysis. Nevertheless, future research should


                                              37
allow for more sources of observed and unobserved heterogeneity among households. Second,
our research is subject to data limitations. In particular, better data on housing prices and
public good provisions would provide a more precise test of the hypotheses of interest. We
believe that the approach outlined in this paper raises a number of interesting issues and
provides ample scope for future research to improve our understanding of the underlying
sorting processes as well as the determination of local public policies.




                                             38
References

Barr, J. and Davis, O. (1966). An Elementary Political and Economic Theory of Expenditures of State and
      Local Governments. Southern Economic Journal, 33, 149{165.
Bergstrom, T. and Goodman, R. (1973). Private Demands for Public Goods. American Economic Review,
      63, 280{296.
Bergstrom, T., Rubinfeld, D., and Shapiro, P. (1982). Micro-Based Estimates of Demand Functions for
      Local School Expenditures. Econometrica, 50, 1183{1205.
Berry, S. (1994). Estimating Discrete-Choice Models of Product Di erentiation. Rand Journal of Economics,
      25(2), 242{262.
Berry, S., Levinsohn, J., and Pakes, A. (1995). Automobile Prices in Market Equilibrium. Econometrica, 63
      (4), 841{890.
Brueckner, J. (1982). A Test for Allocative Eciency in the Local Public Sector. Journal of Public Eco-
      nomics, 19(3), 311{331.
Buchanan, J. (1965). An Economic Theory of Clubs. Economica, 33, 1{14.
Durbin, J. (1954). Errors in Variables. Review of the International Statistical Institute, 22, 23{32.
Ellickson, B. (1973). A Generalization of the Pure Theory of Public Goods. American Economic Review,
      63, 417{432.
Ellickson, B. (1979). Competitive Equilibrium with Local Public Goods. Journal of Economic Theory, 21,
      46{61.
Ellickson, B., Grodal, B., Scotchmer, S., and Zame, W. (1999). Clubs and the Market. Econometrica,
      forthcoming.
Epple, D., Filimon, R., and Romer, T. (1984). Equilibrium Among Local Jurisdictions: Towards an Inte-
      grated Approach of Voting and Residential Choice. Journal of Public Economics, 24, 281{304.
Epple, D. and Platt, G. (1998). Equilibrium and Local Redistribution in an Urban Economy when Households
      Di er in Preferences and Incomes. Journal of Urban Economics, 43(1), 23{51.

                                                     39
Epple, D. and Romer, T. (1991). Mobility and Redistribution. Journal of Political Economy, 99(4), 828{858.
Epple, D. and Sieg, H. (1999). Estimating Equilibrium Models of Local Jurisdictions. Journal of Political
      Economy, 107(4), 645-681.
Fernandez, R. and Rogerson, R. (1996). Income Distribution, Communities, and the Quality of Public
      Education. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111, 135{164.
Fernandez, R. and Rogerson, R. (1998). Public Education and Income Distribution: A Dynamic Quantitative
      Evaluation of Education-Finance Reform. American Economic Review, 88(4), 813{833.
Gilles, R. and Scotchmer, S. (1997). Decentralization in Replicated Club Economies with Multiple Private
      Goods. Journal of Economic Theory, 72, 363{387.
Goldstein, G. and Pauly, M. (1981). Tiebout Bias and the Demand for Local Public Goods. Journal of
      Public Economics, 16, 131{144.
Goodspeed, T. (1989). A Reexamination of the Use of Ability-to-Pay Taxes by Local Governments. Journal
      of Public Economics, 38, 319{342.
Gourieroux, C. and Monfort, A. (1993). Simulation Based Inference. Journal of Econometrics, 59, 5{33.
Hansen, L. P. (1982). Large Sample Properties of Generalized Method of Moments Estimators. Econometrica,
      50 (4), 1029{1053.
Inman, R. (1978). Testing Political Economy's 'As If' Proposition: Is the Median Income Voter Really
      Decisive?. Public Choice, 33(4), 45{65.
McFadden, D. (1989). A Method of Simulated Moments for Estimation of Discrete Response Models without
      Numerical Integration. Econometrica, 57, 995{1027.
Nechyba, T. (1997a). Existence of Equilibrium and Strati cation in Hierarchical Public Good Economies
      with Voting. Economic Theory, 10(2), 277{304.
Nechyba, T. (1997b). Local Property and State Income Taxes: the Role of Interjurisdictional Competition
      and Collusion. Journal of Political Economy, 105(2), April 1997, 351{84.
Pakes, A. and Pollard, D. (1989). Simulation and the Asymptotics of Optimization Estimators. Economet-
      rica, 57, 1027{1058.

                                                   40
Poterba, J. (1992). Taxation and Housing: Old Questions, New Answers. American Economic Review, 82
      (2), 237{242.

Romer, T. and Rosenthal, H. (1979). Bureaucrats versus Voters: On the Political Economy of Resource
      Allocation by Direct Deomcracy. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 93(4), 563{587.

Romer, T. and Rosenthal, H. (1982). Median Voters or Budget Maximizers: Evidence from School Expen-
      diture Referenda. Economic Inquiry, 20(4), 556{578.

Romer, T., Rosenthal, H., and Munley, V. (1992). Economic Incentives and Political Institutions: Spending
      and Voting in School Budget Referenda. Journal of Public Economics, 49(1), 1{33.

Rubinfeld, D., Shapiro, P., and Roberts, J. (1987). Tiebout Bias and the Demand for Local Public Schooling.
      Review of Economics and Statistics, 69, 426{437.

Scotchmer, S. and Wooders, M. (1987). Competitive Equilibrium and the Core in Club Economies with
      Anonymous Crowding. Journal of Public Economics, 34, 416{424.

Tiebout, C. (1956). A Pure Theory of Local Expenditures. Journal of Political Economy, 64, 416{424.




                                                    41
