I. Introduction
         With the increased internationalization of the U.S. economy, the implications of dollar
movements for workers has emerged as a pressing question. A literature has developed that
considers this and related themes. First, the exchange-rate pass-through literature discusses
the degree to which prices of goods -- whether exported, imported, or produced domestically
for home consumption -- are influenced by exchange rates. In the United States export prices
tend to be fairly stable in dollar terms. Import prices appear to be more responsive to
exchange rates movements, but this responsiveness varies considerably across types of goods
and across trading partners. Import-competing products show much smaller elasticities of
response to exchange rates.1 Exchange rates also matter for producer profitability, and for
decisions about capital spending and employment. Industry features –such as their trade
orientation and competitive structure -- scale the importance of these exchange rate effects.2
         The labor market effects of exchange rates are an open question. For the United
States, analyses using data through the mid-1980s show that exchange rates have had
significant implications for wages (Revenga 1992) and for employment across manufacturing
industries (Branson and Love 1988).3 A recent cross-country, cross-industry study by Burgess
and Knetter (1996) found statistically significant effects of exchange rates for employment,
with the size of these effects related to industry characteristics such as competitive structure.
         However, recent work by Campa and Goldberg (1998) found weaker implications of
exchange rates for employment in U.S. industries, but more pronounced effects for wages.
This study used a longer time series than previous empirical work (about twenty-five years of
annual data) and focussed on two-digit industry employment, wages, overtime activity and
overtime wages. The testing methodology allows for exchange rate transmission channels to
vary over time with industry trade exposures to exchange rates through both revenues and

1
  See Goldberg and Knetter (1997) for a survey. The distribution of exchange rate elasticities of the set of
United States import prices thus far examined appears to be centered around 0.5, but the set of goods studied is
by no means exhaustive.
2
  See Clarida (1997) and Sheets (1996) on profitability and exchange rates. Campa and Goldberg
(forthcoming) show that investment spending is time-varying in accordance with the export and imported
input orientation of producers across various industries and across countries and is strongest in industries with
low price-over-cost markups (which can be viewed as closer to perfectly competitive market structures).




                                                       1
costs. Exchange rate effects were statistically significant mainly for wages, and strongest in
industries that are more trade oriented and in industries that generally have lower profit
margins.
        The combination of significant wage responsiveness to exchange rates, without
comparable employment effects poses some interesting questions. One possible reconciling
argument is that a dollar appreciation, for example, could lead workers to lose their jobs, but
then be re-employed at lower wages within the same broad industry group but in a different
narrower industry definition. Such findings would be consistent with observed patterns of
labor force adjustment to oil price shocks (Davis and Haltiwanger, 1997). If this is the case, a
related question is whether workers take new positions in a similar industry within a local
labor market, or if they look for opportunities in a similar industry elsewhere in the country.
Employment changes can entail worker relocation as well as the type of wage adjustments
from moving within and across manufacturing industries that have been detailed by Revenga
(1992). Another argument is that under adverse employment conditions from a dollar
appreciation, for example, workers may engage in less on-the-job search for better paying
jobs.4 Under these conditions, one might observe relatively stable employment with magnified
wage restraint. By unraveling these issues, we hope to better understand the degree of labor
market disruption associated with dollar fluctuations.
        The present paper examines more than two decades of data on average hourly
earnings, hours, and employment for 2-digit industries located within the individual states of
the United States. This approach has several advantages over prior studies. First, since the
trade orientation of industries varies by industry location, we are able to better identify the
magnitude of currency shocks hitting local industries. Second, we are able to consider the
spillovers of exchange rate effects across local industries. From a local labor market
perspective, such spillovers may help explain the magnified wage responses and reduced
employment sensitivity to exchange rates. Third, by examining state-level data, we capture



3
  Examining the 1970s into the early 1980s, Branson and Love estimate that durable goods producers had jobs
were most responsive to exchange rates. Using Revenga’s computed elasticities, the estimated effects on jobs
are increasing gradually to the extent that import competition exists in an industry.
4
  See Mortensen (1986) for a discussion of on-the-job search models.


                                                     2
the adjustments made by workers who might move across state lines, yet remain within the
same broad industry.
       We find that real exchange rates contribute significant explanatory power to
regressions on average hourly earnings, hours, and employment. In pooled industry
regressions, dollar appreciations (depreciations) are associated with small but statistically
significant declines (increases) in hourly earnings by workers. In individual industry
regressions, we observe significant variability across industries in the levels of these earnings
implications and even in the sign of these effects. Moreover, even within individual industries,
some regions are particularly sensitive to dollar movements. Cross-industry spillovers, which
we interpret as providing an indirect means of worker exposure to exchange rates, are
significant for average hourly earnings and for employment within high-markup industries.
       In contrast with results drawn from nationally-aggregated data for industries, the state-
level data exhibit more pronounced responsiveness of employment and hours worked within
industries. On balance, dollar appreciations (depreciations) are associated with employment
declines (increases) for high- and low- profit-margin industry groups. As industries increase
their export orientation, the adverse consequences of appreciations for employment also
increase.   However, some of these adverse consequences are counteracted as industries
increase their reliance on imported inputs. Both forces are significant in determining the
employment effects of exchange rates, and they differ qualitatively and quantitatively across
regions and across industries.
       Finally, our analysis also focuses on and confirms the type of dynamic patterns of
adjustment in local labor markets previously reported by Topel (1986). Using Topel’s
methodology, we construct state- and industry-specific relative demand shocks, both actual
and anticipated. Similar to Topel’s finding using micro date, we find that wages increase in
response to current relative demand shocks and decrease in response to expected future
relative demand shocks.




                                               3
II. The Theory
       Our theoretical set-up pairs a model of dynamic labor demand and exchange rate
exchange rate exposure (Campa and Goldberg 1998) with a dynamic local labor supply
specification. The theory shows clear reasons why industries should be differentially affected
by exchange rates. One reason is that industries differ in trade orientation. But, even
controlling for these differences, exchange rate effects on wages and employment should vary
across industries depending on: (i) the industry product demand elasticity at home and abroad;
(ii) the initial labor share in production; and (iii) the elasticity of labor supply facing the
industry in that locality. Industries with high labor demand elasticity with respect to wages
will exhibit more employment response and less wage response to exchange rate movements.
       Each industry within each locality (defined as a state in our data) can experience
shocks that alter its wages directly or indirectly. Direct effects of exchange rates arise through
own-industry trade orientation. Indirect effects arise through spillovers across local industries
via expected alternative wages. Local unemployment rates are important since they influence
the probability that a worker will be able to find a job that offers the alternative wage. Some
shocks can change the current or future attractiveness of an entire locality and lead to labor
supply shifts through in- or out-migration, as in Topel (1986).
       Controlling for direct and indirect effects of exchange rates could help identify the
separate channels for wage and employment responsiveness. For example, if an industry is
export-oriented, in general a dollar appreciation is expected to reduce the competitiveness of
its products, and as a consequence place downward pressure on industry wages and lead to
layoffs. However, if other local industries also are export-oriented, the dollar appreciation can
lower the alternative wage available to workers and locally expand the labor supply to the
initial industry. The offsetting direction of movement in labor demand and labor supply to the
industry may lead to magnified wage effects and muted employment effects.



A. Exchange Rates and Labor Demand: We begin with profit maximizing producers who
sell to both domestic and foreign markets. Producers make decisions in a dynamic and
uncertain environment, and consider the future paths of all variables influencing their
profitability. The unknowns for the producer are aggregate demand in domestic and foreign


                                                4
markets, y and y*, and the exchange rate, e, defined as domestic currency per unit of foreign
exchange. Production uses three factors: domestic labor L, other domestic inputs Z, and
imported inputs, Z*. Respective factor prices are denoted by w, s, and es*. Labor is a
homogeneous input into production and levels of non-labor inputs can be adjusted in the
short-run without additional costs.
         Producers optimize over levels of factor inputs and total output in order to maximize
expected profits, π , (equation 1) subject to the constraints posed by the production function
(equation 2) and product demand conditions in domestic and foreign markets (equation 3).
Revenues arise from domestic market sales, q, and foreign market sales, q*. In both markets,
the exchange rate influences demand by altering the relative price of home products versus
those of foreign competitors. The exchange rate also directly enters costs through the
domestic price of imported inputs.



                                                              (
                                                          é p q t : y t , et q t)                  ù
                                                          ê
                                                                            (            )         ú
                                               åφ           + et p * q *t : y * t , et q * t
                                                ∞
π ( y t , y *t , et ) =        max                        ê                                        ú
                                                                                                           (1)
                                                          ê − w t Lt − e t s * t Z * t − s t Z t
                                                      t
                          Qt , Lt , Z *t , Z   t =0                                                ú
                                                          ê                                        ú
                                                                  (
                                                          ë − c ∆Lt         )                      û


                                                β         α       1−α − β
subject to      Q = q + q* , Q = L Z * Z                                    ,                              (2)


                 p(q : y, e) = a( y, e)q −1 / η and ep * (q* : y*, e ) = a * ( y*, e )q *−1 / η
                                                                                                       *
and                                                                                                        (3)




The time discount factor is defined by φt = Π δ τ . In equations (2) and (3) we have dropped
                                                                      τ

the period t time subscripts for convenience.5 A Cobb-Douglas production structure is
assumed for simplicity, but our main results also will hold under a more general CES
production structure. In equation (3) the parameters η= and η* are the domestic and foreign
product demand elasticities facing producers. The demand curves in domestic and foreign


5
 A Cobb-Douglas production structure is assumed for simplicity, but our main results also will hold under a
more general CES production structure.


                                                                          5
markets include multiplicative demand shifters, a( y, e) and a * ( y*, e) , which capture the
influence of real income differences across markets and exchange rates.
           It is assumed that an industry’s labor input L is costly to adjust. We assume quadratic
adjustment costs that are proportional to the prevailing wage in the industry (equation 4). The
parameter b allows for additional industry variation in the cost of adjusting employment levels.



c (∆Lt ) = wt     (Lt − Lt −1 )2
                b
                                                                                                (4)
                2
           Following Nickell (1986), the solution of this optimization problem is a dynamic
equation for optimal labor demand, where labor adjusts toward a target level L~ that would be
optimal in the absence of adjustment costs. The speed of adjustment of labor demand to L~ ,
(1-µ), is reduced when industries face high adjustment costs, b, and have low wage
sensitivity of marginal revenue product. Nickell shows that labor demand in any period can
be approximated by

                                           )å (δ g µ ) j L~ t + j
                                             ∞
L t = µ L t − 1 + (1 − µ )(1 − δ g µ                                                                  (5)
                                            j=0



where g is the rate of real wage growth for an industry. Solving the optimal labor problem of
                                                                                         ~
equations (1) to (4), Campa and Goldberg (1998) show that the labor demand target L is
sensitive to exchange rates, with the effects of exchange rates transmitted through three
separate channels – revenues from home market sales, revenues from foreign market sales,
                                                                            ~
and costs of imported inputs into production. The elasticity of response of L to exchange
rates is


            ~
           ∂L
                 ~
                   =
                                   (
                                  −1 pe
                                       )          (     (
                 L 1 æç p(⋅) 1 + η η + χ ep * (⋅) 1 + η * 1 + η
                                                         −1     p *e
                                                                    )(   )   (       ) )ö÷
                                                                     − p(⋅) 1 + η −1 η pe
                                                                                                      (6)
           ∂e    e β çè − αes * (∂Q ∂Z *)−1                                                 ÷
                                                                                            ø

where χ i = p *i q *i ( p i q i + p *i q *i ) represents the share of export sales in revenues, and

η pe and η p*e are domestic and foreign price elasticities with respect to exchange rates.
Observe that the three groups of terms on the right-hand side of equation (6) correspond to
the three exposure channels: the sensitivity to exchange rates of labor demand through


                                                       6
revenues from domestic sales, revenues from foreign market sales, and the costs of
productive inputs.          By            invoking basic relationships on exchange-rate pass-through
elasticities and ex-ante law of one price, we rewrite this relationship as:


              ~      ~
             ∂L
             ∂e
                     L
                       =
                     e β
                         p
                            ((             )       (         )
                           1 + η −1 kM + 1 + η *−1 χ − (∂Q ∂Z *) α
                                                                −1
                                                                                   )                                    (6’)


          Equation (6’) clearly shows the three channels and industry features which magnify
or reduce the degree of industry response to exchange rate movements. First, more import
penetration of domestic markets (M) increases the sensitivity of labor demand to exchange
rates by increasing the price competitiveness of foreign goods. Second, more export-
orientation (m) increases the sensitivity of labor demand to exchange rates, since export
revenues are relatively more responsive to exchange rates. Third, greater reliance on
imported components (higher α) can offset or even reverse the adverse consequences of a
stronger currency (for example) on industry labor demand. Fourth, more labor intensive
production (i.e. high β) is associated with reduced sensitivity of labor demand to exchange
rates. Finally, industries characterized by greater competition among firms (with low η or η*)
are expected to have labor demands that are more sensitive to exchange rates.
          Using equations (5) and (6’), and introducing log-linearized terms for domestic and
foreign aggregate demand conditions, we generate the following reduced form for optimal
labor demand by an industry.6


                                     æ                               (
                                         c 0 + c 1 y t + c 2 y t* + c 3 , 0 + c 3 ,1 χ i + c 3 , 2 M   i
                                                                                                           + c 3 , 3α   i
                                                                                                                            )e       ö
L t = µ L t −1 + 1 − µ
    i        i   i
                      (          i
                                     )
                                     ç                                                                                           t
                                                                                                                                     ÷ (7)
                                     ç
                                     è
                                         + c 4 w ti + c 5 s t + c 6 s t*                                                             ÷
                                                                                                                                     ø



where all variables other than χ, M, and α are defined in logs.7 All variables and parameters
are specific to an industry except for yt and yt*.8 Within an industry, state or regional
differences in labor demand may arise from local differences in trade exposures.




6
    Changes in foreign currency input costs through foreign wages are absorbed into the α term.


                                                                 7
B. Labor Supply: Our approach to labor supply focuses on the behavior of forward-looking
workers in a local labor market. These workers choose their labor supply to an industry by
considering the wages offered by that industry relative to the alternative wage (as offered
locally by other industries). Local labor supply also responds to both current and expected
future local demand conditions, all relative to conditions outside of the locality. As Topel
(1986) demonstrates, these conditions can lead to in-migration or out-migration from an area.
         A reduced form representation for labor supply to an industry i in a locality r is


                  (               )
Lirt = a1r + a 2i w ir t − wˆ ir t + a3r y r t                                                          (8)



where y r t is a vector of terms for local relative conditions (current relative strength of the

locality, and expected future relative strength), and ŵir is the alternative wage in industries
outside of industry i in the locality.9 Exchange rates can shift the labor supply curve facing an
industry in a locality through their impact on the alternative wage, with the magnitude of the
shift depending on the trade orientation of the other local industries, X ir .10 The likelihood
that industry i workers could get this alternative wage depends on the tightness of local labor
markets. We proxy this tightness as inversely related to the local unemployment rate Unempr.
So, wˆ ir t ≈ a 4r ' X ir et + a5r 'Unemp r t , and we write the new reduced form equation for labor

supply as:


Lir t = a1r + a 2i wir t + a3r y r t + a 4r X ir et + a5r Unempr t                                      (9)

7
   The actual parameters on the shocks introduced in our equation (7) depend on the perceived degree of
permanence of the shock. A shock that is transitory will have a much smaller impact on labor demand than a
shock that is viewed as permanent.
8
  Real bilateral exchange rates all are exogenous to an industry. These bilateral exchange rates with currencies
of individual countries are weighted differently for each industry, depending on the importance of a country as
the industry’s trading partner.
9
  Labor supply is upward sloping in an industry’s wage if there is heterogeneity in the workforce, either in
terms of preferences for industry job attributes or mobility costs.
10
   The alternative wage should be viewed as an equilibrium alternative wage, so that it ---in fact--- would be a
function of all of the variables that shift labor demand (as shown in equation 7). Introducing this full set of
terms at this point would complicate notation and have no bearing on our ultimate estimation structure or our
interpretation of the exchange rate channels. The existence of these other terms would matter for the
interpretation on coefficients on the domestic and foreign income and factor price terms in the regressions if
one were to attempt a semi-structural interpretation of these coefficients.


                                                              8
for industry i in a state / region r.


C. Labor Market Equilibrium: Setting labor demand by a local industry (equation 7) equal
to local labor supply (equation 9) yields equations in industry employment and wages:11


wtir =ω 0ir + ω 1i y t + ω 2i y *t + ω 3i s t + ω 6ir Unemp r t
               (                                                                  )
                                                                                                                      (10a)
             + ω 5i , 0 + ω 5i ,1 X i + ω 5i , 2 M i + ω 5i , 3α i + ω 5ir, 4 X ir ⋅ et + ω 6i y r t + ω 7i Li t −1

 Lir t =λir0 + λ1i yt +λi2 y *t + λi3 st + λir4 Unemp r t
                (                                                             )
                                                                                                                      (10b)
              + λi5, 0 + λi5,1 X i + λi5, 2 M i + λi5, 3α i + λir5, 4 X ir ⋅ et + λ 6 y r t + λi7 Li t −1


          Equations (10a) and (10b) form the basis for our tests of exchange rate and local demand
effects on the labor market of industry i operating in region r. The wage and employment response
in an industry to local shocks depends on the elasticities of labor demand and supply, as well as the
costs of adjusting employment in that industry. When labor demand or supply curves are steep –
indicating low employment sensitivity to wages -- shocks to either demand or supply lead to
relatively less employment response and more wage response. When industries have high labor
force adjustment costs, the short-run shift in labor demand in response to any given shock is
smaller. Given an industry’s trade orientation, a more concentrated (and less competitive) industry
will experience a smaller labor demand shift from any given shock.
          The effects of a dollar depreciation on wage and employment in a particular industry are
illustrated in Figure 1. For an industry with primary external orientation through its export sales, a
dollar depreciation increases labor demand. In the absence of a labor supply shift, labor market
equilibrium moves from point A to point B. The direct effects of the depreciation are expanded
employment and higher wages in the industry. Yet, if other local industries are also trade-oriented,
labor supply to industry i might contract if alternative wages rise in those other industries. The
decline in labor supply to industry i because of the exposure of other local industries moves the
equilibrium to point C or point D. These indirect effects can be moderate (point C), so that local-

11
  The coefficients on the interacted exchange rate terms are interpreted in relation to the individual labor demand
and labor supply equations in Campa and Goldberg (1998). The main difference between the current system of




                                                                  9
labor-market spillovers mitigate some of the employment effect of the dollar depreciation but
reinforce the wage effect. However, if the wages of other local industries are very sensitive to
exchange rates, employment in the initial industry can be unchanged or even may contract (point
D). A depreciation generally raises wages, provided that the dominant channels of industry
exposure are through favorable revenue effects.

qi                                                                       i,r
                                                                       L       (s upp ly)


                                      D

                                              C

                                                  B

                                          A



                                                                           i
                                                                        L      (de m and )


                                                                                  i
                                                                                 L

        Figure 1: Local Labor Market Equilibrium for Industry i


III. Data
Labor market series. The dependent variables in our study are average employment, hours
and wages from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) Employment and Earnings with all data
disaggregated by 2-digit SIC industry. We consider the movements in the national data (as a
means of generating a set of reference facts), as well as in data disaggregated by states and
areas.12 Firms are classified into industries based on their principal product using 1987 SIC



equations (10) and the prior paper is the inclusion of local labor market effects and the dynamic labor supply
decision.
12
   This data is derived from the Current Employment Statistics survey that is sent out monthly to all
employers with at least 250 workers and a random sample of smaller employers. See BLS, Handbook of


                                                      10
classifications. We exclude Alaska, Hawaii, and the District of Columbia from the state data.
The data span 1971 through 1995.
        The employment data capture all persons on establishment payrolls who received pay
for any part of the pay period that includes the 12th day of the month. Proprietors, self-
employed, unpaid volunteers and family workers, and domestic workers are excluded. Persons
on paid vacation or sick leave are counted, as are workers who are unemployed or on strike
for some but not all of the pay period. The hours data reflect hours paid, which may differ
from scheduled hours or hours worked. Overtime hours and hours paid to workers on
vacation or sick leave are included. Worker absenteeism and work stoppages cause paid hours
to fall below scheduled hours and are not included.
        The earnings data reflect average weekly earnings divided by average weekly hours.
Workers who are not paid weekly have their earnings and hours expressed on a weekly basis.
Earnings reflect payments for all workers who were on the payroll for any part of the pay
period covering the 12th of the month. Gross payroll prior to deductions for social security,
life insurance, tax withholding, and union dues is used. Overtime, holiday, and incentive pay as
well as regular bonus payments are included, while non-regular bonus payments are excluded.
Firm contributions to fringe benefits, such as health insurance and retirement accounts, are not
included.


Exchange rate series. Our empirical work uses export and import real exchange rates for each
industry. These industry-specific real exchange rates are constructed by weighting the bilateral real
exchange rates of U.S. trading partners in accordance with the importance of these partners in
industry exports or imports in each year. To convert nominal exchange rates into real series, the
nominal measures are adjusted by the GDP deflators of the respective trade partners (International
Financial Statistics data). The resulting real trade-weighted dollar exchange rates follow the
empirical convention that an increase in the exchange rate corresponds to an appreciation of the
dollar. This convention is opposite that used in our theoretical section.




Methods (1997) for details. This sampling implies that smaller employer response to stimuli may be less well
captured by the data set.


                                                    11
         We use industry-specific exchange rates, rather than a common trade-weighted measure,
because these better reflect the actual shocks to individual industries. The industry-specific series
are generally highly correlated with the overall real exchange rate for the United States (Appendix
Table 1 provides correlation coefficients). However, for some industries the export exchange rates
clearly are more similar to the aggregate real exchange rate measure than are the import exchange
rates. The industry for which the export exchange rate is least correlated with the aggregate
measure is Lumber and Wood Products, with a 0.63 correlation coefficient. On the import index
side, the correlation coefficients between the industry exchange rates and the aggregate real
exchange rate were as low as 0.36 for the Petroleum and Coal Industry, 0.50 for Paper and Allied
Products, and 0.58 for Lumber and Wood Products. Therefore, our industry-specific series are
most relevant for capturing industry-specific shocks to import-competitiveness or imported input
providers.


Industry trade orientation series. In some regression specifications, we interact the real exchange
rates with measures of industry export share and imported input share (Campa and Goldberg, 1997
constructions, based on U.S. Department of Commerce series and U.S. input-output tables). These
industry series are not differentiated across states or regions of the United States.
         We are able to perform such state differentiation for our export measures by using a shorter
time series of export data reported by state of origin and by industry, compiled by the
Massachusetts Institute for Social and Economic Research (MISER).13 These series are only
available by 2-digit SIC beginning in 1988. For our regressions, we take this information on the
relative importance of exports to an industry in a state over this shorter time period, and use it to
scale – at the state level -- the longer annual series on national export orientation numbers for each
industry .
         These state-specific data on industry exports make a powerful statement about the diversity
of export-orientation of industries located in different areas of the United States. To demonstrate
this point, Map 1 shows the degree of export orientation of production in each state, based on the
MISER data.14 The larger and heavily export-oriented areas include the Pacific region, Texas,

13
  Comparable numbers are not available for imported input share of industries by state.
14
  To construct this map we used MISER data on the export-orientation of manufacturing industries in each state,
weighted these series by the importance of the specific industry within the state, and assumed a zero export share on


                                                          12
Florida, New York, Vermont, and the Carolinas. Indeed, according to these measurements, which
use the value of exports to gross state product, Vermont is the most export-oriented state.
          Map 2 shows the biased view of state-export orientation that would arise if one used
national export shares for individual industries of individual states. This map presents the ratio of
state export orientation as implied by the MISER data versus that implied by the overall national
export shares of the industries.15 A value greater than one on this map indicates that the export
orientation of a state (based on MISER data) is greater than that implied using the national data on
industry export orientation. The states with dark shading have the most understated export
orientation when the national data on industry export shares is used; the states without shading
have the most overstated export orientation from national series. For some states this
misrepresentation can be enormous.              The national aggregates vastly overstate the export
orientation of manufacturing industries in the Mountain region and vastly understate the export
orientation of various coastal and border areas.
         Other data. Aggregate demand conditions are proxied by (the change in log) real GDP
(IMF International Financial Statistics, line 99b). Other factor costs are captured by (the change
in log) real oil prices (line 001) and the (change in log) 10-year T-bill rate deflated by the wholesale
price index. The aggregate prime age male unemployment rate is our proxy for national labor
market tightness. The state prime age male unemployment rate is our proxy for local labor market
tightness.
         Our regressions also include measures of local relative demand shocks. We use an
adaptation of Topel’s (1986) empirical methodology for measuring current and anticipated
relative demand shocks to a local labor market. Like Topel, we use states as our definition of
a local labor market. For each industry in a state we adjust the employment in the state by
subtracting out the employment for that industry. The current relative demand shock for
industry i in state r during year t measures the percent deviation of the adjusted state

output of non-manufacturing industries.
æ manufacturing GSP ö
ç
è    total GSP
                    ÷⋅
                    ø
                          åj
                               ææ
                               çç
                                       state employment in industry j
                               ç ç total state manufacturing employment
                               èè
                                                                          ö æ MISER exports ö ö
                                                                          ÷⋅ç
                                                                          ÷ ç
                                                                                             ÷÷ ,
                                                                                             ÷÷
                                                                          ø è industry j GSP ø ø
this measure is computed using data for each year between 1988 and 1994, and averaged over these seven
years of data.




                                                       13
employment from its trend relative to the percent deviation of national employment from its
trend in year t (see the appendix for details). This variable captures the extent to which the
current local labor demand conditions deviate from labor demand conditions nationally.
         We use the persistence of this measure of local relative demand shocks to control for
future local relative demand shocks. We regress the current local relative demand shock
measure for a given industry and state on its value lagged one and two years and on the
current national demand shock measure. We use this estimated model to generate forecasts of
future relative demand shocks to the locality. Our measure for anticipated future local relative
demand shocks is a weighted average of the one, two, and three-year ahead forecasts.


IV. Empirical Results
A. Regression method. Starting with the basic forms of equations (10a) and (10b), we
estimate the wage and employment equations in first differences using weighted-least-squares
with lagged industry employment providing the weights. The estimation equations are


∆wtir =ω 0ir + ω 1i ∆y t + ω 2i time + ∆ ω 3i s t + ω 6ir ∆Unemp r t
                (                                                                )
                                                                                                                              (10a)
             + ω 5i , 0 + ω 5i ,1 X ir + ω 5i , 2 M i + ω 5i , 3α i + ω 5ir, 4 X ir ⋅ ∆e i t + ω 6i ∆y ir t + ω 7i ∆Li t −1


∆Lirt =λir0 + λ1i ∆yt +λi2 time + λi3 ∆s t + λir4 ∆Unemp r t
               (                                                             )
                                                                                                                              (10b)
             + λi5, 0 + λi5,1 X ir + λi5, 2 M i + λi5, 3α i + λir5, 4 X ir ⋅ ∆e i t + λ 6 ∆y ir t + λi7 ∆Li t −1


The implied unit of observation is a worker in manufacturing, not a state or SIC aggregate.
All regressions include industry fixed effects, industry time trends, and lagged changes in
industry employment. Regressions using state data also include state fixed effects and state
time trends. All regressions control for the percent change in real GDP, the percent change in
real oil prices, the percent change in real interest rates, and the unemployment rate (at national
or state levels as appropriate). The regressions using state level data allow the coefficients on


15
   Again, we assume that the non-manufacturing industries within a state have no export orientation. The implied
state export share is the weighted average of the industry export shares where the weights are the industry shares in
state output.


                                                               14
these aggregate variables to vary by industry.16 The interacted-trade-shares for each industry
are lagged by one period to avoid simultaneity issues.
        All of our specifications include both the industry-specific export and import exchange
rates. The export exchange rate series proxies the relevant stimuli to export market sales. The
import exchange rate series combines the two other trade transmission channels for exchange
rates, as shown in our theoretical derivation. Ideally, we would include separate measures for
imported input exchange rates and import-competition exchange rates. However, the import
penetration of industries is highly correlated with the imported input shares of industries.
Because of this strong correlation, the data do not allow us to effectively distinguish between
the import competition channel and the imported input channel of exchange rate stimuli.
Thus, by including only one import term, we recognize that the estimated parameter on the
import exchange rate is likely to be combining the two distinct exposure effects. A priori, we
cannot predict the sign of its coefficient.


B. Regression Results: Nationally Aggregated Series for Industries. As a first pass through
the data, we examine industry data on labor market outcomes collected at a national level.
These regressions (shown in Appendix Table 2) consider whether exchange rate movements
are associated with changes in the employment, hours or wages of workers who are
differentiated from each other only in terms of the industries in which they work. In these
national data, if a worker changes jobs within a two-digit industry, but moves across state
lines, there will not be an observable change in employment. Because of this feature, such data
may mask the extent of possible disruption attributable to exchange rates. Employment
changes show up in this data only when a worker moves in or out of a two-digit industry.
        The regressions using industry aggregates on wages, hours, and employment impose
various parameter constraints. The elasticity of labor market outcomes to exchange rate
movements are constrained to be common across all industries, or to differ across industries
or over time only due to differences in the industry trade orientation. We do not investigate
with the national data differences in elasticities due to other industry-specific features, like

16
   By including the industry-specific coefficients, along with the state and industry fixed effects and trend
terms, we reduce the likelihood that our regressions are plagued by the problems caused by combining
explanatory variables based on different levels of aggregation.


                                                     15
competitive structure (as in Campa and Goldberg 1998), labor market norms, or costs of
adjusting the workforce. Given these cross-industry restrictions, it is not surprising that
exchange rate implications appear small and generally insignificant for each of our labor
market variables.


C. Regression Results: Data Disaggregated by States and by Industries. The main body of our
empirical work, presented in Tables 1 to 5, uses our full dataset on labor market outcomes, by
industry, by state, and over time for 1971 through 1995 (about 8,000 observations). Tables 1
through 3 separately consider the elasticities of response of, respectively, real average hourly
earnings, weekly hours, and employment. The industries are grouped together according to
their average price-over-cost markups.17 High markup industries, all else equal, would be
expected to have less responsive labor market outcomes.
        For each industry group, Tables 1 to 3 presents the results of three different
specifications of exchange rate effects on the associated labor market outcome. The most
constrained specifications are those given in columns 1 and 4 of each table where the
exchange rate effects are constrained to be common across industries in the group and over
time. In columns 2 and 5, the exchange rate elasticities are allowed to vary with the size of
the export orientation or the import orientation of an industry in a state and at any point in
time. The coefficients on the exchange rate terms in these regressions are interpreted as the
direct (and contemporaneous) implications for labor markets.18
        Other useful summaries of the effects of exchange rates on the three dependent
variables are given in Tables 4 and 5. Table 4 provides independently estimated exchange rate
elasticities for each industry. For the results reported in Table 4, we constrain the industry-
specific elasticities to be constant over time and across localities in the United States. In
separate tests, we consider whether the data reject equality of the industry exchange rate
elasticities across regions of the United States. If the answer is yes (reject equality), we report

17
    The “Low Markup” group of industries includes primary metal products, fabricated metal products,
transportation equipment, food and kindred products, textile mill products, apparel and mill products, lumber and
wood products, furniture and fixtures, paper and allied products, petroleum and coal products, and leather and
leather products.




                                                     16
an “r” superscript on the associated term in Table 4. For those industries where the data reject
equality across regions, Table 5 provides details on the regional variation in the exchange rate
effects.


Exchange rates and average hourly earnings (Table 1). In state-level data, real exchange rates
matter for average hourly earnings, even in the most constrained regression specifications. For
both high and low markup industries, dollar appreciations generally lower the hourly earnings
of workers.19 For both categories of industries, the estimated magnitudes of the direct effects
are small, with an average net effect of at most -0.1 percent from a 10 percent dollar
appreciation. Indirect effects, from local industry spillovers, are significant but on net go in
the opposite direction to that expected from the alternative wage arguments.
           The first two columns of Table 4 report the industry-specific estimates of average
hourly earning elasticities with respect to export and import exchange rates. Exchange rates
enter significantly in fourteen of the twenty industries. The separate channels for exchange
rate effects can be large and sometimes offsetting. Clear examples of these counteracting
forces are found in the Food, Chemical, and Transportation Equipment industries. In eight
industries the net elasticities of hourly earnings responses to exchange rates are significantly
different from zero, but the sign pattern is mixed.
           Table 5A shows the pattern of regional differences in earnings sensitivity for Food,
Electronics, Instruments and Miscellaneous Manufacturing. For Electronics, the West South
Central and Pacific regions are most significantly effected by changes in the real exchange
rates of export and of imported input partners.


Exchange rates and average weekly hours (Table 2). Dollar movements have significant
implications for average weekly hours in manufacturing. When the dollar appreciates against
the currencies of its export partners, hours worked decline for both high and low markup
industries. Symmetrically, when the dollar appreciates against the currencies of countries from

18
   We averaged the ratio of the Miser industry export orientation (by state) to the aggregate industry export
orientation for the years covered by the Miser data. We then adjusted the aggregate industry export orientation
rates in each state and year by this average ratio.




                                                    17
which the U.S. industries purchase inputs, hours worked expand. These two effects largely
offset each other so that the net effect of dollar movements on hours is small. We find no
important cross-industry spillover effects of exchange rates on hours.
         Estimates of industry-specific coefficients for the two transmission channels tell a
similar story (Table 4, columns 3 and 4). In eleven of the twenty industries, average weekly
hours respond significantly to dollar movements through either the export or the import
channels. While both channels for the exchange rate effects often are significant, the net effect
on hours is significantly different from zero only in the case of Textile Mill Products and
Fabricated Metal Products (where a 10 percent appreciation reduces average weekly hours by
1.1 percent and 0.6 percent, respectively). Regional differences in the responsiveness of hours
to dollar movements are evident for six of the twenty manufacturing industries. As shown in
Table 5B, no single region has industry hours that are uniformly more responsive to exchange
rates.


Exchange rates and average industry employment (Table 3): The data show that exchange rate
movements are clearly correlated with changes in industry employment. For high-markup and
low-markup industries, these regressions support the expected pattern of direct effects
through export and imported-input channels. Dollar appreciations against export partners are
associated with employment declines (both through direct and indirect industry effects), while
appreciations against input providers are associated with employment expansion.20
         There is considerable heterogeneity across industries in the effect of dollar movements
on employment (Table 4). In thirteen of the twenty industries, employment is responsive to
exchange rates through at least one of the trade channels. At the state level some of these
local employment effects are very large, even in net terms. Regional differences in
employment elasticities are important for six of the twenty manufacturing industries.
         Over the full time period (1971 through 1995) the net effect of a dollar appreciation
appears to be expansion of employment. However, tests of the stability and robustness of the

19
  The key exception is the positive earnings effect found for dollar appreciations through the export channel
in high markup industries.




                                                      18
regression coefficients across different subperiods suggest that caution is warranted. The
coefficient estimates are fairly stable or sign-consistent into the mid-late 1980s, but for the late
1980s and early 1990s the fit of the regression equations significantly deteriorates. In many
cases, there are even sign reversals on many estimated coefficients.



Actual versus anticipated shocks, and local labor markets: Finally, the results from our
constructed measures of state relative demand shocks are of independent interest for
understanding the dynamics of labor market adjustment to stimuli. Using Current Population
Survey data from 1977-1979, Topel (1986) finds that an increase in his current relative
demand shock measure leads to significantly higher average weekly wages. In contrast, an
increase in his expected future relative demand shock measure leads to significantly lower
average weekly wages. Topel interprets the positive wage response to the current shock as
consistent with a labor demand shift with a stable labor supply, and the negative wage
response to expected future shocks as consistent with a labor supply shift with a stable labor
demand. Current labor supply shifts in advance of expected future labor demand shifts as
workers attempt to arbitrage lifetime earnings differentials across separate labor markets.
        While our study uses aggregate data and not micro data and controls for a different set
of variables, our results nonetheless confirm Topel’s pattern of wage adjustments to these
state relative demand shock measures. Average weekly wages show a large positive and
statistically significant response to current relative demand shocks. In addition, average
weekly wages fall in response to expected future relative demand shocks (Table 2, data row
8). For both high and low-markup industries, the elasticity with respect to the current shock
is more than double the elasticity with respect to the expected future shock.
        If the local market experiences a demand shock that is large relative to the stocks
experienced by other localities, we also expect local employment and hours to increase.21
From Table 2, we observe a significant qualitative difference across high versus low markup
industries on the response of hours worked. Hours worked in low-markup-industries are very

20
   Again, the exception is for dollar appreciations through the export channel for high markup industries
where we find a positive employment effect. However, when we interact the export exchange rate with the
industry export intensity we find the predicted negative employment effect.
21
   Topel (1986) only looks at the impact on average weekly earnings.


                                                   19
sensitive to relative local demand conditions: hours increase in response to the current
(favorable) shocks, and decrease in anticipation of future (favorable) shocks. Table 3 confirms
the same sign pattern of employment adjustment to these shocks, and suggests that market-
structure may play a role in determining the magnitude of responsiveness to current shocks.
Whereas wages were more responsive to current shocks, hours and employment is more
responsive to perceived future conditions.

V. Conclusions

       In this paper we have used labor market data disaggregated by industry and by state to
explore the labor market implications of exchange rates. This approach offers several potential
advantages over prior studies. First, we can better specify the alternative wage by using data
at the state versus the national level. Second, given the nonrandom distribution of industry
employment across labor markets, aggregate industry level data may pick up spurious state or
region labor market effects. Third, we are able to introduce state and industry-specific export
orientation data, and can consider spillovers within and across labor markets. Finally, and
importantly, if exchange rate movements lead to reallocation of workers and jobs across state
lines, but still within similar industries, we are likely to pick up some effects that may be
missed in industry data aggregated up from the state to the national level.
       We find that local industries differ significantly in their earnings, hours, and
employment responses to exchange rates. Industry wages unambiguously respond to dollar
movements in eight of the twenty manufacturing industries, with possible effects surfacing in
fourteen of the twenty industries. A dollar depreciation is sometimes associated with earnings
growth, but sometimes with wage restraint. For some industries, there are significant regional
differences in these elasticities. Employment is unambiguously responsive to exchange rates in
twelve of the twenty manufacturing industries. The employment effects of exchange rates are
much more easily discerned in the local labor markets than in nationally aggregated series.
However, there are clear issues of the stability of empirical specifications which become
especially pronounced by the late 1980s. This lack of stability leads us to suggest caution in
interpreting and identifying industry-specific responses of labor market outcomes to dollar
movements.



                                               20
References
BLS Handbook of Methods, US Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, April 1997,
   Bulletin 2490, Chapter 2 (Employment, Hours, and Earnings from the Establishment
   Survey)
Branson, W., and J. Love. 1988. “United States Manufacturing and the Real Exchange Rate.”
   In R. Marston, ed., Misalignment of Exchange Rates: Effects on Trade and Industry,
   University of Chicago Press.
Burgess, S. and M. Knetter 1996. An International Comparison of Employment Adjustment
   to Exchange Rate Fluctuations. NBER working paper 5861 (December).
Campa, J., and L. Goldberg. “Investment, Pass-Through and Exchange Rates: A Cross-
   Country Comparison.” Forthcoming International Economic Review.
Campa, J., and L. Goldberg. 1997. “The Evolving External Orientation of Manufacturing:
   Evidence from Four Countries.” FRBNY Economic Policy Review (July): 53-81.
Campa, J., and L. Goldberg. 1998. Employment versus Wage Adjustment and the U.S. Dollar.
   NBER working paper 6749 (October).
Clarida, R.. 1997. “The Real Exchange Rate and U.S. Manufacturing Profits: A Theoretical
   Framework with Some Empirical Support.” International Journal of Finance and
   Economics 2, no. 3 (July): 177-88.
Davis, S. and J. Haltiwanger. 1997. “Sectoral Job Creation and Destruction Responses to Oil
   Price Changes and Other Shocks”. manuscript, University of Chicago.
Goldberg, P. and M. Knetter. 1997. “Goods Prices and Exchange Rates: What Have We
   Learned?” Journal of Economic Literature. Vol. XXXV no.3 (September): 1243-1272.
Mortensen, Dale. 1986. “Job Search and Labor Market Analysis”. In Handbook of Labor
   Economics vol. 2, editors Orley Ashenfelter and Richard Layard (Elsevier Press): 848-
   919.
Nickell, S.J. 1986. Dynamic Models of Labour Demand. Handbook of Labor Economics
   (Elsevier Science Publishers).
Revenga, A. 1992. “Exporting Jobs? The Impact of Import Competition on Employment and
   Wages in U.S. Manufacturing.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107 (1): pp.255-284.




                                            21
Sheets, N.. 1996. “The Exchange Rate and Profit in Developed Economies: An Intersectoral
   Analysis”. Working paper, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
Topel, R. 1986. "Local Labor Markets." Journal of Political Economy, vol. 94, no 3, part 2,
   pp: S111-143.




                                            22
Appendix
Local Relative Demand Conditions and Forecast.                  For each state r and industry i, we
construct a time-series of private-sector nonagricultural employment excluding employment in
that industry22 and regress its logarithm on a quadratic time trend. The residuals from these
regressions, ε tri measure the deviations from trend employment in state r exclusive of industry

i at time t. Similarly, we regress the logarithm of national private sector non-agricultural
employment in year t on a quadratic time trend. The residuals from this regression, ε t ,
capture the aggregate business cycle. Relative local demand shocks in state r and industry i in
year t are defined as

∆y ri t = ε tri − ε t ,                                                       (A1)
so that the relative demand shock measures the local employment shock as a deviation from
the national employment shock.
           We use the persistence of these relative demand shocks to develop a measure of the
expected future relative shock to a state/industry. Specifically, for each state/industry we
estimate the following regression
∆y ri t = α1ri ∆y ri t −1 + α 2ri ∆y ri t − 2 + β ri ε t                                      (A2)

The relative demand shock for industry i in state r is modeled as a function of two lags of the
relative demand shock and the current national shock. If βri is positive, then this industry/state
experiences relative cycles that are magnified by the aggregate cycle. This empirical model is
used to generate one to three-year ahead forecasts of the relative demand shocks for each
industry/state. We use a second-order autoregressive model to forecast the national
employment shocks. Following Topel, we summarize these forecasts into a single weighted
average of the forecasts, with weights declining linearly over the forecast horizon.

22
   Here is where we deviate from Topel’s methodology. Since we are interested in explaining the impacts of
relative demand shocks on the wage, hours, and employment in an industry/state, we must remove any direct
contribution of that industry/state from our measure of the relative demand shock. We do this by subtracting
the employment movements in that industry from our time-series on state employment. This implies that each
manufacturing industry in a state will have a slightly different series of estimated relative demand shocks.




                                                           23
Table 1. Response Elasticities of Average Hourly Earnings of Workers in Industries within Individual States
                                                                                     High Markup Industries                      Low Markup Industries
                                                                                (1)            (2)           (3)               (4)         (5)              (6)
Own Industry Channels: percent change in
• Export exchange rates                                                     .053***                                          -.009
                                                                              (.013)                                         (.007)
• Import exchange rates                                                     -.050***                                          .004
                                                                              (.009)                                         (.009)
• [State] Industry export orientation with export exchange rates                              .011          .011                          -.009***       -.010***
                                                                                             (.008)        (.009)                           (.003)         (.003)
• [State] Industry imported input orientation with import exchange rates                   -.025***      -.025***                            .007           .004
                                                                                             (.008)        (.009)                           (.006)         (.006)
Cross-Industry Spillovers: percent change in
• Other industry export orientation with export exchange rates                                             -.005                                         .002***
                                                                                                           (.010)                                         (.001)
• Other industry imported input orientation with import exchange rates                                   .190***                                         .011***
                                                                                                           (.041)                                         (.004)

State-specific relative demand shock                                            .249***        .248***       .271***        .164***        .173***       .166***
                                                                                 (.056)         (.056)        (.057)          (.049)        (.049)        (.049)
Forecasted state-specific relative demand shock                                 -.118**         -.116*       -.124**        -.584***        −.0634        -.0538
                                                                                 (.061)         (.061)        (.062)          (.055)        (.055)        (.055)

Adjusted R-square                                                                 .387          0.383          0.387         0.347          0.371         0.350

Test for joint significance of exchange rate terms:             F -statistic
    Own Industry channels
        • Non-interacted                                                       14.64***                                         .83
        • Interacted with trade orientation                                                     5.07*           4.25*                        4.29*          5.35*
    Cross-Industry Spillovers                                                                                 10.74***                                      7.57***
    Own-Industry & Cross-Industry Spillovers                                                                   7.92***                                      5.94*
Notes: BLS Employment and Earnings: States & Area data. Weighted least squares estimation using prior period’s employment levels as weights. Standard
errors are given in parentheses. Number of observations is 7,991. Other control variables include industry specific responses to real GDP changes, real oil
price changes, real interest rate changes, and state unemployment rate. Industry fixed effects, state fixed effects, and industry- and state-specific time trends
are included in all specifications.
a
  Own-industry and other-industry export orientation measures are adjusted using Miser data to reflect average state/industry differences.
**
   Significant at the 5% level. * Significant at the 10% level.

                                                                           24
Table 2. Response Elasticities of Average Hours of Workers in Industries within Individual States
                                                                                      High Markup Industries                     Low Markup Industries
                                                                                 (1)           (2)        (3)                  (4)         (5)              (6)
Own Industry Channels: percent change in
• Export exchange rates                                                      -.031***                                       -.029***
                                                                               (.008)                                         (.005)
• Import exchange rates                                                      .034***                                        .019***
                                                                               (.006)                                         (.007)
• [State] Industry export orientation with export exchange rates                           -.020***   -.016***                            -.009***       -.009***
                                                                                             (.005)     (.006)                              (.002)         (.002)
• [State] Industry imported input orientation with import exchange rates                     .0306      .0013                               .0069        .000***
                                                                                            (.0052)    (.0002)                             (.0049)         (.000)
Cross-Industry Spillovers: percent change in
• Other industry export orientation with export exchange rates                                          -.009                                             -.001
                                                                                                        (.007)                                            (.001)
• Other industry imported input orientation with import exchange rates                                   .016                                             -.001
                                                                                                        (.026)                                            (.003)

State-specific relative demand shock                                              -.015         -.004           .005        .091***       .096***        .097***
                                                                                  (.036)        (.036)         (.037)         (.038)       (.038)          (.038)
Forecasted state-specific relative demand shock                                   -.030         -.036          -.043        -.161***      −.163***       -.164***
                                                                                  (.039)        (.039)         (.040)         (.042)       (.042)          (.043)

Adjusted R-square                                                               0.210           0.211           0.211         0.261          0.258          0.258
Test for joint significance of exchange rate terms:             F -statistic
    Own Industry channels
        • Non-interacted                                                       16.82***                                     15.53***
        • Interacted with trade orientation                                                   17.11***        17.88***                       7.08*          6.78*
    Cross-Industry Spillovers                                                                                    1.1                                          .38
    Own-Industry & Cross-Industry Spillovers                                                                  9.11***                                        3.73
Notes: BLS Employment and Earnings: States & Area data. Weighted least squares estimation using prior period’s employment levels as weights. Standard
errors are given in parentheses. Number of observations is 7,991. Other control variables include industry specific responses to real GDP changes, real oil
price changes, real interest rate changes, and state unemployment rate. Industry fixed effects, state fixed effects, and industry- and state-specific time trends
are included in all specifications.
a
  Own-industry and other-industry export orientation measures are adjusted using Miser data to reflect average state/industry differences.
**
   Significant at the 5% level. * Significant at the 10% level.

                                                                               25
Table 3. Response Elasticities of Average Employment of Workers in Industries within Individual States
                                                                                     High Markup Industries                     Low Markup Industries
                                                                               (1)            (2)          (3)                (4)         (5)              (6)
Own Industry Channels: percent change in
• Export exchange rates                                                     .064***                                        -.030***
                                                                             (.018)                                          (.009)
• Import exchange rates                                                     .033***                                        .041***
                                                                             (.013)                                          (.011)
• [State] Industry export orientation with export exchange rates                          -.035***     -.051***                           -.003***         -.003
                                                                                            (.011)       (.012)                             (.004)        (.004)
• [State] Industry imported input orientation with import exchange rates                  .118***      .106***                            .072***        .072***
                                                                                            (.011)       (.012)                             (.008)        (.008)
Cross-Industry Spillovers: percent change in
• Other industry export orientation with export exchange rates                                         .038***                                            -.001
                                                                                                         (.014)                                           (.001)
• Other industry imported input orientation with import exchange rates                                 .189***                                            -.003
                                                                                                         (.056)                                           (.005)

State-specific relative demand shock                                               .110        .156**          .142*       .237***       .244***        .245***
                                                                                  (.078)        (.077)         (.078)        (.064)       (.064)          (.064)
Forecasted state-specific relative demand shock                                 -.625***      -.661***       -.643***      -.719***      −.729***       -.729***
                                                                                  (.085)        (.084)         (.084)        (.072)       (.072)          (.072)

Adjusted R-square                                                               0.568           0.575           0.578         0.565          0.567          0.567
Test for joint significance of exchange rate terms:             F -statistic
    Own Industry channels
        • Non-interacted                                                       39.17***                                     27.62***
        • Interacted with trade orientation                                                   69.66***        40.59***                     39.76***       39.62***
    Cross-Industry Spillovers                                                                                 10.71**                                         .51
    Own-Industry & Cross-Industry Spillovers                                                                  40.39***                                    20.13***
Notes: BLS Employment and Earnings: States & Area data. Weighted least squares estimation using prior period’s employment levels as weights. Standard
errors are given in parentheses. Number of observations is 7,991. Other control variables include industry specific responses to real GDP changes, real oil
price changes, real interest rate changes, and state unemployment rate. Industry fixed effects, state fixed effects, and industry- and state-specific time trends
are included in all specifications.
a
  Own-industry and other-industry export orientation measures are adjusted using Miser data to reflect average state/industry differences.
**
   Significant at the 5% level. * Significant at the 10% level.


                                                                               26
Table 4: Estimated Industry-Specific Elasticities of Labor Market Outcomes to Exchange Rates
                                         % Change in Real
                                          Average Hourly          % Change in Weekly            % Change in
                                               Earnings                   Hours                 Employment
               Industry                 Export         Import     Export        Import      Export     Import
           Food & Kindred Products −0.203**           0.233**  r
                                                                   0.005       −0.003  r
                                                                                            −0.045     0.087**
                                        (0.023)        (0.031)    (0.017)      (0.023)      (0.031)    (0.041)
                   Tobacco Products     −0.084         −0.034     −0.036       −0.007        0.103      0.098
                                        (0.067)        (0.055)    (0.049)      (0.040)      (0.085)    (0.069)
                Textile Mill Products    0.036        −0.073** −0.114**          0.004       0.005     −0.007
                                        (0.031)        (0.033)    (0.023)      (0.024)      (0.043)    (0.046)
  Apparel & Other Textile Products       0.002         −0.015    −0.044** r 0.065**        0.082** r   −0.036 r
                                        (0.014)        (0.029)    (0.010)      (0.022)      (0.019)    (0.040)
          Lumber & Wood Products −0.068**             0.129**     −0.006       −0.029      0.074**  r
                                                                                                       −0.043 r
                                        (0.018)        (0.034)    (0.013)      (0.025)      (0.023)    (0.046)
                Furniture & Fixtures     0.086         −0.077      0.007       −0.014        0.091      0.000
                                        (0.053)        (0.073)    (0.039)      (0.054)      (0.072)    (0.099)
            Paper & Allied Products      0.001        0.073**     −0.004         0.020     0.072**      0.009 r
                                        (0.023)        (0.021)    (0.017)      (0.016)      (0.031)    (0.027)
               Printing & Publishing     0.032         −0.022      0.008         0.005     0.095**     −0.031
                                        (0.030)        (0.020)    (0.022)      (0.015)      (0.039)    (0.026)
        Chemical & Allied Products     0.144**        −0.101**     0.000 r      0.006 r     −0.006      0.019
                                        (0.027)        (0.020)    (0.020)      (0.015)      (0.037)    (0.028)
         Petroleum & Coal Products       0.078        −0.146**    0.106**      −0.061        0.021     −0.011
                                        (0.057)        (0.062)    (0.042)      (0.045)      (0.059)    (0.060)
   Rubber & Misc. Plastic Products       0.042        −0.069*    −0.058**     0.076**        0.065     0.188*
                                        (0.033)        (0.040)    (0.024)      (0.030)      (0.042)    (0.051)
        Leather & Leather Products       0.036          0.015     −0.061      0.067** r    −0.126 r     0.097
                                        (0.070)        (0.045)    (0.052)      (0.033)      (0.096)    (0.062)
    Stone, Clay, and Glass Products    0.139**        −0.118**    −0.037        0.044*     0.153**      0.011
                                        (0.052)        (0.036)    (0.038)      (0.026)      (0.067)    (0.047)
                                                      −0.139** −0.065** r 0.060**           −0.054
                                                                                         r
            Primary Metal Industries   0.095**                                                         0.124**
                                        (0.032)        (0.032)    (0.023)      (0.024)      (0.041)    (0.041)
          Fabricated Metal Products    0.152**        −0.113** −0.088**       0.031**        0.010     0.149**
                                        (0.024)        (0.019)    (0.018)      (0.014)      (0.032)    (0.025)
 Industrial Machinery & Equipment      0.090**        −0.047** −0.069**       0.052** −0.097** r       0.129**
                                        (0.025)        (0.015)    (0.018)      (0.011)      (0.032)    (0.019)
         Electronic & Other Electric    0.043 r        −0.049 r  −0.088**     0.085**      0.473**    −0.161**
                          Equipment     (0.037)        (0.030)    (0.027)      (0.022)      (0.048)    (0.038)
                                                      −0.126**                 −0.005
                                                                         r
          Transportation Equipment     0.235**                     0.002                   0.235** r   0.048**
                                        (0.027)        (0.016)    (0.020)      (0.011)      (0.032)    (0.018)
    Instruments & Related Products −0.124*       r
                                                       0.066 r
                                                                  −0.077        0.073*       0.116     −0.080
                                        (0.070)        (0.055)    (0.051)      (0.041)      (0.094)    (0.074)
                Misc. Manufacturing −0.273** r 0.334** r          −0.050         0.060       0.157     −0.114
                                        (0.108)        (0.129)    (0.079)      (0.095)      (0.128)    (0.152)

Notes: Based on specification (1) from Tables 2-4 where industry fixed-effects were interacted with the percent
change in the industry-specific export and import exchange rates. Standard errors are given in parentheses. **
significant at the 5% level; * significant at the 10% level; r indicates statistically significant regional differences.




                                                            27
Table 5A               Regional Differences in Exchange Rate Implications for Average Real Hourly Earnings

                                                                                  Combined Regional Coefficient,
Industry name          Reject Equality                                         reported by region only if measurable
                       Across          North-             Mid-         E.North      W.North     South        E.South       W.South
                       Regions?        East               Atlantic     Central      Central     Atlantic     Central       Central
Food
(SIC 20)               XRER          no      -0.24***     -0.28***     -0.27**      -0.21***    -0.18***     -0.26***      -0.23***
                                             (0.09)       (0.05)       (0.04)       (0.05)      (0.04)       (0.06)        (0.05)
                       MRER          yes      0.32***     0.43***      0.41***      0.21***     0.21***      0.26***       0.22***
                                             (0.11)       (0.06)       (0.06)       (0.07)      (0.06)       (0.08)        (0.07)
Electronics            XRER          yes                  -0.04        -0.01        -0.11       -0.13        -0.19         -0.35*
(SIC 36)                                                  (0.16)       (0.16)       (0.23)      (0.17)       (0.26)        (0.21)
                       MRER          yes                  (0.02)       0.00         0.04        0.12         0.06          0.31*
                                                          (0.12)       (0.12)       (0.17)      (0.12)       (0.20)        (0.16)
Instruments            XRER          yes     0.09         -0.16        0.11         0.09        -0.31        0.40          -0.65
(SIC 38)                                     (0.19)       (0.11)       (0.18)       (0.63)      (0.34)       (0.60)        (0.40)
                       MRER          yes     -0.15        0.12         -0.13        -0.04       0.23         -0.38         0.49
                                             (0.13)       (0.09)       (0.14)       (0.49)      (0.27)       (0.46)        (0.31)
Misc.                  XRER          yes     -0.81*       -0.18        -1.00***     -0.02       -0.01        -0.81         -1.14***
manufacturing                                (0.40)       (0.12)       (0.23)       (0.44)      (0.37)       (0.40)        (0.35)
(SIC 39)               MRER          yes                  -0.53        0.14         -0.39       -0.74                      0.81
                                                          (0.49)       (0.55)       (0.67)      (.62)                      (0.63)
Note: * denotes statistical significance at the 10% level, ** denote significance at the 5% level, and *** indicate a 1%
level of significance.




                                                             28
Table 5B                Regional Differences in Exchange Rate Implications for Average Weekly Hours


Industry Name           Reject                                                      Combined Regional Coefficient,
                        Equality                                                 reported by region only if measurable
                        Across              North-East     Mid-         E.North      W.North      South        E.South         W.South
                        Regions?                           Atlantic     Central      Central      Atlantic     Central         Central
                        XRER        no      0.04           -0.01        0.07**        0.04        -0.01        0.03            -.07*
Food                                        (0.06)         (0.03)       (0.03)       (0.04)       (0.03)       (0.04)          (0.04)
(SIC 20)                MRER        yes                    -0.05        -0.11        -0.09        -0.03        -0.01           0.07
                                                           (0.08)       (0.08)       (0.08)       (0.08)       (0.09)          (0.09)
                        XRER        yes     0.05           -0.00        0.01         0.02         -0.07***     -0.08***        -0.14***
Apparel & Fabric                            (0.05)         (0.02)       (0.06)       (0.16)       (0.02)       (0.03)          0.04
(SIC 23)                MRER        no      0.08           0.03         -0.03        -0.20        0.08*        0.10*           0.19**
                                            (0.10)         (0.04)       (0.11)       (0.30)       (0.05)       (0.06)          (0.09)
                        XRER        yes     0.01           0.04         0.00         -0.21*       -0.08**      -0.09           0.01*
Chemicals &                                 (0.07)         (0.03)       (0.04)       (0.10)       (0.04)       (0.06)          (0.06)
Products                MRER        yes     -0.02          -0.01        0.00         0.17**       0.07**       0.05            -0.06
(SIC 28)                                    (0.05)         (0.02)       (0.03)       (0.08)       (0.03)       (0.05)          (0.04)
                        XRER        no      0.03           0.01         -0.31**      -0.14        -0.10        -0.23*          -0.32**
Leather &                                   (0.07)         (0.07)       (0.15)       (0.13)       (0.23)       (0.13)          (0.14)
Products                MRER        yes     0.02           0.02         0.35***      0.14         0.06         0.19*           0.36***
(SIC 31)                                    (0.05)         (0.04)       (0.12)       (0.10)       (0.16)       (0.10)          (0.11)
                        XRER        yes                    0.09         0.04         -0.20        -0.10        -0.17           -0.09
Primary metal                                              (0.10)       (0.10)       (0.15)       (0.11)       (0.12)          (0.13)
products                MRER        yes     0.08           0.04         -0.01        0.19*        0.18*        0.11            0.19**
(SIC 33)                                    (0.08)         (0.04)       (0.03)       (0.11)       (0.06)       (0.07)          (0.08)
                        XRER        yes     -0.15          -0.10        0.12**       0.00         -0.10        -0.05           -0.21*
Transportation                              (0.10)         (0.09)       (0.05)       (0.12)       (0.11)       (0.15)          (0.12)
Equipment               MRER        no                     -0.05        -0.15**      -0.10        -0.02        -0.10           0.06
(SIC 37)                                                   (0.07)       (0.06)       (0.09)       (0.08)       (0.11)          (0.09)
Note: One asterisk denotes statistical significance at the 10% level, two asterisks denote significance at the 5% level, and
three indicate a 1% level of significance.




                                                             29
Table 5C                Regional Differences in Exchange Rate Implications for Average Employment

                                                                                   Combined Regional Coefficient,
Industry Name           Reject Equality                                         reported by region only if measurable
                        Across          North-            Mid-         E.North      W.North      South        E.South      W.South
                        Regions?        East              Atlantic     Central      Central      Atlantic     Central      Central
                        XRER       yes       0.07         0.04         0.11         -0.07        0.06*        -0.01        0.03
Apparel & Fabric                             (0.07)       (0.03)       (0.07)       (0.19)       (0.03)       (0.04)       (0.06)
(SIC 23)                MRER       yes                    -0.18        -0.45**      -0.12        -0.16        -0.21        -0.36**
                                                          (0.14)       (0.18)       (0.39)       (0.15)       (0.16)       (0.17)
                        XRER       yes       0.09         0.06         -0.01        0.10         0.12***      0.09**       0.10**
Lumber & Wood                                (0.08)       (0.06)       (0.04)       (0.12)       (0.04)       (0.04)       (0.05)
(SIC 24)                MRER       yes       0.31*        -0.32**      -0.02        -0.28        0.13*        -0.14        0.15
                                             (0.18)       (0.13)       (0.08)       (0.31)       (0.08)       (0.10)       (0.10)
                        XRER       no        0.02         0.07**       0.01         0.05         0.06         0.09*        0.01
Paper Products                               (0.05)       (0.04)       (0.03)       (0.05)       (0.04)       (0.05)       (0.06)
(SIC 26)                MRER       yes       -0.03        0.06**       0.00         0.06         0.02         -0.06        0.01
                                             (0.04)       (0.03)       (0.03)       (0.08)       (0.05)       (0.07)       (0.08)
                        XRER       yes       0.09         -0.05        -0.49*       -0.39        0.31         -0.76***     -0.10
Leather &                                    (0.15)       (0.15)       (0.28)       (0.27)       (0.44)       (0.26)       (0.30)
Products                MRER       no        0.02         0.05         0.41*        0.26         0.12         0.39*        0.24
(SIC 31)                                     (0.10)       (0.09)       (0.22)       (0.21)       (0.30)       (0.20)       (0.23)
                        XRER       yes       -0.17        0.05         -0.09        -0.26***     0.07         0.10         -0.36***
Industrial                                   (0.13)       (0.09)       (0.07)       (0.13)       (0.12)       (0.18)       (0.13)
Machinery               MRER       no        0.12         0.05         0.16***      0.26***      0.13         0.08         0.27***
(SIC 35)                                     (0.08)       (0.05)       (0.04)       (0.08)       (0.08)       (0.12)       (0.08)
                        XRER       yes       -0.16        0.03         0.55***      0.22         0.15         0.40*        -0.64***
Transportation                               (0.19)       (0.16)       (0.08)       (0.20)       (0.18)       (0.24)       (0.21)
Equipment               MRER       no                     -0.17        -0.28**      -0.23        -0.24        -0.26        0.09
(SIC 37)                                                  (0.13)       (-0.28)      (0.16)       (0.15)       (0.18)       (0.17)

Note: One asterisk denotes statistical significance at the 10% level, two asterisks denote significance at the 5% level, and
three indicate a 1% level of significance.




                                                             30
                                          Correlation Coefficients between Industry-Specific real
         Appendix Table 1
                                           exchange rates and an aggregate real exchange rate

                                         XRER with RER      MRER with RER XRER with MRER
       Industry Name (Code)

      Food and Kindred Products (20)          0.89                 0.93                 0.92

               Tobacco Products (21)          0.88                 0.76                 0.56

            Textile Mill Products (22)        0.88                 0.85                 0.75

      Apparel and Other Textiles (23)         0.77                 0.82                 0.61

     Lumber and Wood Products (24)            0.63                 0.58                 0.48

           Furniture and Fixtures (25)        0.79                 0.82                 0.71

       Paper and Allied Products (26)         0.92                 0.50                 0.45

          Printing and Publishing (27)        0.91                 0.81                 0.76

   Chemical and Allied Products (28)          0.93                 0.89                 0.92

    Petroleum and Coal Products (29)          0.90                 0.36                 0.34

       Rubber and Misc. Plastic ( 30)         0.83                 0.87                 0.68

    Leather and Leather Products (31)         0.91                 0.65                 0.55

           Stone, Clay and Glass (32)         0.85                 0.86                 0.76

        Primary Metal Industries (33)         0.90                 0.82                 0.81

       Fabricated Metal Products (34)         0.84                 0.80                 0.60

 Industrial Machinery and Equip. (35)         0.92                 0.85                 0.85

      Electronic and Other Equip (36)         0.88                 0.76                 0.67

      Transportation Equipment (37)           0.90                 0.75                 0.73

   Instruments and Related Prods (38)         0.91                 0.81                 0.89

   Miscellaneous Manufacturing (39)           0.90                 0.88                 0.90
The industry-specific export real exchange rates are denoted by XRER; industry specific import real
exchange rates are denoted by MRER; the trade-weighted aggregate real exchange rate is the Federal
Reserve Bank of Dallas series.




                                                      31
Appendix Table 2: Nationally-Aggregate Industry Data on Earnings, Hours, and Employment: 1971-1995
                                                             Percent Change in Real    Percent Change in Average               Percent Change in Average
                                                            Average Hourly Earnings           Weekly Hours                            Employment
                                                                (1)            (2)          (3)           (4)                     (5)             (6)
Percent change in:
• Export exchange rates                                        0.018                       0.002                                0.072**
                                                              (0.018)                     (0.008)                               (0.027)
• Import exchange rates                                       −0.014                      −0.008                                 0.023
                                                              (0.014)                     (0.007)                               (0.022)
• Industry export orientation with export exchange rates                     −0.008                     −0.011                                     0.016
                                                                             (0.016)                    (0.007)                                   (0.022)
• Industry imported input orientation with import                             0.003                     −0.002                                    0.046**
    exchange rates                                                           (0.014)                    (0.006)                                   (0.021)
% change in:
   Real GDP                                                   0.104**        0.108**      0.236**       0.237**                0.879**           0.921**
                                                              (0.037)        (0.037)      (0.017)       (0.017)                (0.055)           (0.054)
                                                             −0.035         −0.035
                                                                                                **
   Real oil prices                                                  **             **
                                                                                          0.004         0.004**                0.016**           0.017**
                                                              (0.004)        (0.004)      (0.002)       (0.002)                (0.006)           (0.006)
                                                              −0.009         −0.011
                                                                                                *
   Real interest rates                                                                    0.010         0.009*                 0.081**           0.090**
                                                              (0.012)        (0.012)      (0.006)       (0.005)                (0.018)           (0.017)
National unemployment rate                                    0.003*         0.002*        0.001         0.001                 −0.009**          −0.007**
                                                              (0.001)        (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)                (0.002)           (0.002)
Lag employment growth                                        −0.094**       −0.094**     −0.164**      −0.164**                0.106**           0.137**
                                                              (0.029)        (0.029)      (0.013)       (0.013)                (0.043)           (0.041)

Adjusted R-square                                                 0.6295         0.6283         0.5863          0.5893          0.5704            0.5675
Test for joint significance of exchange rate terms:
                  F –statistic/[ Change in adjusted R-square]
        • Non-interacted                                          0.69                           0.66                            5.87**
                                                                [−0.0007]                      [−0.0008]                        [0.0122]
       •    Interacted with trade orientation                                       0.013                         1.91                              4.79**
                                                                                 [−0.0019]                      [0.0022]                           [0.0093]
Notes: BLS Employment and Earnings: National data. Weighted least squares estimates with the weight being last period’s employment level. Standard
errors are given in parentheses. Specifications include a time trend and industry fixed effects. Number of observations is 368 for average hourly earnings and
average weekly hours, and 400 for average employment. ** significant at the 5% level; * significant at the 10% level.


                                                                                   32
                               Map 1: State Export Orientation, 1988 - 1994 Average



            0.038                                                      0.003
                                               0.005                                       0.048
                                                                                                                                                                                     0.114
                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.019
                                                                                                               0.043
                                                                       0.002
          0.062
                              0.042                    0.000                                                                     0.033                                                               0.036
                                                                                                                                                                         0.046
                                                                                               0.056                                                                                                  0.059
                                                                         0.025
                                                                                                                                                                 0.034                               0.021
                                                                                                                         0.033           0.038                                               0.025
                                                                                                                0.046                                                                0.040
                      0.000
                                       0.021                   0.011                                                                                                               0.022
                                                                               0.015               0.016                                         0.020
                                                                                                                                                                                 0.016
                                                                                                                            0.032                          0.032

              0.048
                                                                                                                        0.032                            0.047
                                                                                   0.022
                                                                                                   0.022
                                      0.006                0.008
                                                                                                                                                  0.049

                                                                                                                        0.028
                                                                                                               0.027                 0.027
                                                                           0.082
                                                                                                       0.082

                                                                                                                                                         0.042




           Less Export Oriented


           More Export Oriented


Notes: State export orientation is calculated as the weighted sum across manufacturing industries of the Miser export orientation.
The Miser export orientation is Miser exports over gross state product where each is state and industry specific. The weight that
is used to sum across industries is state and industry specific employment over state manufacturing employment. The sum is
then multiplied by manufacturing gsp over total gsp.




                                                                                                   33
        Map 2: State Export Orientation: Ratio of Actual to Implied, 1988 - 1994 Average



             2.17                                               0.54
                                           0.45
                                                                                     0.94
                                                                                                                                                                       2.06
                                                                                                                                                                                     0.72
                                                                0.17                                    0.71
            1.59
                             1.08                                                                                         0.87
                                                  0.09                                                                                                          1.72                 0.63
                                                                                       1.20                                                                                            1.30
                                                                 1.53
                                                                                                                                                         0.88                        0.54
                                                                                                                                                                              0.69
                                                                                                                                  0.72                                 1.24
                                                                                                          1.08     0.59
                      0.23          0.68
                                                                                                                                                                     0.53
                                                     0.53              1.06                   0.45                                       0.53                      0.79
                                                                                                                          0.73                    1.01
               1.60
                                                                                                                 0.80                            0.93
                                                                              0.60
                                                                                              0.60
                                    0.39                 0.25
                                                                                                                                          1.00
                                                                                                        0.89     0.74
                                                                                                                                 0.98
                                                                   2.53




                                                                                                                                                 2.64
                                                                                                 4.00




      Less Export Oriented than Implied by National Industry Aggregates


      More Export Oriented than Implied by National Industry Aggregates

Notes: Ratio of actual to implied state export orientations is calculated as the weighted sum across manufacturing industries
of the Miser export orientation over the national industry export orientation. The Miser export orientation is Miser exports over
gross state product where each is state and industry specific. The weight that is used to sum across industries is state and
industry specific employment over state manufacturing employment.




                                                                                            35
