1. Introduction

In this paper we show that the two most widely given explanations for the rise of
protection over the past twenty years—antidumping protection and voluntary export
restraints—are fundamentally inter-related.1 We argue that voluntary export restraints
(VERs) are a natural consequence of cost-based antidumping (AD) legislation. Specifi-
cally, when governments implement cost-based AD under incomplete information about
foreign costs, foreign firms undertake VERs in an attempt to convince domestic author-
ities that they are not competitive threats. We show that under typical circumstances
VERs simply muddle the government’s perception and lead it to levy AD duties in
a very clumsy and inefficient fashion. In fact, we show that although cost-based AD
raises welfare under complete information, the distortions inherent with implementing
it under incomplete information make it an undesirable policy.
       Three important institutional characteristics of AD law motivate our approach.
First, cost-based AD petitions have become “the dominant feature of U.S. antidumping
law” (Horlick, 1989, p. 136). Traditionally, dumping was defined as international price
discrimination, but in 1974 the definition was broadened to include sales below cost.2
According to Clarida (1996) since 1980 between one-half and two-thirds of U.S. AD
cases have been conducted using the cost-based definition of dumping.3 Not coinciden-
tally, Bhagwati (1988) and Krueger (1995) both date the rapid increase in high-track
(VERs) and low-track (AD duties) restraints to the mid-1970s. From this perspective,
if one seeks to understand the rise of AD protection and the proliferation of VERs,
cost-based AD policy is a sensible place to start.
       Second, governments implement cost-based dumping under incomplete information.
Under cost-based dumping, the domestic government estimates the foreign firm’s pro-
duction costs and then constructs an AD duty designed to insure that the exporter’s
price is “fair.” Not surprisingly, the ambiguous nature of estimating the foreign firm’s
   1
     Almost 10% of U.S. imports were covered by antidumping orders in 1990, almost triple the coverage
in 1980. During the same period the number of VERs doubled (Krueger, 1995; Low, 1993).
   2
     Clarida (1993) and Ethier (1982) explain why firms sell below cost but neither incorporates VERs
into their analysis.
   3
     Different methods and definitions for evaluating Department of Commerce methodology explains
the different estimates. Note also that the EC, the other major user of AD, has similarly embraced cost-
based methodology. Messerlin (1989) estimates that over 90% of EC cases against developing countries
are based on constructed costs.



                                                   1
costs is the source of numerous complaints. Foreign defendants often claim that esti-
mated costs have nothing to do with their actual costs. Rules such as the use of “best
information available,” which bases the cost estimate on the domestic firm’s estimate
of foreign costs, and ad hoc methods such as basing cost estimates on third market
surrogates make AD procedures quite capricious. Cost uncertainty in conjunction with
the arbitrariness of the methods for constructing costs makes AD an ominous threat for
all foreign firms regardless of their true efficiency.
   Third, foreign firms often undertake VERs prior to any AD investigation hoping to
appease domestic cries for protection. For instance, the 1981 automobile VER, perhaps
the best known VER, was negotiated under the threat of an AD action. Similarly, many
of the steel restraints undertaken in the mid-1980s were negotiated under the threat
of imminent AD action. Krueger (1995, p. 35) states that “threats of administered
protection have induced trading partners to accept other bilateral measures, such as
VERs” (emphasis added). A senior negotiator in the semiconductor dispute stated that
the U.S. industry used “the threat of the dumping case to stimulate broad negotiations
on all aspects of the problem” (Prestowitz, 1988, p. 196, emphasis added). In such
circumstances, the VER is conceived of as a “pressure-release valve,” where foreign
firms reduce exports until protectionist sentiments subside.
   We incorporate these three institutional features into a stylized model and demon-
strate how VERs and cost-based AD are inter-related. The starting point for our anal-
ysis is the long understood insight that governments have an incentive to implement
cost-contingent protection (Brander and Spencer, 1984). We interpret cost-based AD
as a GATT/WTO sanctioned vehicle for implementing a cost-contingent tariff policy.
While this interpretation of cost-based procedures differs from GATT guidelines, many
Department of Commerce (DOC) decisions are so perplexing that the our interpretation
is a plausible view how AD is implemented in practice (Boltuck and Litan, 1991).
   We also suppose that the home government cannot observe the foreign firm’s costs;
we show that this induces the foreign firm to announce a VER in order to signal its
(in)efficiency in an attempt to reduce the size of the potential duty. In other words, the
foreign firm agrees to restrain sales in order to forestall calls for even more restrictive
measures.
   Interestingly, as is often the case in practice we find that the VER fails to release
the protectionist pressures and domestic industries clamor for more protection. For


                                              2
instance, despite the measures taken by the Japanese semiconductor producers to diffuse
the calls for protection, a cost-based AD complaint was ultimately filed. In fact, a review
of AD cases suggests that preemptive export restraints have only had mixed success at
averting AD investigations. As a noted AD expert stated, VERs “have certainly been
instrumental in preventing a number of antidumping proceedings from arising, but (they
are not) . . . a substitute for relief” (Bellis, 1989, p. 54). Moreover, and perhaps most
surprising, we find that the VER causes the AD duties to be particularly ineptly levied:
excessively high duties are assessed against inefficient exporters and undesirably low
duties are imposed on efficient producers. In other words, the preemptive VER not
only does a poor job releasing protectionist pressures, but is at least partly responsible
for the widespread perception the AD duties are often excessive.
      Our approach differs from Harris (1985) and Krishna (1989) who emphasize the
collusive and cartel-enhancing features of VERs.4 While the facilitating practice ex-
planation is a powerful ex post justification for VERs, we have found no evidence that
collusion was the original motivation for a VER at the outset of any trade dispute. As
Low (1993, p. 114) succinctly stated, saying that a VER is voluntary “is like saying that
a man asked to be shot in the foot, without mentioning that he had the choice of being
shot in the foot or in the head.”
      Our paper complements the recent work by Anderson (1992) and Rosendorff (1996).
Both study the interaction between VERs and AD duties, but their models differ from
ours in several important ways. In both their models the VER is undertaken after
the AD complaint is already filed; we suppose the VER is undertaken before the AD
petition is filed. More significantly, they assume that the VER is a substitute for AD
protection (i.e., the VER is assumed to release pressure). In our model the extent to
which the VER forestalls further AD activity is endogenously determined.
   Our analysis is also of interest from a technical viewpoint. We show that the standard
“single crossing” property (also referred to as the Spence-Mirrlees sorting condition)
does not hold in our model. In our context a key issue is the extent to which producers
are willing to restrain exports in order to avoid the AD duty. For a given duty, if
at every quantity level inefficient producers were more willing to restrain output than
more efficient producers, then the single crossing condition would be satisfied. We
demonstrate that single crossing does not hold and that producers’ preferences are
  4
      Staiger and Wolak (1989, 1992) and Prusa (1992) also emphasize AD’s role for maintaining cartels.


                                                   3
characterized by a “double crossing” property.
   If the model were characterized by single crossing, it is well known from the work of
Cho and Sobel (1990) that the stable equilibrium involves separation, albeit with some
distortion to trade. If this were the case then cost-based AD could be justified, at least
to the extent that duties were being levied optimally. We show that double crossing
inhibits firms’ ability to separate and leads to pooling. This in turn implies AD duties
are levied sub-optimally. Thus, distortions occur before and after the investigation,
making cost-based AD a particularly futile policy.
   Bernheim (1991, 1994) has examined dividend policy and social behavior when in-
difference curves violate single crossing. Bagwell and Bernheim (1996) also argue that
Veblen effects in consumption arise when single crossing fails. The similarities between
our model and these papers is largely limited to the equilibrium refinement used and
the persistence of pooling outcomes. However, the nature of the underlying preferences,
the structure of the games, and the characterization of the resulting equilibrium are
substantially different. The properties of our model are closest to those of Cho (1994)
who revisits the limit pricing argument of Milgrom and Roberts (1982).
   The paper proceeds as follows. In the next section we provide some additional
background on AD law to motivate our modeling approach. In Section 3 we describe the
extensive form of the game and in Section 4 solve for the unique equilibrium behavior
of the players once the dumping case is completed. However, as is the case in most
signaling games, there is a plethora of equilibria in the overall game. In Section 5 we
discuss reasonable beliefs refinements and establish the equilibrium concept. Readers
interested primarily in the intuition of the results may prefer to skip the technical
discussion contained in this section. In Section 6 we provide the solution to the model
and in Section 7 we show that a pooling outcome emerges under most reasonable demand
and cost parameter values. The welfare implications of cost-based AD are discussed in
Section 8. Policy implications and the applicability of our findings to other economic
issues are discussed in Section 9.


2. Antidumping as a threat

Under GATT/WTO rules, AD duties can be levied if (i) imports are sold at less than
fair value and (ii) these imports cause material injury to the domestic industry. Under


                                            4
current rules both parts of the AD determination are quite easy to satisfy. Since 1980
the DOC has found dumping in 95% of its decisions (Hansen and Prusa, 1995). As
Low (1993, p. 86) states “virtually any industry that considers itself adversely affected
by foreign competition and presents a competently assembled petition, stands a good
chance demonstrating . . . that it is under attack.”
       There is little doubt that the law is heavily biased against foreign firms (Boltuck
and Litan, 1991). It often appears that the government does not attempt to accurately
measure costs. Consider for instance that any failure by the foreign firm to respond to
the DOC’s onerous reporting requirements allows the DOC to disregard all its data and
instead use the best information available, which typically means data reported in the
domestic firm’s petition (Murray, 1991). Further, after the foreign firm’s variable costs
are estimated DOC adds 10% for overhead and 8% for profit, additions undoubtedly
distort costs.5
       The arbitrariness of AD proceedings surely encourages foreign firms to take actions
to avoid them. In addition, the legal costs surrounding an AD investigation are often
prohibitive with estimates typically in the range of $500,000 to $1 million per firm
(Braga and Silber, 1993; Mendez, 1993). Moreover, if the foreign firm is unlucky enough
to be named in an AD case and have its case completed, it is usually confronted with
a formidable tariff barrier. For example, during 1990 and 1991, the average AD duty
was 55.5%, as compared with those products average MFN tariff of 14.4% (Anderson,
1993).6
       With its ominous record of restricting trade, deterrence appears to be at the heart
of the U.S.’s antidumping policy. For example Krueger (1995, p. 35) states that AD
law is designed “with the clear intent of pressuring for a VER.” As mentioned above,
semiconductors and automobiles are both examples of how the threat of an AD petition
can spur a VER.
       The three key elements of our model, however, are most clearly evidenced by the
steel industry, by far the heaviest user of the law, accounting for more than one-third
of all AD petitions. First, most steel petitions are based on cost allegations (Clarida,
1996). Interestingly, it was at the behest of the steel industry that the definition of
   5
     For perspective, in 1989 only two of the fifteen largest companies in the Fortune 500 passed the 8%
profit test.
   6
     The trade consequences of such large duties are dramatic: Hoekman and Leidy (1991) find that on
average targeted imports are 40 percent lower three years after AD duties are levied.


                                                   5
dumping was broadened to include sales below cost in 1974.
   Second, the steel industry uses the specter of AD investigations to deter foreign pro-
ducers. The industry is a master at raising the visibility of their plight and threatening
burdensome trade restraints. These threats have not been wasted as producers from all
over the world have restrained steel exports in order to avoid the credible threat of an
AD investigation.
       Third, steel petitions are most often threatened against the most efficient producers.
For example, in 1978 estimated costs for a ton of steel were $71 in Japan and $114 in
the U.S. (Jones, 1986). The fact that the Japanese were so much more efficient than
other foreign producers was precisely the reason why they were targeted by the U.S. In
calculating its preliminary margin, the DOC based its estimates on data provided by the
plaintiff in accordance with the “best information available” principle and established
a duty of 32 percent. Patrick and Sato (1982) report that when the “Japanese industry
came to realize it would benefit more from high rather than low cost estimates” the
executives of the major steel firms initiated talks for a VER.7 But, while the efficient
Japanese have been targeted in a number of AD petitions, hundreds of AD petitions
have also been filed against less efficient steel producers. Naturally, the burden of AD
duties have been heavier for relatively inefficient producers.


3. The Model

We describe a scenario where a single foreign producer competes against a home firm
under the scrutiny of the home government. Broadly speaking, the game can be thought
of as occurring in two distinct phases: pre-AD and post-AD determination. During the
first part of the game the foreign firm is aware of the build-up of protectionist pressure.
It also understands the home country’s rent-extracting and profit-shifting incentives for
implementing an AD policy where lower cost firms will be subject to higher AD duties.
Thus, during the first part of the game the foreign firm’s export decision is strategic since
it can influence the government’s posterior beliefs about the foreign firm’s efficiency. We
will show that the export decision involves a choice of either myopic profit maximization
   7
    The 1977 steel dispute was resolved with the trigger price mechanism (which explicitly based market
prices on the DOC’s estimates of Japanese costs). This agreement fell apart partly because of Japan’s
unhappiness with bearing a disproportionate share of the total decrease in steel exports. Within a few
years the trigger price was replaced with explicit quantity restrictions.


                                                  6
or a VER which might conceal the firm’s true type and alleviate protectionist sentiments.
    The extensive form of the game has the following structure. The foreign firm’s
constant marginal cost is drawn from the set T = {C1 , . . . , CT }, with Ci < Cj for i < j,
according to a commonly known probability distribution, µ. The realization of the cost
is private information for the exporter and will be referred to as its type. For simplicity
we will use i to denote the type of exporter with true cost Ci .
       In the first period, we assume that the foreign firm’s exports are subject to a specific
tariff of τ0 ≥ 0. Given this information, the foreign firm chooses and announces its first
period export quantity, Q. Following the decision of its rival, the home firm chooses its
first period quantity, q.
       At the conclusion of the first stage the government observes the level of imports and
home production and then forms beliefs about the efficiency of the foreign firm. If an
AD petition is filed, the government selects a per unit AD duty, τD ≥ 0, which will
remain in effect during the next N periods of trade. Given the level of the AD duty the
two firms compete simultaneously in quantities for the remainder of the game.
       A couple of comments about the design of the game are in order. First, we are
modeling a situation where the home government has an AD statute and the home firm
has an opportunity to file an AD petition at the end of the first period. As discussed
above, it is not the foreign firm’s costs per se that are the impetus for the investigation,
but rather the high level of trade associated with an efficient firm. Thus, the foreign firm
has an incentive to voluntarily restrict its exports in order to reduce the potential duty.
Moreover, it is common knowledge that the foreign firm is likely to announce a VER;
therefore it is natural to assume that the home firm will wait to observe the foreign
firm’s actions before proceeding with first period sales and its filing decision. Thus, we
model the home firm as a Stackelberg follower.8 Besides this intuitive justification for
the Stackelberg assumption, in a game with simultaneous moves, verifying the incentives
of the foreign firm to deviate from a given equilibrium while holding the action of the
domestic producer fixed does not seem sensible if the deviation cannot be supported by
another reasonable equilibrium.
       Second, as is common in the signaling literature, we assume that the home firm
   8
    Since there is no obvious reason to give any firm the advantage of a first mover in subsequent periods
we model the competition à la Cournot. Furthermore, the mode of competition is inessential for the
analysis of the post-duty subgame.



                                                    7
learns the true costs of the foreign firm after the AD investigation.9
    Finally, demand in the home country is assumed to be linear p = a − Q − q. This
simple functional form will allow us to describe the behavior of the players without
resorting to abstract arguments.


4. Analysis of the subgame following the AD petition

4.1. Firm decisions

We are looking for a solution which will prescribe a self-enforcing norm of behavior for
each of the three players. This implies that at minimum the selected equilibria should
satisfy backward induction. Since the subgame starting after the government chooses an
AD duty has a finite number of periods, N , the linear structure of the model guarantees
that it has a unique path which is part of a subgame perfect equilibrium.
    In any stage n of this proper subgame a type i foreign firm takes the total per unit
levy, t = τ0 + τD , as given and maximizes its (variable) profit function

                             πi (Q, q, t) = Q(a − Q − q) − tQ − Ci Q.

The per-period payoff for the domestic firm is

                                   φ(Q, q) = q(a − Q − q) − cd q,

where cd denotes the domestic firm’s marginal costs.
    At each stage the resulting optimum quantity for a type i exporter is

                                     e n = (a + cd − 2Ci − 2t)/3
                                     Q                                                                  (1)
                                       i


and for the domestic firm is

                                    q̃ n (i) = (a + Ci + t − 2cd )/3,                                   (2)
    9
      If costs are not revealed after the determination is made, we would enter a typical limit pricing game
in which the efficient types would try to prove themselves. This would shift the analysis away from the
issue at hand. Of course, such problems would not arise if competition continues to be sequential in
future periods.




                                                     8
where we use the superscript n to denote that these are solutions to the subgame
following the AD duty.
   The total profit (over all N periods following the AD duty) is

    ein = (N/9)(a + cd − 2Ci − 2t)2
 N ·π                                   and       N · φen (i) = (N/9)(a + Ci + t − 2cd )2 . (3)

4.2. Optimal AD duty

As discussed earlier, we will assume that the government uses its cost-based policy
to implement a duty that maximizes host country welfare. While this assumption
does not follow official AD procedures it does seem consistent with empirical evidence
and captures the more general pressures on governments to devise efficient protection
schemes.
   Assuming for the moment that the host government could observe the true cost of
the exporter its payoff for the N period subgame would be the sum of consumer surplus,
profit of the domestic producer and tariff revenue
                                                       
                        w = N (Q + q)2 /2 + φ(Q, q) + tQ .                                 (4)

   Using the unique subgame outcomes the welfare can be expressed as
                       
            w(i, t) = N (2a − Ci − cd − t)2 /18 + (a + Ci + t − 2cd )2 /9 +
                                                  
                         + t(a + cd − 2Ci − 2t)/3 .                                        (5)

When an AD petition is filed the government chooses τD to maximize (5), yielding a
total levy of

                                    t̃i = (a − Ci )/3.                                     (6)

The above expression makes it clear that higher duties are levied against more efficient
exporters. If an efficient exporter does not voluntarily restrict first period exports and
behave like a more inefficient exporter and if a petition is filed, the home government
would levy an AD duty in the amount of τD = t̃i − τ0 . From this point on, a total tariff
t > τ0 is to be understood as the initial tariff plus an AD surcharge equal to t − τ0 .
Hence we will use the terms tariff and duty interchangeably to describe the total level

                                              9
of protection. To keep the model as simple as possible, we will assume that τ0 ≤ t̃T ,
which implies that an AD petition will be filed against all types.10
       Finally, we note that the marginal benefit to the home country from lowering the AD
duty is increasing in Ci . This implies that the government’s best response is monotoni-
cally decreasing in the posterior likelihood of a more inefficient exporter. This explains
the desire of each type to be considered type T .


5. The Equilibrium Concept

Solving the game backwards we proceed to analyze the first stage. In this three-player
signaling game the foreign firm (the sender) signals its type through its export choice;
the home firm then chooses its output level and whether to file a petition; finally, the
government (the receiver) levies an AD duty based on its beliefs about the type of the
exporter. The payoffs from a selected strategy profile in this reduced game are given
by adding the first period profit and welfare to the Cournot subgame profit and welfare
defined above.
       Since any reasonable equilibrium must involve the unique outcome in the second
stage Cournot subgame, any concerns about the multiplicity and reasonableness of
equilibria will stem from first period actions. We will refer to a solution to this reduced
game as a self-enforcing outcome for the whole game.11
       In games with incomplete information the formation of beliefs is often controversial.
We would like to find a solution which is supported by a reasonable belief-formation
process. From a game theoretic standpoint we want our equilibria to resemble closely
the properties of a strategically stable set as defined by Kohlberg and Mertens (1986).12
  10
      This is not a restrictive assumption since the most frequent users of cost-based AD, the U.S. and the
EC, also have very low MFN tariffs. In addition, a higher initial tariff would introduce another stage to
the game without providing additional insight. At this stage, the domestic firm would make a decision
whether to file a petition. Since the beliefs of the government are common knowledge in equilibrium,
the firm would obviously file a petition if the beliefs entail a positive AD duty.
   11
      In general, a self-enforcing outcome of a game need not induce a stable outcome in every subgame or
vice versa. However, under conditions satisfied by our model Cho (1993) shows that in two-player sender-
receiver games (with finite strategy spaces) a strategically stable outcome (in the sense of Kohlberg and
Mertens, 1986) contains an equilibrium which induces a stable outcome in every subgame.
   12
      Strict reference to stability throughout the paper is not warranted, however, since the concept is
not defined for games with continuum of strategies. Our game can be viewed as an approximation to a
game with a large finite number of strategies. For an extensive discussion of stability in the context of
signaling games we recommend the excellent book by van Damme (1987).


                                                    10
Cho and Kreps (1987) and Banks and Sobel (1987) provide reasonable restrictions on
the beliefs of the receiver off the equilibrium path which do not eliminate and often
lead to the unique stable component in two-player signaling games. We will now extend
their arguments to our three-player model and describe the equilibrium concept which
we will employ.
       The first requirement we impose on our equilibria is that they are sequential (Kreps
and Wilson, 1982).13 Hence we require (a) all players to maximize their respective payoff
functions given the strategies of the others and the beliefs of the government (sequen-
tial rationality) and (b) the induced beliefs about the firm’s cost at each export level
obtained with positive probability should be compatible with the strategies of the two
firms in the sense of Bayes’ rule (consistency). At quantities exported with probability
zero any beliefs which rationalize the behavior of the government are permissible.
       The requirement that the solutions be sequential equilibria is quite weak. In fact, the
only new element which the above restriction introduces in addition to the requirements
for a Nash equilibrium is that at zero probability export levels the government is not
allowed to announce irrational duties. The sequential equilibrium concept allows for a
multiplicity of beliefs off the equilibrium path. Hence, if we impose only this restriction
our game will have a continuum of pooling, semi-pooling, and separating equilibria.
       Following the general program developed by Cho and Kreps (1987) and Banks and
Sobel (1987) we will refine the set of sequential equilibria by eliminating those which
assign unreasonable beliefs at null events. In particular, we will require the government
to perceive each out of equilibrium quantity as a possible signal by the exporter and
place probability zero on a type which is unlikely to send it.
       Suppose that we have a sequential equilibrium whose stability we would like to check.
Let one of the three players contemplate deviating from the proposed equilibrium. The
first restriction that we impose requires this player (a) take into account all combinations
of best responses by the other players at information sets likely to be reached by the
deviation strategy14 and (b) disregard all pure actions which do not maximize his payoff
at a given information set, holding the strategies of the other players fixed. In our
  13
     Since the sequential equilibria concept is not defined for games with a continuum of strategies, we
work with its extension provided by Kreps and Sobel (1994).
  14
     In his formulation of a forward induction equilibrium Cho (1987) imposes the same requirement for
general extensive games. His subsequent restrictions, however, are weaker than the ones we employ in
this paper.


                                                  11
context this means that the AD duties available to the government are those which
can be rationalized by some beliefs about the type of exporter. The restriction also
implies that the only strategy that the home firm has is its unique (Stackelberg follower)
maximizer.
       Despite its intuitive appeal such a reduction of the game is ad hoc and may lead
to the elimination of reasonable equilibria. The above process can be justified in finite
games by a well known result due to Kohlberg and Mertens (1986). They show that
for any game and a stable set of equilibria of that game if a pure strategy of a player
does worse in every equilibrium than his equilibrium prescription (i.e., if the strategy
is never a weak best response relative to the set), then after deleting this strategy from
the action set of that player, the subset of equilibria of the original stable set which
assign probability zero to that particular action contains a set which is stable in the
restricted game. The same result holds if a pure strategy is dominated.
       We now assert that a strategy which is not a best reply for the government and
the home firm to a given level of exports is strictly dominated.15 Hence, the result of
Kohlberg and Mertens (1986) guarantees that we will not discard a stable outcome if
as a first step in the refinement process we restrict the strategy sets of the government
and the home firm to their respective best responses.
       In proving our claim, it is important to realize that the best reply function of the
government is independent of the first period strategy of the home firm. Figure 1 can
be useful in clarifying this point. In order to make our argument as clear as possible,
we depict a simplified version where there are only two types (T = 2) and each player
only has two pure actions. As depicted, nature chooses the foreign firm’s type (1 or 2);
after observing its type, the foreign firm makes an export choice (Q1 or Q2 ); the home
firm then chooses its production level (q1 or q2 ); finally, the government levies a duty
(t1 or t2 ).
       Consider a pair of strategies for the foreign and home firms such that the informa-
tion set of the government after (Q1 , q1 ) is reached with positive probability (i.e., the set
containing the nodes x and y). The best response of the government at that information
set depends on the relative likelihood of the two nodes. Each node, however, is reached
by the home firm playing q1 with the same probability. Hence, the only relevant infor-
mation for the optimization problem at the government’s information set comes from
  15
       This claim is true for all two-player games but need not hold in games with more players.


                                                    12
          t2                                                                                                    t2
                          t1            t2                          t1                    t2

           x

          t1                                                                                               t1
                   q1           q2           Q1   2            Q2                q1                q2
                    Dom. Firm




                                                                                  Dom. Firm
           Gov’t




                                Gov’t




                                                                         Gov’t




                                                                                                   Gov’t
                                                      Nature

                   q1           q2           Q1                Q2                q1                q2
         t2                                       1
                                                                                                                t2
           y

                          t1            t2                          t1                        t2
           t1                                                                                              t1


     Figure 1: The extensive form of the first period subgame (2 types, 2 actions)


the randomizations of nature and the exporter. Therefore, the proof of our claim that a
strategy that is not a best reply for the government is strictly dominated is the same as
in two-player games and is a standard application of the separating hyperplane theorem
(Fudenberg and Tirole, 1992).
   Applying similar arguments it is also clear that the home firm’s best response func-
tion does not depend on the strategy of the government. Given any choice of exports
and AD duty, the home firm will produce its unique Stackelberg maximizer. Every other
action of the home firm can be discarded on the basis of the proposition of Kohlberg
and Mertens (1986).
   The restrictions on the behavior of the foreign firm which we require constitute a
straightforward adaptation of the D1 criterion of Cho and Kreps (1987) which is based
on the notion of universal divinity of Banks and Sobel (1987). This refinement is now
formally presented.
   Fix a probability distribution over the end points of the signaling subgame induced
by a sequential equilibrium in which an exporter of type i obtains a profit (over all


                                                      13
periods) of Π∗i . Call this probability the outcome of the game associated with the given
equilibrium. Fix also an out of equilibrium export level, Q0 . Let BR(η, Q0 ) denote the
set of best responses of the government at Q0 given that (a) the induced beliefs about
the types exporting this quantity are η and (b) the home firm produces its unique
maximizer when it observes Q0 . Write element i of η as η(i|Q0 ). Then

                                                    X
                                                    T
                                   0
                          BR(η, Q ) ≡ argmax                w(i, t)η(i|Q0 ).
                                         t∈[τ0 ,t̃1 ] i=1


Let Πi (Q, t) denote the foreign firm’s profit over all periods when it exports Q in period 1
and is thereafter subject to a total duty, t. Define

                        Ei0 (Q0 ) ≡ {t ∈ BR(η, Q0 ) : Πi (Q, t) = Π∗i }

to be the set of best responses of the government which would leave i indifferent between
his equilibrium strategy and exporting Q0 . Similarly, the set of sequentially rational AD
duties which would make i strictly better off is denoted by

                        Ei (Q0 ) ≡ {t ∈ BR(η, Q0 ) : Πi (Q, t) > Π∗i }.

We say that a sequential equilibrium outcome is D1 if and only if there exists an equi-
librium giving rise to this outcome which can be supported with beliefs η(i|Q0 ) = 0 at
each off equilibrium quantity Q0 whenever

                                Ei0 (Q0 ) ∪ Ei (Q0 ) ⊆ Ei0 (Q0 )                         (7)

for Ei0 (Q0 ) 6= {∅}. Thus D1 requires the beliefs of the government to place probability
zero on type i if whenever i wants to deviate from a particular equilibrium so does i0 .
Intuitively, this makes i0 the more likely type to break the equilibrium.
   Note that if i is eliminated for quantity Q0 using the D1 criterion then Q0 is never
a weak best response for that type. The reason is that if Q0 were a weak best response
relative to the equilibria giving rise to the proposed outcome (meaning that Q0 yields the
exporter as much as an equilibrium) then by definition the best response duty against
Q0 must be in Ei0 (Q0 ) and hence in Ei0 (Q0 ). This would make i0 deviate. Appealing



                                               14
once again to the proposition by Kohlberg and Mertens (1986) we could delete such a
Q0 from the strategy set of the exporter of type i without being at risk of eliminating a
stable set of the unrestricted game.
      The refinement procedure outlined in this section would be useful only if it guaran-
tees the existence of a solution surviving the restrictions. In finite signaling games we
can be assured of this by the fact that a stable set of equilibria contains a sequential
equilibrium. Hence, if we start the process of elimination with a set of equilibria leading
to a stable outcome we will not eliminate this outcome. Since a stable set exists, it
follows that we will not eliminate all equilibria.
      As is well known, there are a number of refinements of equilibria used in signaling
games. Similar to the D1 criterion in both intuition and game theory justification are
the Intuitive Criterion and the D2 criterion (Cho and Kreps, 1987). In general D2 is
more stringent than D1 because it further restricts the strategy spaces of the players.
Formally, the steps in applying D2 are the same as the ones outlined above for D1 ,
except (7) should be replaced with

                                 Ei0 (Q0 ) ∪ Ei (Q0 ) ⊆ ∪i0 6=i Ei0 (Q0 ).              (70 )

In our case, D1 is sufficient to give rise to a unique stable outcome of the game.
      On the other hand, the Intuitive Criterion is a weaker refinement than D1 . At an
out of equilibrium quantity Q0 , the Intuitive Criterion requires assigning probability one
to a given type i if, in combination with the lowest possible sequentially rational tariff,
Q0 is (a) preferred by type i to the proposed equilibrium and (b) is not preferred to
the proposed equilibrium by any other type. However, the Intuitive Criterion does not
provide a systematic way to assign beliefs if at Q0 more than one type prefers the lowest
tariff to the proposed equilibrium.
      It is well known that the Intuitive Criterion is not sufficient to support the unique
stable equilibrium if there are more than two types even if the profit function of the
sender exhibits the single crossing property.16 We thus use the D1 refinement. Hence,
throughout the remainder of the paper when we use terms like “equilibrium” and “out-
come” we mean “D1 equilibrium” and “D1 outcome.”
 16
      See Cho and Kreps (1987) for a discussion of the Spence model with three types.




                                                    15
6. Solution of the subgame prior to the AD petition

We will solve for the first stage equilibrium by breaking the problem into several steps.
First, we will characterize the foreign firm’s isoprofit curves and show that the game
falls into a subclass of signaling games with double crossing. Next, we will establish two
conditions: a mimicking condition and a condition that in conjunction with the double
crossing property implies that the most natural outcome is for all types to pool. Finally,
we will describe the behavior of each type in the pooling outcome.

6.1. Isoprofit curves and the double crossing property

In the first period a type i exporter knows that upon observing Q the home firm will
produce according to its best response function

                                  q̃ = (a − Q − cd )/2,                                (8)

From this point on we adopt the convention that if there is no time superscript we are
referring to first period variables.
    The equilibrium first period profit of the foreign firm when producing Q is

                         πi (Q) = Q(a − Q − 2Ci − 2τ0 + cd )/2.                        (9)

   The incentive compatible constraint for type i can be constructed by defining an
isoprofit curve consisting of combinations of quantities Q and duties t which yield the
same total profit, Πi , given that the home firm produces according to its best response,
(8). From (9) and (3) the isoprofit curve is implicitly given by

                  Πi = Πi (Q, t) ≡ πi (Q) + (N/9)(a + cd − 2Ci − 2t)2 .              (10)

   Consider the case when the government has full information. In this case each type i
knows that a petition will lead to an AD duty, t̃i − τ0 . Hence, each type will myopically
maximize its first period profit yielding

           e i = (a − 2Ci − 2τ0 + cd )/2
           Q                                    ei = (a − 2Ci − 2τ0 + cd )2 /8,
                                            and π                                    (11)




                                             16
and an equilibrium profit over all periods

                Πsi ≡ (a + cd − 2Ci − 2τ0 )2 /8 + (N/81)(a + 3cd − 4Ci )2 .

In Figure 2 we depict the isoprofit curves for three types under the full information
outcome. Note that as graphed each firm’s preferred set lies to the south of its respective
isoprofit curve—for a given quantity, profit increases as the tariff falls.
   In standard signaling games it is assumed that one type always has a greater incentive
to deviate from a given outcome than another type. This is referred to as the single
crossing property since it implies that the isoprofit curves cross only once. We will now
show that the isoprofit function of the exporter exhibits a double crossing property. As
will become apparent this property will play a key role in solving for the equilibrium of
the model. By double crossing we mean

Lemma 1 Any two isoprofit curves {Πi , Πj }, i < j, can cross at most once in either of
the two half-spaces defined by t = τ0 + Q. If the isoprofit curves have a point in common
along t = τ0 + Q, then they are tangent at that point. In other words, the graph of the
function t = τ0 + Q divides (Q, t)-space in such a way that at any (Q, t) the slope of Πj
is bigger (smaller) (the same as) the slope of Πi whenever t > (<)(=)τ0 + Q.

(All proofs are in the appendix.)
   Lemma 1 states that the single crossing assumption is violated in our model. This
implies that the incentives for any two types to deviate from a given outcome differ
depending on the relative sizes of t and Q. Intuitively, the double crossing property
reflects the varying incentives to lower current quantity in order to receive a lower duty
in the future. On the one hand, high cost firms already produce less than low cost
firms and hence do not have to distort their sales as much as low cost firms. Thus, in
this respect high cost firms find it easier to deviate from a given outcome (by lowering
quantities). On the other hand, low cost firms have more to gain if future duties are
lower, and hence they benefit more when today’s lower exports result in lower duties
tomorrow. Thus, in this respect low cost firms find it easier to deviate from a given
outcome. Which incentive dominates depends on the relative sizes of t and Q. If t is
relatively small the former effect dominates, while if t is relatively large the latter effect
dominates.

                                             17
                                                       t = τ0 + Q

      t



t̃1
                                                             Π1 (Q, t) = Πs1
t̃2

t̃3



                                                   Π2 (Q, t) = Πs2


                                                Π3 (Q, t) = Πs3
τ0




                                 e3
                                 Q         e1
                                           Q                      Q

                                      e2
                                      Q



          Figure 2: Isoprofit curves under full information




                                 18
   The double crossing property is graphically depicted in Figure 3. Consider first
the case when Q > t − τ0 (i.e., relatively high quantity levels). This case is depicted
graphically by point X in Figure 3. At the point of intersection (X) the slope of isoprofit
curve for the more efficient type (type 1) is bigger than the slope of inefficient type’s
isoprofit curve. This relationship can simply be interpreted as implying that at X a
decrease in exports by 1 is less profitable than a decrease by 2.
   Consider the other case, when Q < t − τ0 . This case is depicted by the point Y in
Figure 3. At the point of intersection the slope of the isoprofit curve for the efficient
type is smaller than the inefficient type’s, implying that at Y a decrease in exports by
1 is more profitable than a decrease by 2.
   Finally, if the two isoprofit curves have a point in common along the locus Q = t−τ0 ,
they must be tangent at that point. This case is depicted by the point Z in Figure 5
and will be discussed at greater length in Section 6.3. Hereafter, we will refer to the
line t = τ0 + Q as the tangency locus.
   Another property of the isoprofit curve is

Corollary 1 Any isoprofit curve can cross the tangency locus at most once.

   Corollary 1 implies that an isoprofit curve either never crosses the tangency locus or
only crosses the tangency locus once. As will become clear, whether an isoprofit curve
crosses the tangency locus depends primarily on the duration of the AD duty.

6.2. The unique candidate for a pure strategy separating equilibrium

We begin by deriving the unique candidate for a pure strategy separating equilibrium.
In order to support such a solution we must provide each type with a quantity, Qsi ,
which is exported with probability one.
   If the outcome is a pure strategy separating equilibrium, then the government is able
to infer each type’s true cost and will in turn levy the optimal duty, t̃i . This implies
that type 1’s unique separating sequential equilibrium strategy is to maximize its first
                                                   e 1 and profit over all periods of Πs .
period profit myopically, yielding exports of Qs = Q
                                                  1                                      1
   The extent to which types j > 1 distort exports depends on whether others have
a desire to mimic them. If the game is not to be trivial, we must assume that some i
                                                                       ej , t̃j ). Since
is willing to mimic some type j, i < j. In general this means Πs < Πi (Q
                                                                    i



                                             19
we are interested in explaining why the most efficient firms restrain their exports, we
require that type 1 be willing to mimic 2,

                                                     e2 , t̃2 ).
                                           Πs1 < Π1 (Q                                                (12)

   In Figure 2 we depict a game where (12) is satisfied. As depicted, 2’s full information
          e 2 , t̃2 ) lies in 1’s strictly preferred region. In other words, as depicted 1 has
outcome, (Q
an incentive to mimic 2, if doing so could induce an AD duty of only t̃2 .
       Since Πs1 is the minimum profit type 1 will earn in any sequential equilibrium, the
incentive compatible constraint for type 1 can be defined by the locus of quantity-duty
pairs in (10) yielding at least Πs1

                                            Πs1 ≤ Π1 (Q, t).                                          (13)

In Figure 2, (13) is satisfied for all (Q, t) lying below Πs1 = Π1 (Q, t).
   It is easy to verify that (13) implicitly defines a function which is strictly concave
in Q and symmetric around Q      e 1 . For each i > 1, (13) defines an open set of quantities
around Q e 1 , Si (1) = (Q (1), Qi (1)), which type 1 would strictly prefer to its equilibrium
                           i
strategy if the response was t̃i . The end points of these intervals are
                                     p
                          e 1 − (2/9) 2N (Ci − C1 )(Ci + 3cd + a − 5C1 ),
                 Qi (1) = Q
                                     p
                          e 1 + (2/9) 2N (Ci − C1 )(Ci + 3cd + a − 5C1 ).
                 Qi (1) = Q

Since C1 < Ci the above quantities are real. In addition, Si (1) is strictly increasing in
N , implying that the longer the period the AD duty stays in effect, the more type 1
is willing to sacrifice if doing so could insure a lower duty. In Figure 3 we depict an
incentive compatible quantity set, S2 (1).
       Incentive compatibility has several important implications for the behavior of each
type i > 1 in a separating equilibrium. For instance, in any pure strategy sequential
separating equilibrium each i > 1 would be at least restricted to Q ∈ Sic (1), where
Sic (1) is defined as the complement of Si (1).17 Type 2’s possible quantity choices can
be further restricted by noting that: S2 (1) is symmetric around Q   e 1 ; Q (1) < Q
                                                                                   e2 <
                                                                                          2
  17
    The strategy set of type i, Si (h), may be further restricted by the incentive compatibility constraint
of other types h, h < i.


                                                    20
  t

                                       t = τ0 + Q




t̃1
                                                     Π1 (Q, t) = Πs1
                                X


           Y
t̃2


                             Π2 (Q, t) = Π2 (Q2 (1), t̃2 )
τ0




          Q2 (1)                       e1
                                       Q                     Q2 (1)    Q

                                 S2 (1)


      Figure 3: Incentive compatibility constraint for 2 defined by 1




                                     21
Qe 1 < Q2 (1); and, given t̃2 the profit function of type 2 is symmetric about Q e 2 . These
observations imply that the payoff for 2 at Q2 (1) is higher than at Q2 (1). Moreover,
the fact that 2’s profit is monotonically increasing up to Q   e2 and decreasing thereafter
implies that Q2 (1) is the unique maximizer among the set of quantities available to 2
in a separating equilibrium. Not surprisingly then it is the unique candidate for a
self-enforcing separating equilibrium strategy.

Proposition 1 Among the set of separating export levels available to 2, Qs2 = Q2 (1) is
the unique candidate to emerge in equilibrium.

     Denote by Qj (i) and Qj (i) the end points of the interval Sj (i), 1 ≤ i < j. Sj (i) is
the set of quantities in combination with t̃j that type i would prefer to Πsi . We can also
show

Corollary 2 Qsj = min{Qj (i)}, 1 ≤ i < j, is the unique candidate for a separating
equilibrium strategy for type j.

     We depict this candidate separating equilibrium in Figure 4. The candidate for
separating equilibrium has several nice properties. First, the most efficient exporter
does not restrain its exports. Rather, the potential AD duty distorts trade from the less
efficient types who voluntarily restrain their exports in order to separate themselves.
Second, this candidate equilibrium involves the least amount of trade restraint and as
such is the best outcome in the sense of Riley (1979). Finally, this candidate equilibrium
has the desirable characteristic that the optimal duties are levied.
     However, we can show that if a weak condition regarding the size of the incentive
compatibility set is satisfied, this candidate cannot be an equilibrium. This key condition
is

                                   Πs1 ≤ Π1 (Q = t̃2 − τ0 , t̃2 ).                      (14)

This condition is satisfied in both Figures 3 and 4. We will show in Section 7 that this
condition is quite likely to be satisfied. Graphically, the condition implies the point
defined by the intersection of t̃2 and the tangency locus, Q = t̃2 − τ0 lies in 1’s preferred
set. Note also that if (14) is satisfied, then by Corollary 1 all other intersections between
the tangency locus and the corresponding optimal duties will also be preferred by 1.

                                                 22
                    t                                            t = τ0 + Q


                                 Π3 (Q, t) = Π3 (Q3 (1), t̃3 )

                                                                    Π1 (Q, t) = Πs1
                    t̃1



                    t̃2
                    t̃3

                    τ0
                                               Π2 (Q, t) = Π2 (Q2 (1), t̃2 )


                        Q3 (1)                           e1
                                                         Q                     Q


                           Q2 (1)


               Figure 4: The unique candidate for a separating equilibrium


Proposition 2 If (14) is satisfied, then there does not exist a pure strategy separating
equilibrium.

   Intuitively, Proposition 2 implies that separating equilibria will not exist whenever
1’s desire to avoid optimal AD duties is sufficiently large. If this is the case, com-
plications arising from the double crossing property arise. Consider for instance the
candidate equilibrium depicted in Figure 3. Since (14) is satisfied, (Qs2 , t̃2 ) must lie in
the half-space Q < t − τ0 , implying that an increase in exports by 1 is less profitable
than an increase by 2. If the government observes a deviation from the candidate, it
infers that the firm is type 2 and hence responds with t̃2 . This in turn induces 2 to
deviate from the candidate equilibrium.




                                                    23
6.3. The unique pooling equilibrium

Proposition 2 leads us to explore the possibilities for pooling. The next two lemmas
will provide the candidate for an equilibrium in which more than one type exports the
same quantity and characterize the foreign firm’s isoprofit function in the equilibrium.

Lemma 2 Fix a pooling outcome in which more than one type exports Qp with positive
probability in the first period, and the response of the government is tp . Then it must
be that Qp = tp − τ0 .

Lemma 2 states that any export-duty pair which does not lie on the tangency locus
cannot be a part of a pooling outcome.
    We now show that if the indifference curves of two types have a point in common
along the tangency line then everywhere else the isoprofit line of the lower type lies
above that of the higher type.

Lemma 3 Let i < j. Then Πi (Q̂ = t̂ − τ0 , t̂) = Πi (Q0 , ti ) and Πj (Q̂ = t̂ − τ0 , t̂) =
Πj (Q0 , tj ) imply tj < ti .

Figure 5 is useful for clarfying Lemma 3. Consider a point, say Z, on the tangency
locus. By Lemma 1 we know that any two isoprofit curves through Z must be tangent.
For example, in Figure 5 we have drawn three isoprofit curves containing Z. Lemma 3
implies that the isoprofit curves of the higher types are nested within the isoprofit curve
of the lower types. For instance, 3’s isoprofit curve lies within 2’s which in turn lies
within 1’s isoprofit curve. Lemma 3 is important since it implies that the government
can clearly rank each type’s incentive to deviate from a candidate on the tangency locus.
In particular, at Z a small deviation is most profitable for 1.
    Using Lemma 3 we can also show

Corollary 3 If type i pools with positive probability in a sequential equilibrium then
every type j > i exports the pooled quantity with probability one.

    We are now ready to prove our main proposition. In particular, we now show that if
(14) is satisfied, then there is a unique equilibrium in which the AD threat induces all
types to sell the same quantity, which means that the most efficient types voluntarily
restrain their exports in order to receive a lower AD duty.

                                            24
Proposition 3 If (14) is satisfied, then there exists a unique equilibrium in which
type 1 produces the pooled quantity with positive probability and all other types pool with
probability one.

   Figure 5 depicts the unique pure pooling equilibrium. Several comments are war-
ranted. First, unlike the separating candidate, in the pure pooling equilibrium the most
efficient firm voluntarily restricts its output prior to the AD investigation. In fact, it is
generally the case that exports are restrained not just by 1 but by many of the more
efficient types. Thus, the pooling equilibrium is consistent with the empirical evidence
(discussed in Section 2) that the threat of an AD duty induces VERs by most efficient
foreign competitors.
   Second, depending on the probability distribution µ, cost-based AD can easily result
in the perception that inefficient exporters are more threatening than they actually are.
For instance as depicted, all types i > 1 will receive a higher duty than is optimal. This
prediction is again consistent with the empirical evidence. In the steel industry, for
instance, a large number of cases have been filed against relatively inefficient producers.
This perception was most forcefully asserted during the Uruguay Round negotiations
as representatives from developing countries (i.e., relatively inefficient firms) vigorously
negotiated for changes in the rules governing cost-based AD.
   Third, these distortions imply that domestic consumers get the worst of both worlds.
Prior to the AD investigation consumers suffer as the efficient firms restrict output.
Following the investigation, consumers bear the burden of having overly large AD duties
being levied on inefficient firms.

6.4. A necessary and sufficient condition

Before concluding this section we would like to relax condition (14) and give a necessary
and sufficient condition for the unique equilibrium to involve pooling in exports (not
necessarily by all types) and characterize the outcome. The condition requires type T −1
to prefer the point (Q = t̃T − τ0 , t̃T ) to its unique candidate separating equilibrium
strategy.
   Intuitively, this is the case because Lemma 1 guarantees that if T − 1 prefers to
separate rather than mimic T at (Q = t̃T − τ0 , t̃T ), then so will every lower type.
Consequently, the separating equilibrium isoprofit curves of each lower type lie in the

                                             25
right half space defined by the tangency locus. The unique equilibrium of the game will
be in pure strategies where each lower type exports a quantity defined in Corollary 2.

Proposition 4 There exists a unique outcome of the game which involves all but (pos-
sibly) the lowest types exporting the same quantity with positive probability if and only
if ΠsT −1 ≤ ΠT −1 (Q = t̃T − τ0 , t̃T ).

    Proposition 3 gives a sufficient condition for type 1 to voluntarily restrict exports in
equilibrium. Proposition 4 provides a necessary condition for a type i to participate in
a pool. By replacing i with 1 in the construction of the unique pooling equilibrium we
see that the most efficient type will restrict exports only if Πs1 > Π1 (Q = t̃T − τ0 , t̃T ).
                  t



                                                t = τ0 + Q
            t̃1
                                       Z
            te                                               Π1 (Q, t) = Π1 (Qe , te )
            t̃2


                                                                Π2 (Q, t) = Π2 (Qe , te )

                                                       Π3 (Q, t) = Π3 (Qe , te )
            τ0




                                           Qe                                      Q


                          Figure 5: The unique pooling equilibrium




                                                  26
7. Characterization of the pooling condition

We have argued above that if (14) holds, then pooling is the unique equilibrium. In
this section we will relate this condition to the underlying primitives of the model. For
analytical convenience we will now assume that the foreign firm is one of two possible
types, 1 and 2. We will also assume that cd = C2 and that τ0 = t̃2 .
   First, we want to establish that the mimicking condition (12) holds. Substituting
we can show that 1 would like to mimic 2 if

                                               81(A − 1)
                                 N > Nm ≡
                                               8(5A − 4)

where we have defined relative costs as

                                          a − C1
                                    A≡           > 1.                                 (15)
                                          a − C2

   In Figure 6 we graph the mimicking condition in A–N space. The mimicking con-
dition is satisfied for all points lying above the N m contour. As the graph makes clear,
for all N > 1 the mimicking condition holds for all reasonable values of A. For N = 1
the condition only holds for A ∈ (1, 49/41). Recall that when a firm restrains exports
   e 2 some first period profit is sacrificed. If the game is sufficiently short, the gain
to Q
from the lower duty is insufficient to induce mimicking. In current U.S. practice, duties
are rarely removed sooner than two years after being imposed. Given this practice we
believe that the relevant scenario is when the the AD duty stays in effect for longer than
one period and thus that the mimicking condition holds for all values of A.
   Conditional on (12), the question now is whether (14) is satisfied. Substituting, we
can show that the pooling condition holds if

                                              9(6A − 5)2
                             N > Np ≡
                                          32(5A − 4)(A − 1)

   This sufficient condition is also graphed in Figure 6 and is satisfied for all points
lying above the N p contour. The graph shows that the pooling condition is likely to
hold for most reasonable parameter values. In particular, if the duty is levied for at
least several periods, the condition is satisfied for almost all A. For instance, if N = 3,
the condition holds for all A > 1.284, if N = 5, the condition holds for all A > 1.093,

                                            27
 9

 8

 7

 6

N5

 4                    Np

 3                            Nm

 2

 1
  1.0   1.5   2.0   2.5       3.0   3.5   4.0   4.5
                          A


        Figure 6: N m and N p contours




                     28
and if N = 10, the condition holds for all A > 1.035.
   While the precise values are clearly specific to this example, this exercise does illus-
trate the two general insights. First, the longer is the duration of the post-duty game,
the more likely will the pooling outcome emerge. Second, post-duty game does not have
to be particularly lengthy for pooling to emerge. A review of U.S.’s experience reveals
that AD duties are often quite long-lived. For instance, in the U.S. duties have been in
place for at least 10 years in more than 20% of (affirmative) AD cases; in fact, according
to ITC (1995), more than half of the AD duties levied between 1955 and 1991 were still
in effect in 1991. Thus, the model’s prediction that foreign firms restrain exports in
order to reduce potential AD duties seems plausible.


8. Welfare implications

We would like to conclude our discussion by conducting a simple welfare analysis. As
we did in the previous section we will assume that the foreign firm is one of two possible
types, 1 and 2. The prior probability of type 1 is µ. We will continue to assume that
cd = C2 and that τ0 = t̃2 .
       We compare the expected welfare in the pure strategy pooling equilibrium with
a situation in which the government does not have a cost-based AD mechanism. In
keeping with GATT MFN rules, we thus consider an alternative where exporters are
subject to a uniform tariff.18
       In a pure strategy pooling equilibrium the government levies a duty equal to te − τ0
where te = µt̃1 + (1 − µ)t̃2 . Regardless of the firm’s type, first period exports are
Qe = te −τ0 and the domestic firm maximizes its profit taking Qe as given. In subsequent
periods the welfare results from the unique Cournot equilibrium with the AD duty
imposed.
       If the government does not have AD law and commits to τ0 , the welfare would
be calculated from the unique Stackelberg and Cournot equilibria in first and later
periods, respectively.Using our expression for relative costs (A), the difference between
the expected equilibrium welfare and the ex-ante expected welfare from precommitment
  18
     The unique ex-ante optimum duty is easily seen to be µt̃1 + (1 − µ)t̃2 . We can perform the welfare
analysis with this tariff imposed in all periods, but we want to emphasize that even with suboptimal
tariffs (and maybe even the worst ex ante tariff) the country is still better off without an antidumping
law.


                                                  29
can be shown from (4) and (5) to be

    ∆(N, A, µ) = (1/72)(4N + 11)(A − 1)2 µ2 − (1/72)(27A − 14)(A − 1)µ − 7/288.

∆(·) is increasing with N , implying that the longer the duration of the duty the larger
are the losses due to a commitment to a suboptimal duty.
   In Figure 7 we depict the zero contours of ∆(·) for N = 5 and N =10. Cost-based AD
raises welfare in the region lying above the contour. The intuition is quite clear: cost-
based AD raises welfare the more likely the firm is type 1 (higher µ) and the longer the
duration of the duty (larger N ). However, note that if the duty stays on for 5 periods,
the cost difference between the firms must get quite large before the AD policy raises
welfare. ∆(·) is positive for a substantial region of the parameter space only for N = 10.
   These results along with those in the previous section highlight the importance of
the duration of the duties. This insight makes the Uruguay Round’s sunset amendment
particularly relevant. This provision mandates that AD duties must be reviewed after
five years and the duty should be removed unless there is evidence that doing so will
result in injury. The sunset amendment was designed to limit the attractiveness of
AD actions (to domestic industries) and as such this provision should raise welfare.
Surprisingly, we find that it may well exacerbate the costs of cost-based AD policy.


9. Concluding Comments

By most accounts the downward trend in trade restrictions was halted (or at least
slowed) in the mid-1970s (Bhagwati, 1988; Krueger, 1995). Blame is usually pointed
to the combination of high-track (VERs) and low-track (AD duties) restraints. In this
paper we have demonstrated that both phenomena can be explained by the fact that
AD laws were broadened to allow for cost-based allegations in the mid-1970s. We have
shown that VERs are undertaken to discourage cost-based AD complaints. However,
we find that in general the VER does not completely release the protectionist pressures
but rather causes the duties to be clumsily levied.
   Our results also help explain why all concerned parties—domestic firms, foreign
firms, and consumers—are unhappy with AD protection. Domestic industries complain
that AD does not sufficiently protect them against their most feared foreign competitors



                                           30
  1.0
  0.9
  0.8
                    Zero contour, N = 5
  0.7
  0.6
µ 0.5
  0.4
                   Zero contour, N = 10
  0.3
  0.2
  0.1
  0.0
        2      3     4    5        6   7   8       9   10
                                   A


            Figure 7: Zero contour of ∆(N, µ, A)




                              31
(Stewart, 1991). At the same time, foreign firms often gripe that the duties are excessive.
Our model shows that both charges have validity. The VER distorts the government’s
perception of the the foreign firm’s efficiency and leads to undesirably low (high) duties
on efficient (inefficient) competitors. Cost-based duties would be more efficiently levied
if the VERs did not interfere with the government’s ability to perceive costs. Finally,
consumers suffer due to both the anticipatory VER and to the ineptly determined
duty. Our results provide additional evidence that AD law creates a heavy burden
on consumers. All in all, even though cost-based AD raises welfare under complete
information, the distortions inherent with implementing it under incomplete information
make it an undesirable policy—especially if the duties are levied for relatively short
durations. Thus, GATT/WTO parties would likely raise welfare by coupling the recent
sunset provision with additional restrictions on cost-based allegations.
   From a technical perspective, our results highlight the importance of the single
crossing assumption in economic models. While this assumption is usually imposed,
our model suggests that those interested in accurately depicting the outcomes in sig-
naling games should formally model agents’ payoffs, i.e., derive payoffs from more basic
economic primitives. As we have shown the equilibrium depends crucially on whether
the payoffs satisfy single crossing or double crossing.



References

Anderson, James E., 1992, Domino Dumping, I: Competitive Exporters, American Eco-
 nomic Review; 82(1), March, 65–83.

Anderson, Keith B., 1993, Antidumping laws in the United States: Use and welfare
 consequences, Journal of World Trade; 27, April.

Bagwell, Laurie Simon and B. Douglas Bernheim 1996, Veblen Effects in a Theory of
  Conspicuous Consumption, American Economic Review, 86(3) 349–73.

Baldwin, Robert E., 1989, The Political Economy of Trade Policy, Journal of Economic
  Perspectives, 3(4), 119–35.

Banks, J.S. and J. Sobel, 1987, Equilibrium selection in signaling games, Econometrica
  55, 647–661.



                                            32
Bellis, Jean-François. 1989, The EEC antidumping system, in Jackson, John H. and
  Edwin A. Vermulst, eds., Antidumping Law and Practice, (The University of Michigan
  Press).

Bernheim, B. Douglas, 1991, Tax Policy and the Dividend Puzzle, Rand Journal of
  Economics 22(4), 455–76.

Bernheim, B. Douglas, 1994, A Theory of Conformity, Journal of Political Economy
  102(5), 841–77.

Bhagwati, Jagdish, 1988, Protectionism, (MIT Press: Cambridge).

Boltuck, Richard and Robert E. Litan, 1991, Down in the Dumps, (The Brookings
  Institution, Washington, DC).

Braga, C.A.P. and S.D. Silber, 1993, Brazilian frozen concentrated juice: The folly of
  unfair trade cases, in J.M. Finger, ed., Antidumping: How it works and who gets
  hurt, (University of Michigan Press: Ann Arbor).

Brander, J.A. and B.J. Spencer, 1984, Tariff protection and imperfect competition, in
  H. Kierzkowsky, ed., Monopolistic competition and international trade, (Clarendon,
  Oxford) 194–206.

Cho, I.K. and D.M. Kreps, 1987, Signaling games and stable equilibria, Quarterly Jour-
 nal of Economics 42, 179–221.

Cho, In-Koo, 1987, A refinement of sequential equilibrium, Econometrica 55, 1367–1389.

Cho, In-Koo, 1993, Strategic stability in repeated signaling games, International Journal
 of Game Theory, 22, 107–121.

Cho, In-Koo, 1994, Separation or Not: A Critique of “Appearance-Based” Selection
 Criteria, Seoul Journal of Economics 7(3), 249–68.

Cho, I.K. and D.M. Kreps, 1987, Signaling games and stable equilibria, Quarterly Jour-
 nal of Economics 42, 179–221.

Cho, I.K. and J. Sobel, 1990, Strategic stability and uniqueness in signaling games,
 Journal of Economic Theory, 50, 381–413.

Clarida, Richard H., 1993, Entry, dumping, and shakeout, American Economic Review
  83, 180–202.

Clarida, Richard H., 1996, Dumping in theory, in policy and in practice, in J. Bhagwati
  and R. Hudec, eds., Fair Trade and Harmonization, (MIT Press, Cambridge) 357–389.

                                           33
Ethier, W., 1982, Dumping, Journal of Political Economy 90, 487–506.
Feenstra, Robert C. and Tracy R. Lewis, 1991, Negotiated Trade Restrictions with
  Private Political Pressure, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106(4), 1287–1308.
Fudenberg, D. and J. Tirole, 1992, Game theory, (MIT Press).
Hansen, Wendy L. and T.J. Prusa, 1995, The road most taken: The rise of Title VII
  protection, The World Economy, 18(2), 295–313.
Harris, R., 1985, Why voluntary export restraints are “voluntary”, Canadian Journal
  of Economics, 18, 799–809.
Hillman, Arye L. and Heinrich W. Urspring, 1988, Domestic Politics, Foreign Interests
  and International Trade Policy, American Economic Review, 77(4), 729–45.
Hoekman, B. and M.P. Leidy, 1991, Antidumping for services?, in Tharakan, P.K.M.,
 ed., Policy Implications of Antidumping Measures, (North-Holland).
Horlick, Gary N. 1989, The United States antidumping system, in Jackson, John H.
  and Edwin A. Vermulst, eds., Antidumping Law and Practice, (The University of
  Michigan Press).
International Trade Commission, 1995, The Economic Effects of Antidumping and
  Countervailing Duty Orders and Suspension Agreements, Publication Number 2900,
  (International Trade Commission, Washington, DC).
Jones, K., 1986, World industry studies 4. Politics vs economics in world steel trade,
  (Allen & Unwin, London).
Kohlberg, E. and J-F. Mertens, 1986, On the strategic stability of equilibria, Econo-
 metrica 54, 1003–1038.
Kreps, D.M. and J. Sobel, 1994, Signaling, in R.J. Aumann and S. Hart, eds., Handbook
  of game theory, Vol. 2 (North-Holland, Amsterdam) 849–867.
Kreps, D.M. and R. Wilson, 1982, Sequential equilibria, Econometrica 50, 863–894.
Krishna, K., 1989, Trade restrictions as facilitating practices, Journal of International
  Economics, 26, 251–270.
Krueger, A.O., 1995, The american trade policy: A tragedy in the making, (The AEI
  Press, Washington, D.C.).
Low, P., 1993, Trading free: The GATT and U.S. trade policy, (The Twentieth Century
  Fund Press, New York).

                                           34
Mendez, J.A., 1993, The development of the Columbian cut flower industry: A textbook
 example of how a market economy works, in J.M. Finger, ed., Antidumping: How it
 works and who gets hurt, (University of Michigan Press: Ann Arbor).

Messerlin, Patrick, 1989, The EC antidumping regulations: A first economic appraisal,
 1980–85, Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv, 125, 563–87.

Milgrom, Paul and Roberts, John D., 1982, Limit Pricing and Entry under Incomplete
 Information: An Equilibrium Analysis Econometrica, 50(2), 443–59.

Murray, Tracy, 1991, The administration of the antidumping duty law by the Depart-
 ment of Commerce, in Richard Boltuck and Robert E. Litan, eds., Down in the
 Dumps, (The Brookings Institution, Washington, DC), 23–56.

Patrick, H. and H. Sato, 1982, The political economy of United States-Japan trade
  in steel, in Yamamura, K. ed., Policy and trade issues of the Japanese economy:
  American and Japanese perspectives, (University of Washington Press).

Prestowitz, Clyde. 1988, Trading places: How we are giving our future to Japan and
  how to reclaim it, (Basic Books, New York).

Prusa, Thomas J., 1992, Why are so many antidumping petitions withdrawn?, Journal
  of International Economics 33, 1–20.

Riley, John 1979, Informational Equilbrium, Econometrica, 47, 331–59.

Rosendorff, B. Peter, 1996, Voluntary Export Restraints, Antidumping Procedure, and
  Domestic Politics, American Economic Review, 86(3) 544–561.

Staiger, Robert W. and Frank A. Wolak, 1989, Strategic use of antidumping law to
  enforce tacit international collusion, NBER working paper, No. 3016.

Staiger, Robert W. and Frank A. Wolak, 1992, The effect of domestic antidumping law
  in the presence of foreign monopoly, Journal of International Economics 32, 265–87.

Stewart, Terrence, 1991, Administration of the antidumping duty law: A different per-
  sective, in Richard Boltuck and Robert E. Litan, eds., Down in the Dumps, (The
  Brookings Institution, Washington, DC), 288–330.

van Damme, E., 1987, Stability and perfection of Nash equilibria, (Springer-Verlag,
  Berlin).




                                         35
Appendix

Proof of Lemma 1
Implicit differentiation of (10) at any (Q, t) yields a slope of an isoprofit curve given by
                                                                           
                             dt            9        a − 2Q − 2Ci − 2τ0 + cd
                   σ(Q, t) =    =                                                 .
                             dQ           8n           a − 2t − 2Ci + cd

The first part of the claim follows directly from the definition of σ(Q, t) and monotonoc-
ity of the profit function. The second part of the claim follows from differentiating
σ(Q, t) with respect to Ci at any (Q, t).
                                                                                              
Proof of Corollary 1
If the isoprofit curve of type i crossed the tangency locus twice then continuity would
imply that i must have another isoprofit curve tangent to t = τ0 + Q at a point (Q̂ =
t̂ − τ0 , t̂). Lemma 1 shows that an isoprofit curve of any i0 through (Q̂ = t̂ − τ0 , t̂) would
be tangent also and both curves would lie in the same half space defined by t = τ0 + Q
at least in a -neighborhood of (Q̂ = t̂ − τ0 , t̂). Since profit is continuous we can always
find a sufficiently small δ-perturbation of the payoff of one type so that the isoprofit
curves cross twice within  of (Q̂ = t̂ − τ0 , t̂). This would violate Lemma 1.               
Proof of Proposition 1
Fix a sequential separating equilibrium outcome obtained from 2 exporting Q∗ ∈ S2c (1),
Q∗ 6= Q (1), and 1 exporting Q e 1 . Take an out of equilibrium message Q0 ∈ S c (1) such
        2                                                                             2
           e 1 | > |Q0 − Q
that |Q∗ − Q             e 1 |.
   Let us construct the sets of sequentially rational responses of the government to Q0
which would make each type break the equilibrium. By the definition (incentive com-
                                                                         e1 to Q0 . Continuity
patibility) of S2 (1) no duty t ∈ [t̃2 , t̃1 ] would make 1 deviate from Q
and monotonicity of 2’s profit function guarantee that exporting Q0 would be strictly
preferred to Q∗ if that would make the country impose t̃2 (or any lower duty). Hence,

                                  E10 (Q0 ) ∪ E1 (Q0 ) ⊆ E2 (Q0 ),

and the D1 criterion requires the beliefs of the government to place probability zero on




                                                    36
1 at Q0 . Hence at Q0 we must have the posterior restricted to η|i≥2 , where
                                         (
                               0
                                             P η(i η(i|Q)
                                                   |Q) 0
                                                            , if i0 ≥ j
                        η|i≥j (i |Q) =           i≥j                      .
                                             0              , otherwise

Since the best reply of the government is decreasing in its beliefs this would make 2
defect from the equilibrium.
   We could make the same argument for all Q∗ 6= Q2 (1). Hence the unique candidate
separating D1 equilibrium outcome is the one arising from type 2 exporting Q2 (1). 
Proof of Corollary 2
Note that the strict concavity of the separating equilibrium isoprofit curve for type 1
implies that Qj (1) > Qi (1) for j > i > 1. On the other hand, Lemma 1 implies that
Πi (Qi (1), t̃i ) > Πi (Qj (1), t̃j ). Hence Qj (1) > Qj (i), ∀j > i > 1 and each type j is
constrained only by type 1 at high quantity levels.
   Starting with type 3, for each type j ≥ 3 apply the arguments used in Proposition 1
to show that any quantity Q0 > Qj (1) in combination with t̃j is inferior to Qj (1). This
is the case because the D1 criterion concentrates the beliefs of the government on k ≥ j
and the corresponding best response would make j deviate from Q0 .
   Fix a candidate equilibrium in which each type j exports Qj (1). To see that Qj (1)
is not a stable equilibrium we use Lemma 1 once again to claim that



                    E10 (Qj (1) − ) ∪ E1 (Qj (1) − ) ⊆ Ej (Qj (1) − ).

   Since Πj (Qj (1), t̃j ) > Πj (Qj−1 (1), t̃j−1 ), D1 requires that the response of the govern-
ment at Qj−1 (1)−  be at most t̃j−1 which is sufficient to discard Qj−1 (1) as a candidate
equilibrium.
   Proposition 1 showed that the unique candidate for a D1 strategy for 2 is Qs2 = Q2 (1).
     ˆ
Let Q̂ = min{Q3 (1), Q3 (2)}. Then both type 1 and type 2 are content with separation
                                   ˆ
rather than mimic type 3 at Q0 < Q̂ and get t̃3 . Hence D1 would restrict the beliefs of
                                     ˆ
the government to i ≥ 3 at Q0 +  < Q̂ and the sequentially rational tariff would make
3 deviate from Q0 . The arguments for all other types are identical.                          
Proof of Proposition 2


                                                  37
Proposition 1 implies that it is sufficient to prove that Q2 (1) is not a D1 strategy for 2.
Let us fix the outcome arising from 2 exporting Q2 (1). By construction Q2 (1) < t̃2 − τ0 ,
which guarantees that the isoprofit curve of 2 through (Q2 (1), t̃2 ) has a slope which is
bigger than the corresponding slope for type 1 (by Lemma 1). This implies that for Q0
-bigger than Q2 (1) the set of sequentially rational duties weakly preferred to (Q2 (1), t̃2 )
by 1 in combination with Q0 is a subset of the best responses which 2 strictly prefers
to its equilibrium action. If the given equilibrium produces a D1 outcome we should be
able to support it with beliefs η|i≥2 at Q0 . Hence the best response of the government
is at most t̃2 . Since, with any t ≤ t̃2 fixed, the profit of 2 is monotonically increasing in
Q at Q2 (1), type 2 would deviate to Q0 , thus upsetting the unique candidate for a D1
pure strategy separating equilibrium outcome.                                                      
Proof of Lemma 2
Without loss of generality assume that Qp < tp − τ0 . Let i be the highest type in the
pool. Then tp > t̃i . Lemma 1 guarantees that in a D1 equilibrium the beliefs of the
government at Q0 -smaller than Qp should place η(i0 |Q0 ) = 0 for all i0 < i. Hence
the response of the government at Q0 should be less than or equal to t̃i . Continuity of
the exporter’s payoff in Q0 would make i strictly better off deviating from the pool for
sufficiently small .                                                                              
Proof of Lemma 3
In Corollary 2 we established that any point (Q̂ = t̂ − τ0 , t̂) is the unique intersection of
the tangency locus with the isoprofit function Πj (Q̂, t̂) = Πj (Q, t) so that any Q0 < Q̂
and t0 such that Πj (Q̂, t̂) = Πj (Q0 , t0 ) implies t0 > Q0 + τ0 .
    Assume that at Q0 < Q̂, Πi (Q̂, t̂) = Πi (Q0 , ti ) and Πj (Q̂, t̂) = Πj (Q0 , tj ) with tj > ti ,
so that the isoprofit curve of j through (Q̂, t̂) is above that of i. We will show that this
assumption leads to a contradiction. By monotonicity of the profit in t we have

                               Πi (Q̂, t̂) = Πi (Q0 , ti ) > Πi (Q0 , tj ).                    (A.1)

On the other hand, since tj > τ0 + Q0 , Lemma 1 shows that the slope of j’s isoprofit
curve through (Q0 , tj ) is bigger than the corresponding slope for i. This implies that

                        Πi (Q̂, t̂) ≥ Πi (Q0 , tj ) ⇒ Πj (Q̂, t̂) > Πj (Q0 , tj ).




                                                   38
The last statement contradicts (A.1) and the construction of tj as Πj (Q̂, t̂) = Πj (Q0 , tj ).
Similar arguments hold for Q0 > Q̂.                                                         
Proof of Corollary 3
Suppose that i is the lowest type in the pool and j > i randomizes in equilibrium between
some Q and the pooled quantity Qp . Then j must be indifferent between Q and Qp .
Since the equilibrium isoprofit curve of i is everywhere above that of j according to
Lemma 3, it must be that Q is strictly preferred to the equilibrium by i in combination
with the equilibrium tariff of the government at Q. This would break the pool.               
Proof of Proposition 3
By Proposition 2 (and the remarks following) no type can separate from type 1 in a D1
equilibrium. Moreover, Lemma 1 guarantees that if type 1 weakly prefers a point along
the tangency line to a given point (Q, t) then every higher type strictly prefers the point
along t = τ0 + Q to (Q, t). Hence if type 1 is in an equilibrium pool so are all higher
types.
   Now we show that all types i ≥ 1 pool with probability one. If Π∗1 is the equilibrium
payoff for 1, it must be that Π∗1 ≥ Πs1 . Monotonicity in t implies that for all Q the
isoprofit curve yielding profit Π∗1 is below the complete information isoprofit curve for
1. By Lemma 3 the response of the government to Q∗ must be t∗ = Q∗ + τ0 and the
equilibrium isoprofit curve for i ≥ 2 giving payoff Π∗i must be everywhere below the
equilibrium curve for 1 by Lemma 3. Since the isoprofit locus defined by Πs1 is under
t = t̃1 , ∀Q, the equilibrium payoff for i ≥ 2 must be strictly higher than producing any
Q in combination with t̃1 .
   The description of the equilibrium isoprofit curves given by Lemma 3 implies that
∀Q 6= Q∗ and i ≥ 2

                                 Ei0 (Q) ∪ Ei (Q) ⊆ E1 (Q).

Hence in a D1 equilibrium the beliefs of the government at Q 6= Q∗ must place proba-
bility one on 1 and the corresponding duty should be t̃1 . As shown above, every type i,
i ≥ 2, is strictly better off in equilibrium than producing Q in combination with t̃1 ;
hence, every i ≥ 2 exports Q∗ with probability one.
   We now consider the government’s and type 1’s equilibrium strategies. Let te ≡
argmaxt w(µ, t) ≥ τ0 denote the ex-ante optimal duty.


                                              39
  First suppose that the prior probability, µ, is such that Πs1 ≥ Π1 (Qe = te − τ0 , te ).
We claim that in this case, type 1 can not pool with probability one in any sequential
equilibrium. This follows from the fact that if 1 pools with probability one, then the
unique best response of the government would be te to the quantity Qe = te − τ0 . The
                                                                           e 1 . This implies
point (Qe , te ) is strictly inferior for 1 compared to full separation at Q
that the only possible solution must involve partial pooling.
   As argued above, in any D1 pooling equilibrium all disequilibrium beliefs will induce
the government to impose t̃1 . The strict concavity of 1’s profit function will then
guarantee that the only quantity produced with positive probability and met with t̃1 is
the unique maximizer, Qe 1 . Moreover, the payoff from such an action must be equal to
the payoff at the pooled message if 1 is to randomize. This implies that the pool must
occur at the point of intersection of 1’s complete information isoprofit curve (10) and
the tangency locus. Denote this quantity Qp . Since Π1 (Q, BR(Qp , ρµ|i≥2 + (1 − ρ)µ))
is a continuous strictly increasing function of ρ there exists a unique solution to

                         Πs1 = Π1 (Qp , BR(Qp , ρµ|i≥2 + (1 − ρ)µ))

                                               e 1 , tp would be the unique best response
such that if 1 puts weight ρ on Qp and 1− ρ on Q
to Qp .
   Second, suppose now that the prior probability, µ, is such that Πs1 < Π1 (Qe = te −
τ0 , te ). In this case type 1 would rather pool at Qe = te − τ0 than separate. The partial
pooling equilibrium described in the preceding paragraph is not even sequential in this
case since the posterior making te a sequential best response would require 1 to export
Qp with probability larger than one. (Keep in mind that in any D1 pooling equilibrium
i ≥ 2 must pool with probability one.) This shows that the only D1 equilibrium is
in pure strategies at exports Qe and duty level te . The off equilibrium response is
t̃1 , ∀Q 6= Qe . The domestic firm produces according to (8) in response to Qe .
   Finally, note that if te < τ0 then no AD petition will be filed in equilibrium and the
firms simply maximize profits myopically and the tariff remains at τ0 .                    
Proof of Proposition 4
Proof: Let Qsi , as defined in Corollary 2, be the unique candidate for a D1 separating
equilibrium strategy for i. Then Πsi = Π(Qsi , t̃i − τ0 ).
   To show necessity observe that ΠsT −1 > ΠT −1 (Q = t̃T − τ0 , t̃T ) implies Πsi > Πi (Q =


                                              40
t̃T − τ0 , t̃T ) by Lemma 1. It follows that Qsi > Q = t̃i − τ0 for all i, and Qsi < Qsi−1 .
Hence by Lemma 1 the isoprofit curve for i through (Qsi , t̃i ) has a slope smaller than
the isoprofit curve of type i − 1 through the same point. In fact the isoprofit curve for
type i is below the curve for type i − 1 for export levels higher than Qsi and above the
curve for i − 1 at quantities smaller than Qsi . Hence D1 requires that the beliefs of the
government be placed on type i − 1 at off equilibrium exports Q ∈ (Qsi , Qsi−1 ) for all i.
      e 1 the government levies a duty of t̃1 − τ0 , and below Qs the response is t̃T − τ0 .
Above Q                                                                T
These beliefs support the outcome in which every type i exports a distinct quantity
Qsi with probability one as the unique outcome of the game. By Lemma 2 no pooling
equilibria exist.
    We now show that if the condition of the proposition holds there exists a unique D1
equilibrium and that in this outcome all but possibly the lowest types export the same
quantity with positive probability.
    Assume that ΠsT −1 > ΠT −1 (Q = t̃T − τ0 , t̃T ) and let type i be the smallest type such
that Πsi > Πi (Q = t̃T − τ0 , t̃T ). According to Corollary 1 for each j ≥ i there exists a
unique point (Q̂j = t̂j − τ0 , t̂j ) such that Πsj = Πj (Q̂j , t̂j ). Recall that if a type prefers
a point along the tangency locus to its separating strategy so does every higher type.
Hence if a type pools, every higher type produces the pooled quantity with probability
one by Corollary 3. Every type lower than i separates with a pure strategy. We now
construct the unique equilibrium by induction on j.

   1. Suppose that t(µ|j≥i ) ≤ t̂i . In this case all j ≥ i pool with probability one
      at Q = t(µ|j≥i ) − τ0 . The unique sequentially rational response to the pooled
      quantity is t(µ|j≥i ).

   2. If t(µ|j≥i ) > t̂i we have two possibilities.

       (a) Assume that t(µ|j≥i+1 ) < t̂i . In this case there exists a unique mixed strategy
            for type i in which it randomizes between Qsi and Q̂i in a way that makes
            t̂i a sequential response for the government. (The construction of the mixed
            strategy for i is the same as the one for type 1 in Proposition 3.) All j ≥ i
            export Q̂i with probability one.
       (b) Let t(µ|j≥i+1 ) ≥ t̂i . If type i pools we know that all j ≥ i would pool with
            probability one. Hence the equilibrium response of the government must be

                                                41
           bigger than t(µ|j≥i+1 ). This implies that i would separate at Qsi .

   Suppose now that all types smaller than a type r > i separate. From the preceding
analysis it must be that t(µ|j≥r ) ≥ t̂r−1 .

   1. If t(µ|j≥r ) ≤ t̂r then all j ≥ r produce Q = t(µ|j≥r ) − τ0 with probability one.

   2. If t(µ|j≥r ) > t̂r we are facing two scenarios.

       (a) Let t(µ|j≥r+1 ) < t̂r . In this case r mixes between Qsr and Q̂r , all j ≥ r export
           Q̂r with probability one, and the equilibrium duty is t̂r − τ0 .
       (b) If t(µ|j≥r+1 ) ≥ t̂r type r separates at Qsr with probability one.

This completes the induction.
   Since by assumption t̂T −1 > t̃T separation is not feasible for T − 1 by the above
construction. Hence in any D1 equilibrium at least types T and T − 1 export the same
quantity with positive probability.
   It is easy to see that if i is the lowest type in a pool, D1 restricts the off equilibrium
response of the government to t̃i in the neighborhood of the pool where the equilibrium
isoprofit curve for i is above that of i − 1. For lower quantity levels the beliefs are
concentrated on the type willing to break the equilibrium at the highest duty. By
Lemma 1 this is necessarily a type smaller than i. For export levels where the equilibrium
isoprofit curve of i is below the isoprofit curve for i− 1 but (necessarily) lower than Qsi−1
the beliefs are concentrated on i − 1. For any j ≤ i − 1 the beliefs of the government
are placed on j − 1 between Qsj and Qsj−1 . For export levels higher than the equilibrium
quantity of type 1 the response is t̃1 . This is the unique system of beliefs which satisfy
D1 and they trivially support the pooling outcome of the game.                              




                                               42
