24.02.99

A Contribution to the Theory of Welfare Comparisons

Page 2

A Contribution to the Theory of Welfare Comparisons
Introduction
Recent times have witnessed a greatly heightened awareness of the interactions between
economic, social and environmental issues. Terms like “green accounting” and “sustainability”
have found their way into the lexicon of popular jargon. There has appeared a widespread
interest in the idea of extending the concepts and measurement of national income to include
important near-market activities in related areas that bear on welfare and productivity -- such as
the environment and natural resources, but also human capital formation, unpaid home production
(possibly including leisure-time activities), research and development, and the like.
Many theoretical questions have been raised about augmented national income, ranging
from broad concerns, posed at a high level of abstraction, about its welfare foundations, through
basic issues touching upon the design of green national income accounts, down to narrow advice
on which particular activities to include and how to include them. In response, as if wanting to be
able to answer such questions, has arisen a branch of economic analysis that might be called the
pure theory of comprehensive national income accounting. Through the core of this theory runs a
common strand attempting to connect a currently-observable index of comprehensive net national
income or product with some appropriate but not-currently-observable welfare measure of future
power to consume, which typically has a “sustainability-like” flavor or undertone.
We seem presently to have created at least a partially-successful body of theory.1
However, some big pieces of the conceptual puzzle are not yet fitting snugly into a fully-coherent
overall picture. One piece is obvious because the existing theory is, almost without exception,
built around a fictitious entity of “aggregate consumption,” while what we really want is a general
theory that includes heterogeneous consumption as seamlessly as it incorporates heterogeneous
capital. Another piece of the puzzle is a seeming disconnect between the idea that, to be
observable, net national product or income must be a price-weighted commodity-based index,
whereas the concepts that show up naturally in optimal growth theory, such as the Hamiltonian,

1

For a good overview, with an extensive bibliography, see Aronsson, Johansson and
Löfgren [1997].

24.02.99

A Contribution to the Theory of Welfare Comparisons

Page 3

are mostly utility-based measures. Finally, perhaps the biggest and most critical piece of the
puzzle not yet fitting neatly into the existing body of theory concerns the answer to the following
question. Exactly how, at least in principle, are we supposed to use national income statistics and
other currently-observable market information to make rigorous inferences about welfare
differences among economies or across economic situations? Taken seriously, such inferences
would appear to require the calculation and comparison of inherently-dynamic wealth-like
measures. Is there a way to circumvent these difficult calculations, or at least to relate the
dynamic wealth-like measures to some form of a simpler static income-like version?
The purpose of this paper is to take one more step moving in the direction towards a
more-fully-coherent theory. The paper is aimed primarily at showing how to make rigorous
dynamic welfare comparisons based only on current directly-observable market information. In
the course of developing a general methodology to deal with this problem, the paper will treat
fully-disaggregated consumption as a natural formulation, and will also show implicitly how to
reconcile commodity-based national product with utility-based welfare. And, by embedding
short-run consumer behavior within an optimal growth framework, the paper will cast new light
on some old controversies in consumer-surplus and index-number theory. While the motivation
has been framed here in terms of the theory of national income accounting, the essential
contribution of the paper is to provide a proper dynamic generalization of the standard static
formula for the welfare evaluation of economic changes.

The Setting of the Model
Previous work on the welfare significance of national income has effectively postulated a
single homogeneous “aggregate consumption” good, while allowing multiple capital goods. Here
we are covering in full generality the case of heterogeneous investment and consumption. Let the
vector C represent an m-dimensional fully-disaggregated bundle of consumption flows. More
specifically, Ci(t) measures the flow of consumption services from consuming Ci(t) units of
commodity i at time instant t, for i'1,2,...,m .
The consumption vector C is conceptualized as being a complete list containing

24.02.99

A Contribution to the Theory of Welfare Comparisons

Page 4

everything that influences current well being, including environmental amenities and other
externalities. Consumption here would ideally include all components that influence the true
“standard of living” -- not just the goods we buy in stores and the government services
“purchased” with our taxes, but also non-market commodities, such as those produced at home,
and environmental services, such as those rendered by natural capital like forests and clean air.
For the sake of developing the core theory, initial consumption C(0) is presumed to be fully
observable and it is assumed we know at the present time the associated m-vector of competitive
or efficiency consumption prices. We will also presume to be able to observe the relevant shortrun market demand function in the domain over which static comparisons will be made.
For any consumption time series {C(t)} , it is supposed that it is meaningful to measure
overall intertemporal well-being by the expression:
4

W({C(t)}) /

m

e &Dt U(C(t)) dt ,

(1)

0

where U(C) is some given concave non-decreasing instantaneous utility function with continuous
second derivatives defined over all non-negative consumption flows C, while D is some given rate
of pure time preference. As practically every economist will attest, for better or for worse (1) is
the standard workhorse version of the objective function used widely in economics as a maximand
in intertemporal optimization problems. Also for what it is worth, a linear functional taking the
form of (1) can be given an axiomatic justification as representing the appropriate dynamic
preference ordering whenever independence, stationarity, continuity and a few other seeminglystandard conditions are postulated.2
The notion of “capital” used in the model is intended to be quite a bit more general than
the traditional produced means of production like equipment and structures. Most immediately,
pools of natural resources are unquestionably considered to be forms of capital. Forms of human
capital, such as education, should in principle be included, and also the knowledge capital
2

See, e.g., Koopmans [1960].

24.02.99

A Contribution to the Theory of Welfare Comparisons

Page 5

accumulated from R&D-like activities. Generally speaking, every possible type of capital should
be included -- to the extent that we know how to measure and evaluate the associated net
investment flows. Under a very broad interpretation, environmental assets generally might be
treated as a form of capital. From this perspective, environmental quality would be viewed as a
stock of capital that is depreciated by pollution and invested-in by abatement.3 The underlying
ideal is to have the list of capital goods be as comprehensive as possible, subject to the practical
limitation that meaningful competitive-market-like efficiency prices are available for evaluating the
corresponding net investments.
Suppose that altogether there are n capital goods, including stocks of natural resources
and other non-orthodox forms. The stock of capital of type

(1#i#n) in existence at time t is

denoted Ki(t) , and its corresponding net investment flow is Ii(t)'K0i(t) . The n-vector K'{Ki}
denotes all capital stocks, while I'{Ii} stands for the corresponding n-vector of net investments.
Note that the net investment flow of a natural capital asset like a timber reserve would be negative
if the overall extraction rate exceeds the replacement rate. Generally speaking, net investment in
environmental capital should be regarded as negative whenever the underlying asset is being
depleted or run down more rapidly than it is being replaced or built up.
Again in the spirit of focusing sharply for the sake of developing the core theory, we
assume the production system is time autonomous.4 For theoretical purposes, we are thus
imagining an idealized world where the coverage of capital goods is so comprehensive, and the
national accounting system is so complete, that there remain no unaccounted-for residual
“atmospheric” growth factors. All sources of future growth have been identified as proper
investments able to be evaluated at their proper efficiency prices.
Unfortunately, we do not now live in a world where national income accounting is

3

4

Mäler [1991] includes a good discussion of some of the relevant issues here.

For some treatments of the time-dependent case, see Nordhaus [1995], Weitzman
[1997], or Weitzman and Löfgren [1997], and the further references cited therein. Time
dependence introduces a host of messy complications, but a modified (and unpretty) version of
the result presented here can usually be found, contingent on some simplifying assumptions about
the particular form of time dependency.

24.02.99

A Contribution to the Theory of Welfare Comparisons

Page 6

complete. Completeness is perhaps best envisioned as a limiting case, which some accounting
systems approach in coverage but few attain. In our actual world we cannot measure accurately
all investments, many externalities are not internalized, it is often difficult to find market-like
prices for non-market goods, and there are various “atmospheric” sources of positive or negative
growth, which we cannot or do not include in net national product. (The omitted “atmospheric”
contributions are identified primarily as a residual, which is obtained by subtracting off from actual
growth the effects of all known, properly identified, sources of growth.)
Even if it were to be admitted that we live in a world whose accounting is incomplete, it
would still be indispensable for us to understand fully the pure theory of perfectly complete
accounting -- if for no other reason than as a base case, or reference, or starting point for a more
complete analysis. In actuality, the most important practical reason for studying the pure theory
of complete accounting is that it can suggest what things to include, and how best to include
them, to “green up” national income -- meaning to make it a more complete aggregate reflecting
more accurately what the future portends relative to the present. For this reason, one might say
that the pure theory is useful in a world of incomplete accounting precisely because it suggests
the best way to make the accounting more complete.
In the mathematical language of the model, the accounting system is said to be perfectly
complete, or, equivalently, national income is said to be fully comprehensive, if the attainablepossibilities set at any time t can be described in reduced form as a function only of the capital
stocks K(t) existing at that time. Therefore, by making this assumption we are allowed to denote
the (m+n)-dimensional attainable possibilities set here as S(K) . Then the consumption-investment
pair (C(t),I(t)) is attainable at time t if and only if
(C(t),I(t)) g S(K(t))

.

(2)

As usual, the set S(K) is presumed to be convex. Here, purely for ease of exposition, it
will be assumed that S(K) is strictly convex.
In the context of the duality theory of a multi-sector optimal growth problem, specification
(2) signifies that attainable possibilities at any time are completely summarized by the state of

24.02.99

A Contribution to the Theory of Welfare Comparisons

Page 7

then-existing capital stocks, whose corresponding net investment flows, which are also completely
“accounted for” at known efficiency prices, are included in net national product. A complete
accounting system of comprehensive national income, which is embedded in a dynamic economy
at competitive equilibrium, corresponds to an infinite horizon optimal control problem whose
distinguishing mathematical characteristic is that the only place where time enters explicitly is
through the constant exponential discounting term of the objective functional.

A Tale of Two Economies
Suppose we are interested in comparing the dynamic welfare delivered by two different
economies or two different economic situations. Let the economy “type” be indexed by the
superscript indicator variable j. The index value j'1 indicates the given base economy. The
index value j'2 indicates some particular comparison economy. Both economies share the same
preferences, but they may have arbitrarily different endowments and/or arbitrarily different
technologies. The basic contribution of this paper is to compare (1) across the two economies
relying only on currently-observable market information.
Both economies j'1 and j'2 behave over time as if they are solutions of a symmetrical
pair of optimal growth problems of the form:
maximize
4

m

U(C j(t)) e &Dt dt ,

(3)

0

subject to the constraints
(C j(t),I j(t)) g S j(K j(t)) ,

(4)

j
K0 (t) ' I j(t) ,

(5)

and the differential equations

24.02.99

A Contribution to the Theory of Welfare Comparisons

Page 8

and obeying the initial conditions
j

K j(0) ' K0 ,

(6)

j

where K0 is the initially given capital stocks -- all of the above holding for j'1 and j'2 .
Concerning the above formulation (3)-(6), note that the “technology” S j(K) in (4) and
j

the “endowments” K0 in (6) are allowed to differ arbitrarily between the base economy (j=1)
and the comparison economy (j=2), while “preferences” are identical, as indicated by the shared
objective function (3).
In what follows, it is assumed, purely for ease of exposition, that the two optimal solutions
of (3)-(6) corresponding to j'1 and j'2 not only exist, but are unique. Let {C(j(t), I(j(t), K(j(t)}
represent the optimal trajectory for economy j. As is well known from duality theory, the
solutions of (3)-(6) for both economies will generate corresponding dynamic competitive prices,
denoted here by the m-vector time series {p(j(t)} for consumption-goods (money) prices, and by
the n-vector time series {q(j(t)} for investment-goods (money) prices. Then (money) national
income or product for economy j at time t is
Y (j(t) / p(j(t)@C(j(t) % q(j(t)@I(j(t) .

(7)

Let {8j(t)} represent the non-observable marginal utility of income along an optimal
trajectory in economy j (=1,2) at time t. The investment-goods price n-vector, expressed in real
current-value utility terms for economy j (=1,2) at time t is then
8j(t)q(j(t) ,

(8)

while the corresponding consumption-goods price m-vector, expressed in real current-value utility
terms for economy j (=1,2) at time t is
8j(t)p(j(t) .

(9)

In the model, {8j(t)} may be chosen arbitrarily because it represents an extra degree of

24.02.99

A Contribution to the Theory of Welfare Comparisons

Page 9

freedom that merely parameterizes the marginal utility of money income, which can be given a life
of its own, related behind the scenes of the real economy to the money supply and other
background, purely-monetary, factors that determine the price level. What matters for the
allocation of resources in the real economy -- through the classical-dichotomy veil of
arbitrary {8j(t)} , so to speak -- is real prices (8), (9), which are denominated in terms of the
contemporaneous value of utility serving as numeraire.
Next, define the maximized current-value Hamiltonian expression
j

Ĥ (K;q,8)

/

maximum {U(C) % 8q@I} .
(C,I)gS j(K)

(10)

j

Note in (10) that the dependence of Ĥ upon j comes solely through the constraint-set
term S j(K) .
As is well known, the duality conditions corresponding to (3)-(6) can be given an
interpretation as if describing a decentralized perfectly-competitive economy in dynamic
equilibrium with a single representative agent, whose preference ordering is described by (1). We
will emphasize this decentralized market interpretation throughout the paper, concentrating
especially on how the observable short-run market demand function of the representative
consumer-agent can be used to reveal certain relevant aspects of the agent’s underlying
preferences.
The first type of optimality condition requires that the Hamiltonian expression (10) should
actually attain its maximum everywhere along an optimal trajectory. In the representative-agent
interpretation, maximizing the Hamiltonian is equivalent to a combination of the condition
describing the representative consumer’s decentralized static-equilibrium behavior:
U(C(j(t)) % 8j(t)q(j(t)@I(j(t) '

maximum {U(C) % 8j(t)Z} ,
p(j(t)@C%Z'Y (j(t)

(11)

along with the condition describing the representative producer’s decentralized static-equilibrium
behavior:

24.02.99

A Contribution to the Theory of Welfare Comparisons

p(j(t)@C(j(t) % q(j(t)@I(j(t) '

maximum
j

Page 10

{p(j(t)@C % q(j(t)@I} .

(j

(C,I)gS (K (t))

(12)

A second set of optimality conditions can be translated as describing a perfect
capital/stock market in dynamic competitive equilibrium:
d j (j
MĤ
[8 (t)q (t)] & D8j(t)q(j(t) ' &
/
,
dt
MK 000 (j(t)
j

(13)

where the notation ‘ *(j(t) ’ means evaluation along the optimal trajectory of economy j at time t.
Finally, the third optimality condition is the transversality requirement
lim e &Dt 8j(t) q(j(t)@K(j(t)

'

0 .

t64

(14)

If conditions (13) or (14) did not hold, then pure positive profits could be made by
intertemporal arbitrage operations, which would induce a change in (13), (14) -- meaning these
equations could not have been describing a dynamic competitive equilibrium in the first place.
Because of the underlying convexity of problem (3)-(6), the duality conditions (11)-(14)
are both necessary and sufficient for an optimal solution.5

Current Directly-Observable Market Information
From this point on, the paper deals with market-behavior observations made only at the
present time t'0 . More precisely, we take on faith that the dynamic optimality-equilibrium
conditions describing the coupled system (3)-(6), (10)-(14) will hold over all future time, but,
aside from this general knowledge, all that we are permitted to know or infer at the present time

5

This aspect, along with the representative-agent dynamic-competitive-equilibrium
interpretation of duality, is discussed in several advanced theory textbooks. For an exposition
whose notation is very close to this paper, see Weitzman [1970] and/or Weitzman [1973].

24.02.99

A Contribution to the Theory of Welfare Comparisons

Page 11

t'0 must be based solely on what is, at least in principle, the current directly-observable market
behavior of the representative consumer. In keeping with this restriction on knowable
information, the symbol X (j(0) -- for all pertinent X -- is henceforth in the paper replaced
simply by the symbol X j . Thus, the representative consumer in economy j (=1,2) currently (at
the present time t'0 ) faces prices p j and income Y j , where, from (7),
Y j ' p j@C j % q j@I j .

(15)

Note that consumption C j in (15) is conceptualized entirely as a flow concept, as is
investment I j and income Y j . Strict adherence here to this economic, service-flow view of
consumption will imply some surprisingly useful consequences.
The presently-observable short-run market demand function in economy j is the
representative consumer-agent’s response to the following counterfactual question. “All other
things being equal, how much would you choose to buy and consume now if the short-run market
prices of consumption were p?” The answer is given by envisioning the consumer’s short-run
demand behavior as a reaction-function of p, where p is viewed in this context as a counterfactual
parametrically-given version of the variable pj((t) appearing in the constraint set of equation (11)
for t'0 .
To the representative consumer-agent in situation j (=1,2), then, the act of “maximizing
the Hamiltonian” translates behaviorally from (11) into having this consumer solve a decentralized
problem of the reduced form:
Maximize
U(C) % 8j Z ,

(16)

p@C % Z ' Y j ,

(17)

subject to the budget constraint

where p stands for the counterfactual parametrically-fixed short-run consumption prices, Y j
represents the given as-if-fixed national-income budget, 8j is the (not observable to an outsider)

24.02.99

A Contribution to the Theory of Welfare Comparisons

Page 12

given as-if-fixed marginal utility of income, and Z symbolizes aggregate investment, to be chosen
along with C by the representative consumer in j.
A critical, if simple, observation from (16), (17) is that the Hamiltonian itself is in the
form of a quasilinear utility function -- which means it is an objective function having several
very important properties and implications.
Virtually all economists agree that consumption should be conceptualized as a flow of
services. At least in principle, the appropriate market prices of consumer durables, like owner
occupied houses or cars, should be interpreted as imputations -- namely, the imputed rental
prices, which would be observed in a competitive market economy if the flow of consumption
services were fixed at a corresponding level.6 Pushing this service-flow view of consumption to
its logical limit, there is a simple but important implication, which has largely gone unnoticed in
the literature. Under the standard economic assumptions, as we have shown, the short-run
consumer objective function is quasilinear. If consumption is conceptualized strictly as a flow,
then the corresponding short-run consumer demand function is independent of income.
Intuitively, this kind of envelope-type result occurs because the consumer can fully offset, via
changes in savings behavior, any and all possible income effects of short-run price changes on
instantaneous consumption flows -- merely by shifting investment income across time.
We write the directly-observable short-run consumer-demand function in economy j
(=1,2) as D j(p) . The vector function D j(p) is the implicit solution of the above problem (16),
(17), which therefore satisfies, for all parametrically-given hypothetical values of p$0 , the
standard duality conditions
U )(D j(p)) # 8jp ,

(18)

[8jp&U )(D j(p))]@D j(p) ' 0 .

(19)

and

Because there are no income effects as p is varied in the short run, 8j is seen by the representative
6

See, e.g., Boskin et al [1998] for a good discussion aimed at practical applications.

24.02.99

A Contribution to the Theory of Welfare Comparisons

Page 13

consumer as if being fixed in (18), (19), even though it is not directly observable to an outsider.
Next, for all consumption flows C$0 , define the directly-observable short-run inversedemand function in economy j (=1,2), denoted P j(C) , to be the solution of the equation:
P j(C) / min {p* D j(p)'C} .

(20)

The corresponding short-run consumer-expenditure function in economy j (=1,2) is
E j(C) / P j(C)@C .

(21)

The expenditure formula (21) describes the expense to consumers in economy j of
purchasing the fixed market basket of consumption goods C. In other words, expression (21) is
just exactly the familiar revenue function from elementary economics, which a hypothetical
monopolist would face in economy j.
We now define what might be called an ideal “CPI-type” (consumer-price-index-type)
price deflator, or, equivalently here, an ideal “PPP-type” (purchasing-power-parity-type) price
deflator -- as a function of the parametrically-fixed market basket of consumption goods C.
Definition. An ideal CPI/PPP-type price deflator for converting from the current prices of
comparison economy 2 into the current prices of base economy 1, evaluated at the fixedbenchmark market basket of consumption goods C, is defined as the Laspeyres-type ratio:
2(C) /

E 1(C)
E 2(C)

.

(22)

That there may be some kind of an imputation issue involved in calculating (22) should
come as no more of a surprise here than the idea that the appropriate “price” of owner-occupied
housing needs to be imputed as what would be the observed rental price in the economy at some
given level of housing consumption-flow services. The appropriate prices to use in (21) and (22)
are the imputed, counterfactual, other-things-being equal prices that would actually be observed
in the marketplace of each economy (j =1 and j=2), if the consumption-flow basket being
purchased were actually observed to be the benchmark C. In practice, this is typically not a

24.02.99

A Contribution to the Theory of Welfare Comparisons

Page 14

difficult imputation to make for economies that are structurally very similar, like the U.S. and
Canada, or like the U.S. from one year to the next, because the index number comparison then
typically reduces to using the existing market prices for a given well-specified representative
market basket of consumer goods. Even so, in any actual real-world comparison-pricing exercise,
surprisingly many imputations are required to deal with “comparison-resistant” items of the same
quantity and quality as the particular consumption market basket chosen to be “representative” in
the comparisons.7 And there is absolutely no way of escaping the central necessity to make some
genuine imputations in CPI/PPP-type price deflators if the two comparison economies differ
substantially in structure -- so that, for example, one economy may have commodities in its
marketplace that are not purchased at all in the marketplace of the other economy. The following
concept may help to shed some analytic light on this important set of issues.
Definition: An ideal CPI/PPP-type price deflator is called “benchmark-invariant” if 2(C)
defined by (22) is independent of the benchmark market basket of consumption goods C, for all
current consumption flows C$0 .
The following result is of theoretical importance for the paper, but also, I believe, has
some real-world implications for how best to actually perform the imputations that are required to
construct CPI/PPP-type price deflators in practice.
Lemma: When consumption is measured as a strict flow of services, so that (18) and (19)
describe the short-run demand function, then the ideal CPI/PPP-type price deflator (22) is
benchmark-invariant.
Proof: see Appendix.
As the lemma permits it, we will henceforth replace the symbol 2(C) by the symbol 2 ,
which stands here for ‘the’ ideal CPI/PPP-type price deflator.

Dynamic Welfare Comparisons
We come now to the basic result of the paper. With complete accounting, all relevant
information for making dynamic welfare comparisons is contained in market behavior that is
7

For a practical overview with further references, see Summers and Heston [1991].

24.02.99

A Contribution to the Theory of Welfare Comparisons

Page 15

currently observable within the domain of the relevant current static comparison. Equation (23)
shows that the theoretically-correct but non-observable dynamic welfare index on the left-hand
side of the equality sign is exactly the familiar, even famous, currently-observable static welfare
expression on the right-hand side.
Theorem: Under the assumptions of the paper,
4

4

D
[ U(C(2(t))e &Dtdt & U(C(1(t))e &Dtdt] ' 2Y 2 & Y 1 %
1 m
m
8 0
0

p1

m

2p

D1(p)@dp .

(23)

2

Proof: see Appendix.
Expression (23) can be conceptualized as “compressing” or “reducing” the wealth-like
“true” dynamic welfare ordering on the left-hand side of the equation into the isomorphic incomelike static welfare ordering on the right-hand side. A way to think about the theoretical
equivalence of these two welfare orderings is to envision economic situations j=1 and j=2 as
varying over all possible technologies and initial endowments. Then situation j=2 will be “better”
than situation j=1 by welfare criterion (1) if and only if the right-hand side of equation (23) is
positive. It follows that, for purposes of comparison, the dynamic welfare ordering induced by
(1) is equivalent to the static welfare ordering induced by the expression
p1

2Y 2 & Y 1 %

m

D1(p)@dp .

(24)

2p2

The basic result (23) can thus be interpreted as proving that expressions (1) and (24) are
here just different representations of the same underlying dynamic welfare ordering. The
currently-observable static expression (24) might even be called a sufficient statistic for
comparisons based upon the standard but not-currently-observable dynamic welfare criterion (1) - because expression (24) exhausts all of the welfare-comparison information contained in (1).
The unobservable “normalization constant”

24.02.99

A Contribution to the Theory of Welfare Comparisons

D
81

Page 16

,

(25)

which appears on the left-hand side of (23), involves a compounding of two “conversion
coefficients.” The coefficient 1/81 represents an arbitrary and inessential scaling constant for
converting from units of utility into units of current income in the base economy. The pure-timepreference coefficient D converts the utility wealth expression within the square brackets of (23)
into an annuitized flow of stationary-equivalent or sustainable-equivalent utility. Net national
income itself is here interpretable as measuring sustainable-equivalent money-metricized utility.8
Note the very simple form of the isomorphism parable being told by (23). The difference
in money-metricized sustainable-equivalent utility between any two comparison economies comes
exactly in the form of an answer to the following standard question of classical static welfare
analysis. “How much extra money must a consumer facing observable prices
income

Y

1

1

with observable

(and corresponding non-observable-but-constant marginal utility of income 81 ) be paid

to be equally as well off as when facing observable prices

p

2

with observable income Y 2 (and

corresponding non-observable-but-constant marginal utility of income 82 )?” The answer to this
standard question in economic statics is given by the famous expression (24), where the term
p1

m

2p

D1(p)@dp

(26)

2

stands for the appropriate change in old-fashioned (Marshall-Dupuit) consumer surplus. It is
because the Hamiltonian itself is in the form of a quasilinear utility function that the answer to the
static question above (as well as to the larger dynamic-welfare question answered by (23)) is such
a simple direct function of observable short-run market demands, entirely free of messy and
extraneous income-effect corrections.

8

This interpretation, which is further elaborated in Weitzman [1999], can be proved here
directly from (23).

24.02.99

A Contribution to the Theory of Welfare Comparisons

Page 17

It follows that there no need to apologize at all for using consumer surplus routinely in
welfare comparisons -- whenever consumption is conceptualized as being a short-run flow of
services embedded within a larger dynamic-optimization problem of the generic form (3)-(6),
which is, at least implicitly, the background setting for most economic applications. Actually, the
burden of proof in this context might well appear to rest upon any economist trying here to use
one of the well-known “variation” measures instead of consumer surplus.9 Such a person might
be asked to begin by explaining how the artificial constructs of “compensating variation” or
“equivalent variation” can possibly represent a useful extension of the more intuitive and more
practical concept of consumer surplus -- in a generic context where both variation measures are
operationally indistinguishable from a change in consumer surplus in the first place.
As is well known, with a quasilinear utility function the utility difference between any two
static economic situations differing in income and prices can be measured by the famous static
welfare formula of type (24) -- consisting of the change in real income plus consumer surplus.10
An exact statement in the notation of this paper is:
U(C2) & U(C1)
' 2Y 2 & Y 1 %
1
8

p1

m

2p

D1(p)@dp .

(27)

2

It is the welfare relation (27) that is cited behind the scenes to justify using (24) as a
veritable workhorse of applied partial-equilibrium analysis. Equation (23) represents a true
generalization of (27) from a static to a dynamic context. The static equation (27) is just a very
special case of the far more general equation (23), where the relevant utility function U(C,x)
selected to appear on the left-hand side of (23) is of the familiar Hamiltonian quasilinear form
U(C,x) / U(C) % x ,

9

(28)

I realize that such statements may sound heretical, but at the same time believe it is
important to say plainly that the standard optimal-growth framework opens the door to
rehabilitating old-fashioned consumer surplus as a useful apparatus of some general applicability.
10

See, e.g., Varian [1992], Section 10.4.

24.02.99

A Contribution to the Theory of Welfare Comparisons

Page 18

while the (m+1)-dimensional attainable-possibilities set relevant for this special case is simply
S j(K) / {(C,x): p j@C %

x
# Y j} .
j
8

(29)

As (27) is a special static case of (23), and as (27) has proved itself to be of great practical
importance in many fields of applied economic analysis, it might be hoped that its dynamic
generalization (23) may also find useful applications. The basic result (23) shows that (1) and
(24) are operationally-equivalent representation forms of the same underlying dynamic preference
ordering. An economist is therefore free to choose whichever representation is more convenient
to work with. For most economic applications, the income-like form (24) is vastly simpler, more
intuitive, more observable, and more operational than the equivalent wealth-like form (1).
Thus, a relatively-straightforward, simple-minded shorthand application of static
consumer-welfare theory -- which involves only comparing presently-observable prices and
quantities along the relevant part of the short-run consumer-demand function -- gives the “correct
answers” to some seemingly very complicated questions, the longhand versions of which must
intrinsically involve comparing wealth-like “true indicators” of dynamic welfare. Put slightly
differently, every time we perform a familiar, static, consumer-surplus-like economic analysis of
the welfare difference between two situations, we are implicitly answering a dynamic question
posed in terms of an underlying dynamic welfare comparison.

Conclusion
This paper has derived a kind of “dynamic welfare-comparison principle,” which lets us
compare dynamic welfare situations rigorously, yet relies only on currently observable prices and
quantities evaluated along the current short-run consumer-demand function within the current
consumption-comparison domain. The underlying isomorphism assures us that it is ‘OK’ to
translate dynamic welfare comparisons into a simple as-if-static story told in terms of
conventional, old-fashioned consumer-welfare theory. The simple-minded story gives the correct
answers to complicated questions that intrinsically involve comparing wealth-like dynamic welfare

24.02.99

A Contribution to the Theory of Welfare Comparisons

Page 19

measures across any two economic situations differing arbitrarily in technologies or endowments.
It is anticipated that there may be useful applications of a welfare-comparison principle
having this kind of simplicity and generality.

Appendix
Proof of Lemma:
From (18), (19) and the definition (20), it follows that the equation
U )(C) ' 8j P j(C)

(30)

holds for j=1, j=2, all C$0 .
An immediate consequence of comparing (30) with the definitions (21), (22) is that
2(C) ' 2 /

82
81

(31)

€

for all C$0 .

Equation (31) represents a stronger-than-required form of the conclusion to be proved in
the lemma, but a form which will nevertheless be needed in the following proof of the theorem.
Proof of Theorem:
A basic result from Weitzman [1970; page 15, equation (16)], transposed to the notation
of this paper, is
4

D

m

U(C(j(t)) e &Dt dt ' U(C j) % 8jq j@I j .

(32)

0

Taking the difference of (32) between comparison and base economies gives
4

D [ U(C (t))e
m
(2

0

4

&Dt

dt &

U(C(1(t))e &Dtdt] ' U(C2) % 82q2@I2 & U(C1) & 81q1@I1 . (33)
m
0

24.02.99

A Contribution to the Theory of Welfare Comparisons

Page 20

Now just using basic mathematical considerations arising from smooth differentiability of
the function U(C) , we have
C2

m

U )(C)@dC ' U(C2) & U(C1) ,

(34)

1

C

where the left-hand-side integral of (34) is path-independent because the second mixed partial
derivatives of U(C) are equal by the assumption of continuous second derivatives.11
Now (30) implies directly that
C2

m

C2

U )(C)@dC ' 81

C1

m

P1(C)@dC .

(35)

C1

Because {P1(C)} and {D1(C)} from (18), (19), (20) are inverse functions to each other,
integration by parts along any continuous connecting path yields the equation
C2

m

P1(C2)

P1(C)@dC ' P1(C2)@C2 & P1(C1)@C1 &

1

m

1

C

D1(p)@dp .

(36)

1

P (C )

Picking C'C2 in (30) for j=1 and for j=2, and then comparing the resulting expression
with (31) implies
P1(C2) ' 2 P2(C2) .

(37)

Now, by the definition (20),

11

Actually, because the function U(C) is concave, the assumption of differentiability is not
even required here, since the singular points where the second derivatives do not exist or are not
continuous have measure zero in the relevant domain. However, the slight gain in generality of
recasting the paper without any differentiability assumptions is not worth the messy and
excessively mathematical notation that is thereby required. But it could be done!

24.02.99

A Contribution to the Theory of Welfare Comparisons

Page 21

P j(C j) ' p j .

(38)

Making use of (37) and (38), expression (36) can be transformed into the equivalent form
2p2

C2

m

P (C)@dC ' 2p @C & p @C &
1

2

2

1

1

1

C

m
p

D1(p)@dp .

(39)

1

Next, substitute (39) into (35) into (34) to yield the equation
2p2

U(C2) & U(C1) ' 81 [2p2@C2 & p1@C1 &

m
p

D1(p)@dp] .

(40)

1

Finally, substitute (40) into the right-hand side of equation (33) and use (31) to obtain the
expression
4

D[ U(C (t))e
m
(2

0

2p2

4

&Dt

dt &

U(C (t))e
m
(1

dt] ' 8 [2p @C %2q @I &p @C &q @I &

&Dt

1

2

2

2 2

1

1

1 1

m

D1(p)@dp]. (41)

p1

0

Using (15) to abbreviate (41) and rearranging terms, we have, at last, equation (23), which
is the result desired to be proved.

€

24.02.99

A Contribution to the Theory of Welfare Comparisons

Page 22

References
Aronsson, T., P-O Johansson and K-G Löfgren (1997): Welfare Measurement, Sustainability and
Green National Accounting. (Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar).
Boskin, M.J., E.R. Dulberger, R.J. Gordon, Z. Griliches, and D.W. Jorgenson, “Consumer Prices,
the Consumer Price Index, and the Cost of Living.” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol.
12, no. 1 (Winter 1998), 3-36.
Koopmans, T.C. (1960): “Stationary Ordinal Utility and Impatience,” Econometrica 28, 287-309.
Mäler, K.-G. (1991): “National accounts and environmental resources”. Environmental and
Resource Economics, 1, 1-15.
Nordhaus, W.D.: “How should we measure sustainable income?” Mimeo dated October, 1995.
Summers, R., and A. Heston (1991): “The Penn World Table (Mark 5): An Expanded Set of
International Comparisons, 1950-1988". Quarterly Journal of Economics, CVI (2) (May 1991),
327-368.
Varian, H. R. (1992). Microeconomic Analysis, 3rd edition. (New York: W. W. Norton).
Weitzman, M. L. (1970) “Aggregation and Disaggregation in the Pure Theory of Capital and
Growth: A New Parable.” Yale University, New Haven CT 06520: Cowles Foundation
Discussion Paper No. 292 (April 16, 1970). [Available upon request from the Cowles Foundation
or the author.]
Weitzman, M. L. (1973): “Duality Theory for Infinite Horizon Convex Models.” Management
Science, XIX (March 1973), 783-789.
Weitzman, M.L. (1997): “Sustainability and technical progress.” Scandinavian Journal of
Economics, 99(1), 1-13.
Weitzman, M.L., and K-G Löfgren (1997): “On the welfare significance of green accounting as
taught by parable.” Journal of environmental economics and management, 32, 139-153.
Weitzman, M.L. (1999): “The Linearized Hamiltonian as Comprehensive NDP.” Forthcoming in
Environment and Development Economics.

