                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                ALTERNATIVE AND PART-TIME
                                EMPLOYMENT ARRANGEMENTS
                                 AS A RESPONSE TO JOB LOSS


                                            Henry S. Farber


                                          Working Paper 7002
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w7OO2


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 1999




The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not reflect those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

©   1999 by Henry S. Farber. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including notice, is given to the source.
                                                                          ©
Alternative and Part-Time Employment
Arrangements as a Response to Job Loss
Henry S. Farber
NBER Working Paper No. 7002
March 1999
JEL No. J30

                                            ABSTRACT

       I examine the extent to which workers who lose jobs find work in alternative employment

arrangements including temporary work and independent contracting and find part-time work, both
voluntary and involuntary. The analysis is based on data from the Displaced Worker Supplements
(DWS) and the February 1994 and 1996 Current Population Surveys (CPS) which I match to the
Contingent and Alternative Employment Arrangements Supplements (CAEAS) to the February CPSs
in the subsequent years (1995 and 1997 respectively). I find that job losers are significantly more
likely than non-losers to be in temporary jobs (including on-call work and contract work). I also find
evidence that the likelihood of temporary employment falls with time since job loss. With regard
to part-time employment, I find that involuntary part-time employment is an important part of the
employment experience subsequent to job loss and that the likelihood of involuntary part-time
employment falls with time since job loss, particularly for full-time job losers. Thus, it appears that
temporary and involuntary part-time jobs are part of a transitional process subsequent to job loss
leading to regular full-time employment.


Henry S. Farber
Industrial Relations Section
Firestone Library
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
farber@princeton.edu
                 Alternative and Part-Time Employment Arrangements
                               as a Response to Job Loss
                                               Henry S. Farber




1. Introduction
    The purpose of this study is to examine the extent to which workers who lose jobs find
work in alternative employment arrangements, including temporary work and independent
contracting and in voluntary or involuntary part-time jobs rather than as conventional full-
time employees. My analysis is based on data from the Displaced Worker Supplements
(DWS) to the February 1994 and 1996 Current Population Surveys (CPS) which I match
to the Contingent and Alternative Employment Arrangements Supplements (CAEAS) to
the February CPSs in the subsequent years (1995 and 1997 respectively). These data
allow me to identify job losers in the DWS, and they contain detailed information on their
post-displacement employment arrangements from the CAEAS.
    Interest in this subject is motivated by several factors. First, while employment in
the United States has grown steadily for the last twenty years, substantial concern exists
about the quality of the stock of jobs.' Areas of concern include increased inequality
in wages, a decline in real wages at the lower end of the distribution, and reductions in
important fringe benefits such as employer-provided health insurance.2 Second, concern
has developed in the last decade regarding high rates of job loss and reduced job security.3

     Support for this research was provided by the Office of the Assistant Secretary of Labor for Policy,
United States Department of Labor under Purchase Order No. B9462164 and by the Industrial Relations
Section at Princeton University. Karen Conneely and Harry Krashinsky provided able research assistance.
Susan Houseman and David Neumark and two anonymous referees provided useful comments on earlier
drafts.
  1 Civilian employment was 89.9 million in January 1977 and rose to 128.6 million in January 1997, for
an average annual increase of almost 2 million jobs per year. These statistics are taken from U.S. Bureau of
Labor Statistics Series ID LFS11000000. This is the Seasonally adjusted civilian employment level derived
from the Current Population Survey for workers aged 16 and older.

 2 See Farber (1997c) for a brief review of and references to the literature on job quality and for an analysis
of the quality of new jobs. Farber and Levy (1998) present an analysis of the decline in employer-provided
health insurance that focuses on workers in new jobs and on part-time workers.

    The most recently available data show elevated rates of job loss in the 1993-1995 period (Farber,

                                                      1
Finally, there has been concern about an increase in the fraction of the work-force in part-
time and temporary jobs.4 The evidence also suggests that these jobs do not offer pay,
fringe benefits, or opportunity for advancement comparable to those on regular jobs.5
   The interaction between job loss and alternative work arrangements has not been ex-
amined in previous work. In my earlier work (Farber, 1997a) I found that workers who
lose jobs are more likely to be reemployed in part-time jobs and, even when reemployed
in a full-time job, they earn significantly less than they did prior to their job loss. Part of
these costs associated with job loss may be related to difficulty finding conventional em-
ployment arrangements. The central goal of this study is to provide statistical evidence on
the extent to which alternative employment arrangements are, in fact, a common response
to job loss. I find that temporary employment and involuntary part-time employment are
used disprortionately by job losers, and I also investigate in some detail whether or not
these alternative employment arrangements are a transitional experience for job losers.


2. The February 1995 and February 1997 CAEAS Data

The February 1995 and 1997 Contingent and Alternative Employment Arrangements sup-
plements to the CPS contain information on alternative employment arrangements held
at the survey date. Workers in alternative employment arrangements include independent
contractors, consultants, free-lance workers, other self-employed workers, temporary work-
ers, on-call workers, and contract workers. In order to focus the analysis, I combine these
into three categories. The first, which I call independent contractors, consists of indepen-
dent contractors, consultants, and free-lance workers. The second is composed of other

1997a) and a reduction between 1993 and 1996 in the fraction of the workforce who have been in their
jobs for long periods of time (Farber, 1997b). For further analyses of job loss and its consequences see
Farber (1993), Gardner (1995), Kletzer (1989), Neal (1995), Parent (1995) Podgursky and Swaim (1987),
and Topel (1990)

    See, for example, Abraham (1990), Abraham and Taylor (1996), Belous (1989), Blank (1990b), Golden
and Applebaum (1992), Houseman (1997), and Howe (1986) for discussions of the incidence of and moti-
vations for alternative employment arrangements.

    See, for example, Blank (1989, 1990a), Ferber and Waldfogel (1996), Montgomery and Cosgrove (1993),
and Tilly (1991).


                                                  2
self-employed workers (other-SE). The third, which I call temporary workers, consists of
temporary, on-call, and contract workers.6
    In order to place workers in these categories, I use data from the basic CPS question-
naire as well as from the CAEAS. Specifically, a worker is classified as an independent
contractor if he/she is employed at the survey date, is classified as self-employed in the
basic CPS, and responds affirmatively in the CAEAS that he/she is ".               .   . self-employed as
an independent contractor, independent consultant, free-lance worker, or something else."
A worker is classified as other-SE if he/she is employed at the survey date, is classified
as self-employed in the basic CPS, and is not classified as an independent contractor as
defined here.7 A worker is classified as a temporary worker if he/she is employed at the
survey date, is not classified as either type of self-employed worker, and responds affirma-
tively that he/she is in a temporary job, works for a temporary work agency, is an on-call
worker, is a day laborer, or is a contract employee. All other workers (including part-time)
are classified as "regular" workers.

The Incidence of Alternative Employment Arrangements

    The first four columns of table 1 contain weighted breakdowns of employment arrange-
ments for 102,318 individuals in the February 1995 and 1997 CAEASs aged 20-66 who are
employed at the survey date.8 The first row of the table contains the breakdown for the

  6 Another potential way to identify temporary workers is to classify those workers who report their
industry of employment as personnel supply services (Census Industry Code 731). However, most workers
who actually work for personnel supply firms apparently report themselves as employed in the industry
to which they are assigned. Evidence for this is that the Current Employment Survey data, which are
based on information collected from employers, shows that 2.2 percent of nonfarm employment was in the
personnel supply services industry (SIC 736) in 1997 (based on BLS series EEU00000001 and EEU8073601).
In contrast, my tabulations the February 1997 CPS shows that 0.76 percent of employment was in the
personnel supply services industry (CIC 731). Additionally, the personnel supply services industry includes
an unknown number of workers who are not temporary workers. Thus, use of this industry classification to
identify temporary workers in the CPS is not likely to be very useful here. See Segal and Sullivan (1997)
for an analysis that does use this method to identify temporary workers. See also Polivka (1996).

    Many of these workers are likely to be owners of small businesses.

  8 This age range was selected to match individuals who were 20-64 in the February 1994 DWS. These
percentages and other statistics presented in this study are weighted by the CPS final sampling weights.
The CAEAS is distributed with special supplement weights to account for non-response to the supplement.
These are based on differential response rates by demographic group, and they are highly correlated with
the final sampling weights (correlation = 0.9988). Thus, while my use of the final sampling weights would
understate overall population counts relative to those derived by using the special supplement weights,

                                                    3
entire sample, and it shows 82.5 percent in "regular" employment relationships, 5.9 percent
independent contractors, 5.4 percent other-SE, and 6.2 percent temporary workers.
    The last three columns of table table 1 contain weighted breakdowns of full/part-
time status for the same sample. The full/part-time distinction is made using data from
the basic CPS information on hours of work. Part-time workers are those whose total
hours on all jobs are less than 35 hours per week.9 Those part-time workers who report
a preference for working full-time and who report being part-time for economic reasons
(slack work, can't find a full-time job, seasonal work) are classified as involuntary part-time.
The remainder are classified as voluntary part-time. The first row of the table contains
the breakdown for the entire sample, and shows 84.7 percent in full-time employment
relationships, 10.8 percent voluntarily part-time, and 4.5 percent involuntarily part-time.
    The remainder of table 1 contains breakdowns of employed workers by type of employ-
ment and full/part-time status separately by sex, education level, and age.'° A significantly
larger fraction of females than males (85.1 percent vs. 80.2 percent) are in regular em-
ployment relationships. This is due to the fact that females are significantly less likely
than males (8.5 percent vs. 13.8 percent) to be self-employed (either type). There is
only a small difference by sex in the rate of temporary employment. Despite being more
likely to be in regular employment arrangements, females are substantially more likely
than males to be employed part-time. The overall differential of 15.3 percentage points is
accounted for largely by a 13.5 percentage point differential in the rate of voluntary part-
time employment which is supplemented by a 1.9 percentage point differential in the rate
of involuntary part-time employment. These differences likely reflect systematic differences
in labor supply between men and women.
both weights will yield similar results with regard to computation of means and proportions.

    The algorithm for assigning part-time status to workers has several steps: 1) a worker is considered
part time if usual total hours are less than 35 per week; 2) where usual total hours are missing then a worker
is considered full time if usual hours on the main job are at least 35 per week; 3) where part-time status
remains unassigned actual total hours during the reference week are used; and, finally, 4) an indicator in
the basic CPS for "usually full time" is used to resolve the remaining cases.
10 While   not presented here, I also carried out multivariate probit analyses of the probability of being
in employment relationships of each type. These probit models controlled for race as well as for sex, and
education, and age, and they show the same relationships of the likelihood of alternative arrangements as
the simple breakdowns in table 1.


                                                     4
   There is not a strictly monotonic relationship between education category and the in-
cidence of regular employment relationships, but the most obvious pattern is that workers
with at least 16 years of education have lower rates of regular employment (about 2 to 4
percentage points lower) than do workers with less education. This is accounted for by
higher rates of self-employment (both types) among workers in the highest education cate-
gory. With respect to part-time employment, the most striking difference is that workers in
the highest education category have substantially higher full-time employment rates than
do workers with less education. Workers with 12 years of education have an intermediate
rate of full-time employment. The fact that the involuntary part-time rate is monotoni-
cally declining with education accounts for these findings (along with the unusually high
voluntary part-time rate for workers with 13-15 years of education).
    The fraction of workers in regular employment relationships declines monotonically
with age. This results from an increase with age in the proportion of workers who are
self-employed (both types) and a decrease with age in the fraction of workers who are in
temporary jobs. The temporary job rate is particularly high for workers in the youngest
age category. Full-time employment rates are lowest for workers in the youngest and oldest
age categories, and this is primarily due to high voluntary part-time rates among workers
in these two age categories. For the youngest workers, this may reflect part-time work
while in enrolled in school. For the oldest workers this may reflect decreased labor supply
of workers approaching retirement.
    Note that the type of employment arrangements and full/part-time status are not inde-
pendent. Table 2 contains a cross-tabulation of employment arrangements with part-time
status for the 102,318 workers in the combined February 1995 - February 1997 sample
used in table 1.11 Regular workers are substantially more likely to be full time and less
likely to be in either part-time category than are workers in the other employment ar-
rangements. On the other extreme, temporary workers are least likely to be full time and
most likely to be in either part-time category. Fully 24.4 percent of temporary workers are
voluntarily part-time and 11.9 percent of temporary workers are involuntarily part-time.
    A Pearson chi-squared text of independence in table 2 yields a test statistic of 3586.5 distributed as
x2(6) and clearly rejects independence (p-value<O.000001).


                                                   5
This compares with 9.2 percent of regular workers in voluntary part-time jobs and 3.4
percent of regular workers in involuntary part-time jobs. The self-employed categories are
intermediate in their full/part-time status.


3. Matching the February DWS and February CAEAS Data

The first step in matching the February 1994 and 1996 DWSs with the February 1995
and 1997 CAEASs respectively is to define the pooi of individuals eligible to be matched
from the DWSs. In order to be eligible to be in the CPS in both the DWS and CAEAS
in the subsequent year, a household must be in one of its first four months in the sample
in the DWS. Such a household is then eligible to be in the sample in the CAEAS in
the subsequent year (in one of its four months back in the sample after an eight-month
hiatus). But, because addresses rather than specific households or individuals are sampled
and surveyed, only individuals who have not moved in the intervening year are eligible
to be matched. Information contained in the CPS since 1994 is meant to allow an exact
match of individuals across CPSs, but, in order to reduce the likelihood of coding errors
leading to inappropriate matches, I also match on a set of demographic characteristics
(age, sex, and race).
   I restrict my analysis to individuals aged 20-64 in the Februarys with the DWSs (1994
and 1996). There are 39,841 individuals in this age group in rotation groups 1-4 in February
1994 and there are 34,689 individuals in this age group in rotation groups 1-4 in February
1996. Thus, 74,530 individuals are eligible to be matched with individuals in the CAEAS
in the subsequent year (February 1995 or February 1997). Of these, I am able to match
50,620 for a match rate of 67.9 percent. A problem is that the match rate depends centrally
on whether or not individuals have changed residence between the survey dates. Not
surprisingly, workers who lose jobs (defined precisely later in this section) are more likely
to change residence. The match rate among job losers is 65.4 percent compared with
a 69.1 percent match rate among non-losers. The lower match rate among job losers is
particularly unfortunate given the focus of this study, but there is no obvious solution to
this problem.

                                               6
   It might be expected that the distribution of type of employment in the CAEAS in
the subsequent year would be related to the probability of matching, with those in al-
ternative employment relationships less likely to be matched. It turns out that there are
generally small differences in the distributions of employment arrangements by whether
the observation was matched. Specifically, recall that 82.5 percent of the overall sample
from the CAEAS (including all 8 rotation groups) were employed in regular jobs. Among
those matched, 82.9 percent were employed in regular jobs. The comparisons for the other
categories are fairly close: independent contractors (5.9 percent overall vs. 5.6 percent
matched), other self-employed (5.4 percent overall vs. 6.8 percent matched), and tempo-
rary (6.2 percent overall vs. 4.7 percent matched). It appears that other self-employed are
more likely to be matched, and this may reflect the fact that, based on the algorithm that
defines this category, independent business owners are included in this category and these
businesses are not likely be geographically mobile. On the other hand, temporary workers
are less likely to be matched. While there is nothing that can be done about this problem,
it is important to note these differences in match rates.

Job Loss as Defined by the Displaced Worker Survey

   The February 1994 and 1996 DWSs ask workers if they were displaced from a job at
any time in the preceding three-year period (1991-93 and 1994-1996 respectively). Other
events including quits and being fired for cause are not considered displacement. Thus,
the supplement is designed to focus on the loss of specific jobs that result from business
decisions of firms unrelated to the performance of particular workers.
   The central use of the DWS for the purposes of this study is to identify individuals
who have lost a job in the relevant intervals. While job loss as measured by the DWS
almost certainly does not represent all job loss about which we ought to be concerned, it
does represent the best available source of data on job loss.12 Overall, 6,637 individuals
aged 20-64 reported in the February 1994 DWS having lost a job in the 1991-93 period.
Similarly, 6,459 individuals aged 20-64 reported in the February 1996 DWS having lost a

 12 See Farber (1997a) for a detailed discussion of the definition and limitations of the measure of job loss
from the DWS.


                                                     7
job in the 1994-96 period.13 Of these 13,096 job losers, 6,733 were in rotation groups 1-4,
and, hence, are potentially matchable to the subsequent CPSs with the CAEAS.

The Final Match

Of the 50,620 individuals aged 20-64 in the February 1994 and 1996 CPSs who were
successfully matched to the February 1995 and 1997 CPSs, 2,145 were not interviewed
for the displaced worker supplement so that there is no information on job loss for these
workers. These individuals are dropped from the analysis. While only the employed
were eligible to be interviewed for the CAEAS, I am interested in all employment-related
outcomes for displaced workers. Thus, for now I retain those who are not employed at
the CAEAS date. But 3,412 employed individuals were not administered the CAEAS.
When these non-respondents are eliminated from the sample, there are 45,063 individuals
including 4,102 job losers left in the matched sample, and they form the core of the analysis
using the matched data. There is complete information for this sample on job loss in the
three-year period prior to the DWS and on employment arrangements in the subsequent
CAEAS. Of the 45,063 individuals in the sample, 33,296 are employed at the relevant
CAEAS date.

4. Job Loss and Alternative Employment Arrangements: The Matched Data
   Table 3 contains a breakdown of employment arrangements at the CAEAS date by
whether the individual reported a job loss in the three years prior to the relevant DWS.
The sample contains all individuals, whether employed at the CAEAS date or not. In
particular, it shows the fraction of the sample separately for job losers and non-losers that
are in each type of employment (or non-employment) arrangement. I also present the
difference between the rates for non-losers and the rates for losers, and I call this difference
the job-loss differential.
   These data include individuals who are not employed in order to highlight two issues.
First, individuals who lost jobs in the three years prior to the DWS are more likely than
13 These represent 8.6 and 10.6 percent (weighted) of the total samples respectively. However, these are
not good estimates of the job-loss rates because many of those sampled had not worked and, hence, were
not at risk to lose a job.


                                                  8
non-losers (6.2 percentage points) to report being unemployed a year after the DWS date.14
Second, job losers are less likely than non-losers (6.8 percentage points) to be out of the
labor force (NILF) a year after the DWS date. This is because in order to have lost a
job, workers must have been employed at some point in the three years prior to the DWS.
Many of the workers who were not job losers have been out of the labor force for a long
period of time (or never in the labor force).
     It would be most appropriate to omit workers with no long-term attachment to the
labor force from the analysis because they are not (to a first approximation) affected by
job loss, but it is not possible to identify these workers. I proceed by analyzing employment
status of the sample of workers who are employed at the CAEAS date. Since a substantial
fraction of job losers are not employed (25.6 percent in table 3), this analysis errs in
excluding individuals who were affected by job loss. Nonetheless, it gives the clearest
picture of the distribution of employment arrangements subsequent to job loss and how
this distribution is related to a history of job loss.
     Table 4 is organized identically to table 3 with the difference that the breakdown
in table 4 recomputes the fraction of workers in each type of employment relationship
excluding those who are not employed. The results show that employed job losers have
a smaller probability than non-losers of being in a regular job. The job-loss differential
for temporary work is positive, suggesting that job losers who find work are substantially
more likely than non-losers to be in temporary jobs (by 5.7 percentage points). Another
difference is that job-losers are less likely to be other-SE (by 3.1 percentage points), but
there is not a significant job-loss differential in the probability of being an independent
contractor. The analysis in table 3, which includes those not employed, yields the same
qualitative results.
     A word is required on the interpretation of the two self-employed categories. The
"independent contractor" category includes self-employed workers who say that they are
independent contractors, independent consultants, free-lance workers, or something else.
This appears to be the category that captures the sort of self-employment arrangements
14  Higher unemployment rates among displaced workers is well known from the literature on job dis-
placement. See, for example, Podgursky and Swaim (1987).


                                                9
individuals might find themselves after leaving a company and 1) perhaps performing
the same function for their old employer on a contract basis or 2) starting a "consulting"
business selling their services. The "other self-employed" category is the residual and likely
captures owners of small business (e.g., retail sales). As such, the "contractor" category
is more likely to be used by job losers than the "other-SE". This is consistent with the
tabulations in tables 3 and 4.
    The next step is to carry out multivariate analyses of the probability of employment by
type in order to estimate the job-loss differentials in employment probabilities controlling
for demographic characteristics. Given the similarity of the relationship between job loss
and type of employment found in the analysis that includes those not employed and the
analysis that focuses on those employed, I continue using only the sample composed of those
employed at the CAEAS survey date. I estimate simple probit models of the probability
of employment of the various types as a function of job-loss status, age, education, sex,
marital status, the interaction of sex and marital status, and race.15
    The key variable for the purposes of this study is the job loss indicator. Its normalized
coefficient measures the adjusted (for demographic characteristics) lost-job differential in
the probability of employment of the indicated type controlling for the observable demo-
graphic characteristics.'6 The differences in the structure of employment relationships
across demographic groups implicit in the probit estimates are as noted in the raw tab-
ulations in table 1 from the February 1995 and 1997 CAEASs, and, for this reason, the
estimates of the coefficients of the demographic variables are not presented here.
    The first row of table 5 contains the adjusted job-loss differentials for the overall sample
of 33,095 workers. The results are similar to the unadjusted differences found in table 4.
 15 Note, that I am not estimating a multinomial choice model of employment type, such as multinomial
logit or probit. What I am interested in here is data description and summary rather than estimates of
some structural choice model. The ease of interpretation of the estimates from the binomial probit models
make them a preferred method for this purpose.

 16 The coefficients are normalized to represent the derivative of the probability of the outcome with
respect to a change in the particular explanatory variable evaluated at the means of the explanatory
variables. The normalization factor is (X3) so that the normalized coefficient is computed as j33)
where 3 is the vector of estimated parameters of the probit model, X is the vector of means of the
explanatory variables, and is the standard normal probability density function. The standard errors are
also normalized by q(X/3), but they do not take into account the fact that the normalization itself is a
random variable.


                                                   10
Job losers are about 2.8 percentage points less likely than non-losers to be in regular
jobs. There is no difference by job-loss status in the probability of being an independent
contractor, but job losers are significantly less likely than non-losers to be in other-SE jobs
(3.1 percentage points). Job losers are significantly more likely to be in temporary jobs
(4.1 percentage points).
   The job-loss differentials in the first row of table 5 control for observable differences
across workers, but they constrain the job-loss differential in the employment outcomes to
be the same for all types of workers. I relax this restriction by estimating separate probit
models for various categories of workers. Each of these probit models contain the same
set of variables as the overall model (omitting the set of variables on which the particular
subsample is stratified). The remaining rows of table 5 contain the normalized probit
coefficients of the job-loss dummy variable from each of these models for 1) separate models
by sex and marital status, 2) separate models by educational category, and 3) separate
models by age category.
   The adjusted job-loss differentials estimated from separate probit models by sex and
marital status are not very different. The adjusted job-loss differentials show lower prob-
abilities of regular employment and other-SE for job losers, and these differentials are
largest for unmarried workers of both sexes. This is offset largely by higher probabilities of
temporary work for job losers. Single females who lose jobs also show a higher probability
of being an independent contractor.
   The adjusted job-loss differentials estimated from separate probit models by educa-
tional category suggest that there is a contrast in the job-loss differentials between workers
with less than 16 years of education and workers with 16 or more years of education. While
job losers with less than 16 years of education are about 1 percentage point less likely than
non-losers to be employed in a regular job, job losers with at least 16 years of education are
fully 6 percentage points less likely than non-losers to be employed in regular jobs. This
difference across education groups appears to be accounted for largely by 1) a higher ad-
justed job-loss differential in the probability of being an independent contractor (about 1.8
percentage points for highly educated workers compared with zero for less educated work-
ers), and 2) a higher adjusted job-loss differential in the probability of being a temporary

                                              11
worker (about 5.1 percentage points for highly educated workers compared with about 3.5
to 4 percentage points for less educated workers). Job losers in all educational categores
are about three percentage points less likely than non-losers to be other self-employed,
   The remainder of table 5 contains the adjusted job-loss differentials estimated from
separate probit models by age category. It appears that the largest job-loss differential in
the probability of regular employment is largest for middle-aged workers (35 to 54 years
of age). The positive job-loss differential in the rate of temporary employment is shared
by workers in all age categories but the youngest. The negative relationship between job
loss and the rate of other-SE is stronger among older workers.
   To summarize, employed job losers are more likely to be in alternative employment
arrangements, broadly defined, than are non-losers. The largest consistent differences are
that job losers are more likely than non-losers to be in temporary jobs and job losers are
less likely than non-losers to be "other self-employed" workers. There is also some evidence
that highly educated job-losers are more likely to be independent contractors relative to
similarly educated non-losers.

Is Temporary Employment Subsequent to Job Loss a Transitional Experience?

There are at least two interpretations of the finding that workers who have lost jobs are
more likely to be in temporary jobs. The first is that temporary employment relationships
are used by some workers in a transition period following job loss due to difficulty in
finding regular employment. Following this transition period, displaced workers will find
regular employment. The second interpretation is that the relationships between job loss
and temporary employment are the result of unmeasured heterogeneity across workers so
that workers who tend to be employed in temporary jobs are also workers who are more
likely to lose jobs regardless of the type of job they are holding.
    While the data do not allow me to make a definitive determination of the relative im-
portance of these two explanations, there is some evidence available that can shed some
light on this issue. The first explanation (alternative employment as a transition phase)
implies that the probability that a worker holds a temporary job will decline with time
since displacement. The second explanation (unmeasured heterogeneity) has no such im-
plication.

                                            12
    I investigate this directly using the matched sample and information available in the
DWSs reporting the year of job loss. Unfortunately, the design of the 1994 and 1996 DWSs
was such that the year of job loss was asked only of individuals who reported losing a job
for a subset of the allowed reasons. Specifically, individuals who reported losing a job due
to 1) a plant closing, 2) slack work, or 3) position or shift abolished were asked follow-up
questions including the year of job loss. Individuals who reported losing a job for other
reasons were not asked the follow-up questions. Thus, information on the year of job loss
is available for only 2056 of the 3031 workers who reported a job loss in February 1994 or
1996, were matched to an observation in February 1995 or 1997, and who were employed
at the survey date in February 1995 or 1997. I computed the number of years since job
loss for these 2056 workers. Given that job loss occurred in the three years prior to the
DWS date, years since job loss ranges from 2 to 4 years at the CAEAS date. Of the 2056
workers in the sample, 851 reported a loss two years earlier, 612 reported a loss three years
earlier, and 593 reported a loss four years earlier.17
    Table 6 contains a breakdown of employment arrangements by years since job loss,
and it confirms that the likelihood of regular employment increases with time since job
loss (by 3.4 percentage points from 2 to 4 years, p-value = 0.043)). In fact, at four
years since job loss (three years prior to the DWS date, four years prior to the CAEAS
date), the fraction of losers employed in regular jobs is virtually identical to the fraction
of non-losers in regular jobs. This can be accounted for by a decline in the likelihood
of temporary employment with time since job loss (by 4 percentage points from 2 to 4
years, p-value      0.00023), although the likelihood of temporary employment among job
losers still substantially exceeds the likelihood of temporary employment among non-losers,
even after four years. There are also offsetting movements with time since job loss in the
likelihood of being in the two self-employment categories. However, these movements are
not statistically significant at conventional levels. The movements with time since job loss

 17 have repeated the analyses of adjusted job-loss differentials using only non-losers and this restricted
sample of job losers, and the results are very similar. The declining number of job losers with time since
the survey likely reflects recall bias. Such bias makes it more likely that recent events and more salient
events are recalled. (Topel, 1990)


                                                   13
in the likelihood of regular and temporary employment provide support for the view that
temporary employment is used by some workers as a transition to regular employment.18

Brief Comments on the Results on Alternative Employment Arrangements

    The advantage of using the matched DWS-CAEAS data is that detailed information
on employment arrangements allows the identification of alternative employment arrange-
ments held subsequent to job loss. But there are at least two disadvantages. First, the
sample size is relatively small due to 1) the relatively small fraction of workers who report
a job loss in the DWS, 2) the relatively small fraction of individuals who report being in
an alternative employment arrangement in the CAEAS, and 3) the inability to match a
substantial number of individuals across the two surveys. The second disadvantage is that
the information on alternative work arrangements refers to a point in time substantially
after the time of job loss (at least 14 months later at best and up to four years at worst).
To the extent that alternative employment arrangements as a response to job loss are
part of a transitory phase, these matched data might substantially understate the use of
alternative employment arrangements as a response to job loss.19
    While I cannot address these issues directly due to data limitation, I now turn to
analysis of part-time employment and its relationship with job loss. I do this for three
reasons. First, part-time employment, particularly involuntary part-time employment,
may be experienced by job losers in a transition period. Second, information on part-
time employment is available as part of the basic CPS questionnaire and so is available at
the DWS date (one year more proximate to the job loss) as well as at the CAEAS date.
Third, because observations on part-time status are available at two points in time in the

 18 While not presented here, probit models of the probability of employment of the various types that
control for age, education, sex, race, marital status, and the interaction of sex and marital status along
with time since job loss do not change these findings.

 19 For example, the estimates suggest that the likelihood of temporary employment arrangements falls
by about 2 percentage points with each year since job loss. Simple (weighted) tabulation of the data show
that 11.9 percent of those employed in at the CAEAS date who had lost jobs in the year prior to the
relevant DWS (two years prior to the CAEAS) were in temporary jobs at then CAEAS date. If the point
estimate is taken seriously (admittedly a stretch given the out-of-sample nature of this calculation), then
about 14 percent of those displaced in the year prior to the CAEAS would be predicted to be in temporary
jobs at the CAEAS date.


                                                   14
matched data (three points in time for job losers), I can address directly the question of
the transitory nature of part-time employment subsequent to job loss.

5. Job Loss and Part-Time Employment

   I begin the analysis of job loss and part-time employment by carrying out an analysis
of part-time employment using the matched DWS-CAEAS data that parallels the anal-
ysis presented above for alternative employment arrangements. The matched data have
measures of part-time employment at two points in time: the DWS date and the CAEAS
date.2° Since the DWS date is more proximate to the date of job loss (1-3 years) than
the CAEAS date (2-4 years), a comparison of the part-time rates at the two dates as well
as measures of the transition rates from part-time to full-time employment can shed some
light on the extent to which part-time employment is used as a transition strategy after
job loss.
   Table 7 provides strong evidence that involuntary part-time employment is an impor-
tant transition strategy for job losers. The first three columns of the table contain the
full-time, voluntary part-time, and involuntary part-time rates for non-losers and for job
losers measured at the DWS date. Also presented is the job-loss differential in these rates.
The full-time employment rate is 5.6 percentage points lower for job losers than for non-
losers. This is almost entirely accounted for by a 4.9 percentage point higher involuntary
part-time rate for job losers relative to non-losers. The important contrast is with the
tabulations in the last three columns of table 8, which provide the same breakdown for
part-time employment status at the CAEAS date. Here there is no significant difference in
the full-time rate between job-losers and non-losers and only a 1.5 percentage point higher
involuntary part-time rate for job losers relative to non-losers.
    As before, the next step is to carry out multivariate analyses of the probability of the
three full/part-time categories in order to estimate the job-loss differentials in employment
probabilities controlling for demographic characteristics. The first row of table 8 contains
estimates of the adjusted job-loss differentials from simple probit models of the probability
 20 The DWS also has information on full/part-time status on the lost job. I use this information later in
this section.


                                                   15
of employment of the various types as a function of job-loss status, age, education, sex,
marital status, the interaction of sex and marital status, and race.21 The estimates in
the first three columns of table 8 use the subset of the matched sample consisting of
those individuals who are employed at the DWS date while the estimates in the last three
columns use the subset of the matched sample consisting of those individuals who are
employed at the CAEAS date.22
    The first row of table 8 contains the adjusted job-loss differentials for the overall sample
are similar to the unadjusted differences found in table 7. Job losers are about 6.1 per-
centage points less likely than non-losers to be in full-time jobs at the DWS date, and this
difference shrinks to 2.2 percentage points by the CAEAS date. There is a small positive
relationship between job loss and voluntary part-time employment at the DWS date that
is not apparent at the CAEAS date. Finally, job losers are 3.5 percentage points more
likely to be involuntarily in part-time jobs at the DWS date, and this difference falls to
1.3 percentage points by the CAEAS date.
    The estimates in table 7 and the first row of table 8 present the consistent picture that
involuntary part-time employment is experienced disproportionately by job losers. How-
ever, the differential rate of involuntary part-time employment falls with time, suggesting
that this is a transitional experience for many job losers.
    The probit models underlying the estimates in the first row of table 8 control for
observable differences across workers, but they constrain the job-loss differential in the
full/part-time employment outcomes to be the same for all types of workers. As before, I
relax this restriction by estimating separate probit models for various categories of workers.
Each of these probit models contain the same set of variables as the overall model (omitting
the set of variables on which the particular subsample is stratified). The remaining rows

 21 These differentials are the coefficients on the job-loss variable in the probit models normalized to
represent the derivative of the probability of the outcome with respect to a change in job loss status. See
note 16 for details.

 22 While the full estimates of the probit model are not presented here, the estimates based on both samples
verify the common finding that married females are substantially less likely to be employed full time, a
fact that is largely accounted for by a substantially higher probability of being employed voluntarily in a
part-time job. The results also support the common finding that the probability of involuntary part-time
employment falls monotonically with education.


                                                    16
of table 8 contain the normalized probit coefficients of the job-loss dummy variable from
each of these models for 1) separate models by sex and marital status, 2) separate models
by educational category, and 3) separate models by age category.
    The adjusted job-loss differentials estimated from separate probit models by sex and
marital status yield results that are not very different from those derived from the overall
sample. The major exception is that only married females have a significant job loss
differential in the rate of involuntary part-time employment remaining at the CAEAS
date.
   The adjusted job-loss differentials estimated from separate probit models by educa-
tional category imply that the job loss differentials in full-time employment for workers
in all educational categories are significantly negative at the DWS date. This is offset by
significant positive job loss differentials in involuntary part-time employment for workers
in all educational categories. Moving forward one year to the CAEAS date, the job-loss
differentials in full-time employment disappears for workers in the lowest and highest ed-
ucational categories but remains substantial for workers in the intermediate educational
categories.
   With regard to age, the job-loss differential in full-time employment for the oldest
workers is large and negative at the DWS date and remains so one year later at the
CAEAS date. This is offset roughly equally by positive job-loss differentials in voluntary
and involuntary part-time employment for the oldest workers.
   To summarize, the evidence in tables 7 and 8 provide clear evidence that job losers
are disproportionately employed involuntarily in part-time jobs. The evidence is also clear
that much of this involuntary part-time employment is part of a transition process to full
time employment.


The Use of Part-Time Employment by Losers of Full-Time Jobs

The 1994 and 1996 DWSs provide information on the full/part-time status of the lost job
for those who lose jobs due to a plant closing, slack work, or position/shift abolished. For
the part-time job losers, there is no information on whether the individual was part-time

                                            17
voluntarily or involuntarily.23 Analysis of post-job-loss full/part-time employment status
conditioning on the full/part-time status on the lost job can provide more information on
the extent to which part-time employment, both voluntary and involuntary, is used by job
losers. Of particular interest is the post-displacement experience of losers of full-time jobs
since these workers show more commitment to full-time work than do part-time workers,
many of whom are part-time voluntarily.24
    Table 9 contains information, based on the matched data, on the post-displacement
full/part-time status of workers broken down by the full/part-time status on the lost
job. The first row of table 9 reproduces the first row of table 7, and it shows the post-
displacement full/part-time status of those workers who did not report losing a job. The
second and third rows report the post-displacement full/part-time employment status of
full-time job losers and part-time job losers respectively. The first three columns report
the fraction in each full/part-time status at the DWS date, and the last three columns
report the fraction in each full/part-time status at the CAEAS date.
   Among those employed at the relevant survey date, there is a sharp contrast between
the full-time job losers and the part-time job losers. By the DWS survey date, the fraction
of full-time job losers who are working full-time is virtually identical to the fraction of non-
losers who are working full-time (84.3 percent vs. 85.0 percent), and, by the CAEAS date,
the fraction of full-time job losers who are working full-time is significantly larger than
the fraction of non-losers who are working full-time (88.3 percent vs. 85.4 percent, p-value
of difference < 0.00005). It is also the case that full-time job losers are less likely than
non-losers to be voluntarily part-time and more likely than non-losers to be involuntarily
part-time at the DWS date. By the CAEAS date, the gap in the voluntary part-time
rates increases while the gap in the involuntary part-time rate decreases. This pattern
is a result of the fact that the pool of non-losers contains a core of individuals who are

23 Of the 2598 job losers for whom we have information on the full/part-time status on the lost job, 10.9
percent (weighted) reported losing a part-time job. In contrast, 15.0 percent (weighted) of those workers
who did not lose a job were employed part-time at the DWS survey date. Thus, the job-loss rate on
full-time jobs appears to be higher than the job-loss rate on part-time jobs.

24 Tabulations of the February 1994 and 1996 CPS data yields the result that 68.1 percent of part-time
workers are part-time for voluntary reasons.


                                                    18
voluntarily part-time as a result of labor supply choices while the full-time job losers have
shown evidence of a commitment to full-time work. This interpretation of the evidence
is further supported by the post-displacement full/part-time status of the part-time job
losers, who are substantially less likely thatn full-time job losers to be employed full time
at either the DWS date or the CAEAS date.


Transitions in Full/Part-Time Status between the DWS Date and the CAEAS Date

The analysis in the previous subsection strongly suggests that there is heterogeneity among
the workforce in general and among job losers in particular in preferences for full-time
work. There may also be further heterogeneity in the ability to find and hold a full-time
job. Implicit in the earlier discussion is the idea that full-time workers are committed to
full-time work, but it is surely the case that some full-time workers move to part-time work
and vice versa, even without a job loss. This presumably reflects changes in individual
constraints and in market conditions over time. In this subsection, I examine individual
transitions in full/part-time status between the DWS date and the CAEAS date separately
for non-losers and for full-time and part-time job losers.
   Conditioning on full/part-time status at the DWS date, I use the non-losers as a "con-
trol group", and I measure their transition rates to full-time, voluntary part-time, and
involuntary part-time employment by the CAEAS date. These are, in a sense, the "natu-
ral" rates of transition. I then contrast these transition rates with the transition rates for
full- and part-time job losers. These analyses provide further information on the incidence
and persistence of part-time employment subsequent to job loss.
   Table 10 contains the core of this analysis. The first panel contains the transition rates
of workers who were working full-time at the DWS date. In the control group of non-losers,
95.4 percent remained employed full-time a year later while 2.6 percent moved to voluntary
part-time status and 2.0 percent moved to involuntary part-time status. Think of these as
the natural transition rates. The picture is not far different for losers of full-time jobs who
were employed full-time at the DWS date. However, part-time job losers who are employed
full-time at the DWS date are less likely to remain in full-time employment (92.6 percent)

                                              19
and more likely to move to involuntary part-time status (4.7 percent).25
    The second and third panels of table 10 contains the transition rates of workers who
were in voluntary and involuntary part-time status respectively at the DWS date. The
key finding is that a substantially higher fraction of full-time job losers (relative to either
non-losers or part-time jobs losers) moved from part-time jobs to full-time jobs between
the DWS date and the CAEAS date. This is further evidence that full-time job losers find
themselves in part-time employment as a transition to reemployment full-time.

6. The Interaction of Alternative Employment Arrangements and
Full/Part-Time Status
I have established that temporary and part-time employment, particularly involuntary
part-time employment, are important transitional outcomes for displaced workers. Further,
the breakdowns in table 2 clearly show that temporary workers are the least likely of all
groups to be in full-time jobs. Temporary workers are more likely than other workers to
be both voluntarily and involuntarily part-time. In this section, I briefly investigate how
the interactions between alternative employment arrangements and full/part-time status
generally and between temporary work and part-time status specifically are related to job
loss.
    Table 11 contains breakdowns, using the merged data, of full/part-time status by em-
ployment status at the CAEAS date separately for non-losers and job losers. The top panel
of the table uses the merged data to reproduce the breakdowns in table 2 (which used the
entire 95 and 97 CAEASs), and the results are very similar. This verifies that the merged
sample is not substantially different in these dimensions than the overall sample. The
second panel of table 11 contains the same breakdowns for non-losers. These breakdowns
are very close to those for the overall sample, and this is not surprising given that only a
small fraction of the sample consists of job losers. The third panel of the table contains the
breakdowns for all employed job losers, and the there are some important differences here.

 25 There are relatively few part-time job losers in the sample used for this analysis (173 total) and even
fewer who are employed full time at the DWS date (92). As a result the standard errors on the transition
rates for part-time job losers are relatively large, the differences between pthese transition rates and those
for other groups are not generally statistically significant at conventional levels.


                                                     20
A significantly higher fraction of temporary workers who lost jobs are employed full-time at
the CAEAS date relative to non-losers (12.0 percentage points, p-value < 0.0000001). This
is entirely accounted for by an 11.8 percentage point difference in the voluntary part-time
rate between non-losers and job losers (p-value < 0.0000001).
   The contrast between non-losers and job losers is even more striking when considering
only full-time job losers. The bottom panel of table 11 contains breakdowns for 1772
full-time job losers who are employed at the CAEAS date. Full-time job losers who are
employed in temporary jobs at the CAEAS date are even more likely to be in full-time
jobs (76.8 percent) and even less likely to be in voluntary part-time jobs (10.9 percent).
   These results imply that temporary jobs are often taken by workers who have a pref-
erence for part-time work. It may be that temporary employment arrangements are an
efficient arrangement for these workers. However, it is clear that among job losers, par-
ticularly those who lost full-time jobs, temporary jobs are transitional outcomes that are
more likely than the usual temporary job to be characterized by full-time hours.

7. Final Remarks
It is clear that alternative employment arrangements are an important feature of the
U.S. labor market. Tabulation of the February 1995 and 1997 CAEASs showed that 17.5
percent of workers were self-employed or in temporary jobs. Additionally, 15.3 percent of
workers in these same surveys were employed part-time (10.8 percent voluntary, 4.5 percent
involuntary). My analysis of the matched DWS-CAEAS data shows that job losers are
more likely than non-losers to use alternative and part-time employment arrangements. I
find that job losers are significantly more likely than non-losers to be in temporary jobs
(including on-call work and contract work) and that job losers are significantly more likely
than non-losers to be employed involuntarily part-time.
   I also find that the likelihood of temporary and involuntary part-time employment falls
with time since job loss. Thus, it appears that these alternative employment arrangements
are often part of a transitional process subsequent to job loss leading to regular full-
time permanent employment. In this respect, temporary employment by job-losers is
of a different character than temporary employment by non-losers. Job losers who find

                                            21
employment in temporary jobs are more likely to be working full-time while non-losers
who are employed in temporary jobs are more likely to be working voluntarily part-time.




                                          22
8. References
Abraham, Katharine G. "Restructuring the Employment Relationship: The Growth of
   Market-Mediated Work Arrangements," in Katharine G. Abraham and Robert B.
   McKersie, eds., New Developments in the Labor Market: Toward a New Institutional
  Paradigm, Cambridge MA: MIT Press, 1990, pp. 85-119.
Abraham, Katharine G. and Susan K. Taylor. "Firms' Use of Outside Contractors: Theory
   and Evidence," Journal of Labor Economics 14 (July 1996): pp. 394-424.
Belous, Richard S. The Contingent Economy, Washington, D.C., National Planning Asso-
   ciation, 1989.
Blank, Rebecca M. "The Role of Part-Time Work in Women's Labor Market Choices Over
   Time," American Economic Review 79 (May 1989): pp.295-299.
Blank, Rebecca M. "Are Part-Time Jobs Bad Jobs?," in A Future of Lousy Jobs?, Gary
   Burtless, ed., The Brookings Institution, 1990.(a)
Blank, Rebecca M. "Understanding Part-Time Work," in Research in Labor Economics,
   Volume 11. Laurie J. Bassi and David L. Crawford, eds., JAI Press, Inc. 1990.(b)
Farber, Henry S. "The Incidence and Costs of Job Loss: 1982-91," Brookings Papers on
   Economic Activity: Microeconomics, (1993,1), 73-119.
Farber, Henry S. "The Changing Face of Job Loss in the United States: 1981-1995,"
   Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics, 1997: 55-128.
Farber, Henry S. "Trends in Long-Term Employment in the United States, 1979-96," Work-
   ing Paper No. 384, Industrial Relations Section, Princeton University, July 1997.(b)
Farber, Henry S. "Job Creation in the United States: Good Jobs or Bad?" Working Paper
   No. 385, Industrial Relations Section, Princeton University, July 1997.(c)
Farber, Henry S. and Helen Levy. "Recent Trends in Employer-Sponsered Health Insur-
   ance: Are Bad Jobs Getting Worse?" Working Paper No. 402, Industrial Relations
   Section, Princeton University, July 1998.
Ferber, Marianne and Jane Waldfogel. " 'Contingent' Work: Blessing and/or Curse,"
   Radcliffe Public Policy Institute mimeo, 1996.
Gardner, Jennifer M. "Worker Displacement: A Decade of Change," Monthly Labor Review
   118 (April 1995): pp. 45-57.

                                           23
Golden, Lonnie and Eileen Appelbaum. "What Was Driving the 1982-88 Boom In Tempo-
   rary Employment?," American Journal of Economics and Sociology 51 (October 1992):
   pp. 473-493.
Houseman, Susan N. "Temporary, Part-Time and Contract Employment in the United
   States: New Evidence from an Employer Survey," W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employ-
   ment Research, mimeo, February 1997.
Howe, Wayne J. "Temporary Help Workers: Who They Are, What Jobs They Hold,"
   Monthly Labor Review 109 (November 1986): pp. 45-47.
Kletzer, Lori G. "Returns to Seniority after Permanent Job Loss," American Economic
   Review 79 (June 1989): pp. 536-543.
Montgomery, Mark and James Cosgrove. "The Effect of Employee Benefits on the Demand
   for Part-Time Workers," Industrial and Labor Relations Review 47 (October 1993): pp.
   87-98.
Neal, Derek. "Industry-Specific Capital: Evidence from Displaced Workers," Journal of
  Labor Economics 13 (October 1995): pp. 653-677.
Parent, Daniel. "Industry-Specific Capital: Evidence from the NLSY and the PSID,"
   Working Paper No. 350, Industrial Relations Section, Princeton University, November
   1995.
Podgursky, Michael and Paul Swaim. "Job Displacement Earnings Loss: Evidence from
   the Displaced Worker Survey," Industrial and Labor Relations Review 41 (October
   1987): pp. 17-29.
Polivka, Anne. "Are Temprorary Help Agency Workers Substitutes for Direct Hire Temps?
   Searching for an Alternative Explanation for of Growth in the Temporary Help Indus-
   try," mimeo, U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, May 1996.
Segal, Lewis M. and Daniel G. Sullivan. "The Growth of Temporary Services Work,"
   Journal of Economic Perspectives 11 (Spring 1997): pp. 117-136.
Tilly, Chris. "Reasons for the Continuing Growth of Part-Time Employment," Monthly
   Labor Review 114 (March 1991): pp. 10-18.
Topel, Robert. "Specific Capital and Unemployment: Measuring the Costs and Conse-
   quences of Job Loss," Carnegie Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy33 (1990):
   pp. 181-214.

                                          24
        TABLE 1: Fraction of Employed with Specific Alternative Employment Arrangements
                               February 1995 and 1997 CAEAS's
                                      Workers aged 20-66

Group         Regular Contractor Other-SE Temporary Full-Time                 Vol PT Invol PT
All            0.825        0.059       0.054         0.062        0.847      0.108       0.045
              (0.001)       (0.001)    (0.001)        (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.001)     (0.001)
Male           0.802        0.076       0.061         0.061        0.918      0.045       0.036
              (0.002)       (0.001)    (0.001)        (0.001)     (0.002)    (0.001)     (0.001)
Female         0.851        0.039       0.046         0.064        0.765      0.180       0.055
              (0.002)       (0.001)    (0.001)        (0.001)     (0.002)    (0.001)     (0.001)
Ed<12          0.823        0.053       0.047         0.077        0.818      0.087       0.094
              (0.004)       (0.002)    (0.002)        (0.003)     (0.004)    (0.003)     (0.002)
Ed=12          0.841         0.054      0.052         0.053        0.853      0.097       0.050
              (0.002)       (0.001)    (0.001)        (0.001)     (0.002)    (0.002)     (0.001)
Ed 13—15       0.828         0.054      0.049         0.069        0.810      0.148       0.042
              (0.002)       (0.001)    (0.001)        (0.001)     (0.002)    (0.002)     (0.001)
Ed > 16        0.803         0.071      0.064         0.062        0.890      0.084       0.026
              (0.002)       (0.001)    (0.001)        (0.001)     (0.002)    (0.002)     (0.001)
age 20-24      0.851        0.012       0.014         0.123        0.705      0.226       0.070
              (0.004)       (0.002)    (0.002)        (0.002)     (0.003)    (0.003)     (0.002)
age 25-34      0.853         0.042      0.035         0.070        0.868      0.088       0.044
              (0.002)       (0.001)    (0.001)        (0.001)     (0.002)    (0.002)     (0.001)
age 35—44      0.826         0.066      0.057          0.052       0.871      0.090       0.039
              (0.002)       (0.001)    (0.001)        (0.001)     (0.002)    (0.002)     (0.001)
age 45-54      0.810         0.076      0.072         0.043        0.885      0.075       0.040
              (0.003)       (0.002)    (0.002)        (0.002)     (0.002)    (0.002)     (0.001)
age 55-64      0.767         0.088      0.095          0.050       0.812      0.139       0.049
              (0.004)       (0.002)    (0.002)        (0.002)     (0.003)    (0.003)     (0.002)

Note: Based on tabulations from the February 1995 and 1997 Contingent and Alternative Em-
ployment Arrangements Supplements to the CPS. See the text for definitions of the alternative
employment arrangements and the full/part-time statuses. The classifications of employment ar-
rangements in the first four columns are independent of full/part-time status classifications. All
fractions are weighted by CPS sampling weights. The numbers in parentheses are standard errors.
n=102318.




                                                 25
                        TABLE 2: Part-Time Status by Employment Arrangement
                                  February 1995 and 1997 CAEAS's
                                         Workers aged 20-66
                                           (row fractions)
                           Group         Full-Time Vol P-T Invol PT
                           Regular            0.874      0.092   0.034
                           Contractor         0.756      0.148   0.097
                           Other-SE           0.781      0.151   0.069
                              Temporary          0.638        0.244        0.119
                              All                0.847        0.108        0.045

Note: Based on tabulations from the February 1995 and 1997 Contingent and Alternative Employment
Arrangements Supplements to the CPS. See the text for definitions of categories. n=102318.

          TABLE 3: Fraction of Individuals with Specific Alternative Employment Arrangements
                                          By Job Loss Status
                                    Matched DWS - CAEAS Data
                                    Individuals aged 20-64 in DWS
         Group         Regular Contractor Other-SE Temporary Unemployed                       NILF
        Non-Losers       0.613         0.047        0.044         0.035             0.028     0.234
                        (0.002)       (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)           (0.001) (0.002)
         Job Losers      0.599         0.046        0.021         0.078             0.090     0.166
                        (0.007)        (0.003)     (0.003)       (0.003)           (0.003)   (0.006)
        Difference -0.014             —0.001       —0.023         0.043             0.062    —0.068
                        (0.008)        (0.003)     (0.003)       (0.003)           (0.003)   (0.007)

Note: Based on tabulations from the matched February 1994 and 1996 DWSs with the February 1995 and
1997 CAEASs respectively. See the text for definitions of the job type classifications. Workers are classified
as unemployed and not in the labor force (NILF) according to the standard CPS definitions. See the text for
a description of the matching procedure. All fractions are weighted by CPS sampling weights. The numbers
in parentheses are standard errors. n=45063.

          TABLE 4: Fraction of Employed with Specific Alternative Employment Arrangements
                                       By Job Loss Status
                                     Matched DWS - CAEAS
                                 Workers aged 20-64 at DWS Date
                                          All Workers (n=33296)
                      Group         Regular Contractor Other-SE Temporary
                      Non—Losers      0.830          0.063        0.060            0.047
                                     (0.002)        (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)
                      Job Losers      0.805          0.062        0.029            0.105
                                     (0.007)        (0.004)      (0.004)       (0.004)
                      Difference —0.025             —0.001       —0.031            0.057
                                     (0.007)        (0.005)      (0.004)       (0.004)
Note: Based on tabulations from the matched February 1994 and 1996 Displaced Workers Supplments to the
CPS with the February 1995 and 1997 Contingent and Alternative Employment Arrangements Supplements
to the CPS respectively. See the text for a definitions of the job type classifications. See the text for a
description of the matching procedure. All fractions are weighted by CPS sampling weights. The numbers
in parentheses are standard errors. n=33296.


                                                     26
             TABLE 5: Lost-Job Differential in Probability of Employment by Type
                                Matched DWS - CAEAS Data
              Individuals Aged 20-64 at DWS Date and Employed at CAEAS Date
                                   Based on Probit Analysis
         Estimated Normalized to Represent Marginal Effects on Probability of Outcome
                                       (standard errors)

              Group                Regular     Contractor      Other-SE     Temporary
              All                 —0.0277         0. 0010      —0.0313        0.0414
                                  (0. 0068)      (0.0042)      (0. 0049)     (0. 0033)
              Single Male         —0.0339        —0. 0073      -0. 0242       0. 0514
                                  (0. 0168)      (0. 0 107)    (0. 0 101)    (0.0096)
              Married Male        —0.0132        -0. 0039      -0.0548        0.0416
                                  (0. 0119)       (0. 0085)    (0.0095)      (0. 0046)
              Single Female       —0. 0529        0. 0133       0. 0080       0. 0266
                                  (0. 0126)      (0. 0052)     (0. 0055)     (0. 0090)
              Married Female      -0. 0259       —0.000 1      -0. 0410       0. 0439
                                  (0. 0 132)     (0. 0080)     (0. 0106)     (0. 0065)
              Ed<12               -0. 0 105      —0.0066       -0. 0314       0.0354
                                  (0. 0252)      (0. 0 147)    (0. 0 174)    (0. 0137)
              Ed=12               -0.0196        -0. 0   149   -0.0308        0. 0422
                                  (0. 0116)      (0. 0076)     (0.0084)      (0. 0052)
              Ed 13—15            —0.0123         0. 0011      —0.0317        0.0332
                                  (0. 0118)      (0. 0069)     (0. 0079)     (0. 0064)
              Ed > 16             -0.0614         0. 0183      —0.03 11       0. 0514
                                  (0. 0116)      (0. 0076)     (0. 0084)     (0. 0052)
              Age 20-24           —0.0156         0. 0079      —0. 0042       0. 0055
                                  (0. 0251)      (0. 0056)     (0. 0084)     (0. 0229)
              Age 25-34           —0. 0189        0. 0027      -0. 0 121      0. 0254
                                  (0. 0122)      (0. 0071)     (0. 0071)     (0. 0076)
              Age 35-44           —0. 0378       —0.0089       -0. 0463       0. 0564
                                  (0. 0118)      (0.008 1)     (0. 0092)     (0.0052)
              Age 45-54           -0. 0346        0.0161       -0. 0343       0.0342
                                  (0. 0143)      (0. 0090)     (0. 0113)     (0. 0057)
              Age 55-64            0. 0014       —0.0305       -0. 0632       0. 0569
                                  (0. 0248)      (0.0166)      (0.0200)      (0.0100)
Note: The estimates are the normalized coefficients on the lost-job dummy variable from separate
probit models where the dependent variable is the indicator variable for the type of employment in
each column. Other variables included in the probit model include, where appropriate, a constant,
three dummy variables for education category, four dummy variables for age category, and dummy
variables for sex, marital status, the interaction of sex and marital status, and race. The estimates
are based on the matched February 1994 and 1996 DWSs with the February 1995 and 1997 CAEASs
respectively. Individuals aged 20-64 in the February 1994 and 1996 DWSs and were employed in at
the CAEAS date. See the text for a description of the employment types and for a description of
the matching procedure. See note 16 for details of the normalization. The normalized asymptotic
standard errors are in parentheses. All analyses are weighted by CPS sampling weights from 1994
or 1996.




                                                27
              TABLE 6: Breakdown of Employment Arrangements by Years Since Job Loss
                                     Matched DWS - CAEAS
                              Individuals Employed at CAEAS Date
                               Individuals Aged 20-64 at DWS Date

                   Yrs Since Loss     Regular    Contractor      Other-SE   Temporary
                   2 Years             0.795             0.055     0.032       0.118
                                       (0.013)       (0.008)      (0.008)      (0.007)
                   3 Years             0.816             0.058     0.029        0.097
                                       (0.015)       (0.010)      (0.009)      (0.009)
                   4 Years             0.829             0.074     0.019        0.078
                                       (0.015)       (0.010)      (0.009)      (0.009)
                   No Loss             0.830             0.063     0.060        0.047
                                       (0.002)       (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)

    Note: Based on tabulations from the Merged February 1994 and 1996 DWSs with the February 1995
    and 1997 CAEASs respectively. See the text for definitions of the job type classifications and for
    a description of the matching procedure. All fractions are weighted by CPS sampling weights from
    1994 or 1996. The numbers in parentheses are standard errors. n=32321 including 2056 job losers.


        TABLE 7: Fraction of Employed with Specific Full/Part-Time Employment Arrangements
                                          By Job Loss Status
                                       Matched DWS - CAEAS
                                    Workers aged 20-64 at DWS Date
        Group          Full Time Vol P-T Invol P-T Full Time Vol P-T Invol P-T
                         at DWS at DWS      at DWS   at CAEAS at CAEAS at CAEAS
        Non-Loser          0.850      0.109        0.041         0.854       0.107         0.039
                          (0.002)    (0.002)      (0.001)        (0.002)    (0.002)       (0.001)
        Job Loser          0.794      0.116        0.090         0.842       0.104         0.054
                          (0.007)    (0.006)      (0.004)        (0.006)    (0.005)       (0.004)
        Difference       -0.056       0.008        0.049         -0.011     -0.003         0.015
                          (0.007)    (0.006)      (0.004)        (0.007)    (0.006)       (0.004)
Note: Based on tabulations from the matched February 1994 and 1996 DWSs with the February 1995 and
1997 CAEASs respectively. See the text for definitions of the job type classifications and for a description
of the matching procedure. All fractions are weighted by CPS sampling weights from 1994 or 1996. The
numbers in parentheses are standard errors. n=z33705 at DWS date and n=33296 at CAEAS date.




                                                    28
                    TABLE 8: Lost-Job Differential in Full/Part Time Status
                                Matched DWS - CAEAS Data
              Individuals Aged 20-64 at DWS Date and Employed at CAEAS Date
                                  Based on Probit Analysis
         Estimated Normalized to Represent Marginal Effects on Probability of Outcome
                                       (standard errors)
 Group               Full Time     Vol P-T    Invol P-T    Full Time     Vol P-T    Invol P-T
                        at DWS      at DWS       at DWS     at CAEAS    at CAEAS      at CAEAS
 All                 -0.0613       0.0168       0.0354      -0.0219      0.0075        0.0130
                      (0.0060)    (0.0049)     (0.0030)     (0.0059)     (0.0047)     (0.0032)
 Single Male         —0.0445       0.0069       0.0355      -0.0124      0.0049        0.0073
                      (0.0145)    (0.0105)     (0.0091)     (0.0137)     (0.0098)     (0.0091)
 Married Male        -0.0394       0.0104       0.0263      —0.0225      0.0115        0.0095
                      (0.0053)    (0.0037)     (0.0036)     (0.0052)     (0.0032)     (0.0038)
 Single Female       —0.0744       0.0164       0.0480      —0.0099     -0.0004        0.0097
                      (0.0164)    (0.0138)     (0.0089)     (0.0158)     (0.0128)     (0.0091)
 Married Female      —0.0920       0.0413       0.0410      —0.0293      0.0012        0.0239
                      (0.0161)    (0.0151)     (0.0066)     (0.0160)     (0.0152)     (0.0068)
 Ed<12                -0.0775     -0.0056       0.0667      -0.0093     -0.0276        0.0277
                      (0.0243)    (0.0183)     (0.0162)     (0.0255)     (0.0176)     (0.0173)
 Ed=12                -0.0666      0.0279       0.0334      -0.0422      0.0282        0.0122
                      (0.0106)    (0.0080)     (0.0062)     (0.0103)     (0.0077)     (0.0062)
 Ed 13—15             -0.0666      0.0279       0.0334      —0.0422      0.0282        0.0122
                      (0.0106)    (0.0080)     (0.0062)     (0.0103)     (0.0077)     (0.0062)
 Ed      16           -0.0497      0.0036       0.0348       0.0016     -0.0108        0.0093
                      (0.0114)    (0.0099)     (0.0052)     (0.0112)     (0.0095)     (0.0054)
 Age 20-24             0.0276     —0.0700       0.0306       0.0409     -0.0338       —0.0021
                      (0.0385)    (0.0361)     (0.0197)     (0.0338)     (0.0309)     (0.0165)
 Age 25-34            -0.0580      0.0233       0.0271      —0.0206      0.0118        0.0076
                      (0.0108)    (0.0087)     (0.0056)     (0.0111)     (0.0086)     (0.0062)
 Age 35-44            -0.0582      0.0095       0.0371      -0.0177      0.0060        0.0099
                      (0.0099)    (0.0077)     (0.0049)     (0.0096)     (0.0072)     (0.0050)
 Age 45-54            -0.0676      0.0257       0.0340      —0.0209      0.0015        0.0173
                      (0.0104)    (0.0080)     (0.0056)     (0.0106)     (0.0080)     (0.0060)
 Age 55-64            -0.1150      0.0561       0.0492      -0.0897      0.0538        0.0316
                      (0.0221)    (0.0189)     (0.0117)     (0.0221)     (0.0192)     (0.0112)

Note: The estimates are the normalized coefficients on the lost-job dummy variable from separate
probit models where the dependent variable is the indicator variable for the type full/part-time
status in each column. Other variables included in the probit model include, where appropriate, a
constant, three dummy variables for education category, four dummy variables for age category, and
dummy variables for sex, marital status, the interaction of sex and marital status, and race. The
estimates are based on the matched February 1994 and 1996 DWSs with the February 1995 and
1997 CAEASs respectively. Individuals aged 20-64 in the February 1994 and 1996 DWSs and were
employed in at the CAEAS date. See the text for a description of the employment types and for
a description of the matching procedure. See note 16 for details of the normalization. Normalized
asymptotic standard errors are in parentheses. All analyses are weighted by CPS sampling weights
from 1994 or 1996.



                                               29
         TABLE 9: Fraction Employed with Specific Full/Part-Time Employment Arrangements
                     By Job Loss Status and Full/Part-Time Status on Lost Job
                                     Matched DWS - CAEAS
                                Workers aged 20-64 at DWS Date
                                          (row fractions)
       Group             Full Time     Vol P-T    Invol P-T     Full Time      Vol P-T     Invol P-I
                             at DWS     at DWS        at DWS      at CAEAS    at CAEAS      at CAEAS
       Non—Loser             0.850      0.109         0.041         0.854        0.107        0.039
                            (0.002)    (0.002)       (0.001)       (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.001)
       F-T Job Loser         0.843      0.078         0.079         0.883        0.066        0.051
                            (0.009)    (0.008)       (0.005)       (0.008)      (0.007)      (0.005)
       P-T Job Loser         0.500      0.360         0.140         0.602        0.293        0.105
                            (0.025)    (0.022)       (0.014)       (0.025)      (0.021)      (0.014)

Note: Based on tabulations from the Merged February 1994 and 1996 DWSs with the February 1995 and
1997 CAEASs respectively. See the text for a definitions of the job type classifications and for a description
of the matching procedure. All fractions are weighted by CPS sampling weights from 1994 or 1996. The
numbers in parentheses are standard errors. n=32709 at DWS date and n=32246 at CAEAS date.




                                                     30
    TABLE 10: Fraction of Employed by Full/Part-Time Employment Arrangement at CAEAS Date
        By Job Loss Status and Full/Part-Time Status on Lost Job and Job at DWS Date
                                    Matched DWS - CAEAS
                               Workers aged 20-64 at DWS Date
                                        (row fractions)
                        Group                Full Time   Vol P-T Invol P-T
                                               at CAEAS at CAEAS  at CAEAS
                        F-T at DWS
                        Non—Loser                0.954       0.026         0.020
                                                (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)
                        F-T Job Loser            0.961        0.015        0.024
                                                (0.006)      (0.004)      (0.004)
                        P-T Job Loser            0.926       0.027         0.047
                                                (0.023)      (0.017)      (0.015)
                        Vol P-T at DWS
                        Non-Loser                0.265       0.654         0.081
                                                (0.008)      (0.009)      (0.005)
                        F—T Job Loser            0.481        0.388        0.131
                                                (0.040)      (0.043)      (0.025)
                        P—T Job Loser            0.217        0.711        0.072
                                                (0.056)      (0.060)      (0.035)
                        Invol P-T at DWS
                        Non—Loser                0.558        0.208        0.234
                                                (0.015)      (0.012)      (0.013)
                        F-T Job Loser            0.676        0.138        0.186
                                                (0.046)      (0.037)      (0.039)
                        P-T Job Loser            0.540        0.170        0.290
                                                (0.101)      (0.082)      (0.086)

Note to table 10: Based on tabulations from the Merged February 1994 and 1996 DWSs with the February
1995 and 1997 CAEASs respectively. Only those individuals employed at both dates are included in the
analysis. See the text for a definitions of the job type classifications and for a description of the match-
ing procedure. All fractions are weighted by CPS sampling weights from 1994 or 1996. The numbers in
parentheses are standard errors. n=30383.




                                                    31
              TABLE 11: Part-Time Status by Employment Arrangement at CAEAS Date
                                           Merged Data
                                Workers aged 20-64 at DWS Date
                                          (row fractions)
                          Group               Full-Time Vol P-T Invol PT
                          All   Workers
                          Regular                 0.879      0.091        0.030
                                                 (0.002)    (0.002)      (0.001)
                          Contractor              0.745      0.153        0.101
                                                 (0.008)    (0.007)      (0.004)
                          Other—SE                0.784      0.154        0.062
                                                 (0.008)    (0.007)      (0.004)
                          Temporary               0.638      0.254        0.107
                                                 (0.008)    (0.007)      (0.005)
                          Non-Losers
                          Regular                 0.880      0.091        0.029
                                                 (0.002)    (0.002)      (0.001)
                          Contractor              0.744      0.151        0.105
                                                 (0.008)    (0.007)      (0.004)
                          Other-SE                0.790      0.150        0.059
                                                 (0.008)    (0.007)      (0.005)
                          Temporary               0.616      0.277        0.108
                                                 (0.009)    (0.008)      (0.005)
                          All Job Losers
                          Regular                 0.869      0.087        0.044
                                                 (0.007)    (0.006)      (0.005)
                          Contractor              0.754      0.179        0.066
                                                 (0.026)    (0.022)      (0.016)
                          Other—SE                0.651      0.232        0.117
                                                 (0.039)    (0.032)      (0.024)
                          Temporary               0.736      0.159        0.105
                                                 (0.020)    (0.017)      (0.013)
                          F-T Job Losers
                          Regular                 0.911      0.052        0.037
                                                 (0.008)    (0.006)      (0.006)
                          Contractor              0.754      0.147        0.099
                                                 (0.031)    (0.024)      (0.021)
                          Other-SE                0.729      0.143        0.128
                                                 (0.047)    (0.037)      (0.033)
                          Temporary               0.768      0.109        0.124
                                                 (0.024)    (0.019)      (0.017)

Note to table 11: Based on tabulations from the Merged February 1994 and 1996 DWSs with the February
1995 and 1997 CAEASs respectively. Only those individuals employed at the CAEAS date are included
in the analysis. See the text for a definitions of the job type classifications, and for a description of the
matching procedure. All fractions are weighted by CPS sampling weights from 1994 or 1996. The numbers
in parentheses are standard errors. n=33296.




                                                    32
