NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

NEW EVIDENCE ON SEX SEGREGATION
AND SEX DIFFERENCES IN WAGES FROM
MATCHED EMPLOYEE-EMPLOYER DATA

Kimberly Bayard
Judith Hellerstein
David Neumark
Kenneth Troske

Working Paper 7003
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7003

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 1999

We thank Fran Blau, Bill Evans, Erica Groshen, Robert Lalonde, Brooks Pierce, and Peter Schmidt for
helpful comments. This research was supported by NSF grant SBR95- 10876 through the NBER. This paper

was originally prepared for the U.S. Bureau of the Census's International Symposium on Linked
Employer/Employee Data, Washington, D.C., 1998. The research in this paper was conducted while the last
three authors were research associates with the Center for Economic Studies, U.S. Bureau of the Census.

Research results and conclusions expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily indicate
concurrence by the Bureau of the Census, the Center for Economic Studies, or the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©

1999 by Kimberly Bayard, Judith Hellerstein, David Neumark, and Kenneth Troske. All rights reserved.

Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

New Evidence on Sex Segregation and Sex Differences
in Wages from Matched Employee-Employer Data
Kimberly Bayard, Judith Hellerstein, David Neumark, and Kenneth Troske
NBER Working Paper No. 7003
March 1999

JEL No. J16, J18
ABSTRACT
We assemble a new matched employer-employee data set covering essentially all industries and

occupations across all regions of the U.S. We use this data set to re-examine the question of the
relative contributions to the overall sex gap in wages of sex segregation vs. wage differences by sex
within occupation, industry, establishment, and occupation-establishment cells. This new data set is
especially useful because earlier research on this topic relied on data sets that covered only a narrow
range of industries, occupations, or regions. Our results indicate that a sizable fraction of the sex gap

in wages is accounted for by the segregation of women into lower-paying occupations, industries,
establishments, and occupations within establishments. Nonetheless, a substantial part of the sex gap

in wages remains attributable to the individual's sex. This latter finding contrasts sharply with the
conclusions of previous research (especially Groshen, 1991), which indicated that sex segregation

accounted for essentially all of the sex wage gap. Further research into the sources of withinestablishment within-occupation sex wage differences is therefore much more important than
previously thought.

Kimberly Bayard
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742

David Neumark
Department of Economics
Michigan State University
East Lansing, MI 48824
and NBER
neumarkd@pilot.msu.edu

Judith K. Hellerstein
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
hellerst@econ.umd.edu

Kenneth R. Troske
Department of Economics
University of Missouri—Columbia
Columbia, MO 65211

I. Introduction
Women have consistently earned lower wages than men in U.S. labor markets, although

this gap has narrowed in recent decades (Blau, 1998). Understanding the sources of sex
differences in wages is vital to determining why the wage gap between men and women persists.
Previous research has focused on the effect of the occupational segregation of men and women on
the wage gap (e.g. Macpherson and Hirsch, 1995), the effect of industry segregation (e.g. Fields
and Wolff, 1995), and to a lesser extent on the segregation of men and women into different

employers (Blau, 1977; Bielby and Baron, 1984; Carrington and Troske, 1998).' These studies all
find evidence that the wage gap falls considerably once one accounts for segregation.
Evidence on the contribution to the wage gap of within-establishment within-occupation

segregation is far harder to find. Indeed, we are not aware of any empirical work on this issue that
uses large data sets representative of a wide array of industries. The reason for this is the paucity
of data sets containing detailed demographic information for multiple workers in the same

establishment. As a result, studies of the effects of establishment and occupation-establishment
segregation have used unusual, somewhat narrow data sets. The most complete study of which we
are aware is Groshen (1991). She uses various Industry Wage Surveys (IWS) conducted between
1974 and 1983 to estimate the proportions of the sex difference in wages attributable to the percent

female in the occupation, the establishment, and the job-cell (i.e., within occupations within
establishments), in five specific industries (Miscellaneous Plastic Products, Nonelectrical
Machinery, Life Insurance, Banking, and Computer and Data Processing).2 She finds that the

'Blau also documents the role of segregation by industry.

2The IWS originally covered 70 industries, but Groshen reports results only for these five. These
surveys have been discontinued. Her work builds on Blau's (1977), but provides a more complete
decomposition of the sex gap in wages, including evidence on the importance of an individual's sex

segregation of women into lower-paying occupations within employers also contributes to the

wage gap. Groshen finds little remaining wage gap between men and women once she accounts
for the relationship between wages and the percent female within establishments, occupations, and
establishment-occupation cells.3 Groshen concludes, then, that pay differences between men and
women cannot be a result of wage discrimination by employers of the type that violates the Equal
Pay Act.

Groshen's results suggest that understanding the persistence of the sex wage gap amounts
to understanding the forces that lead to sex segregation in the workforce. Such forces could range
from employer discrimination in hiring and promotion to different preferences across the sexes for

the non-pecuniary benefits ofdifferentjobs. Groshen is well aware of the possible limited
representativeness of her data, however, noting that, "although theoretically ideal, study of a full
national cross-section of industries is impossible because of the lack of appropriate data" (p. 460).
In this paper we construct and use an extended version of the Worker-Establishment
Characteristics Database (WECD) to decompose the source of male/female wage differentials.4
Like the WECD, this data set matches workers who responded to the long form of the 1990
Decennial Census to the establishments where they work, using the U.S. Census Bureau's Standard

Statistical Establishment List (SSEL). However, whereas the WECD is limited to manufacturing
plants, this new data set (the New Worker-Establishment Characteristics Database, or NWECD)

within occupation, establishment, and job cell. Blau studies BLS Area Wage Surveys conducted in 1970,
which covered clerical, professional, and technical occupations; she focuses on a subset of these
occupations in three large northeastern cities.
3This mirrors to some extent Blau's (1977) earlier finding that "intraoccupational pay
differentials by sex are primarily the result of differences in wage-rates among firms rather than within
firms" (p. 73).
4For a description of the original WECD, see Troske (forthcoming).

2

includes workers and establishments from all sectors of the economy. Thus, we provide new
estimates of the role of various dimensions of sex segregation in generating sex differences in
wages, based on a large data set with workers in nearly all regions, industries, and occupations.5

Our results indicate that a sizable fraction of the sex gap in wages is accounted for by the
segregation of women into lower-paying occupations, industries, establishments, and occupations

within establishments. We also find, however, that a very substantial part of the sex gap in wages
remains attributable to the individual's sex. These findings contrast sharply with the conclusions
of previous research (especially Groshen, 1991) indicating that sex segregation accounted for

essentially all of the sex wage gap. We explore a number of possible reasons for the differences in
results. We ultimately conclude that the data we use yield different answers from the data
Groshen used, even for the same occupations and industries that she studied.

II. The Data
The data used in this study come from a match between worker records from the 1990
Sample Detail File (SDF) to establishment records in the 1990 Standard Statistical Establishment

List (SSEL).6 The 1990 SDF consists of all household responses to the 1990 Decennial Census
long form. As part of the Decennial Census, five-sixths of all households receive a "short-form,"
which asks seven basic demographic questions about household members ("person questions") and

seven questions about the housing unit ("housing questions"). The remaining one-sixth receive a
more extensive "long-form" survey, which contains 26 additional person and 19 additional

housing questions. These questionnaires ask households to supply distinct information for each

5Because of the matching described below, and other sample restrictions, the data set is not
nationally representative.
6Both the SDF and the SSEL are confidential Census Bureau products, as is the NWECD that we
describe in this paper.
3

household member. Those receiving the long-form are asked to identify each employed household
member's (1) occupation, (2) employer location, and (3) employer's industry in the previous week.
The Census Bureau then assigns occupational, industrial, and geographic codes to long-form

responses. Thus, the SDF contains the standard demographic information for workers collected on
the long form of the Decennial Census, along with detailed location information and a three-digit

census industry code for each respondent's place of work.
The SSEL is an annual list of business establishments maintained by the U.S. Census

Bureau. The SSEL contains detailed location information and a four-digit SIC code for each
establishment, along with a unique establishment identifier that is common to other Census Bureau

economic surveys and censuses. It also includes information on total payroll expenses,
employment, and whether or not the establishment is part of a multi-establishment firm.
We matched workers and establishments using the detailed location and industry

information available in both data sets. Briefly, the first step in the matching process was to keep
only establishments unique to an industry-location cell.7 Next, all workers indicating that they
work in the same industry-location cell as a retained establishment were linked to the

establishment. The matched data set is the NWECD. Because the SDF contains only a sample of
workers, and because not all workers are matched, the matched data set includes a sample of
workers at each establishment.
The Census Bureau organizes the United States into different geographic areas, assigning

codes to each. For the NWECD, there are five areas of interest: state, county, place, tract, and

7We do this because we do not actually have the employer name available on both establishment
and worker records.

4

block.8 The geographic coding process works primarily as a hierarchy. The Census Bureau
assigns unique codes to every state in the country. Within states, each county is also assigned a
unique code. In addition, in areas or townships with a population of 2,500 or more, the Census
Bureau assigns a place code. Because an area or town can cross county boundaries, we can
distinguish between areas in the same place but different counties. Tract codes are unique within
counties and block codes are unique within tracts. The Census Bureau uses the same geographic
codes in both the SSEL and the Decennial Census.
Two shortcomings of the geographic codes in the SSEL are (1) the absence of tract and
block codes before 1992, and (2) the incomplete assignment of these codes to all establishments.

To assign tract and block codes to the 1990 SSEL, we extracted each establishment's block and
tract code (when available) from the 1992 SSEL, and then matched these codes back to the 1990

SSEL. Some establishments that ceased operation between 1990 and 1992 do not appear in the
1992 SSEL, making it impossible to identify block and tract codes for these establishments. Not
all establishments had tract and block codes assigned as of 1992 due to address problems. In the
1992 SSEL, Census had assigned tract and block codes to 45% of all establishments.

In addition to geographic codes, the Census Bureau assigns industry codes to the SDF and

the SSEL. The Census Bureau asks long-form respondents to identify their employer's industry,
which the Census Bureau codes into one of 244 Census Industry Classification (CIC) codes. Each
CIC corresponds roughly to a three-digit Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) code.9 In the

81n some geographic areas, the Census Bureau uses Block Numbering Areas (BNAs) instead of
tracts. For our purposes, a BNA is equivalent to a tract. The Census Bureau assigns tracts and blocks in
tandem, so whenever an establishment is assigned a tract code, it is also always assigned a block code.

9An exception is Construction. There is one CIC for Construction and this corresponds to the
equivalent of three two-digit SIC codes.
5

SSEL, the Census Bureau assigns each establishment a six-digit SIC code based on the plant's
primary economic activity. '° Since the CIC codes are more aggregated than SIC codes, we use a

concordance table to assign a CIC to each SIC in the SSEL."
The first step in the matching process is to assign industry-location cells to all plants in the

SSEL. We divide the SSEL into plants that are unique in a state-county-place-industry (SCPI) cell
and those that are not, and retain all unique SCPI plants. In cases where there are multiple plants
in an SCPI cell, we first retain the cell only if all plants in the cell have tract and block codes. We
then keep only those plants that are unique within a state-county-place-tract-block-industry cell.

Next, we assign workers in the SDF to industry-location cells based on information
provided in the SDF. Unlike the SSEL, the Census Bureau assigns detailed geography codes to all
observations in the SDF.'2 Once we have workers assigned to industry-location cells and have
establishments that are unique within a cell, we can match the workers to the particular
establishments where they work.

We take a number of additional steps to improve the quality of the match. First, to ensure
that workers are matched properly to employers in the WECD, we discard all workers and

establishments from the matched sample where Census imputed either the worker's or the
establishment's industry.13 We also discard all workers from the matched sample if the worker's

'°The last two digits of the SIC code are product codes for goods-producing industries, or type of
business codes for service establishments.

'tA few SICs correspond to more than one CIC. We omitted establishments in these industries.
12When long-form respondents omit geographic information, the Census Bureau imputes missing

values.
'3This imputation occurs for plants when an incomplete SIC code (only the first two or three
digits) is provided. For such cases, the Census Bureau randomly assigns the remaining digits.

6

place-of-work code is imputed and if this imputed code is the source of the match.14

Second, some matches lead to apparent inconsistencies, prompting us to discard matches
when the number of workers matched to an establishment exceeds the number of employed

workers as reported by the establishment in the SSEL. There are several reasons why the number
of matched workers might exceed total employment. First, there may be errors in the industry or
geographic codes for some workers or establishments in the SDF or SSEL. Second, there is a time
lag between when the Census Bureau surveys workers and employers. Census asks workers where
they worked on April 1 and employers how many workers they employed as of March 12; total

employment on April 1 may exceed total employment on March 12. A third problem is that
workers may be incorrectly assigned to locations because of imprecise SDF questions. Because
the SDF asks workers only where they worked in the past week, workers who were working at a

site other than their employer's primary location may be improperly assigned to an establishment.

Fourth, in the SSEL total employment includes only a plant's employees, not its owners. In the
SDF, however, both owners and employees are assigned to a particular establishment. Thus,
although there may be legitimate reasons for the number of matched workers to exceed reported
establishment employment, to avoid potentially incorrect matches we discard cases where this
occurs.

In our matched sample, we also imposed some restrictions on both individuals and

establishments. We include only individuals who report usually working between 30 and 65 hours

'4To understand the exclusion based on imputed geographic data, consider the following
example. When a worker is matched to an establishment unique in an SCPI cell, the match is based on
the state, county, place, and industry of the worker and the establishment. If the worker's block code is
imputed, then this imputed code has no bearing on the match, and we retain the match in the data.
However, if the match relies on tract and block-level information, and the worker's place-of-work block
code is imputed, then we discard the worker from the matched data set.
7

per week, and 30 or more weeks in the last year (1989). These restrictions on hours and weeks are
intended to pick out full-time, full-year workers who are less likely to have changed jobs in the

past year, as well as those whose hours are so high that they may have held multiple jobs. We
make these restrictions for three reasons. First, because the Decennial Census collects data on
earnings from all jobs, rather than wages on the current job, we need to try to eliminate variation in

wages that stems from multiple job-holding at a point in time or during the previous calendar
year.'5 Second, because the 1990 Decennial Census asks workers to report the address of the
establishment where they worked in the previous week, while the earnings data are for the
previous calendar year, job changing may lead to inaccurate measurement of earnings in the

matched data. Finally, Groshen's IWS data, with which we are trying to draw some comparisons,
cover only full-time workers. We also restrict the sample to workers aged 18 to 65, with a
constructed hourly wage ((annual earnings/weeks worked)/usual hours worked per week) in the
range $2.50 to $500, and those working in establishments in public administration (in order to
restrict our focus to the private sector).
We also require that establishments have total employment of at least 25, for two reasons:
first, when we compared average establishment-level worker earnings in the matched observations
in the SDF with average payroll expenses in the SSEL, these corresponded much more closely for
establishments with 25 or more workers; second, the IWS industry samples included mainly
establishments with 25 or more workers, and we are interested in a comparison of our results to

Groshen's results using the IWS. In addition, to ensure that we have a reasonable basis for
estimating the characteristics of an establishment's workforce, we required that the number of

15Multiple job holding rates are virtually identical among men and women. 1996 CPS data
indicate rates of 6.2% for men and 6.1% for women (Stinson, 1997). Thus, although multiple job
holding could affect our data, it is unlikely to influence the sex differences we estimate.
8

matched workers be least five percent of employment as reported in the SSEL. Finally, we
eliminated the less than .1% of establishments that reported earnings exceeding more than
$600,000 per worker.

Table 1 documents the effects of these various matching rules and exclusion restrictions on
the sample size, the number of matched workers, and average earnings and employment calculated

from both the SSEL and SDF data. We define measures of establishment earnings per worker
from data in both the SSEL and the SDF. For the SSEL, earnings per worker is constructed as
Total Annual Payroll/Total Employment. For the SDF, establishment earnings per worker is
created by averaging the annual wages and salaries of all workers matched to the establishment.
The table shows that seven percent of establishments can be assigned to unique industry-location

cells. These establishments are nearly twice as large as those in the overall sample (with an
average of 41.17 workers, vs. 21.10 for the full SSEL sample), but have average earnings that are

lower by about $2200. This does not contrast with standard size-wage effects (Brown and Medoff,
1989), since there are no controls for industry, etc., and the ability to assign establishments to
unique industry-location cells is not random with respect to these characteristics.
The next three rows (c-e) provide information on the observations on workers in the SDF.
Out of a total of 17,311,211 workers, we match 1.1 million, or 6.5%, to establishments, once we

discard unreliable matches or workers without earnings data. There are, of course, numerous
establishments to which no workers are matched, reflected in the decline in the number of matched
establishments from 388,787 to 201,944 based on the simple match, and 156,332 once other
restrictions are imposed. Naturally, the establishments to which workers in the SDF are matched

tend to be larger, with average employment of 83.24. The last three columns compare earnings
data. Average establishment earnings per worker reported in the SSEL are about $1200 lower than
9

the corresponding figure estimated from the SDF ($18,218 vs. $19,416); this is presumably

attributable to the fact that in the SDF individuals can report earnings from more than one job. We
also find, comparing columns (6) and (7) of row e, that average earnings per worker in the SDF
data are about $3,170 higher than average establishment earnings estimated from the same

(matched) data. These numbers can differ because the earnings per establishment figures are not
weighted by the number of matched workers in estimating average establishment earnings per

worker; thus, this result likely stems from the concentration of higher-earning workers in larger
establishments. Row f drops workers based on the restrictions on hours, weeks, age, wages, etc.,
with little impact except to drop those with lower earnings.
The final sample is described in row g, which we obtain after dropping establishments with
fewer than 25 employees, with an insufficiently small percentage of matched employees, and with

earnings outliers. We end up with a sample of 637,718 workers matched to 32,931 establishments.
These establishments are of course much larger than those represented in the previous rows, and

have an average of 16.14 workers matched to them. We also find that among this subset of larger
establishments, average establishment earnings estimated from the SSEL and the SDF are
considerably closer ($20,983 vs. $23,328).

Descriptive statistics for the matched sample are reported in column (1) of Table 2. The
sample is approximately 47% female and seven percent black, with an average age of 40. The
percentage ever married is 86. Because in estimating wage equations we want to account for the
possible effects of children on women's wages, in particular, we extracted from the SDF the
number of children ever born, which is only available for women, and therefore defined to be zero

10

for men.16 On average, women in the NWECD have had 1.84 children. With respect to education,

21.1% have a bachelor's degree or higher, and 50% report no college education. Column (3)
reports descriptive statistics for the entire SDF file, with the weeks and hours restrictions imposed.
Most of the demographic characteristics are quite close in the matched and full sample, with the

exception of the cumulative fertility rate (for women) in the matched sample. Geographically,
individuals living in MSA's are less likely to be in the matched sample, presumably because in

urban areas individuals are less likely to work in unique industry-location cells. Turning to
occupation, laborers are over-represented in the matched sample, and support occupations under-

represented. Similarly, the industry composition of the sample is heavily weighted toward
manufacturing, with 52% of workers in this industry, vs. 24% in the full sample, while retail is
grossly under-represented, presumably because most retail establishments are in locations in which

similar establishments are located (such as malls). In the empirical analysis, we address the
potential consequences of the over-representation of manufacturing establishments.
The fact that the NWECD does not comprise a representative sample of U.S. workers is not
surprising given the requirements for a match, and given the size restrictions imposed on matched

establishments. For our purposes, however, the important question is whether the NWECD is not
representative in ways that will bias the wage regressions we estimate. To partially answer this
question, we report in Table 3 estimates from basic wage regressions with and without industry

and occupation controls. Columns (1) and (2) provide benchmark estimates from wage
regressions with and without industry and occupation controls, respectively, using workers from

'61n the regression analysis that follows, this implies that we simply restrict the effect of children
ever born on men's wages to be zero.
11

the SDF.17 Not surprisingly, the results from the SDF are very similar to those from other large,

nationally representative data sets (such as the CPS). The male-female wage gap in column (1) is
23.1%, but falls to 17.4% in column (2) when we control for broad occupation and industry

categories. Similarly, the black-white wage gap is significant in both regressions, but it is smaller
in column (2). Both columns show evidence of quadratic age profiles and positive returns to
education, although the returns to education are smaller in column (2). Columns (3) and (4) of
Table 3 replicate the specifications of columns (1) and (2), respectively, but use the NWECD data.
The male-female wage gap in column (3) is 28.2%, which is slightly larger than that in the SDF
(23.1%), but the difference in the male-female wage gap between the two data sets is virtually
eliminated once we control broadly for industry and occupation (17.4% in the SDF vs. 16.6% in

the NWECD). There are some other minor differences looking across the columns of Table 3
between the two data sets, but for the most part the wage regression results from the NWECD

come close to replicating those from the SDF, particularly once controls for industry and
occupation are added. Note that in the empirical work below, we always include some sort of
controls for industry and occupation since one of our interests is in the effects of industry and
occupation segregation on male-female wage differences.

Therefore, while the NWECD data are not representative of the underlying population of
U.S. workers, the NWECD represents a clear improvement over existing data sources used to

study the role of sex segregation along a number of dimensions in the workplace. The NWECD
covers essentially the entire array of industries, occupations, locations, etc., in the U.S. economy.
Moreover, wage regression estimates from the NWECD do not differ substantively from those

'7Actually, because of computing constraints and the very large sample size of the SDF (1.7
million workers), the data used to construct columns (1) and (2) of Table 3 come from a random ten
percent sample of the SDF.
12

obtained from a representative sample of the U.S. population of workers.

III. Methods
In our initial empirical work, we assume that the wage gap between men and women is a

function of individual human capital characteristics and characteristics of the "femaleness" of
where a worker works, as represented by the percent female in a worker's occupation, industry,
establishment, and occupation within an establishment (job cell). That is, we estimate wage
regressions of the following form:
(1)

ln(wpojej)

= a + I3F + yOCC%F0 + ÔIND%FJ + XEST%Fe + OJOB%FJ + Xpoiej + Eijkmn,

where w is the log hourly wage, F is a dummy variable equal to one if individual p is female,
OCC%F is the percent female in occupation o, IND%F the percent female in industry i, EST%F
the percent female in establishment e, and JOB%F the percent female in job cell j. A vector of
control variables is represented by X.
With the estimated coefficients of equation (1) in hand, we can construct standard wage
decompositions that decompose the difference in average log wages between women and men

(denoted w and wm') as follows:

(2) w -

Wm'

=

13' +

(' (OCC%Ff - OCC%Fm) + ô'(IND%Ff - IND%Fm) + ).'(EST%Ff - EST%F,,)

+ O'(JOB%Ff - JOB%Fm) + (Xf - Xm)1'

where primes on the coefficients indicate estimates, and 'f and 'm' subscripts on the variables
indicate means for women and men, respectively. This decomposition gives us the proportion of
the wage gap due to individual sex differences in wages for workers in the same job cell (3'), and
due to segregation of women into lower-wage occupations (y'[OCC%Ff - OCC%Fm]), industries
(ô'[IIND%Ff IND%Fm]), establishments (A'[EST%Ff- EST%Fm]), and job cells (O'[JOB%Ff JOB%Fm]), and differences in other observable characteristics. These decompositions can
13

therefore be thought of as traditional Oaxaca (1973) decompositions, imposing the restriction that
the coefficients are the same for men and women. We present most of our results imposing this
restriction,18 but also report key results below using the unrestricted decomposition.

While establishments are well-defined, industry and occupation can be defined at a variety

of levels of disaggregation. Since the question of primary concern is within- vs. across-job wage
differences, we are interested in trying to narrow occupational classifications. If, however, we use
highly disaggregated occupations, we can end up with very small job cells (establishment-

occupation cells), particularly since we only have a sample of workers in each plant. This may
cause measurement error problems, which we discuss below. Consequently, we report evidence
from specifications using a variety of levels of occupational disaggregation, beginning with 13
broad Census occupations, and then using successive levels of disaggregation of occupations used
by the Census Bureau, down to the finest level of disaggregation into 505 occupations (of which

491 are represented in our data). The Census coding of occupations corresponds to some extent to
3-digit Standard Occupation Classification (SOC) codes.'9 To preview the results, we find that
while using different levels of occupational disaggregation does change the quantitative results,
the qualitative results are not strongly affected by the level of occupational detail that we use.

The percent-female variables in equation (1) are all estimated directly from the data. The
percentages female in the occupation and industry are estimated from the full SDF sample, so

measurement error is likely to be minimal. However, the percentages female in the plant and job

18This specification follows Groshen (1991).

'9We combined a small number of Census occupations. Because we do not look at
establishment-industry cells (since all workers in an establishment are presumably in the same industry,
and are so by construction in our data set), we face no constraint in disaggregating industries finely, and
hence we always use the detailed Census industry codes.
14

cell are estimated by necessity from the matched data in the NWECD. On average 16.14 workers
are matched to a plant, so job-cell estimates, in particular, are often based on a small number of
observations. Measurement error in these estimates therefore could be sizable, biasing the
estimates of X and 0 towards zero (and presumably biasing the other coefficient estimates as well,

although a priori the direction of bias is unclear). Since our research focuses on the relative
importance of sex differences in wages within vs. across occupation, industry, establishment, and

job cell (i.e., the relative magnitudes of 3 vs. y, ô, ), and 0), this measurement error is of
substantive importance. To assess the influence of measurement error on the estimates, we first
estimate the regressions and decompositions for the full sample, and then for restricted samples of
individuals who work in job cells with a minimum of 10 observations per cell.
We also report results in which we estimate 3 controlling for fixed occupation, industry,
establishment, and job-cell effects, rather than controlling for the percent female in each of these
categories; this amounts, of course, to putting in job-cell dummy variables since these absorb

occupation, industry, and establishment effects. In the absence of measurement error, we would
not expect estimates of 1 obtained using these fixed effects to differ much from estimates using
the percent-female variables if the percent-female variables do a reasonable job of characterizing
how wages are affected by the sorting of workers into different industries, occupations,

establishments, and job cells. Using job-cell dummies, however, avoids the measurement error
inherent in the percent-female variables, and therefore should provide more reliable estimates of
the within-job-cell sex difference in wages (n). Nonetheless, most of the results we report use the
percent-female variables, both to follow some of the earlier literature (e.g., Groshen, 1991), and
because the estimated effects of the percent-female variables are of interest in their own right--for
example, in inferring the potential effects of a policy of comparable worth (Johnson and Solon,
15

1986).

The next section presents the empirical analysis of the NWECD data. We first present our
basic estimates, and then numerous analyses that address measurement error bias and other

estimation issues. Our estimates turn out to differ sharply from Groshen's (1991) earlier estimates
of the roles of sex segregation and within-job sex differences in wages, so in the following section
we explore in detail the differences between these alternative estimates.
IV. Results Using the NWECD
Basic Analysis

Table 4 begins by reporting results of wage regression estimations using 13 broad
occupation categories.20 To estimate the raw wage gap, column (1) simply reports estimates from
a regression of log hourly wages on the female dummy variable; the raw gap in these data is

37521 Column (2) then reports wage regression estimates introducing the four percent-female
variables, but no other controls. Controlling for segregation by industry, occupation,
establishment, and job cell, the sex gap in wages falls by about one-third, to -.244. Wages are
lower in establishments with a higher percent female, and within establishments, in occupations
with a higher percent female (the job-cell effect).22 In this specification without other controls

20These 13 occupation categories are: (1) managerial and professional specialty--executive,
administrative and managerial ; (2) managerial and professional specialty--professional specialty; (3)
technical sales and administrative support--technicians and related support; (4) technical sales and
administrative support--sales; (5) technical and administrative support--administrative support; (6)
service--private household; (7) service--protective; (8) service--except private household and protective;
(9) farming, forestry and fishing; (10) precision production, craft, and repair; (11) operators, fabricators,
and laborers--machine operators; (12) operators, fabricators, and laborers--transportation and material
moving; (13) operators, fabricators, and laborers--handlers, equipment cleaners, helpers, and laborers.
21AIl of our coefficient estimates are highly significant, so while standard errors are reported, we
do not continually refer to statistical significance.
22Macpherson and Hirsch (1995) caution that the percent female in the worker's occupation may
be a proxy for other job-related characteristics, so that the estimated effect on wages partially reflects
16

(notably education), occupational and industry segregation have the opposite of the usual effects,

with wages higher in occupations and industries with a higher percent female. As discussed
below, this result is generally reversed when individual-level controls are added. At the same
time, it should be noted that most studies of sex segregation do not control for establishment and

job cell (e.g., Macpherson and Hirsch, 1995; Johnson and Solon, 1986, Fields and Wolff, 1995);
thus, these studies no doubt overstate the role of occupational and/or industry segregation per se.
The decomposition also requires the calculation of mean differences between women and men in

the right-hand-side variables, which are reported in column (3). As we would expect, women are
in occupations, industries, establishments, and job cells with a higher percent female.
Columns (4) and (5) present the first decomposition, for the wage regression specification

in column (2). Column (4) reports the absolute contribution of each variable to the wage gap, and
column (5) the relative contribution. The estimates in column (5) indicate that over half (65.1%)
of the wage gap is attributable to sex differences in wages that remain after accounting for

segregation by occupation, industry, establishment, and job cell. Just over one-third (34.7%) is
due to segregation into lower-paying occupations within establishments.
Columns (6) and (7) report wage regression estimates and the "relative contribution"

decomposition once we add human capital controls. Note that the Decennial Census does not have
any direct information on experience or tenure; instead, we include age and its square. Because
for women past childbearing is negatively associated with wages, especially in the absence of

compensating differentials based on workers' preferences, and perhaps also different skill requirements.
Their evidence is consistent with this, as the longitudinal estimate of the effect of percent female in the
occupation is much weaker than the cross-sectional estimate. Sorensen (1989) presents similar evidence
for women only, based on a comparison of OLS estimates with estimates that account for selectivity into
employment and into female-dominated occupations (although one can raise questions regarding
identification of this model). In both papers, despite the evidence of bias, occupational segregation
continues to lower wages.
17

experience or tenure controls (Korenman and Neumark, 1992), we include a variable measuring

the number of children ever born to women, which is set to zero for men. Given that this may also
affect the rate of growth of wages over the life cycle, we also include an interaction of this variable

with age (Polachek, 1975). The estimated effect of each additional child born is a two percent
reduction in women's wages, while each child is associated with .5 percentage point lower wage

growth over ten-year intervals. Thus, these variables display the qualitative effects of bearing and
rearing children that we would expect.
Upon including these controls, along with those for education, marital status, race, and
location, the estimated coefficient of the female dummy variable declines in absolute value (from
-.244 to -.132), while the estimated coefficient of the percent female in the job cell declines by

more (from - .243 to -.097). In this specification, the estimated effects of occupation and industry
segregation become negative. In terms of the decomposition, after accounting for the effects of
sex segregation by occupation, industry, establishment, and job cell, the sex difference in wages

remains large, contributing over one-third of the sex gap (.351). The contribution of establishment
segregation remains about the same, while the contribution of segregation within jobs within
establishments falls by over half (to .138).
The Effects of the Degree of Occupational Disaggregation

The results in Table 4 are based on 13 highly-aggregated occupations. Because sex
segregation (reflected in the mean difference in the proportion female in women's vs. men's
occupations) is likely to be more severe at a more-detailed occupational level, the decomposition

results may be sensitive to the level of occupational aggregation used. To explore this question, in
Table 5 we report results for increasing degrees of occupational disaggregation. Column (1)
replicates the key results (for the specification including controls) from Table 4. Tn the second
18

column, we increase the number of occupational classifications to 72, which amounts to
disaggregating each of the 13 original occupations into anywhere from two to 14 distinct

occupations. In the last column, we disaggregate as much as our data allow and use 491 of the
most-detailed Census occupation codes. Each detailed Census occupation code corresponds
generally to a mix of three-digit and four-digit Standard Occupation Classification (SOC) codes,
often combining two or three four-digit occupations into a Census occupation.23 The first two
rows of the table show, as we would expect, that given the greater degree of sex segregation in
more detailed occupations, the mean sex difference in the percent female by occupation and job

cell is larger in each successive column. (The figures for industry and establishment are
unchanged, of course.)
Turning to the wage regression estimates, the estimated coefficient of the female dummy
variable, or the individual sex effect, declines as more detailed occupations are used, from -.132 in
column (1) to -.09 1 in column (3), with the corresponding relative contribution to the wage gap

falling from .351 to .243. Nonetheless, a sizable sex wage gap persists. Of all the segregation
measures, the contribution ofjob-cell segregation is most affected by the level of occupational
disaggregation. The proportion of the sex gap accounted for by job-cell segregation rises from
13.8 to 23.6%.

23For an example of what this occupational disaggregation really means, consider one of our 13
Census occupation codes, Technicians and Related Support Occupations. At the level of 72 total
occupations, this category constitutes three separate occupations: (1) Health Technologists and
Technicians; (2) Technologists and Technicians, Except Health Engineering and Related Technologists
and Technicians; Science Technicians; and (3) Technicians, Except Health, Engineering, and Science.
At the level of 491 total occupations, these three categories are further disaggregated into 22 distinct
occupations, including such occupations as dental hygienists, survey and mapping technicians, and legal
assistants.
19

Including Establishment-Level Controls
To assess the robustness of our basic results and those using different levels of
occupational disaggregation, we also estimated these same specifications including controls for

establishment size and whether the establishment belongs to a multi-unit firm. To the extent that
these reflect establishment-level characteristics, they may "over-control" for establishment-level

differences, because they may capture dimensions of sex segregation. On the other hand, these
variables may be related to unobserved human capital, calling for their inclusion along with the

other human capital controls. Table 6 reports the results. They are very similar to those in Table
5, except that, as we might expect from controlling for some establishment characteristics that are
correlated within an industry, the contribution of sex segregation by industry and establishment to

the overall sex gap in wages falls slightly.

Manufacturing vs. Non-Manufacturing
Earlier, we noted that the sample of establishments in the NWECD is heavily weighted
towards manufacturing. If the effects of sex segregation are different in manufacturing and nonmanufacturing industries, then in order to obtain unbiased estimates of population parameters, one
might want to weight the data to make them more representative. Of course, many other factors
influence selection into the NWECD sample, some of which may be related to unobservable

characteristics, making it unclear how the weights might be constructed. In this subsection,
therefore, we address the most salient non-representativeness--the preponderance of manufacturing
plants--by reporting separate estimates for the manufacturing and non-manufacturing sectors.

Table 7 reports results of the relative contribution of sex itself and of each dimension of
segregation to the sex wage gap, exactly paralleling the estimates reported in Table 5, although

now disaggregated by sector. (The coefficient estimates are not shown.) There are some
20

differences between the two sectors. In general, there is more segregation in the nonmanufacturing sector except at the job-cell level; this may reflect the greater variety of industries

comprising this sector. In addition, there are some differences in the relative contributions to the
wage gap of occupation, industry, and job-cell segregation. However, the key finding that the
individual's sex accounts for a large share of the wage gap persists in both the manufacturing and

non-manufacturing sectors. For example, in column (3), using the most disaggregated
occupations, sex alone accounts for 24.8% of sex wage gap in manufacturing, and 23.3% in non-

manufacturing. Thus, although this evidence does not address all sources of nonrepresentativeness in the NWECD, it indicates that the most pronounced source of nonrepresentativeness has little influence on the results.
Cohort Effects
Although our human capital measures include controls for how many children a woman
has had, and an interaction between children and age, these are only proxies for the labor market

interruptions of women. To the extent that they do not fully capture the differential labor market
experience of similarly aged women and men, our regression results, especially the coefficient on

the female dummy, may be biased. To the extent that younger cohorts of women have had fewer
labor market interruptions than older cohorts, this bias should be less severe for younger workers.
Table 8 therefore replicates the specifications in Table 5, but uses only the sample of workers who
are below the median age.24 The raw wage gap between young men and women is smaller than
that for the full sample (-.26 versus -.3 8), and the coefficient estimates on the female dummy

variable are smaller (ranging from -.05 to -.08 versus -.09 to -.13). Because the extent of

24The segregation measures for percent female in the industry, occupation, establishment, and job
cell are calculated from the full sample.
21

segregation between men and women is very similar for young workers relative to the full sample,
however, and because the regression coefficients on the segregation variables are also very similar,
the relative contribution of the female dummy to the wage gap for younger workers is not very

different than for the full sample. An individual's sex still accounts for anywhere between 20 and
31% of the wage gap. The results from the full sample are therefore not being driven by
unmeasured differential labor market experiences of men and women.
The Effects of Measurement Error on the Estimates
As discussed above, sampling error in the estimates of the percent female in the

establishment and job cell may be quite severe. We do a number of things to assess the role of
measurement error that this may induce. First, in Table 9 we report results from reestimating the
specifications in Table 5 using data only on job cells with at least 10 workers. By restricting
attention to larger job cells, we should reduce measurement error in the percent female in the job

cell. Of course, this restriction also entails a cost in terms of the number of observations,
particularly when more-detailed occupations are used. As the sample sizes towards the bottom of
Table 9 show, this restriction results in excluding about 30% of the sample when we use the most
aggregated occupations, rising to about 68% when we use the most-detailed occupational

classification. Our estimates may also change because the restriction we impose tends to exclude
smaller establishments.25

The bottom rows of Table 9 summarize the evidence on the contributions of each
component of segregation and the individual's sex to the overall sex wage gap with and without

the job-cell-size restriction. We generally obtain higher estimated effects ofjob-cell segregation,

25Although the observed characteristics of workers in this restricted sample are not vastly
different from those in the full sample, workers in the restricted sample are slightly higher-paid and
slightly more likely to be married.
22

with the estimates nearly doubling and job-cell segregation contributing 46% of the sex wage gap

for the most-detailed occupational breakdown. The estimated effects of establishment segregation
change somewhat, while the estimated effects of industry segregation rise for the more

disaggregated occupation breakdowns. Finally, the contribution of occupational segregation
varies significantly across the columns; even the sign changes across the columns, so that in the
last two columns, occupational segregation actually narrows the wage gap between men and

women by 16 to 30%. The change in the estimated effects of the female dummy variable does
vary across columns, decreasing 2.0 percentage points in column (1) but increasing 0.4 and 3.4
percentage points in columns (2) and (3). In every model, however, there is a large role for
individual sex even after accounting for the percent female within occupation, industry,

establishment, and job cell. The female dummy variable accounts for at least 28% of the wage
gap.

Eliminating Measurement Error
An approach that eliminates any role of measurement error in the percent female variables
is to include a full set ofj oh-cell dummy variables, which capture occupation, industry,

establishment, and of course job-cell fixed effects. In addition to eliminating measurement error,
this specification has the benefit that, unlike standard wage decompositions, it does not impose a
particular parametric structure on the way segregation affects sex wage differences. The cost of
this procedure is that we sacrifice estimates of the effects of sex segregation along each of these

dimensions. These estimates are reported in Table 10. Because job-cell dummy variables are
included, the estimated effects of the individual's sex in these specifications can be thought of as

within-job-cell sex differences in wages. Up to this point, we have been reluctant to use this label
in describing the effect of an individual's sex; however, because the results from this less
23

parametric specification turn out to be quite similar to those using the percent-female variables,
from this point on we use this more transparent expression to describe the sex difference in wages
attributable to an individual's sex.
In the first two panels, estimates are first reported for wage equation specifications

including no controls, and then including the human capital controls. Compared with the
corresponding estimates in Table 5, the estimated effect of the individual's sex is actually larger in
Table 10 whatever the level of occupational detail.26 For example, in Table 5 using the most-

aggregated occupations, the estimated coefficient of the female dummy variable is -.132; the

comparable estimate in Table 10 is -.170. Interestingly, however, the decline in this estimated
coefficient as more-detailed occupations are used is similar in Table 10 (from -.170 to -.130 using
the most-detailed occupations) to the decline in Table 5 (from -.132 to -.09 1). As the last row of
the table reports, the ratio of the estimated within-job-cell sex difference using the fixed effects vs.
the percent-female variables is lower when we use job cells with at least 10 workers relative to the
full sample, which is consistent with some decrease in measurement error bias as we restrict the
sample to larger job cells.27 Regardless, no matter what specification one looks at it in Table 10,

26While it is impossible to sign a priori the effect of measurement error on the female dummy
variable, one's intuition might be to expect the coefficient on the female dummy variable to be go down
in Table 10 relative to the earlier tables since, in those tables, the female dummy is positively correlated
with the mismeasured percent female in establishment and job-cell variables. Exactly the opposite
occurs.
27We also used this specification to verify that the relationship we estimate between wages and
sex is actually driven by the rate of pay. Recall that our wage variable is a constructed wage, with hours
and weeks in the denominator. In principle, it is possible that it is not rates of pay on a weekly, biweekly, monthly, etc., basis that differ by sex within job cells, but rather that it is weeks or hours that
differ. For women to have lower constructed wages within job cells, however, it would have to be the
case that their weeks or hours were higher within job cells, which seems unlikely. To check this, we
estimated specifications for log weeks and for log hours with a dummy variable for female and job-cell
fixed effects as control variables. For the different levels of occupational disaggregation, the estimated
coefficient on the female dummy variable in the weeks regression ranged from -.005 to -.007, while in
the hours regression it ranged from -.030 to -.044. These negative coefficients imply that dividing
24

there is no evidence that measurement error in the earlier tables is biasing the estimated withinjob-cell sex difference in wages away from zero, leading to a spurious negative estimate.28

Moreover, the results in Table 10 make it clear that the estimated within-job-cell sex difference in
Table 5 is not attributable to the functional form used to estimate the impact of segregation on
wages.

The Effects of Using Separate Regressions Estimated by Sex

To this point, we have followed Groshen (1991) in using a single wage regression for men

and women, with a dummy variable for women. A more flexible decomposition procedure is to

use separate wage regressions for men and women, following Oaxaca (1973). In this case, using f
and 'm' subscripts to indicate coefficients corresponding to women and men, we can decompose

the difference in average log wages between women and men as follows (dropping the variable F
used in equation (1)):
(3)

wf - wm' = {' (OCC%Ff - OCC%Fm) + ôf'(IND%Ff - IND%Fm) + Af'(EST%Ff - EST%Fm)

+ O(JOB%F - JOB%F) + (Xf - Xm)f'}
+ {(af'—am') +

(y- ym1)O°"01m + (ôôm')IND%Fm + ()m)EST%Fm

+ (OOm')JQB%Fm + Xm(I;-tm') }
In this decomposition, the first term in curly brackets gives the component of the wage gap
attributable to differences in characteristics of individuals and jobs, while the second gives the

component attributable to differences in coefficients. In the usual application of this

through by weeks and hours would tend to make constructed wages look, if anything, more equal by sex
within job cell than the reported rates of pay.

28 is also the case that the standard errors hardly increase when we use fixed job-cell effects. In
the specifications with the percent-female variables, the standard errors were potentially understated
because there were multiple observations on the same establishment, job cell, etc. However, the fact that
the standard errors are scarcely larger with fixed job-cell effects indicates that this understatement was
trivial.
25

decomposition, the second term is interpreted as capturing discrimination, although once one starts
to include job characteristics (such as the percent female in the occupation), one could argue that
this interpretation breaks down because sex segregation may reflect discrimination.29 As
explained in Neumark (1988), the decomposition in equation (3) uses the female wage structure as
the "no-discrimination" wage structure, which is why mean differences in characteristics are

evaluated at the female coefficients. Alternatively, one can use the male (or some other) wage
structure, in which case the coefficients at which the mean differences are evaluated would have

'rn subscripts, and the means at which the differences in coefficients are evaluated would in turn

have 'f subscripts.
In terms of the decompositions used in this paper, each of the first four terms in equation
(3) gives the component of the wage differential attributable to the corresponding dimension of sex

segregation. For example, y (OCC%Ff - OCC%Fm) measures the component attributable to
occupational segregation. In contrast, the entire second term involving the differences in
intercepts and coefficients measures the component attributable to the individual's sex.

Table 11 reports results using this less-restrictive decomposition. We restrict attention to
the two most-detailed occupational classifications in the Decennial Census. The first thing to
notice is that the estimated coefficients on the percent-female variables differ sharply by sex. The
percent female in the occupation has a negative and significant effect on men's wages but a small

positive and significant effect on women's wages. The percent female in an industry has a much
larger negative impact on men's wages than on women's wages, while, conversely, the percent
female in the establishment and job cell have much stronger negative influences on women's

291n fact, there are also many reasons why differences in coefficients may not reflect
discrimination, such as the apparent productivity-enhancing effects of marriage for men (Korenman and
Neumark, 1992).

26

wages. Not surprisingly, then, the decompositions will be markedly different depending on the
choice of the no-discrimination wage structure, as reported further down in the table.
The best comparison is between the results reported in columns (2) and (3) of Table 5, and

those reported in the lower panel of Table 11. This comparison indicates that, using the female
wage structure (reported following the slash), the shares of the wage gap attributable to each
dimension of segregation and to within-job-cell sex differences are roughly similar; the only

notable difference is that in Table 11 segregation by job cell has a larger effect. Using the male
wage structure (reported before the slash), a considerably larger share (about 50%) of the wage gap
arises within job cells, reflecting the weaker estimated effects of establishment and job-cell

segregation for men. Although the apparent differences in the effects of segregation for men and
women are of independent interest and bear further exploration, for the purposes of this paper the
important point is that using separate wage equations for men and women certainly does not

eliminate the significant role of within-job-cell sex differences in wages. Compared with singleequation estimates, these differences are as large using the female wage structure, and much larger
using the male wage structure.
V. Comparison with Groshen1s Estimates

To this point, we have presented numerous analyses of the NWECD data set. The findings
indicate that within-job-cell sex differences in wages as well as job-cell segregation account for

large shares of the sex wage gap, and that occupational segregation is relatively unimportant. The
findings regarding the within-job-cell sex differences and occupational segregation contrast

sharply with the findings reported by Groshen (199 l).° She studies five specific industries in both

30The result on occupational segregation may appear to contradict a rather extensive literature
documenting the negative relationship between wages and the percent female (e.g., Macpherson and
Hirsch, 1995; Sorensen, 1990). However, most of this work does not include information on other
27

manufacturing and non-manufacturing, using data from the 1 970s and 1 980s drawn from Bureau

of Labor Statistics IWS. Groshen finds that within-job-cell sex differences account for only -1.0

to 6.6% of the wage gap. In contrast, the effect ofjob-cell segregation ranges from -2.7 to 32.5%

of the wage gap, with the percentage above 20 for three of the five industries. The percent female
in the occupation accounts for the largest share, ranging from 40.6 to 74.8%. The estimated
contributions ofjob-cell segregation are not very different from ours, but Groshen's estimated
contributions of occupational segregation and within-job-cell sex differences contrast strongly
with our results.31 In this section, we discuss a number of possible explanations of these
differences.

Derences in Control Variables
Because of data limitations in the IWS, Groshen does not have any human capital or other

controls in her equations. The estimates in Tables 4-6, excluding and including controls, indicate
that this does not explain the differences between the two sets of results. In particular, the
inclusion of human capital and other controls in the NWECD data results in a remaining within-

job-cell sex difference in wages that is smaller than the difference in the absence of controls. If we

components of segregation. When we estimate the models in Table 5 omitting the percent female in
industry, establishment, and job cell, we find strong negative effects of the percent female by occupation,
which accounts for 6 to 21% of the sex wage gap, with the upper end of the range corresponding to the
more-detailed occupational classification.
310ur finding that sex segregation within occupation accounts for a relatively small proportion of
the male/female wage gap is consistent with the results reported by Macpherson and Hirsch (1995).
These authors, using matched longitudinal data on workers from the Current Population Survey, find that
once they control for unobserved worker characteristics the estimated effect of percent female within
occupation declines substantially. In fact our estimated coefficient of -.038 (in column (3) of Table 5) is
in the range of estimates they report in their Table 9. Since Macpherson and Hirsch only have data on
workers, part of what is captured by controlling for unmeasured worker characteristics is the effect of
percent female in a worker's establishment and job cell, which we find to be considerably more important
than occupational segregation, yet which are of course positively correlated with percent female in the
occupation. Although we cannot compare our results on the role of these other factors with Macpherson
and Hirsch, their results do provide some support for the accuracy of our findings.
28

compare Groshen's results with estimates using the NWECD without these other controls (as in

columns (2)-(5) of Table 4), the contrast of our results with hers is even sharper. To ensure more
direct comparability of the results from the two data sets, in this section we report results
excluding these other controls.

The Effects of the Particular Industries Studied
The most obvious difference between our NWECD data set and the IWS data that Groshen

studies is the scope of industries studied. The results we have presented using the NWECD are
based on a large sample consisting of a broad (nearly complete) array of industries, while
Groshen's work is restricted to five specific industries: Miscellaneous Plastics Products,

Nonelectrical Machinery, Banking, Life Insurance, and Computer and Data Processing. To
examine whether her results are specific to the industries she studied, we attempted to draw

subsamples in our data set for these specific industries. We were able to obtain samples large
enough to study for the first three of these industries.32 In addition to restricting the analysis of the
NWECD data to these industries, we also restrict attention to the classes of occupations covered by

the IWS. For Plastics and Machinery, these include production and maintenance occupations,
while for Banking these include nonsupervisory occupations.
A direct comparison of the results for similar workers in Miscellaneous Plastics Products,

Nonelectrical Machinery, and Banking is provided in Table 12. We present results using the
NWECD with each level of occupational disaggregation in columns (1)-(3), and Groshen's results
using the IWS in column (4)•33 Turning first to the segregation estimates, as in the full sample,

321n contrast, we had data on only 464 workers in 70 establishments in Computer and Data
Processing, and fewer than 75 workers and fewer than 10 establishments in Life Insurance.

33The unadjusted sex wage gaps are roughly comparable in the two data sources for the two
manufacturing industries, but not banking, although always smaller in the IWS. In the NWECD the
29

job-cell segregation plays a fairly important role in the NWECD data. In each industry, the
estimated contribution ofjob-cell segregation to the sex wage gap is similar to Groshen's
estimates, especially with the more-detailed occupational classification. For example, using the
most-detailed classification in the NWECD data, in column (3), the estimated share for Plastics is
.342 in the NWECD data, vs. .325 in the IWS. In Nonelectrical Machinery the corresponding
estimates are .254 vs. .124, and in Banking .208 vs. .2 18. Similarly, the estimated contributions of
establishment segregation are similar for the two data sources, with estimates in the NWECD and

the IWS (again, comparing columns (3) and (4)) of .170 vs. .121 in Plastics, .322 vs. .480 in
Nonelectrical Machinery, and .038 vs. .048 in Banking.
The differences between the two data sets remain sharp, however, regarding the roles of

occupational segregation and the individual's sex (or within-job-cell sex differences in wages). In
all three industries the IWS data indicate a much more prominent role for occupational

segregation. In the two manufacturing industries, Groshen's estimates attribute 41 to 49% of the
wage gap to occupational segregation, compared with nine to 22% in the NWECD data. In
Banking, Groshen's estimates indicate an even larger role for occupational segregation,

contributing 71% of the sex gap in wages, compared with 29% in the NWECD data. Most
importantly, in each of the three industries we obtain the same result as in the full sample that the
sex gap within job cells accounts for a large share of the wage gap; using the most-detailed
occupational classification, the individual's sex accounts for 26 to 47% of the sex wage gap,

compared with one to seven percent in the IWS data. Thus, even looking at the industries (and
occupations) Groshen studies, our data assign a less prominent role to occupational segregation,

estimated coefficients of the sex dummy variable when it is the only included variable are -.32 for
Plastics, - .40 for Nonelectrical Machinery, and -.56 for Banking. The corresponding numbers for the
IWS reported in Table I of Groshen's paper are -.24, -.30, and -.37.
30

and--in sharpest contrast to her estimates--a prominent role to sex wage gaps within establishments
and occupations.34

Dfferences in Sample Periods
One possible explanation is that our data are from a later period than the IWS, and it is
conceivable that sex differences in wages that remain after accounting for each dimension of sex
segregation widened over the 1 980s. While we have no way to evaluate this possibility, we are
skeptical that relative contributions of different components of the wage gap changed so much in

such a short period. We know, of course, that wage differences between and within skill groups
did widen over this period. However, given that the overall sex gap in wages did not widen over
this period (Blau, 1998), we see no reason to believe that it widened within job cells. We also
know that occupational segregation declined over this period (Blau, 1998), so it is possible that the
contribution of occupational segregation fell, but there is no obvious reason why the wage gap
previously attributable to occupational segregation would now all "load" on to the individual's sex.
Finally, the differences between our results and Groshen's are as sharp or sharper for the
Nonelectrical Machinery and Banking industries compared with Miscellaneous Plastics, despite
the fact that the data from the first two industries come from the 1980s, while the data for the third

come from the 1970s. Overall, then, we are very doubtful that differences in the periods studied
explain the differences in results.

34Because her occupation definitions are industry-specific, Groshen computed percent female in
the occupation separately for each industry studied, which contrasts with the procedure in more-standard
data sets of using economy-wide estimates to study the role of occupational segregation. In contrast, we
use the full SDF to compute the percent female. However, we reestimated the models in Table 12 using
a definition of the percent female based only on the specific industry. This had little or no impact on the
contribution of the individual's sex, although it did slightly raise the contribution of occupational
segregation, and slightly lower the contribution ofjob-cell segregation.
31

Differences in Occupational Classflcation and Coverage
Although in Table 12 we restrict attention to the same broad occupations that Groshen

studies, there remain differences in the occupational classification. In particular, the occupational
classifications available in the IWS are highly detailed, and specific to the five narrow industries
Groshen studies.35 This raises the possibility that if we could somehow use occupational

classifications in the NWECD that are closer to those used by Groshen in the IWS, our results
would coincide with hers.36 However, the results in Table 5 show that going from 13 to 491
occupations in the NWECD makes little substantive difference, which makes us skeptical that the

level of occupational detail explains the differences in results. Furthermore, although the IWS
occupational classification may differ from ours, it is not clear that the IWS uses a greater degree

of occupational disaggregation within each industry. In the top row of each panel in Table 12 we
report the number of occupations represented in the data set when we use each level of

occupational disaggregation; in columns (l)-(3) this is the number following the slash, whereas the
number preceding the slash is the total number of occupations on which the classification is based.
These numbers reveal that using the most-detailed Census occupations (in column (3)), we
actually have more occupations represented in each of the three industries than the IWS.
On the other hand, it may be that features of the occupational classification other than the

level of disaggregation are relevant. Presumably the most relevant one is the extent to which the
occupational classification is based on sex-segregated occupations. For example, if the Census
occupations are less sex segregated, and hence combine occupations or jobs based on the IWS

35As an example, in the Miscellaneous Plastics Products industry, Groshen cites three different
jobs on blow-molding machines as "operate," "set-up," and "set-up and operate."
36Blau's (1977) occupational classifications are also somewhat narrower than ours, primarily
because she has some distinctions based on job levels within occupations.
32

classifications that are segregated by sex, then in the NWECD we may find more evidence of a
within-job-cell sex gap in wages after accounting for segregation.
It appears, however, that the degree of sex segregation in the detailed Census occupations

is no lower than in Groshen's data. In particular, Table 13 compares the mean difference in the
percent female in job cells in the two data sets, again for the NWECD using the most-detailed

occupational classifications. As the table shows, once we use relatively detailed Census
occupational classifications, sex segregation in the NWECD is about the same as in the IWS in the
two manufacturing industries, and higher in Banking.37

Another possibility is that the results are simply sensitive to the precise occupations
covered within each industry. It turns out that the IWS often covers a narrow set of occupations
within each industry, among the production and maintenance workers (in Plastics and

Nonelectrical Machinery) and nonsupervisory workers (in Banking). To address this question, we
also constructed subsamples for each of these industries in which we restrict attention to the subset
of Census occupations that can be matched reasonably well with the main occupational categories

surveyed by the IWS. We can do this because the occupational descriptions provided in the IWS
documentation correspond closely to those in the SOC, and we can then map the SOC codes into
Census codes.38 Note that this alternative approach does not yield greater occupational

disaggregation in the NWECD. All it yields is an analysis similar to the one we have done, but for
the specific occupations covered in the IWS.

37The results of this comparison were similar if we restricted attention to the occupations that
match more explicitly those covered by the IWS, discussed below.

38This refers to the main occupational categories surveyed in the IWS. The Census occupations
are too aggregated to be matched to the occupation sub-categories in the IWS (which distinguish, for
example, by job level).
33

The results using these subsets of occupations are reported in Table 14. The results for the
IWS occupations are reported in column (1). As shown in the first row of each panel, there are
now, of course, fewer occupations covered. A comparison of the estimates in column (1) with
those in column (2), which are for all of the occupations within the broad categories of production
and maintenance or nonsupervisory workers, indicates that the estimates are not very sensitive to

restricting the sample to the subset of occupations covered in the IWS. The estimated effects of
each type of segregation are similar in the two samples. Furthermore, the estimated effect of the
individual's sex remains large for each industry in the subset of IWS occupations, with its
estimated contribution to the wage gap similar in this subset and the broader set of occupations.
Thus, differences in occupational coverage do not explain the differences between our results and
Groshen's.

The only possibility is that within the particular occupations considered in column (1) of
Table 14, the degree of occupational disaggregation matters; this is the same question we

considered earlier with respect to the broader set of occupations in the NWECD. Although it is
true that for these particular occupations Groshen's occupational classification is more
disaggregated, as indicated by the greater number of occupations in column (3) than in column (1)
of Table 14, the essential question is whether the aggregation in the NWECD masks sex

segregation. To examine this question, we computed the measure of sex segregation based on the
sex difference in the mean percent female in the job cell, for the specific occupations
corresponding to those covered by the IWS (as we did for the broader set of NWECD occupations

in Table 13). As in Table 13, the data again indicate that the aggregation in the NWECD does not
mask sex segregation relative to Groshen's classification. The degree of sex segregation is now
greater in the NWECD for both Plastics (.775 vs. .76 1) and Banking (.68 1 vs. .505), and is only a
34

bit smaller in Nonelectrical Machinery (.596 vs. .646). Thus, we conclude that neither differences
in occupational classification nor in occupational coverage appear to explain the differences
between our results and Groshen's.

Measurement Error
As discussed earlier, measurement error may influence some of our results relative to

Groshen's. In particular, sampling error in the estimates of the percent female in the establishment
and job cell may be quite severe. Of course, Groshen also does not have data on all workers in
each establishment, but rather just those in a subset of occupations; specifically, the IWS excluded

executive, professional, and supervisory workers. Thus, her estimates of the percent female in the
establishment are also prone to sampling error, and may also be influenced by the non-random

selection of which occupations were surveyed. Similarly, her estimates of percent female in the
occupation are based on a small subset of establishments, also non-random, and hence are prone to
error, whereas our estimates of occupational segregation are based on the full SDF, so that
measurement error bias is likely minimal.39 In addition to these considerations, the analysis
restricting attention to large job cells (Table 9) and using fixed effects for occupation, industry,
establishment, and job cell (Table 10), suggested that measurement error in the percent female
variables was not responsible for finding a significant negative sex gap in wages within job cells.
Finally, the direct comparison of estimates on an industry-by-industry basis also permits us
to make some more definitive statements about the possible explanations of the differences

between our results and those of Groshen. The variables in the NWECD for which measurement
error is potentially serious are the percent female in the establishment and the percent female in the

391n fact, in the discussion of the IWS, the BLS Handbook of Methods states that "estimates of
the number of workers in a given occupation are subject to considerable sampling error, due to the wide
variation among establishments in the proportion of workers found in individual occupations."
35

job cell. To address questions of measurement error, it is more useful to look at coefficient
estimates than the decomposition results, as the latter are also multiplied by the mean differences

in the segregation measure. These results are reported in Table 15. We focus on the comparison
between the two most-detailed occupational classifications in the NWECD, and Groshen's

estimates.
The variable that is most prone to measurement error in the NWECD is the percent female

in the job cell. However, the estimates in Table 15 indicate that the estimated coefficients of this
variable are larger in the NWECD than in the IWS for all three industries. This indicates that
measurement error in the NWECD, which should bias the estimated coefficient of percent female
in the job cell downward (toward zero), is not responsible for the differences in results.
Reinforcing this conclusion, the percent female in the establishment is also prone to measurement
error in the NWECD, yet the estimated coefficient of this variable is higher in our sample than in

the IWS data for the two manufacturing industries, although not for Banking. Based on this
evidence, we conclude that although measurement error may bias some of the estimates we obtain
using the NWECD data, it does not explain the differences between our results and Groshen's.

Data Collection
To this point, we have found that issues regarding measurement, occupational
classification, industries studied, etc., do not appear to explain the differences between our results

and Groshen's. We next turn to some issues regarding the role that data collection may play.
In the IWS, within each industry establishments were chosen using a random probability

sample with over-weighting of large establishments. Selected establishments reported information
on the number of workers of each sex working in nonsupervisory production jobs and

36

nonsupervisory nonproduction jobs (office work).4° No data on the sex composition of

supervisory workers were collected. Payroll records ideally were then used to collect data on the
number of workers of each sex working in a specific (non-supervisory) occupation at each

earnings level. Data were only reported for a selection of occupations that were chosen on an
industry-by-industry basis partially to reflect the types of activities performed by workers in an

industry, but also to reflect their 'prevalence in the industry, definiteness and clarity of duties, and
importance as reference points in collective bargaining." (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 1976).
The IWS data have a number of strengths and weaknesses. Because the data on the sex
composition of workers in each job cell ideally were generated using payroll data, there should be

no sampling error. In contrast, our NWECD data do contain this kind of sampling error. On the
other hand, as noted earlier, the IWS likely has some measurement error in the percent female in
the establishment and the occupation.
Perhaps the biggest drawback to the IWS relative to the NWECD, however, is that all the

data in the IWS come from surveyed establishments. While it is hard to gauge how accurately
establishments were able to or required to provide detailed occupational and earnings data by sex,

it is clear that it is not in any establishment's best interest to provide data suggesting that within
narrowly-defined occupations there was a pay gap between men and women.4' It might therefore
not be surprising to find that there is little evidence of a within-job-cell sex wage gap in the IWS.
In contrast, the wage and sex data in the NWECD come from data reported by the worker in the
SDF, where the worker has no incentive to misreport earnings or occupation in a way that is

40The survey, BLS 275 1A, asks the establishment to report the "approximate total employment"
in the establishment.

4tThe Equal Pay Act places the burden of proof on the employer to show that unequal pay for
equal work is based on a factor other than sex, such as seniority.
37

systematically correlated with sex. While this is only a possible explanation for the differences
between the results from the two data sets, we have not been able to verify that the data collection
effort accessed employers' payroll records in such a way as to ensure that employers did not

misreport individuals' wages to mask within-job-cell sex differences. For more details on how the
IWS data on earnings and sex-mix within occupations were collected, see the Appendix.
Finally, to this point we have only offered a conjecture that the IWS data lead to masking

of within-job-cell sex wage gaps. Within-job-cell sex wage gaps could be masked either by
misreporting of wages, or by misreporting of the sex composition of occupations. Given that we
do not find more segregation in the IWS data than in the NWECD data, we doubt that
misreporting of the sex composition of occupations in the IWS--specifically, the reporting of more

segregation than is actually the case--is occurring. However, we do note that in each of the three
industries that we can compare, the raw sex wage gap is smaller in Groshen's data than in our data

(see footnote 33). As noted earlier, in Groshen's data, the gap is -.24 in Plastics, -.30 in
Nonelectrical Machinery, and -.37 in Banking; in contrast, the corresponding gaps are -.32, -.39,

and -.56 in our data. Thus, despite that fact that Groshen's data come from an earlier period when
the sex wage gaps would have been expected to be larger, they are smaller by .08 to .19 in her
data. This is consistent, at least, with underreporting of sex wage gaps in the IWS.42
We do not have direct and compelling evidence to suggest that the IWS be disregarded for

the purpose of decomposing the sex wage gap. However, given the distinctly different findings
produced using the NWECD, and the potential problems with the IWS, our findings should, at a
minimum, call into question the previously-held belief based on the IWS data that occupation,
establishment, and job-cell segregation can account for essentially all of the male/female wage gap
42We thank Bob Lalonde for suggesting this comparison.

38

that is not explained by other individual-level characteristics.

VI. Policy Implications
The policy implications of our findings are very different than those drawn from the earlier

research. Our results suggest that identifying and eliminating the sources of within-occupation,
within-establishment wage differences between men and women can play a large role in reducing

wage differences between men and women. In particular, if within the narrowly-defined
occupations that we study the jobs performed by men and women require substantially equal skill,
effort, responsibility, and working conditions, yet wages differ by sex, then enforcement of the

Equal Pay Act can play a fundamental role in closing the wage gap between men and women. In
contrast, if segregation along various dimensions accounted for most of the sex wage gap, then
policies along the lines of comparable worth, equal opportunities in employment and promotion,
and affirmative action would be central to any further closing of this gap, and stronger equal pay
provisions would not be effective.43

There is currently substantial interest in equal pay issues in the federal government.

President Clinton recently announced in a radio address a $14 million equal pay initiative in his
budget proposal to address pay disparities between men and women.44 He also called on Congress

to pass the Paycheck Fairness Act, a bill introduced recently in the U.S. Senate and U.S. House of
Representatives that calls for strengthening of the Equal Pay Act to allow for, among other things,

43For example, referring to the role of equal pay provisions in eliminating within job cell sex
differences in wages, Groshen concludes from her results that "either the provisions have succeeded, or
this component was never the main source of the gap" (p. 470).

44"Radio Address by the President to the Nation," January 30, 1999.
39

compensatory and punitive damages against employers violating the Act.45'46 While not addressed

to the specifics of these proposals, our findings suggest that stronger enforcement of equal pay
legislation could further reduce the wage gap between men and women.

VII. Conclusions
We assembled a large matched employer-employee data set covering essentially all

industries and occupations across all regions of the U.S. We use this data set to re-examine the
question of the relative contributions to the overall sex gap in wages of sex segregation vs. wage
differences by sex within occupation, industry, establishment, and occupation-establishment cells.
This is especially important given that earlier research on this topic relied on data sets that covered
only a narrow range of industries, occupations, or regions.
Our results indicate that, although a sizable fraction of the sex gap in wages is accounted
for by the segregation of women into lower-paying occupations, industries, establishments, and
occupations within establishments, a substantial part of this gap remains attributable to the

individuaPs sex. Overall, our estimates indicate that from about one-quarter to one-half of the sex
wage gap takes the form of wage differences between men and women within narrowly-defined

occupations within establishments. These findings contrast sharply with the conclusions of
previous research (especially Groshen, 1991) indicating that sex segregation accounted for
45The Senate Bill is S.71, introduced by Senator Thomas Daschle on January 21, 1997. The
House Bill is H.R. 2023, introduced by Rep. Rosa DeLauro on June 24, 1997. The Senate version of the
bill additionally instructs the Secretary of Labor to "develop guidelines to enable employers to evaluate
job categories based on objective criteria such as educational requirements, skill requirements,
independence, working conditions and responsibility" which employers can use to help ensure that they
are in compliance with the law. The House version instructs the Secretary of Labor to issue "voluntary
pay guidelines for the relative pay ranges of a selection of male- and female-dominated widely held
occupations." Finally, the House version of the bill requires employers with 100 or more employees to
submit reports to the EEOC containing information from payroll records on wages by race, sex, and
national original of employees.
46Attorneys' fees can currently be awarded.

40

essentially all of the sex wage gap. We explore numerous possible explanations for these different
findings, but we find that even restricting attention to the narrow industries studied in the earlier
research, our data still show important differences in wages paid to men and women within
occupations and establishments.
We do not attempt in this paper to determine the underlying forces that cause men and
women to have different wages within narrowly-defined occupations in the same establishments.
Our results simply suggest that there is still research to be done in order to identify these forces.

In particular, our results leave open the possibility that within narrowly-defined occupations and
establishments, men and women are performing essentially the same job but are not being paid

equally--a violation of the Equal Pay Act. Further research into the sources of withinestablishment within-occupation sex wage differences is therefore much more important than

previously thought.

41

Appendix: Issues in the Collection of Earnings and Sex-Mix Data by Occupation in the IWS
Ideally, BLS field representatives collected data for the IWS on earnings and the sex-mix

within occupations using the payroll records of surveyed establishments. Data were only reported
for a selection of occupations that were chosen on an industry-by-industry basis partially to reflect
the types of activities performed by workers in an industry, but also to reflect their "prevalence in
the industry, definiteness, and clarity of duties, and importance as reference points in collective
bargaining."
When payroll records were utilized for data collection, it is not entirely clear how field

economists verified or coded wages. The form used to record the data (BLS 2753G, reproduced in
the BLS Handbook of Methods) has the following headings: (I) occupation and grade, (ii)
occupational code, (iii) sex, (iv) method of pay, (v) number of workers, (vi) hours, and (vii) salary,

rate, or earnings. There is some ambiguity regarding how the field economist would record data
on individual men and women. It does not seem likely that a record was filled out for each
worker, both because the number of records could be prohibitively large, and because the entry for

"number of workers" would not make sense. Yet the Handbook indicates that this form was used
"in recording occupation, sex, ..., and pay rate or earnings for each worker studied" (p. 138).
Alternatively, it is possible that the field economist filled out a separate line for workers of each
sex within an occupation,47 but it also appears possible that she would record a single wage for the

occupation, indicating the percent female. Unfortunately, however, we have been unable to track
down instructions that may have been issued to field economists to better understand how the IWS

seems somewhat implausible to us to think that in years subsequent to the passage of the
Equal Employment Opportunity Act of 1972 companies worked with government field economists to
prepare reports indicating different wage rates for men and women doing the same job, despite a pledge
of confidentiality from the BLS.
42

data were meant to be collected, or original copies of the filled-out surveys to determine how the
data were actually collected.
The BLS documentation for the IWS also suggests that in at least some cases companies
generated the reports for the surveys (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 1976). The Handbook (p.
138) reads:

"Bureau field economists collect data by personal visit to each of the sample establishments. Job
functions and factors in the establishment are carefully compared with those included in the
Bureau job definitions. The job matching may involve review of records such as pay structure
plans and organization charts, company position descriptions, interviews with appropriate
officials, and, on occasion, observation of jobs within plants. A satisfactory completion ofjob
matching permits acceptance of company-prepared reports where this procedure is preferred by
the respondent. Generally, however, the field economist secures wages or salary rates ... from
payroll or other records ..."

It is hard to imagine that self-generated reports by companies would contain obvious evidence of
violation of the Equal Pay Act. We were able to find no information on how many companies
generated their own reports for the BLS.

43

References
Bielby, William, and James Baron. 1984. "A Woman's Place is with Other Women: Sex
Segregation Within Organizations." In Barbara Reskin, ed., Sex Segregation in the Workplace:
Trends, Explanations. Remedies (Washington, DC: National Academy Press), pp. 27-55.
Blau, Francine D. 1977. Equal Pay in the Office (Lexington, MA: D.C. Heath and Company).

Blau, Francine D. 1998. "Trends in the Well-Being of American Women, 1970-1995." Journal of
Economic Literature, Vol. 36, No. 1, March, pp. 112-65.
Brown, Charles, and James L. Medoff. 1989. "The Employer Size Wage Effect." Journal of
Political Economy, Vol. 97, No. 5, October, pp. 1027-59.
Carrington, William J., and Kenneth R. Troske. "Sex Segregation in U.S. Manufacturing."
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 51, No. 3, April, pp. 445-64.

Fields, Judith, and Edward N. Wolff. 1995. "Interindustry Wage Differentials and the Gender
Wage Gap." Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 49, No. 1, October, pp. 105-120.
Gold, Michael Evan. 1993. An Introduction to the Law of Employment Discrimination, ILR
Bulletin 68 (Ithaca, NY: ILR Press).
Groshen, Erica L. 1991. "The Structure of the Female/Male Wage Differential: Is it Who You Are,
What You Do, or Where You Work?" Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 26, No. 3, Summer, pp.
457-72.
Jacobsen, Joyce P. 1994. "Trends in Workforce Segregation 1960-1990." Social Science
Ouarterly, Vol. 75, No. 1, March, pp. 204-11.

Johnson, George, and Gary Solon. 1986. "Estimates of the Direct Effects of Comparable Worth
Policy." American Economic Review, Vol. 76, No. 5, December, pp. 1117-25.
Korenman, Sanders, and David Neumark. 1992. "Marriage, Motherhood, and Wages." Journal of
Human Resources, Vol. 27, No. 2, Spring, pp. 233-55.
Korenman, Sanders, and David Neumark. 1991. "Does Marriage Really Make Men More
Productive." Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 26, No. 2, Spring, pp. 282-307.
Macpherson, David A., and Barry T. Hirsch. 1995. "Wages and Gender Composition: Why Do
Women's Jobs Pay Less?" Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 13, No. 3, July, pp. 426-71.

Neumark, David. 1988. "Employers' Discriminatory Behavior and the Estimation of Wage
Discrimination." Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 23, No. 3, Summer, pp. 279-95.
Oaxaca, Ronald. 1973. "Male-Female Wage Differentials in Urban Labor Markets." International
Economic Review, Vol. 14, No. 3, October, pp. 693-709.

Polachek, Solomon. 1975. "Differences in Post-School Investment as a Determinant of Market
Wage Differentials." International Economic Review, Vol. 16, No. 2, PP. 45 1-70.
Sorensen, Elaine. 1990. "The Crowding Hypothesis and Comparable Worth." Journal of Human
Resources, Vol. 25, No. 1, pp. 55-89.
Sorensen, Elaine. 1989. "Measuring the Pay Disparity Between Typically Female Occupations and
Other Jobs: A Bivariate Selectivity Approach." Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 42,
No. 4, July, pp. 624-3 9.
Stinson, John F. Jr. 1997. "New Data on Multiple Jobholding Available from the CPS." Monthly
Labor Review, March, pp. 3-8.
Troske, Kenneth R. "The Worker-Establishment Characteristics Database." Forthcoming in John
Haltiwanger, Marilyn Manser, and Robert Topel, eds., Labor Statistics Measurement Issues
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press).
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 1976. BLS Handbook of Methods. Bulletin 1910.

U.S. Department of Commerce, Office of Federal Statistical Policy and Standards. 1980. Ih
Standard Occupational Classification Manual (Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing
Office).

156,332

129,021

32,931

e. Discard matches with imputed industry or location,
or number of matched workers greater than
SSEL employment, discard workers with zero
or missing earnings, or working outside U.S.

f. Exclude workers with hours <30 or> 65,
weeks in 1989<30, age < 18 or> 65,
wage < $2.50 or> $500, public administration

g. Discard establishments with employment <25, number
of matched workers <5 percent of SSEL employment,
and earnings outliers, final sample

Standard errors of means are reported in parentheses.

201,944

...

388,787

d. Respondents matched to establishments in b.

c. Workers among long-form respondents
in Sample Detail File (SDF)

b. Establishments in unique industry-location cells

a. Establishments in SSEL with positive employment

Number of
establishments
(SSEL)
(1)
5,593,379

637,718

845,036

1,117,424

1,720,423

17,311,211

19.37
(.26)

180.84
(2.68)

83.59
(6.70)

83.24
(5.72)

7.15
(.07)

6.55
(.07)

66.46
(4.43)

8.52
(.08)

41.17
(2.30)

Number of Avg. number Avg. establishment
workers
of matched
employment
workers
from SSEL data
(2)
(3)
(4)
21.10
(.45)

Table 1: Construction ofNWECD

20,983.40
(63.64)

19,224.23
(218.75)

18,218.33
(181.34)

18,123.98
(205.00)

17,102.78
(28.97)

23,327.76
(71.73)

23,112.66
(53.66)

19,416.60
(47.81)

17,094.00
(38.83)

25,978.52
(26.58)

25,611.43
(23.88)

22,582.18
(21.21)

20,831.89
(17.28)

20,977.51
(6.75)

Avg. establishment
Avg. establishment Avg. earnings!
earnings/worker from earnings/worker from worker from
SSEL data
SDF data
SDF data
(5)
(6)
(7)
19,310.37
(10.98)

Table 2: Descriptive Statistics for NWECD and Full SDF Sample, Full-Time Full-Year Workers

Annual earnings

Log hourly wage
Demographics.
Female

Age
Black
Ever married
Number of children ever born (women)
High school degree
Some college
Associate's degree
Bachelor's degree
Advanced degree
Location.
MSA
New England
Mid-Atlantic
East North Central
West North Central
SouthAtlantic
East South Central
West South Central
Mountain
Pacific

Occupation:
Manager
Support
Service
Farming
Production
Laborer

Industry:
Agriculture
Mining
Construction
Manufacturing
Transportation
Wholesale
Retail
FIRE
Business services
Personal services
Entertainment services
Professional services

Mean
(1)
25978.52
2.349

NWECD
Standard deviation
Mean
(3)
(2)
21227.38
27259.79

.539

2.336

10.979

38.440

.468

39.589

Standard deviation

(4)
29275.13
.600

.428

.070
.855
.369

.077
.803
1.603
.325

.191

.216

.095
.128
.083

.078

.575
.044
.143
.273

.764
.056

.122
.137

.092

.083

.059

.086

.095

.038
.075

.050
.134

.270
.230
.086
.004

.281

.145
.265

.135
.173

.004
.006
.0001
.517
.062
.012
.039

.018
.009
.067
.239
.085
.052
.139
.076
.043
.023
.010

1.841

SDF

1.622

.007
.004
.002
.002
.343

The sample size is 637,718 for the NWECD, and 10,830,247 for the SDF.

.159
.085

.153
.195
.165

.306
.088
.016

.238

11.272

1.583

Table 3: Regressions for Log Wages for SDF and NWECD Workers

SDF workers
Female

-0.231
(0.001)

-0.174
(0.001)

NWECD workers
(4)
-0.282
-0.166
(0.001)
(0.002)

Age

0.062
(0.0003)

0.048
(0.0003)

0.058
(0.0004)

0.043
(0.0003)

Age2IlOO

-0.060

(0.0004)

-0.045
(0.0003)

-0.055
(0.0004)

-0.040
(0.0004)

Number of children

-0.049
(0.002)

-0.032
(0.002)

-0.029
(0.002)

-0.023
(0.002)

Number of children x age

-0.0002
(0.00004)

-0.0002
(0.00003)

-0.0004
(0.00004)

-0.0002
(0.00003)

Black

-0.072
(0.002)

-0.03 1

(0.002)

-0.081
(0.002)

-0.042
(0.002)

Ever married

0.135
(0.001)

0.086
(0.001)

0.132
(0.002)

0.081
(0.002)

High school degree

0.178
(0.001)

0.104
(0.001)

0.156
(0.002)

0.098
(0.002)

Some college

0.284
(0.002)

0.156
(0.002)

0.254
(0.002)

0.143
(0.002)

Associate's degree

0.363
(0.002)

0.186
(0.002)

0.401
(0.002)

0.194
(0.002)

Bachelor's degree

0.568
(0.002)

0.335
(0.002)

0.542
(0.002)

0.325
(0.002)

Advanced degree

0.743
(0.002)

0.493
(0.002)

0.663
(0.002)

0.480
(0.003)

MSA

0.205
(0.001)

0.166
(0.001)

0.157
(0.001)

(0.001)

(1)

(2)

(3)

0.120

Industry controls

No

Yes

No

Yes

Occupation controls

No

Yes

No

Yes

0.364

0.494

0.409

0.562

637,718

637,718

R2

N

1,084,379

1,084,379

The regressions in columns (1) and (2) are based on a 10-percent random sample from the SDF. Standard errors of regression estimates
are reported in parentheses. The industry and occupation controls include the full set of three-digit Census industry and occupation
codes. Number of children refers to number of children ever born; this is asked of women in the Census, and is set to zero for men.

Table 4: Estimated Log Wage Differentials by Sex, and Percent Female in Occupation, Industry, Establishment, and Job Cell

Coefficient Coefficient
estimate

(1)
Female

% female in occupation,

estimate

-.375

(2)
-.244

(.001)

(.002)

...

.180

Mean difference,
women - men

(3)
1.00

Absolute
contribution to
wage gap, (2) x (3)

(4)
-.244

Relative
contribution to
wage gao
(5)
.651

...

.122

.180

.032

-.087

...

-.188

.248

.030

-.081

...

-.243

...

...

.049

-.163

.108

.338

-.064

.170

-.166
(.004)

.149

.536

-.130

.347

-.097
(.003)

.138

.054

.045

(.004)
Age

-.102

(.005)

(.005)
%female in job cell

(7)
.351

(.003)

(.006)
% female in establishment

Relative
contribution to
wage gap

(.002)

(.004)
%female in industry

Coefficient
estimate
(6)
-.132

-.312

...

...

(.0004)

Agesquared

...

...

-.243

...

...

1002

x

Black

-.051

-.033

(.0004)
...

...

.023

...

...

-.076

.005

(.002)
Ever married

...

...

-.011

...

...

.120

.004

(.002)

Number of children

...

...

1.841

...

...

-.019

.095

(.002)

Number of children
x

...

...

81.590

...

...

age

Highschooldegree

-.0005

.103

(.00004)
...

...

-.019

...

...

.159

.008

(.002)

Some college

...

...

-.001

...

...

.272

.001

(.002)
Associate's degree

...

...

.050

...

...

.450

-.060

(.002)

Bachelor's degree

...

...

.002

...

...

.592

-.003

(.002)
Advanced degree

...

...

-.011

...

...

.752

.021

(.002)
MSA

...

...

-.049

...

...

.146

.019

(.00 1)

R2

.121

.140

.438

The sample size is 637,718. Standard errors of regression estimates are reported in parentheses. In this table, 13 occupational categories are used.

Table 5: Estimated Log Wage Differentials by Sex, and Percent Female in Occupation, Industry, Establishment,
and Job Cell, Varying Degrees of Occupational Disaggregation

13

(2)
72

(3)
491

% female in occupation

.180

.340

.396

% female in job cell

.536

.657

.744

-.132
(.002)

-.104
(.002)

-.091
(.002)

-.102
(.003)

-.011

(.003)

-.038
(.003)

% female in industry

-.163
(.005)

-.178
(.005)

-.164
(.005)

% female in establishment

-.166
(.004)

-.162
(.004)

-.187
(.004)

%femaleinjobcell

-.097
(.003)

-.139
(.003)

-.119
(.003)

R2

.438

.438

.437

Relative contribution to wage gap:
Female

.351

.278

.243

% female in occupation

.049

.010

.040

%femaleinindustry

.108

.118

.109

% female in establishment

.149

.146

.169

% female in job cell

.138

.244

.236

(1)

Number of occupations

Mean derences, women - men:

Coefficient estimates:
Female

% female in occupation

All specifications include the same controls as in column (6) of Table 4. Column (1) reproduces results from columns (6)
and (7) of Table 4. The sample size is 637,718. The residual category in the relative contribution to the wage gap is the
contribution of the human capital controls.

Table 6: Estimated Log Wage Differentials by Sex, and Percent Female in Occupation, Industry, Establishment,
and Job Cell, Varying Degrees of Occupational Disaggregation,
with Establishment-Level Controls for Size and Multi-Unit Firms

(1)

(3)

13

(2)
72

491

Mean differences, women - men:
% female in occupation

.180

.340

.396

% female in job cell

.536

.657

.744

-.135
(.002)

-.107
(.002)

-.094
(.002)

-.095
(.003)

- .009

(.003)

-.042
(.003)

%femaleinindustry

-.154
(.005)

-.168
(.005)

-.151
(.005)

% female in establishment

-.147
(.004)

-.145
(.004)

-.172
(.004)

% female in job cell

-.102
(.003)

-.143

(.003)

-.119
(.003)

.457

.457

.456

Relative contribution to wage gap:
Female

.361

.287

.252

% female in occupation

.046

.008

.044

%femaleinindustry

.102

.111

.100

% female in establishment

.132

.131

.155

% female in job cell

.145

.250

.236

Number of occupations

Coefficient estimates:
Female

% female in occupation

Dummy variables for establishment sizes 25-49, 50-99, 100-249, 250-499, and 500+ were included, Individual coefficient
estimates are not reported, but indicated a significant positive monotone relationship of log wages with size. A control
variable for whether the establishment belonged to a multi-unit firm was also included; this contributed .022-.023 to the
wage gap. Aside from these differences, all specifications include the same controls as in column (6) of Table 4. The
sample size is 637,718.

Table 7: Estimated Log Wage Differentials by Sex, and Percent Female in Occupation, Industry, Establishment,
and Job Cell, Varying Degrees of Occupational Disaggregation, for Manufacturing and Non-Manufacturing Plants

A. Manufacturing

(1)

(2)

(3)

13

72

491

Mean d(fferences, women - men:
% female in occupation

.112

.226

.287

% female in industry

.127

.127

.127

%female in establishment

.246

.246

.246

% female in job cell

.482

.632

.730

Relative contribution
to wage gap:
Female

.354

.284

.248

% female in occupation

.003

.049

.077

% female in industry

.095

.086

.083

% female in establishment

.092

.122

.133

% female in job cell

.172

.173

.174

Number of occupations

B. Non-Manufacturing
Mean differences, women - men:
% female in occupation

.174

.344

.394

% female in industry

.205

.205

.205

% female in establishment

.275

.275

.275

% female in job cell

.480

.603

.698

Relative contribution to wage gap:
Female

.339

.263

.233

% female in occupation

.148

-.003

.018

% female in industry

.097

.120

.115

% female in establishment

.091

.050

.070

-.0 14

.237

.231

% female in job cell

All specifications include the same controls as in column (6) of Table 4. The sample size is 329,905 in Panel A, and
307,813 in Panel B.

Table 8: Estimated Log Wage Differentials by Sex, and Percent Female in Occupation, Industry, Establishment,
and Job Cell, Workers Under Median Age

(1)

(2)

13

72

(3)
491

Mean differences, women - men:
% female in occupation

.177

.334

.386

% female in industry

.240

.240

.240

% female in establishment

.328

.328

.328

% female in job cell

.526

.649

.738

-.08 1

-.065
(.003)

-.053
(.003)

.002

-.025
(.004)

Number of occupations

Coefficient estimates:
Female

(.002)

% female in occupation

-.106
(.004)

(.004)

-.143
(.006)

-.164
(.006)

-.15 1

% female in establishment

-.154
(.006)

-.155
(.006)

-.176
(.005)

% female in job cell

-.084
(.004)

-.114
(.004)

-.099
(.004)

R2

.398

.397

.397

Relative contribution to wage gap:
Female

.308

.247

.200

% female in occupation

.071

-.002

.037

% female in industry

.130

.149

.137

% female in establishment

.192

.192

.218

% female in job cell

.167

.279

.276

% female in industry

(.006)

All specifications include the same controls as in column (6) of Table 4. The sample size is 313,045. The raw wage gap
for this sample is -.264. The median age is 39 for both men and women.

Table 9: Estimated Log Wage Differentials by Sex, and Percent Female in Occupation, Industry, Establishment,
and Job Cell, Restricting Minimum Size of Job Cell to 10 Workers to Reduce Measurement Error

(1)
13

(2)
72

(3)
491

Mean differences, women - men:
% female in occupation

.172

.357

.421

% female in industry

.266

.283

.292

% female in establishment

.338

.354

.364

% female in job cell

.439

.492

.535

-.122
(.002)

-.096
(.003)

-.091

-.160
(.005)

.151

(.008)

.227
(.010)

% female in industry

-.092
(.008)

-.309
(.012)

-.352
(.015)

% female in establishment

-.143
(.010)

-.011

(.012)

-.075
(.015)

-.171
(.007)

-.290
(.008)

-.280
(.010)

R2

.373

.366

.367

N

448,305

298,227

201,176

9,005

6,467

4,961

Relative contribution
to wage gap, restricted/unrestricted:
Female

.331/.351

.282/.278

.277/.243

% female in occupation

.075/049

-.159/.010

-.2911.040

% female in industry

.0671.108

.258/.118

.312/.109

% female in establishment

.131/149

.0111.146

.083/.169

% female in job cell

.203/138

.4211.244

.455/.236

Number of occupations

Coefficient estimates:
Female

% female in occupation

% female in job cell

Number of establishments

(.004)

All specifications include the same controls as in column (6) of Table 4. In the bottom panel, the estimates following the 'I'
reproduce those in Table 5.

Table 10: Estimated Log Wage Differentials by Sex, Including Fixed Occupation, Industry, Establishment,
and Job Cell Effects

(1)

(2)

Number of occupations

13

72

(3)
491

No controls, full sample:
Estimated coefficient of
female dummy variable

-.235
(.00 1)

-.196
(.002)

-.180
(.002)

Relative contribution to
wage gap

.628

.524

.481

Estimate relative to
specification using
percent female variables

.96

.93

.91

With controls, full sample:
Estimated coefficient of
female dummy variable

Relative contribution to
wage gap

Estimate relative to
specification using
percent female variables
With controls, restrict minimum
size ofjob cell to 10 workers:
Estimated coefficient of
female dummy variable

Relative contribution to
wage gap
Estimate relative to
specification using
percent female variables

-.170
(.002)

-.142
(.002)

-.130
(.002)

.453

.380

.347

1.29

1.37

1.43

-.142
(.002)

-.112
(.003)

-.107
(.003)

.386

.330

.326

1.08

1.08

1.18

All specifications include the same controls as in column (6) of Table 4. The industry, occupation, and establishment
effects are all absorbed in job-cell dummy variables, which are incorporated by forming within-job cell deviations.

Table 11: Estimated Log Wage Differentials by Sex, and Percent Female in Occupation, Industry, Establishment,
and Job Cell, With Separate Wage Equations for Men and Women

Number of occupations
Coefficient estimates:
% female in occupation

% female in industry

% female in establishment

% female in job cell

N

Men
(1)
72

Women
(1')
72

Men

Women

(2)

(2')

491

491

-.122
(.004)

.059

(.004)

-.129
(.004)

(.003)

-.116
(.007)

-.307
(.007)

-.090

(.007)

-.127
(.006)

-.157
(.006)

-.130
(.005)

-.199

-.008

-.220
(.004)

-.0004
(.004)

-.191

(.004)
.379

.367

.379

.366

339,041

298,677

339,041

298,677

-.313

.021

(.007)
(.006)

(.004)

Relative contribution to wage
gap, male/female wage
structure as no-discrimination
wage structure
Female

.528/336

.517/292

% female in occupation

.11 11-053

.1361-023

% female in industry

.208/.077

.203/.059

% female in establishment

.115/.142

.118/.180

% female in job cell

.014/386

.001/.379

Specifications include the same controls as in column (6) of Table 4. In calculating the decompositions, the coefficients on the number of children
variables are treated as zero for men. When reporting the relative contributions, the entry before (after) the 'I' uses the male (female) wage structure
as the no-discrimination wage structure.

Table 12: Estimated Log Wage Differentials by Sex, and Percent Female in Occupation, Establishment,
and Job Cell, Specific Industries

A. Miscellaneous Plastics Products, Production and Maintenance Workers

(3)

Groshens results
(4)

491/86

42

Number of occupations

13/3

NWECD data
(2)
72/20

Relative contribution to wage gap:
Female

.459

.376

.264

.067

% female in occupation

.190

.124

.223

.488

% female in establishment

.116

.139

.170

.121

% female in job cell

.236

.361

.342

.325

(1)

N

3,106
324

Number of establishments

70,355
876

B. Nonelectrical Machinery, Production and Maintenance Workers

Number of occupations

13/3

72/23

491/123

77

Relative contribution to wage gap:
Female

.480

.380

.336

.010

% female in occupation

.102

.110

.088

.406

% female in establishment

.376

.308

.322

.480

% female in job cell

.042

.202

.254

.124

N

54,838
795

12,356
734

Number of establishments

C. Banking, Nonsupervisory Workers

Number of occupations

13/Il

72/30

491/68

48

Relative contribution to wage gap:
Female

.488

.531

.466

.024

% female in occupation

.309

.215

.289

.710

% female in establishment

.022

.029

.038

.048

% female in job cell

.182

.226

.208

.218

N
Number of establishments

2,573

440

74,480
579

All controls included in early tables are excluded here, to maintain comparability with Groshens results; she does not have data on any of these
controls. The results with the NWECD data were qualitatively similar including the human capital controls. Column (4) is from Groshen (1991),
Tables I and 2. In the rows labeled 'numbers of occupations" we first report the number of occupations used in the occupational classification
(corresponding to the earlier tables), and then the number of occupations represented in the data for the specific industry and occupations considered.

Table 13: Comparison of Sex Segregation in Job Cells

A. Miscellaneous Plastics Products, Production and .Vlainlenance Workers

Number of occupations
Mean difference, women - men,
in % female in job cell

NWECD data
(1)
86

Groshen's data
(2)
42

.731

.761

B. Nonelectrical Machinery, Production and Maintenance Workers
Number of occupations

123

77

Mean difference, women - men,
in % female in job cell

.646

.646

C. Banking, Nonsupervisory Workers

Number of occupations
Mean difference, women - men,
in % female in job cell
See notes to Table 12.

68

48

.740

.505

Table 14: Estimated Log Wage Differentials by Sex, and Percent Female in Occupation, Establishment,
and Job Cell, Specific Industries, Using Main IWS Occupation Categories

A. Miscellaneous Plastics Products
NWECD data,
IWS occupations

NWECD data, all production
and maintenance workers

(1)

(3)

491/39

(2)
491/86

.195

.264

.067

% female in occupation

.241

.223

.488

% female in establishment

.163

.170

.121

% female in job cell

.401

.342

.325

N

1,771
227

3,106
324

70,355
876

Number of occupations
Relative contribution to wage gap:
Female

Number of establishments

Groshen's results
42

B. Nonelectrical Machinery

Number of occupations

491/26

491/123

77

Relative contribution to wage gap:
Female

.377

.336

.010

% female in occupation

.076

.088

.406

% female in establishment

.200

.322

.480

% female in job cell

.347

.254

.124

N

5,626

12,356
734

54,838
795

491 / 13

NWECD data, all
nonsupervisory workers
491/68

Groshen's results
48

Relative contribution to wage gap:
Female

.437

.466

.024

% female in occupation

.363

.289

.710

% female in establishment

.019

.038

.048

%female in job cell

.182

.208

.218

N

1,830
390

2,573

74,480
579

Number of establishments

451

C. Banking

NWECD data,
IWS occupations

Number of occupations

Number of establishments

440

See notes to Table 12. Estimates in columns (2) and (3) are reproduced from columns (3) and (4) of Table 12.

Table 15: Comparison of Coefficient Estimates Underlying Decompositions

A. Miscellaneous Plastics Products, Production and Maintenance Workers
NWECD data
Number of occupations
Female

% female in occupation

% female in establishment

% female in job cell

Groshen's results

(1)

(2)

20

(3)

86

42

-.120
(.023)

-.084

-.0 16

(.027)

(.003)

(.041)

-.438
(.044)

-.242
(.004)

-.197
(.037)

-.241

(.035)

-.099
(.004)

-.187
(.034)

-.150
(.035)

-.103
(.005)

-.311

B. Nonelectrical Machinery, Production and Ma intenance Workers
Number of occupations

23

123

77

-.150
(.014)

-.133
(.016)

(.004)

% female in occupation

-.362
(.026)

-.169
(.023)

-.452
(.006)

% female in establishment

-.357
(.026)

-.373
(.024)

-.330
(.007)

% female in job cell

-.143
(.026)

-.156
(.025)

-.058
(.007)

Female

.003

C. Banking, Nonsupervisory Workers

30

68

48

Female

-.299
(.034)

-.263
(.039)

-.009
(.003)

% female in occupation

-.588
(.052)

-.654

(.046)

-.685
(.008)

-.102
(.060)

-.135

-.385

(.058)

(.012)

-.198

-.158

(.048)

(.050)

-.160
(.008)

Number of occupations

% female in establishment

% female injob cell

See notes to Table 12. The number of occupations listed is the number represented in the data for the specific industry and occupations considered.
Specifications correspond to those in columns (2), (3), and (4) of Table 12, respectively.

