1. Introduction
Empirical asset pricing is in a state of turmoil. The Capital Asset Pricing Model [CAPM, Sharpe
(1964), Black (1972)] has long served as the backbone of academic finance and numerous
important applications. However, studies have identified empirical deficiencies in the CAPM,
challenging its preeminence. The most powerful challenges include market capitalization and
related financial ratios that can predict the cross-section of returns. For example, the firm "sizeeffect" drew attention as a challenge to the CAPM. Ratios of stock market price to earnings or
the book value of equity are studied by Basu (1977), Banz (1981), Chan, Hamao and Lakonishok
(1991), and Fama and French (1992), among others.
With the CAPM under such strenuous attack the field is hungry for a replacement
model.1 There are some natural heirs waiting in the wings, including the intertemporal
equilibrium models of Merton (1973) and Breeden (1979) and the Arbitrage Pricing Theory of
Ross (1976). However, empirical implementations of these models have failed to produce much
confidence in their explanatory power [e.g. Chan, Chen and Hsieh (1985), Chen, Roll and Ross
(1986), Shanken and Weinstein (1990), Hansen and Singleton (1982), Connor and Korajczyk
(1988), Lehmann and Modest (1988), Roll (1995)].
One response to this hunger for a replacement for the CAPM has been to use the returns
of attribute-sorted portfolios of common stocks to represent the factors in a multi-beta model.
For example, Fama and French (FF, 1993, 1995, 1996) advocate a three-factor "model," in
1

The CAPM does have its erstwhile saviors. For example, studies find that dynamic
versions of the CAPM with time-varying parameters and/or broader specifications for the
market portfolio perform better than traditional formulations of the model. Examples include
Harvey (1989), Ferson and Harvey (1991), Pannikkath (1993), Ferson and Korajczyk (1995),
Jagannathan and Wang (1996) and Carhart, et al. (1996). See Ghysels (1998) for a recent
critique of conditional CAPMs.

2
which a market portfolio return is joined by a portfolio long in high book-to-market stocks and
short in low book-to-market stocks, (HML) and a portfolio that is long in small (i.e, low market
capitalization) firms and short large firms (SMB). Fama and French (1997) use this model for
calculating the costs of equity capital for industry portfolios [see also Ibbotson Associates
(1998)]. Several recent studies use the FF three-factor model as an empirical asset pricing
model. However, the model is controversial.
There is controversy over why the firm-specific attributes that are used to form the FF
factors should predict returns. Some argue that such variables may be used to find securities that
are systematically mispriced by the market [e.g. Graham and Dodd (1934), Lakonishok, Shleifer
and Vishny (1994), Haugen and Baker (1996), Daniel and Titman (1997)]. Others argue that the
measures are proxies for exposure to underlying economic risk factors that are rationally priced
in the market [e.g. Fama and French (1993, 1995, 1996)]. A third view is that the observed
predictive relations are largely the result of data snooping and various biases in the data [e.g.
Black (1993), MacKinlay (1995), Breen and Korajczyk (1994), Kothari, Shanken and Sloan
(1995); see also Chan, et al. (1995)].
Berk (1995) emphasizes that because returns are related mechanically to price by a
present value relation, ratios which have price in the denominator are related to returns by
construction. If the numerator of such a ratio can capture cross-sectional variation in the
expected cash flows, the ratio is likely to provide a proxy for the cross-section of expected
returns. Ratios like the book-to-market are therefore likely to be related to the cross-section of
stock returns whether they are related to rationally priced economic risks or to mispricing effects.
Ferson et. al. (1999) illustrate that spread portfolios like SMB or HML can appear to explain the

3
cross-section of stock returns even when the attributes used in the sort bear no relation to risk.
Since the FF factors are not derived from a theoretical model, such concerns about their
interpretation are natural.
Given the prominence of the Fama-French three-factor model, we believe that it is
interesting to test its empirical performance as an asset pricing model. The model was developed
to explain unconditional mean (average) returns, and several studies explore its ability to explain
average returns.2 In this paper we test the FF model on conditional expected returns. Thus, we
do not focus on alternative "factors" that may provide a better model of average returns. We
concentrate instead on the ability of the model to capture common dynamic patterns in returns,
modelled using a set of lagged, economy-wide predictor variables. Previous studies, including
Fama and French (1996), explore the ability of the FF model to capture dynamic patterns in
returns such as the momentum effect of Jegadeesh and Titman (1993). We focus on common
dynamic patterns, captured by a standard set of economy-wide instruments. These lagged
instruments are used in numerous previous studies, including some by Fama and French (1988,
89).
We find that simple proxies for time variation in expected returns, based on common
lagged instruments, are also significant cross-sectional predictors of returns. The ability of these

2

Fama and French (1993, 1996) find some nonzero alphas relative to the model, but
interpreted them as economically insignificant. Daniel and Titman (1997) find nonzero alphas
using the FF model against a "characteristics-based" alternative for average returns. Berk
(1997) criticizes their sorting procedures and Davis, Fama and French (1998) question the outof-sample validity of their findings. Brennan, Chordia and Subrahmanyam (1998) document
cross-sectional attributes such and trading volume and exchange membership, that also appear
to reject the FF three-factor model.

4
variables to explain the cross-section of returns provides a powerful rejection of the FF model as
a conditional asset pricing model. In some cases loadings on the lagged variables drive out the
individual FF variables in cross-sectional regressions. The results are robust to variations in the
empirical methods and to a variety of portfolio grouping procedures. We also reject the four
factor model advocated by Elton, Gruber and Blake (1995). Our results raise a caution flag for
researchers who would use the FF and Elton, Gruber and Blake models to control for systematic
patterns in risk and expected return. Our results carry implications for risk analysis, performance
measurement, cost-of-capital calculations and other applications.
Our paper is related most closely to previous studies that have used the loadings of stock
portfolios on lagged economy-wide variables to explain the cross-section of expected returns.
Jagannathan and Wang (1996) and Jagannathan, Kubota and Takehara (1998) show that asset
covariances with labor income can be a powerful cross-sectional predictor in the U.S. and Japan.
We use loadings on a larger set of lagged variables from the literature modelling time-series
predictability.3 The results show that size and book-to-market related factors leave out important
cross-sectional information about expected returns, even in portfolios formed to maximize the
potential explanatory power of these variables. The FF factors perform even less well in
alternative designs.

3

Conditional asset pricing studies use lagged instruments to model the time-series of
returns, and then test cross-sectional restrictions on the conditional expected returns. An early
example of this approach is the so-called "latent variable" tests, pioneered by Hansen and
Hodrick (1983) and Gibbons and Ferson (1985); see Ferson, Foerster and Keim (1993) for a
review of this literature. Conversely, a few studies have observed that ratios such as book-tomarket, originally identified as a cross-sectional predictor, have some time-series predictive
power for aggregate returns [e.g. Pontiff and Schall (1997), Kothari and Shanken (1996)].

5
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 details the empirical methods. Here we
propose a simple refinement of the standard Fama-MacBeth (1973) approach to cross-sectional
regressions designed to improve its efficiency. Section 3 describes the data. Our empirical
results are presented in the fourth section. Section 5 explores some of the implications of the
results. Section 6 discusses the robustness of the results to alternative portfolio grouping
procedures, errors-in-variables and other considerations. Some concluding remarks are offered in
the final section.

2. The Empirical Framework
2.1 Time-series Tests
We start with the null hypothesis that the FF three-factor model identifies the relevant risk in a
linear return generating process:

ri,t+1 = Et(ri,t+1) + $it' {rp,t+1 - Et(rp,t+1)} + ,i,t+1

(1)

Et(,i,t+1)=0,
Et(,i,t+1 rp,t+1)=0,

where ri,t+1 is the return for any stock or portfolio i, net of the return to a one-month Treasury
bill. rp,t+1 is a vector of excess returns on the risk factor-mimicking portfolios. In the FF threefactor model, rp is a 3 x 1 vector containing the market index excess return, HML and SMB.
The notation Et(.) indicates the conditional expectation, given a common public information set at
time-t. The factor model expresses the unanticipated return, ri,t+1-Et(ri,t+1), as a linear regression

6
on the unanticipated parts of the factors. The coefficient vectors $it are the conditional betas of
the return ri on the factors (this is content of the third line of equation 1). The error terms ,i,t+1
may be correlated across assets.4
Equation (1) captures the idea that rp,t+1 are risk factors, but it says nothing about the
determination of expected returns. We assume the following general model for the conditional
expected returns and the betas:

Et(ri,t+1) = "it + $it' Et(rp,t+1),
$it = b0i + b1i' Zt,

(2)

"it = "0i + "1i' Zt,

where Zt is an L x 1 vector of mean zero information variables known at time t and the
parameters of the model are {b0i, b1i, "0i, and "1i}. In the FF three-factor model, b0i is 3x1, b1i is
3xL, "1i is 1xL and "0i is a scalar.
Since we find that the lagged instruments have explanatory power beyond the FF threefactor model, we want to be sure that they do not simply proxy for time-variation in the FF factor
betas. Given the evidence of time-varying conditional betas for stock portfolio returns [e.g.
Ferson and Harvey (1991), Ferson and Korajczyk (1995), Braun, et al. (1995)], it makes sense to
allow for time-variation in the conditional betas. Thus, we allow the betas in equation (2) to

4

The covariance matrix of these errors would be restricted to have bounded eigenvalues as
the number of assets grows in the Arbitrage Pricing Theory [see, e.g. Chamberlain and
Rothschild (1983)].

7
depend on Zt. The betas are modelled as linear functions of the predetermined instruments,
following Shanken (1990), Ferson and Schadt (1996) and other studies. In equation (2), the
relation over time between the lagged instruments and the betas for a given portfolio is assumed
to be a fixed linear function, as b1i is a fixed coefficient. However, we examine models
estimated on rolling sample windows, an approach that allows b1i to vary over time, thus relaxing
the assumption of a fixed linear relation.
The hypothesis that the FF model explains expected returns says that the "alpha" term,
"it in equation (2) is zero (that is, the parameters "0i, "1i are zero). Assuming that alpha is zero is
equivalent to assuming that the error term ,i,t+1 in equation (1) is not priced. Testing for "1i=0
in system (2) asks whether the variables in Zt can predict returns over and above their role as
linear instruments for the betas.
Equation (2) follows previous empirical studies in which the alternative hypothesis
specifies an alpha that is linear in instrumental variables. Examples include Fama and MacBeth
(1973), who used the square of beta and a residual risk; Rosenberg and Marathe (1979) who used
firm-specific accounting measures; and more recently Daniel and Titman (1997) who use
portfolio valuation ratios. Our example provides an natural test of the FF model, where
mispricing related to the lagged, economy-wide instruments Zt is the alternative hypothesis.
The models for both the betas and the alphas, as given by equation (2), are likely to be
imperfect. The second and third equations of (2) may have independent error terms, reflecting
possible misspecification of the alphas and the betas.
Combining equations (1) and (2), we derive the following econometric model:

8
rit+1 = ("0i + "1i'Zt) + (b0i + b1i'Zt) rp,t+1 + ,i,t+1.

(3)

An advantage of the regression (3) is that it does not impose a functional form for the expected
premiums, Et(rpt+1). This allows us to address the question of whether the lagged market
indicators enter as proxies for time-variation in the conditional betas for specific factors, without
concern about getting the right model for the expected returns on the factors.

2.2 Cross-sectional Test Methodology
The cross-sectional regression approach of Fama and MacBeth (1973) is widely used to study
asset pricing models and the cross-sectional structure of asset returns. In this approach returns
are regressed each month, cross-sectionally, on a set of predetermined attributes of the firms or
portfolios. The attributes may include estimates of "betas" from a prior time period, as in Fama
and MacBeth's study of the CAPM, or other variables such as the book-to-market ratio of the
portfolio may be used, as in Fama and French (1992).
A cross-sectional regression using stock returns as the dependent variable is likely to
have heteroskedastic and correlated errors, the latter due to the substantial correlation across
stock returns in a given month. The usual regression standard errors are therefore not reliable.
To test the hypothesis that the expected coefficient is zero, Fama and MacBeth suggested forming
a t-ratio as the time series average of the monthly cross-sectional coefficients divided by the
standard error of the mean, where the latter is computed from the time-series of the coefficient
estimates. Shanken (1992) provides an analysis of the properties of this widely used approach.
Jagannathan and Wang (1998) provide a recent asymptotic analysis, and Ahn and Gadarowski

9
(1998) extend the analysis under autocorrelation and heteroskedasticity, where a single crosssectional regression is used.
In the appendix of this paper we show that the approach of Fama and MacBeth, which
weights the monthly cross-sectional regression coefficients equally over time, can be easily
improved. Under standard assumptions, the efficient GLS estimator of the pooled time-series and
cross-sectional regression can be written as a weighted average of the time-series of the FamaMacBeth coefficients. The monthly estimates are weighted in inverse proportion to their
variances. A measure of the total explanatory power of the system is also derived. We present
results using the efficient-weighted estimators, as well as using the more traditional approach.

3. The Data
We obtained monthly returns on U.S. common stock portfolios for the period July, 1963 to
December, 1994. The portfolios are formed similar to Fama and French (1993). Individual
common stocks are placed into five groups according to their prior equity market capitalization,
and independently on the basis of their ratios of book value to market value per share. This 5 by
5 classification scheme results in a sample of 25 equity portfolio returns. The appendix provides
a more detailed description. Table 1 presents summary statistics for the returns. The means and
standard deviations are annualized.
Our lagged instrumental variables, Zt, follow from previous studies. These are: (1) the
difference between the one-month lagged returns of a three-month and a one-month Treasury bill
["hb3," see Campbell (1987), Harvey (1989), Ferson and Harvey (1991)], (2) the dividend yield
of the Standard and Poors 500 (S&P500) index ["div," see Fama and French (1988)], (3) the

10
spread between Moody's Baa and Aaa corporate bond yields ["junk," see Keim and Stambaugh
(1986) or Fama (1990)], (4) the spread between a ten-year and a one-year Treasury bond yield
["term," see Fama and French (1989)] and (5), the lagged value of a one-month Treasury bill
yield ["Tbill," see Fama and Schwert (1977), Ferson (1989) or Breen et al. (1989)].5
Table 2 summarizes time-series regressions of the twenty five portfolios on the lagged
instruments. The data are monthly for the July 1963 to December 1994 period. The regressions
produce significant t-statistics for many of the variables. The adjusted R-squares vary from about
6-14% across the 25 portfolios. The residual autocorrelations are generally not large -- about 0.1
on average -- but there are some statistically significant autocorrelations for the small firm
portfolios. These no doubt reflect the nonsynchronous trading of these small stocks.6
The coefficients on the lagged variables show a great deal of spread across the
portfolios. This is important, as cross-sectional dispersion in the coefficients is necessary to
provide explanatory power for the cross-section of stock returns.
Table 2 also reports regressions for the FF factor portfolios on the lagged instruments.
Two of the FF factors, MARKET and SMB produce similar R-squares to the 25 portfolios, but
the HML portfolio is remarkable, as its adjusted R-square is zero. This foreshadows the result
that the HML portfolio does not help to explain time-varying conditional expected returns.

5

Because of concerns about possible nonstationarity of the bill, we also examine results
where the one-month yield is stochastically detrended by subtracting the lagged, twelve-month
moving average.
6

The autocorrelations are estimated by regressing the fitted residual on its lagged value by
OLS. A White (1980) t-ratio is reported for the slope coefficient of this regression in Table 2.

11
4. Empirical Evidence
4.1 Are the Betas time-varying?
As we will show later, the lagged instruments track variation in expected returns that is not
captured by the FF three-factor model. However, the lagged instruments may have explanatory
power because they pick up time-variation in the betas on the FF factors. This would imply that
the FF model should be implemented in a conditional form, i.e. with time-varying betas, but it
would not indicate a fundamental shortcoming of the FF model.7
To examine the issue of time-varying betas, we report regressions in which we allow the
lagged instruments to enter the models through the conditional betas. Table 3 presents the results
of estimating the time-series regression (3) for each of the 25 portfolio returns. Both one-factor
models, where the CRSP index is the market factor, and the FF three-factor model are examined;
to save space we focus on the three-factor model in Table 3.8 The table reports the adjusted Rsquares of the regressions and the right-tail p-values of F tests for the hypothesis that the
interaction terms between the factor-mimicking portfolios and the lagged variables may be
excluded from the regressions. In the three-factor model, the F-tests for eleven of the 25
portfolios produce p-values below 0.05 when the alphas are allowed to be time varying, and
twelve cases reject constant betas on the assumption that the alphas are constant over time. A
joint Bonferroni test strongly rejects the hypothesis that the betas are constant over time, in either

7

Subsequent to an earlier version of this paper, Fama and French (1997) presented
evidence of time-varying betas in their model, when applied to industry portfolios. Eckbo et
al. (1998) provide evidence of time-varying betas for firms issuing new equity and their
matching firms.
8

More details are available at http://www.duke.edu/~charvey/Research/inder.htm.

12
specification. The evidence of Table 3 suggests that even if the FF factors are useful to control
for "risk," it may be important to allow for the time-varying betas picked up by the lagged
instruments.

4.2 Time-series Evidence on the Three-factor Model
Table 4 presents further results from the time-series model (3). For the first two columns we
regress the 25 size and book/market portfolio excess returns on a constant and the three FF
factors. A t-test is conducted for the hypothesis that the intercept is equal to zero, similar to
Fama and French (1993, 1996), who found that the intercepts were close to zero. The null
hypothesis is equivalent to the statement that a constant combination of the three FF factors is an
unconditional (fixed weight) minimum variance portfolio. This says that the three factors explain
the unconditional expected returns of the 25 portfolios and therefore, of all fixed-weight
portfolios formed from them. Similar to Fama and French, we find little evidence against this
hypothesis. Only 4 of 25 p-values (second column) are less than 0.05. The largest unconditional
alpha is for the small-firm/value portfolio; just over 6% per year, and the second largest alpha is
about 2.3% per year.
In the third column of Table 4 we subject the FF model to a more stringent test, with a
specific alternative hypothesis. We regress the portfolio excess returns over time on the three FF
factors and the vector of lagged instruments. The F-test for the hypothesis that the lagged
variables may be excluded from the regression is reported. This is implied by the hypothesis that
the FF three-factor model with constant betas can explain the dynamic behavior of the conditional
expected returns of the 25 portfolios, given the lagged instruments. Now we find strong evidence

13
against the model. All of the p-values are less than 0.10, and all except one of the 25 are less
than 0.05.9
Since we found evidence that conditional betas for the 25 portfolios on the FF variables
are time-varying, the instruments could enter the model through the betas. In other words, by
holding the betas fixed the tests may be biased against the FF model. In the fourth column of
Table 4 we allow the betas to be time-varying. Each portfolio excess return is regressed on a
constant intercept, the lagged instruments, the FF factors and the products of the FF factors with
the lagged instruments. This allows the FF factor betas to vary as a linear function of the lagged
instruments. The null hypothesis that the alphas are constant (the lagged instruments may be
excluded from the model of alpha) is tested with an F-test. Most of the p-values from this test
are again small. We thus obtain a strong rejection of the FF three-factor model, even allowing
for time-varying betas that depend on the instruments.
In summary, Fama and French (1993) found that the regression intercepts are close to
zero for their three-factor model. However, conditional on the lagged instruments the alphas are
time-varying and thus, not zero. This implies that the FF three-factor model does not explain the
conditional expected returns of these portfolios. Even a conditional version of the FF model,
with time-varying betas, can be rejected.

4.3 Economic Significance of the Conditional Alphas

9

Conditional pricing implies that the intercepts and the slopes on the lagged instruments are
zero, while we test the weaker implication that only the slopes are zero. Including the intercept
would provide an even more powerful rejection of the FF model.

14
While the time-series tests reject the FF model, the lagged instruments deliver only small
increments to the already large time-series R-squares provided by the contemporaneous factors.
We therefore conduct experiments to assess the economic significance of the conditional alphas.
In a first experiment we use the fitted conditional alphas in a step-ahead "trading
strategy" to assess the economic significance of the departures from the FF model. Each month
we form portfolios using the estimated conditional alphas of equation (3) and trailing data. Each
of the 25 size and book-to-market sorted portfolios is assigned an alpha rank, and an equally
weighted combination of the top seven and bottom seven alpha portfolios is formed and held for
one month. The procedure is repeated each month, producing a time-series of trading strategy
returns for high and low-alpha portfolios. The models are estimated using either an expanding
sample or a rolling, 60-month sample. We find that the subsequent returns of the high
conditional alpha portfolios exceed those of the low conditional alpha portfolios by economically
significant amounts. With the expanding sample, the difference in returns is more than 9% per
year. With the rolling sample, it is more than 8% per year. The standard deviations of the
returns are slightly smaller in the high alpha portfolios, which reinforces the economic
significance of the conditional alphas.
In a second experiment we use the fitted values of the alphas, "0i + "1i'Zt, from
equation (3) in monthly cross-sectional regressions for ri,t+1, where the equation (3) is estimated
using only trailing data. The three-factor betas for time t are also included in the regression.
This means that the cross-sectional regression coefficient on the fitted alphas is the return for the
month of a zero-net investment portfolio with three-factor betas equal to zero and a fitted alpha,
based on past data, of one percent per month. If the FF model is correctly specified the expected

15
return of such a portfolio and, therefore, of the time-series average of the coefficient, should be
zero.
The results of the cross-sectional regressions using a number of specifications for the
fitted alphas and the FF factor betas may be found on the internet. They show that the fitted
alphas are significant regressors in models with the three FF betas, producing t-ratios between
4.3 and 7.8, depending on the experiment. Including the fitted alphas in the regressions does not
much affect the coefficients on the FF betas, because the fitted alphas are constructed to be
orthogonal to the FF betas in the cross-section.10 Thus, the regressions further illustrate the
economic significance of the conditional alphas.

4.4 The Cross-section of Expected Stock Returns Revisited
Fama and French (1992) use cross-sectional regressions of stock portfolio returns on size and
book-to-market to attack the CAPM. In this section we use a similar approach to examine the FF
three-factor model in more detail. Consider the cross-sectional regression

rit+1 = (o,t+1 + (t+1' $it + (4,t+1 *it'Zt + Qit+1 ; i = 1, ..., N,

(5)

where (o,t+1 is the intercept and (t+1=((1,t+1,(2,t+1(3,t+1)' and (4,t+1 are the slope coefficients.

10

This occurs because the factors are simple combinations of the test assets, which implies
that a weighted average of the alphas must be zero. Consider the special case of a stacked
regression model: r = " + rp$ + u, where rp=rW is a combination of the test assets with
weight given by the nxk matrix, W. Using the definition $ = (W'VW)-1W'V, where V is the
covariance matrix of r, it is easy to show that "'V-1$' = 0.

16
The $it are the betas on the three FF variables, formed using information up to time t. The term
*it'Zt denotes the fitted conditional expected return, formed by regressing the return i on the
lagged variables Z, using data up to date t, where *it is the time-series regression coefficient.11
We will use fitit as a shorthand for this variable. The dating convention thus indicates when a
coefficient or variable would be public information. The hypothesis that the FF factor betas
explain the cross-section of expected returns implies that the coefficient (4,t+1 is zero. The
alternative hypothesis is that the FF variables do not explain the conditional expected returns, as
captured by the lagged instruments.
Jagannathan and Wang (1997) study the asymptotic properties of cross-sectional
regression models, allowing for heteroskedasticity in returns. They show that if an asset pricing
model is misspecified, the coefficients are biased and, in some cases, the t-ratios do not conform
to a limiting t distribution. Thus, the coefficients can not be used to select significant factors.
They emphasize, however, that including additional cross-sectional predictors in the model, the tratios for those variables provide a valid test of the null model. Their analysis justifies our use of
the t-ratio on (4 as a test of the FF three-factor model.
Table 5 summarizes several versions of the cross-sectional regressions. The time-series
averages of the cross-sectional regression coefficients are shown along with their Fama-MacBeth
t-ratios. We examine one-factor models, where the CRSP value-weighted index is the factor and

11

The time-series regression is riJ = *it'Z J-1 + v iJ, J=1,... t, so * it is estimated using data up
to time t for returns and up to time t-1 for the lagged instruments.

17
three-factor models, using the FF variables. Table 5 concentrates on the FF three-factor model.12
We estimate the betas using either an expanding sample or a rolling, 60 month prior estimation
period. When conditional betas are used (panels C,D,G and H) they are assumed to be linear
functions of the lagged instruments. We estimate each cross-sectional regression model with and
without the fitted expected returns in the regression, and we compare the results.
The FF model implies that the intercepts of the cross-sectional regressions should be
zero. Table 5 shows that when the three factor-betas are the only regressors the intercept has a tratio of 0.80 using the expanding sample, as large as 1.9 in other cases. The larger values may
be interpreted as weak evidence against the FF three-factor model, similar to Fama and French
(1993, 1996).
When the fitted expected returns using the lagged market instruments (the "fit") are
included in the cross-sectional regressions the results are dramatically different. The t-ratios of
the fit are in excess of 5.7 in all of the panels. The FF three-factor model thus fails miserably,
when confronted with this alternative hypothesis. While the magnitudes of the coefficients are
difficult to interpret if the model is misspecified [Jagannathan and Wang (1997)], some of the
patterns are interesting. With the fit in the regressions the coefficients on HML are consistently
smaller, and the t-ratios become individually insignificant in many of the cases. The average
coefficient on the market beta, (1(mkt), is usually larger in the presence of the fit. The intercepts
are typically smaller and insignificant when the fit is included.

12

Results for the one-factor models are available on the internet. Consistent with Fama and
French (1992), there is no significant relation between the returns on these portfolios and the
market index betas. However, the fitted expected returns using the lagged market instruments are
highly significant, with t-ratios in excess of seven.

18
The coefficients and t-ratios in Table 5 show that the FF three-factor model is rejected.
The fit thus provides a powerful alternative that allows us to detect patterns in the cross-section of
the conditional expected returns that the FF model does not capture. The rejection can also be
turned around. If the fit delivered a perfect proxy for Et(ri,t+1). Then in the cross section, the
coefficients on $it should have a mean of zero and the coefficient on the fit should be 1.0. The
tests therefore reject the hypothesis that the fit completely captures expected returns. Of course,
since the lagged instruments represent only a subset of publicly available information, and the
regressions that determine the fit have estimation error, we do not expect the fit to provide a
perfect proxy for expected returns. We discuss errors-in-variables in separate section below.
The t-ratios in Table 5 allow a convenient economic interpretation of the rejections, as
they are proportional to a portfolio's Sharpe ratio (average excess return divided by standard
deviation). For example, with a sample of 378 months and a t-ratio for the HML premium of
3.65 in Panel A, the Sharpe ratio of the HML premium is 3.65/%378 = 0.188. MacKinlay
(1995) argues that such a high Sharpe ratio for monthly stock returns is implausible. With the fit
in the regression the Sharpe ratio for the HML premium is 1.58/%378 = 0.081, while that for the
premium, (4(fit), is 7.8/%378 = 0.401. Applying MacKinlay's interpretation here, it suggests
that if we accepted the FF three-factor as a model for both expected returns and risk control, then
the portfolio strategy implied by the fit is an attractive, near arbitrage opportunity. Alternatively,
we interpret the evidence as a striking rejection of the FF three-factor model.

4.5 Are these "Useless" Factors?
While the results of the cross-sectional regressions are striking they should be interpreted with

19
some caution. Kan and Zhang (1999) provide an analysis of bias in cross-sectional regressions
when there is a "useless" factor that has a true beta in time series equal to zero. They show that
such a useless factor beta may appear with a large t-ratio in a cross-sectional regression, as the
design matrix of the regression is ill-conditioned. Jagannathan and Wang (1998) provide an
asymptotic analysis that includes a useless factor as a special case, and Ahn and Gadarowski
(1998) extend their results with more general assumptions about heteroskedasticity and
autocorrelation. Given that the lagged instruments have relatively small R-squares in the timeseries, it is possible that our results reflect a bias as described by these studies.
Kan and Zhang (1999) suggest using the stability of the cross-sectional coefficient in
subperiods as a diagnostic tool to indicate the useless factor bias, as the cross-sectional
coefficients should be unstable in the presence of a useless factor. Our rolling estimators provide
an opportunity to look for instability. We therefore examine time-series plots of our crosssectional coefficients. Figure 1 shows an example. The cross-sectional regression coefficients on
the fit are graphed over time. Superimposed on the same graph are the monthly coefficients for a
factor which is as far from useless in the time-series regression as we can imagine; that is, the
coefficient for the beta on the market index. Since the units of the regressors -- market beta
versus fit -- are different, we multiply the coefficient on the fit by the ratio of the time series
means of the coefficient values. Scaled to the same means, the volatilities of the two time series
are very different. The coefficients on the fit appear much more stable than those for the market
beta. Indeed, to see variation in both series on the same graph we use different scales: The fit
coefficient is shown at a smaller scale than the market beta coefficient. Given this striking
evidence, we do not believe that a useless factor story explains our results.

20

4.6 Results using efficient-weighted Fama-MacBeth Regressions
Table 6 summarizes cross-sectional regression results using the efficient-weighted version of the
Fama-MacBeth coefficients, as derived in the appendix. These essentially weight the coefficient
each month in inverse proportion to the variance of the estimator from that month. A t-ratio for
each coefficient is constructed similar to Fama and MacBeth (1973), but where the months are
weighted to reflect the weighted estimator.
The results in Table 6 confirm the finding that the fit allows us to reject the FF model in
cross-sectional regressions. In three of the four cases, the fit t-ratio is significant given the FF
factor loadings. Although the magnitudes should be interpreted with caution, as explained
before, many of the patterns in the regression results are similar to those of Table 5. Only in one
of four cases does the coefficient on the HML loading produce a significant t-ratio when the fit is
in the regression, and in no case is SMB significant. However, unlike the previous tables, the
weighted average slope coefficient for HML is larger when the fit is in the regression.
We observed earlier that the increments to time-series regression R-squares, for the
portfolio returns regressed on the contemporaneous factors, are small when the lagged
instruments are included in the regressions. Table 6 includes estimates of overall R-squares, as
derived in the appendix. The overall R-squares combine the time-series and cross-sectional
dimensions of model explanatory power, where each return-month is weighted inversely to its
variance. For the FF model, the R-squares vary between 0.2% and 0.42% across the
experiments. These figures are much lower than the cross-sectional regression R-squares
reported in previous studies, reflecting the relatively poor fit of the FF three-factor betas to the

21
time-series of the expected returns. (Recall that the explanatory variables are predetermined
betas, not the contemporaneous factor values.) When the predetermined value of the fit is in the
regressions, the R-squares range from 9.3% to 9.5%. These figures are similar to those obtained
from time-series regressions of returns on the lagged instruments themselves. The comparison
shows that the fit provides a dramatic improvement in the overall explanatory power, illustrating
that the FF three factor model is strongly rejected when we ask it to explain time-variation in
conditional expected returns.

4.7 Digging deeper
Given that the time-series instruments deliver such a powerful cross-sectional predictor of stock
returns, it is interesting to know which of the lagged variables are relatively important in the
cross-sectional regressions. We repeat the cross-sectional analysis of the preceding section,
replacing the fitted expected returns with the estimated regression coefficient, *, on a single
lagged instrument, and we study the instruments one at a time in the presence of the FF threefactor betas. The results may be found on the internet.
The cross-sectional coefficients on the individual *'s show a number of interesting
patterns. No individual coefficient drives the cross-sectional explanatory power. However, the
coefficients for the lagged excess return of the three-month bill, *HB3, and for the lagged onemonth yield *Tbill, are consistently strongly significant cross-sectional predictors. For example,
the t-ratios for the slope coefficient for *HB3 are between 2.6 and 3.8 in all of the 48 different
specifications we examine. For *Tbill the t-ratios are all between 2.1 and 4.1. This suggests that
the FF three-factor model leaves out important patterns in expected stock returns that are related

22
to cross-sectional differences in the portfolios' sensitivity to lagged interest rates.

4.8 Tests on a Four-factor Model
The idea that the FF factor model may leave out important interest rate exposures is reflected in
the work of Elton, Gruber and Blake (EGB, 1995), who advocate a four-factor model. The first
three factors are similar to FF, and the fourth factor is a low-grade bond portfolio excess return.
We repeat the battery of tests described above using the EGB four-factor model as the null
hypothesis, with data over the February, 1979 - December 1993 period, a total of 180 monthly
observations.13 The main results are summarized here, and are available by request or on the
internet.
When we test for time-varying betas of the size and book/market sorted portfolios, as in
Table 3, we find evidence of time-varying betas in the four-factor model. The F-tests produce 10
out of 25 p-values less than 0.05, and the Bonferroni inequality implies that the p-value of a joint
test across the 25 portfolios is less than 0.001. There is also evidence of time-varying alphas in
this model, similar to Table 4. As a prelude to the cross-sectional regressions we examine the
average cross-sectional correlations of the four factor-beta estimates and we find no strong
correlations. This suggests that the (x'x) matrix in the cross-sectional regressions should not be
ill-conditioned due to colinearity of the regressors.
The cross-sectional regression analysis, similar to Table 5, reveals some interesting
results for the four-factor model. In the presence of the bond-return factor, the betas on the EGB

13

We are grateful to Chris Blake for providing data on the EGB factors.

23
market, size and value-growth factors are seldom individually significant in the cross-sectional
regressions. By itself, the fitted expected return produces t-ratios between 3.8-5.8 in experiments
corresponding to the eight panels of Table 5. When the four factor-betas and the fit are in the
regression, the t-ratios for the fit are between 3.3-5.6. No four-factor beta is individually
significant in the presence of the fit.
In summary, the results for the EGB four-factor model are similar to the results for the
FF three factor model. Conditional on the lagged instruments the alphas in either model are
time-varying and thus, not zero. This implies that the models do not explain the conditional
expected returns of these portfolios. Even conditional versions of the models, with time-varying
betas, do not capture the dynamic patterns of the expected returns. The lagged instruments do
not explain much the time-series variance of the returns. However, in cross-sectional regressions
the fit is a relatively powerful regressor. Its Fama-MacBeth t-ratios are large even with the
factor-betas in the regression.

5. Interpreting the evidence
The above evidence shows that variables used to proxy for expected returns over time in the
conditional asset pricing literature also provide a potent challenge for the Fama-French and EltonGruber-Blake variables in explaining the cross-section of conditional expected returns. These
results carry implications for risk analysis in market efficiency studies, performance
measurement, cost-of-capital calculations and other applications.
Factor models are frequently used to control for risk in studies of market efficiency.
This is typically done by regressing returns on the factors and taking the residuals, perhaps added

24
to the intercept, as a measure of risk-adjusted returns. Alternatively, returns may be measured in
excess of the return on a matching portfolio, constructed to have similar market capitalization and
book/market ratio as the firm to be studied. Such an approach is required in a situation such as a
study of initial public offerings (IPOs), as no prior returns data are available to estimate a
regression model. If size and book/market are good proxies for risk, then the matching portfolio
provides a risk adjustment. Our evidence casts serious doubt on the empirical validity of such a
procedure. Matching the market, small firm and book/market exposure is expected to leave
predictable dynamic behavior in the "risk adjusted" returns. When studying the performance of
portfolios based on a phenomenon that is correlated with aggregate economic activity, such as
IPOs, the risk of falsely detecting "market inefficiencies" is likely to be especially acute. This is
because the lagged instruments are likely to be correlated with the event in question.
Another recent application of the FF and EGB factor models is in measuring the
performance of mutual funds. Here, a regression of the fund on the factor excess returns
produces an intercept that is interpreted as a multi-beta version of Jensen's (1968) alpha.
However, our evidence shows that even the hypothetical, mechanically-constructed portfolios in
our study have nonzero alphas in these models. The alphas are time-varying and can be modelled
as simple functions of publicly available, lagged instruments. Since these portfolios can in
principle be traded and the instruments are known, it should be a simple matter for a fund to
"game" a performance measure constructed using these models. From this perspective, the
performance of funds in relation to such strategies remains an open puzzle.14

14

Becker et. al (1998) find that, while hypothetical portfolios of value stocks return more
than growth stocks, portfolios of value-investing mutual funds grouped on similar criteria in their

25
Factor models for expected returns, and the CAPM in particular, have long been used in
corporate cost-of-capital calculations. Here, the idea is to find an expected return commensurate
with the risk of a project, and to discount prospective cash flows at the risk-adjusted return to
determine its present value. Studies such as Fama and French (1997) have put the FF factor
model to this application, and some have used it in practice. Of course, the lack of theoretical
grounding for the FF model is a serious limitation in this context. For example, taken literally
the model suggests that a firm could change its capital costs by altering its book value, other
things equal. Our empirical evidence provides additional reasons to be suspicious of the FF
model as a source of risk-adjusted discount rates.
Our empirical results may also be interpreted from a technical perspective, in view of
portfolio efficiency. A portfolio is minimum-variance efficient if and only if expected returns in
the cross-section are a linear function of asset's covariances with the portfolio return [e.g. Roll
(1977)]. If betas on the FF factors provide a reasonable description of the cross-section of the
unconditional expected returns of these portfolios, then a combination of the factors is a fixedweight, unconditionally efficient portfolio. If the lagged variables deliver a good proxy for the
conditional expected returns at each date, given the lagged instruments Zt, the fit is proportional
in the cross-section to betas on a conditional minimum-variance portfolio given Zt. The FamaMacBeth regressions use the actual future returns each month as the dependent variable. These
may be viewed as equal to the unconditional expected returns plus noise, or as equal to the
conditional expected returns plus a noise which is, on average, smaller. The covariances with a

equity holdings do not offer higher returns than growth mutual funds. The difference is not
explained by higher expense ratios for growth funds.

26
conditionally efficient portfolio should therefore provide a more powerful regressor in the FamaMacBeth approach, with smaller errors than would the covariances with an unconditionally
efficient, fixed weight portfolio.15
Although the portfolio efficiency interpretation of our results does not require a riskbased asset pricing model, if a risk-based model determines expected returns then the results
carry implications about the model. These may provide direction for future research attempting
to identify better-specified asset pricing models. In a risk-based asset pricing model expected
excess returns are proportional to securities covariances with a marginal utility of wealth. In
essence, we should be looking for models in which the cross-section of the conditional
covariances with the marginal utility captures the cross-section of the fit.

6. Robustness of the Results
We conduct a number of additional experiments to assess the sensitivity of our results to the
portfolio grouping procedures and the empirical methods. The results of these experiments are
described in this section. Tables of these results are available by request, or on the internet.

6.1 Errors-in-variables
The cross-sectional regressions are likely to be affected by errors-in-variables when the first-pass

15

We emphasize that the unconditional efficiency is defined here within the set of fixed
weight portfolios of the test assets. This is to distinguish from the notion of unconditional
efficiency in Hansen and Richard (1987), which is defined over the set of all dynamic trading
strategies that may depend on the conditioning information. See Bansal and Harvey (1997) and
Ferson and Siegel (1997) for treatments of efficiency with dynamic trading strategies.

27
time-series regression coefficients appear on the right-hand side. If the factors are measured with
error, we may falsely reject a model by introducing an explanatory variable that is correlated
with the true factor betas. Kim (1997) explores the possibility that the CAPM is rejected by a
book-to-market factor for this reason, and we can not rule out a similar explanation for our
rejections of the FF model. Since it is not clear what risks the FF factors may represent, it is
hard to consider measuring those factors without error.
Errors in variables arises even when the first-pass regressions are unbiased, as a result of
the sampling error in the first-pass estimator. This is the classic generated regressor problem,
known to bias the second pass, cross-sectional regression slopes in finite samples, and their
standard errors even in infinite samples [see Pagan (1984), Shanken (1992), Kim (1995, 1997)
and Kan and Zhang (1999) for recent analyses]. The first pass regression coefficients may also
be biased in finite samples even without measurement errors in the factors [e.g. Stambaugh
(1998), Kothari and Shanken (1997)].
While measurement error problems are potentially complex, they are likely to be more
severe in the time-series coefficients of the fit than in the estimates of the FF factor betas,
because the explanatory power of a time-series regression on the contemporaneous FF factors is
much higher than on the lagged instruments. Errors-in-variables therefore probably works
against our ability to find that the lagged instruments are significant, suggesting that our results
are conservative in view of measurement error. However, when there is correlated measurement
error in a multiple regression the direction of the effect may be difficult to predict. We wish to
be conservative about our evidence that the fit rejects the FF model. Therefore, we conduct of
experiments to assess the likely robustness of our results to measurement errors.

28
We repeat our analysis using the actual values of size and book/market in place of timeseries betas on the FF factor-portfolios. As these attributes are likely to be measured more
precisely than the time-series regression coefficients, this skews the measurement error further in
favor of the FF model. We use data on twenty five portfolios, sorted on the basis of
book/market and size, together with the actual values of the log of the market capitalization,
lnSize, and the log of the book/market ratio, lnB/M, measured similar to Fama and French
(1992).16 The data cover the July 1964 to December 1992 period, a total of 342 observations.
We repeat our previous tests for time-varying betas and alphas using this slightly
different sample of returns, and the results are similar to those reported above. We find strong
evidence of time-varying betas and alphas. Table 7 focusses on the cross-sectional regressions,
similar to Table 5 but using the actual lagged values of the attributes instead of the FF betas for
SMB and HML. When the market betas, lnSize and lnB/M are used alone in the regressions, the
results are as expected from Fama and French (1992). When the fit is included in the crosssectional regressions, its t-ratios are 4.3 or larger in every case we consider. This is striking
evidence against the FF three-factor model, especially in view of the measurement error issue.
As an additional check, we run cross-sectional regressions using betas on the FF factors
and on the time-series of the fitted cross-sectional coefficients obtained from Table 5, treating the
latter as competing excess returns or "factors". This approach should place the fit at a further
measurement error disadvantage, relative to the FF factors. We find that the fit loadings produce
a Fama-MacBeth t-ratio larger than 1.95 in three of the four panels corresponding to Table 5.

16

These data are courtesy of Raymond Kan and Chu Zhang, to whom we are grateful. The
sorting criteria are somewhat different than in our first sample; see the appendix for details.

29
While these additional experiements increase our confidence that our results are robust to
measurment errors, it seems impossible to completely resolve the measurement error issue
without knowledge of the underlying "true" model of expected returns.

6.2 Results for Industry Portfolios
We replicate the tests of the previous sections using a sample of industry portfolio returns. The
data are from Harvey and Kirby (1996) and are described in the appendix. Industry portfolios
are interesting in view of the evidence in Fama and French (1997), who use the FF three-factor
model to estimate industry costs of capital. Since the FF factors are designed to explain the
returns on size and book/market portfolios, we expect them to perform less well on portfolios
grouped by alternative criteria.
We find strong evidence that the lagged market indicators enter as instruments for time
varying betas on the industry portfolios. The F-tests for 22 of the 25 portfolios produce p-values
below 0.05, and a joint Bonferroni test strongly rejects the hypothesis that the three factor-betas
are constant. Compared with our tests in Table 3, this is consistent with the observation of Fama
and French (1997) that the betas of industries vary over time more dramatically than portfolios
sorted on size and book/market.
The portfolio excess returns are regressed on a constant and the three FF factors and a ttest is conducted for the hypothesis that the intercept is equal to zero. Similar to the size and
book/market portfolios, this test produces find little evidence against the hypothesis that the FF
variables can unconditionally price the 25 industry portfolios, and fixed-weight combinations of
their returns; only 5 of 25 p-values are less than 0.05.

30
We regress the portfolio excess returns on the three FF factors and the vector of lagged
instruments. The F-test for the hypothesis that the vector of instruments may be excluded from
the regression produces 25 p-values; all are less than 0.01. When we allow for both time-varying
betas and time-varying alphas and test the hypothesis that the alphas are constant, we find 24 of
the 25 p-values are below 0.01. In summary, the industry portfolio evidence against the FF
three-factor model is even more striking than is the evidence based on the book/market
portfolios.
We repeated our tests of the EGB four-factor model using the industry portfolios in place
of the size and book/market sorted portfolios. We find slightly weaker evidence of time-varying
betas and alphas here than in the other portfolio design. Still, the tests reject the hypotheses of
constant betas or alphas. The cross-sectional regression analysis produces generally similar
results to those we described before.

6.3 Size, book-to-market and momentum portfolios
Fama and French (1996) found that their three-factor model was most seriously challenged by the
"momentum" anomaly described by Jegadeesh and Titman (1993). This is the observation that
portfolios of stocks with relatively high returns over the past year tend to have high future
returns. To see if our results are sensitive to portfolios grouped on momentum, we obtained data
from Carhart, et al. (1996).17 In each month, t, Carhart et al. (1996) group the common stocks
on the CRSP tape into thirds according to three independent criteria, producing 27 individual

17

These data are courtesy of Mark Carhart, to whom we are grateful.

31
portfolio return series. The grouping criteria are (1) market equity capitalization, (2) the ratio of
book equity to market equity and (2) the past return for months t-2 to t-12. The data are
available for the same sample period as our previous analysis, so we can conduct a controlled
experiment by using the same lagged instrument data.
Conducting the tests for time-varying betas as in Table 3, we find strong evidence that
the betas on the FF factors vary with the lagged instruments. The largest of the 27 p-values from
the F-tests is 0.029. Examining the alphas as in Table 4, we find that the unconditional alphas
are larger than in the original twenty five portfolios, consistent with the findings of Fama and
French (1996). They range to -11% per year. Testing for zero unconditional alphas using F
tests, 16 of the 27 p-values are less than 0.05 and the Bonferroni p-value is less than 0.001.
Testing for constant alphas in conditional models with time-varying betas, the largest of the 27 pvalues is less than 0.001.
We examine cross-sectional regressions, similar to Table 5, and find that the results are
consistent with those using the other portfolio designs. When the fitted conditional expected
return is used alone in the cross-sectional regressions, its t-ratio varies between 7.9 and 8.3.
When all four variables are used, the t-ratio for fitted expected return remains strong, between
7.5 and 8.4.
6.4 Data Mining
The issue of data mining has been raised in previous studies, both in connection with the size and
book/market effects in the cross-section of stock returns and in connection with the lagged
instruments in the time series of returns [e.g. Lo and MacKinlay (1990), Black (1993), Breen and
Korajczyk (1994), Foster, Smith and Whaley (1997)]. With data mining, a chance correlation in

32
the data may be "discovered" to be an interesting economic phenomenon. An empirical
regularity that is dredged from the data by chance is not expected to hold up outside of the
sample that generated it. Since many researchers use the same data in asset pricing studies, a
collective form of data mining is a severe risk. Of particular concern here is the extent to which
our results may be an artifact of data mining.
While we can not rule out a potential data mining bias in our results, we have reasons to
suspect this is not a serious problem. There have been out-of-sample studies that help to mitigate
concerns about data mining in the cross-sectional analysis of book/market. For example, Chan,
Lakonishok and Hamao (1991) and Fama and French (1998) find book/market effects in the
cross-section of average returns in Japan and other countries. Davis, Fama and French (1998)
extend the results in U.S. data, back to 1929. Barber and Lyons (1997) find the effects in a
sample of U.S. firms that were not used by Fama and French in their original (1992) study.
There is also out-of-sample evidence that helps to mitigate concerns about data mining in
the time-series predictive ability of the lagged instruments. The lagged Treasury bill rate, for
example, was noted by Fama and Schwert (1977). If its explanatory power was a statistical
fluke, it should not have remained a potent predictor, as it has, in more recent samples. Pesaran
and Timmerman (1995) present an analysis of the ability of a set of lagged instruments, similar to
ours, to predict returns in periods after they were discovered and promoted in academic studies.
We have an additional reason to believe that our results are not an artifact of data
mining. Even if the lagged instruments were dredged from the data in previous studies, they
were selected primarily for their ability to predict stock returns over time. We can think of no
reason that a spurious time-series correlation with returns should produce a spurious ability to

33
explain the cross-section of portfolio returns.

7. Concluding Remarks
Previous studies identify predetermined variables with some power to explain the time series of
stock and bond returns. This paper shows that loadings on the same variables also provide
significant cross-sectional explanatory power for stock portfolio returns. We use time-series
loadings on the lagged variables to conduct powerful tests of empirical models for the crosssection of stock returns. We reject the three-factor model advocated by Fama and French (FF,
1993) even in a sample of equity portfolios similar to the one used to derive their factors. We
also reject the four factor model advocated by Elton, Gruber and Blake (EGB, 1995). The results
are robust to variations in the empirical methods, and to a variety of portfolio grouping
procedures.
Our focus is not to search for alternatives to the factors advocated by Fama and French
and Elton, Gruber and Blake. Our evidence does suggest that applications of these factor models
should control for time-varying betas, and that doing so provides some improvement. However,
even conditional versions of the models, with time-varying betas, appear to leave significant
predictable patterns in their pricing errors.
Loadings on lagged instruments reveal information that is not captured by these popular
factors for the cross-section of expected returns. This should raise a caution flag for researchers
who would use the FF or EGB factors in an attempt to control for systematic patterns in risk and
expected return. The results carry implications for risk analysis, performance measurement,
cost-of-capital calculations and other applications.

34
Appendix
Efficient weighting of Fama-MacBeth Regressions
Consider a pooled time-series and cross-section regression model written similar to Litzenberger
and Ramaswamy (1979), as:
Y = X ( + U, E(UU') = S,

(A.1)

where Y is a TN x 1 vector. The first N rows are the returns of N stock portfolios for the first
month of the sample, followed by the second month, and so on. There are T months in the
sample. The TN x K matrix X has a column of ones, and the remaining columns are the
predetermined portfolio attributes such as the betas, book-to-market ratios or the fitted expected
returns, stacked up like the dependent variable. The K x 1 vector of parameters, (, are the
average risk premiums that we wish to estimate. The TN x TN covariance matrix is S.
Under standard assumptions the generalized least squares estimator is best linear
unbiased, and is given as:

(GLS = (X'S-1X)-1 X'S-1Y

(A.2)

We make the assumption that the error terms are uncorrelated over time but correlated across
stock portfolios with a general N x N covariance matrix at date t, St. This implies that S has a
block diagonal structure with the St's on the diagonal. Using this structure in equation (A.2), the
GLS estimator may be written as:

(GLS = (Et Xt'St-1Xt)-1 (Et Xt'St-1Yt) ,

(A.3)

35
where Et indicates summation over time. Now, the GLS version of the Fama-MacBeth
coefficient for month t may be written as:

(FM,t = (Xt'St-1Xt)-1 (Xt'St-1Yt)

(A.4)

From equations (A.3) and (A.4) we can express the full GLS estimator as:
(GLS = Et {(Et Xt'St-1Xt)-1 (Xt'St-1Xt)} (FM,t ,

(A.5)

which shows that the efficient GLS estimator is a weighted average of the Fama-MacBeth
estimates with the weights for each date t, proportional to Xt'St-1Xt.
From equation (A.4) we calculate the variance of a typical Fama-MacBeth estimator for
month t as E{((FM,t- ()((FM,t- ()'} = (Xt'St-1Xt)-1. Thus, we can see that the efficient weighting
of the FM estimators in (A.5) places more weight on the months with lower variance estimators,
and less weight on a month with an imprecise estimate.
The standard errors of the GLS estimates may be obtained from the usual expression:
Var((GLS) = (Et Xt'St-1Xt)-1. However, when N is large relative to T (for example, a standard
design with a rolling regression estimator of beta, N=25 and T=60), full covariance GLS is not
practical. In such cases weighted least squares (WLS) may be used, which assumes that St is
diagonal. But with a diagonal covariance matrix the standard error estimator does not capture the
strong cross-sectional dependence in stock returns, which motivates the original Fama-MacBeth
approach.
Fama and MacBeth (1973) suggest calculating a standard error for the overall coefficient
from the time-series of the monthly estimates. The variance of the sample mean of the monthly

36
estimates is: (1/T)[T-1Et (FM,t2 - (T-1Et (FM,t)2], which assumes that the model errors are
uncorrelated over time, but cross-sectionally dependent.
We provide a simple modification of the approach of Fama and MacBeth for the
efficient-weighted FM estimator. We first express (GLS=Et wt(FM,t, where the weight for each
month, wt={(Et Xt'St-1Xt)-1 (Xt'St-1Xt)}. The variance may be obtained as:

s2((GLS) = (1/T)[T-1Et wt2 (FM,t2 - (T-1Et wt(FM,t)2].

(A.6)

The standard errors for the efficient-weighted FM estimator are thus obtained by replacing (FM,t
by wt(FM,t in the usual calculation.

A Measure of Explanatory Power
The simplest measure of explanatory power in a regression model is the coefficient of
determination, or R-squared. However, the usual R-squared is difficult to interpret in a crosssectional regression for stock returns because of the strong cross-sectional dependence. Consider
a standard, GLS-transformed version of equation (A.1):

~
Y

~
~
=~
E(~
X ( + U,
U U ') = ITN,

-1/2
where ~
Y,
Y = S

~
X

= S-1/2X and

~
U

(A.7)

= S-1/2U. In the transformed model there is no time-

series or cross-sectional correlation of the errors, and the errors are homoskedastic. We use the
R-squared of the transformed model as a measure of the overall explanatory power. The GLS R-

37
squared is advocated by Kan and Zhang (1999) for cross-sectional regressions. The overall
measure here gives equal weight to the time series and cross-sectional dimensions of explanatory
power in the transformed model. Within a given cross-section, observations with larger standard
deviations are given smaller weight. In the time-series dimension, months with larger standard
deviations of the error term are given smaller weights.
Define de-meaned variables, yit = Yit - N-1 T-1 Et Ei Yit, demeaned using the grand
mean, taken over both the time series and cross-section. Stack the yit's into a TN x 1 vector, y,
using the same convention as before. The de-meaned predictors x and the residuals, u, are
defined analogously. A simple expression for the overall R-square measure uses the TN x 1
vectors y, x and u. The of the R-square for the transformed model (A.7) is 1-(u'S-1u)/(y'S-1y).
Substituting the expression for (GLS with the assumed diagonal structure of S, we can express the
R-square in terms of the demeaned N-vectors of the original data:

R-squared = (Etyt'St-1xt) (Etxt'St-1xt)-1 (Etxt'St-1yt)/(Etyt'St-1yt).

(A.8)

In a typical application such as ours, full covariance GLS is not practical. We therefore use a
weighted least squares version of (A.8). We replace St with a diagonal matrix using an estimate
of the variance of the residuals for each test asset in a given month on the diagonals.

Book/Market and Size-sorted Portfolios
Returns on 25 value-weighted portfolios of the common stock of firms listed on the New York
Stock Exchange (NYSE) and covered by Compustat, are formed. Following Dimension Fund

38
Advisors' exclusion criteria, foreign firms, ADR's, and REITS are excluded. Portfolios are
formed by ranking firms on their market capitalization (size) in June of each year and the ratio of
book value to market value of equity (BE/ME) as of December of the preceding year. The size
and BE/ME sorts are independent. Firms are ranked and sorted annually into five groups.
Monthly portfolio returns are then computed from July of year t+1 to June of t+2 for each
group. BE is Stockholder's Equity (A216) less Preferred Stock Redemption Value (A56) (or
Liquidating Value (A10), or Par Value (A130), Depending on availability), plus balance sheet
deferred taxes (A35), if available. If Stockholders Equity is not available, it is calculated as
Total Common Equity (A60) plus the par value of preferred stock (A130).

39
Industry Portfolios
Monthly returns on 25 portfolios of common stocks are from Harvey and Kirby (1996). The
portfolios are value-weighted within each industry group. The industries and their SIC codes are
in the following table.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Number Industry
SIC codes
------------------------------------------------------------------------1
Aerospace
372, 376
2
Transportation
40, 45
3
Banking
60
4
Building materials
24, 32
5
Chemicals/Plastics
281, 282, 286-289, 308
6
Construction
15-17
7
Entertainment
365, 483, 484, 78
8
Food/Beverages
20
9
Healthcare
283, 384, 385, 80
10
Industrial Mach.
351-356
11
Insurance/Real Estate
63-65
12
Investments
62, 67
13
Metals
33
14
Mining
10, 12, 14
15
Motor Vehicles
371, 551, 552
16
Paper
26
17
Petroleum
13, 29
18
Printing/Publishing
27
19
Professional Services
73, 87
20
Retailing
53, 56, 57, 59
21
Semiconductors
357, 367
22
Telecommunications
366, 381, 481, 482, 489
23
Textiles/Apparel
22, 23
24
Utilities
49
25
Wholesaling
50, 51
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

40
REFERENCES
Ahn, Seugn C. and C. Gadarowski, 1998, Two-pass cross-sectional regression of factor pricing
models: Minimum distance approach, working paper, Arizona State University.
Bansal, Ravi and C.R. Harvey, 1997, Dynamic trading strategies, working paper, Duke
Univerity.
Banz, Rolf W., 1981, The relationship between return and market value of common stocks,
Journal of Financial Economics 9, 3-18.
Barber, B. M. and J. D. Lyon, 1997, Firm size, book-to-market ratio and security returns: A
holdout sample of financial firms, Journal of Finance 52, 875-901.
Basu, Sanjoy, 1977, The investment performance of common stocks in relation to their priceearnings ratios: A test of the efficient markets hypothesis, Journal of Finance 32, 663-682.
Becker, C., W. Ferson, D. Myers and M. Schill, 1998, Conditional Market Timing with
Benchmark Investors, Journal of Financial Economics (forthcoming).
Berk, Jonathan B., 1997, Sorting out sorts, working paper, University of California at Berkeley.
Berk, Jonathan B., 1995, A critique of size-related anomalies, Review of Financial Studies 8,
275-286.
Black, Fischer, 1972, Capital market equilibrium with restricted borrowing, Journal of Business
45, 444-455.
Black, Fischer, 1993, Beta and return, Journal of Portfolio Management 20, 8-18.
Braun, Phillip, Daniel Nelson and Alain Sunier, 1995, Good news, bad news, volatility and
betas, Journal of Finance 50, 1575-1604.
Breeden, Douglas T., 1979, An intertemporal asset pricing model with stochastic consumption
and investment opportunities, Journal of Financial Economics 7, 265-296.
Breen, William, Lawrence R. Glosten and Ravi Jagannathan, 1989, Economic significance of
predictable variations in stock index returns, Journal of Finance 44, 1177-1190.
Breen, William J. and Robert A. Korajczyk, 1994, On selection biases in book-to-market based
tests of asset pricing models, working paper, Northwestern University.

41
Brennan, M., T. Chordia and A. Subrahmanyam, 1998, Alternative Factor Specifications,
Security Characteristics, and the cross-section of expected stock returns, Journal of Financial
Economics 49, 345-73.
Campbell, John Y., 1987, Stock returns and the term structure, Journal of Financial Economics
18, 373-400.
Carhart, Mark M., Robert J. Krail, Ross L. Stevens and Kelly D. Welch, 1996, Testing the
conditional CAPM, working paper, Graduate School of Business, University of Chicago,
Chicago IL.
Chamberlain, Gary, and M. Rothschild, 1983, Arbitrage, Factor Structure and Mean Variance
Analysis on Large Asset Markets, Econometrica 51, 1281-1304.
Chan, K. C., Nai-fu Chen and David Hsieh, 1985, An exploratory investigation of the firm size
effect, Journal of Financial Economics 14, 451-472.
Chan, Louis K.C., Yasushi Hamao and Josef Lakonishok, 1991, Fundamentals and stock returns
in Japan, Journal of Finance 46, 1739-1764.
Chan, Louis K. C., Narasimhan Jegadeesh and Josef Lakonishok, 1995, Evaluating the
performance of value versus glamor stocks: The impact of selection bias, Journal of Financial
Economics 38, 269-296.
Chen, Nai-fu., Richard Roll and Stephen A. Ross, 1986, Economic forces and the stock market,
Journal of Business 59, 383-403.
Connor, Gregory and Robert A. Korajczyk, 1988, Risk and return in an equilibrium APT:
applications of a new test methodology, Journal of Financial Economics 21, 255-289.
Daniel, Kent and Sheridan Titman, 1997, Evidence on the Characteristics of Cross-sectional
Variation in Stock Returns, Journal of Finance 52, 1-33.
Davis, J., E. Fama and K. French, 1998, Characteristics, covariances and average returns: 19291997, working paper, University of Chicago.
Eckbo, E., O. Norli and R. Masulis, 1998, Conditional long-run performance following security
offering: Is there a new issues puzzle? working paper, Dartmouth College.
Edwin J. Elton, Martin J. Gruber and Christopher R. Blake, 1995, Fundamental economic
variables, expected returns, and bond fund performance, Journal of Finance 50, 1229-1256.
Fama, Eugene F., 1990, Stock returns, expected returns, and real activity, Journal of Finance

42
45, 1089-1108.
Fama, Eugene F. and French, Kenneth R., 1988, Dividend Yields and Expected Stock Returns,
Journal of Financial Economics 22, 3-25.
Fama, Eugene F. and French, Kenneth R., 1989, Business Conditions and Expected Stock
Returns, Journal of Financial Economics 25, 23-50.
Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 1992, The cross-section of expected returns, Journal
of Finance 47, 427-465.
--------------------------------------, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds,
Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3-56.
--------------------------------------, 1995, Size and book-to-market factors in earnings and returns,
Journal of Finance 50, 131-155.
-------------------------------------, 1996, Multifactor explanations of asset pricing anomalies,
Journal of Finance 51, 55-87.
--------------------------------------, 1997, Industry cost of equity, Journal of Financial Economics
43:2, 153-194.
--------------------------------------, 1998, Value versus Growth: The international evidence, Journal
of Finance (forthcoming).
Fama, Eugene F. and James D. MacBeth, 1973, Risk, return and equilibrium: Empirical Tests,
Journal of Political Economy 81, 607-636.
Fama, Eugene F. and G. William Schwert, 1977, Asset returns and inflation, Journal of
Financial Economics 5, 115-146.
Ferson, Wayne E., 1989, Changes in expected security returns, risk and the level of interest
rates, Journal of Finance 44, 1191-1218.
Ferson, W., S. Foerster and D. Keim, 1993, Tests of General Latent Variable Models and Mean
Variance Spanning, Journal of Finance 48, 131-156 (March).
Ferson, Wayne E. and Campbell R. Harvey, 1991, The Variation of economic risk premiums,
Journal of Political Economy 99, 385-415.
Ferson, W. and R. Korajczyk, 1995, Do Arbitrage Pricing Models Explain the Predictability of
Stock Returns? Journal of Business 68, 309-349 (July).

43
Ferson, Wayne, Sergei Sarkissian and Timothy Simin, 1998, The Alpha Factor Asset Pricing
Model: A Parable, Journal of Financial Markets (forthcoming).
Ferson, W. and Rudi, Schadt, 1996, Measuring fund strategy and performance in changing
economic conditions, Journal of Finance 51, 425-462 (June).
Ferson W., and A. Siegel, 1997, The efficient use of Conditioning Information in Portfolios,
working paper, University of Washington.
F. Douglas Foster, Tom Smith and Robert E. Whaley, 1997, Assessing goodness-of-fit of asset
pricing models: The distribution of the maximal R2, Journal of Finance 52, 591-608.
Ghysels, E., 1998, On stble factor structures in the pricing of risk: Do time-varying betas help or
hurt?, Journal of Finance 53, 549-574.
Gibbons, Michael R., and Wayne E. Ferson, 1985, Tests of asset pricing models with changing
expectations and an unobservable market portfolio, Journal of Financial Economics 14,
217--236.
Graham, Benjamin and D. Dodd, 1934, Security analysis, McGraw-Hill, New York.
Hansen, Lars P., and Robert J. Hodrick, 1983, Risk averse speculation in forward foreign
exchange markets: An econometric analysis of linear models, in Jacob A. Frenkel, ed.:
Exchange rates and international macroeconomics (University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL),
113--152.
Hansen, Lars P. and Scott Richard, 1987, The role of conditioning information in deducing
testable restrictions implied by asset pricing models, Econometrica 50, 1269-1286.
Hansen, Lars P. and Kenneth Singleton, 1982, Generalized instrumental variables estimation of
nonlinear rational expectations models, Econometrica 55, 587-613.
Haugen, Robert A. and Nardin L. Baker, 1996, Commonality in the determinants of expected
stock returns, Journal of Financial Economics 41, 401-440.
Harvey, Campbell R., 1989, Time-varying conditional covariances in tests of asset pricing
models, Journal of Financial Economics 24, 289-318.
Harvey, Campbell R. and Chris Kirby, 1996, Analytic tests of factor pricing models,
Unpublished working paper, Duke University, Durham, NC.
Ibbotson Associates, 1998, Cost of Capital Quarterly 1998 Yearbook, Ibbotson Associates,
Chicago, IL.

44
Jagannathan, Ravi, and Zhenwu Wang, 1996, The conditional CAPM and the cross-section of
expected returns, Journal of Finance 51, 3--54.
Jagannathan, Ravi, and Zhenwu Wang, 1998, Asymptotic theory for estimating beta pricing
models using cross-sectional regressions, Journal of Finance 53, 1285-1309.
Jagannathan, Ravi, Keiichi Kubota and Y. Takehara, 1998, The relation between labor-income
risk and average returns: Empirical evidence for the Japanese Stock Market, Journal of Business
71, 319-47.
Michael C. Jensen, 1968, The performance of mutual funds in the period 1945-1964, Journal of
Finance 23, 389-46.
Jegadeesh, Narasimhan and Sheridan Titman, 1993, Returns of buying winners and selling losers,
Journal of Finance 48, 65-91.
Kan, Raymond and Chu Zhang, 1999, Two-pass tests of asset pricing models with useless
factors, Journal of Finance 54, 203-235.
Keim, Donald B. and Robert F. Stambaugh, 1986, Predicting returns in the bond and stock
markets, Journal of Financial Economics 17, 357-390.
Kim, Dongchoel, 1997, A reexamination of firm size, book-to-market, and earnings price in the
cross-section of expected stock returns, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 32:4,
463-489.
Kim, Dongcheol, 1995, The errors in the variables problem in the cross-section
of expected stock returns, Journal of Finance 50, 1605-1634.
Kothari, S.P., and Jay Shanken, 1997, book-to-market time series analysis, Journal of Financial
Economics 44, 169-203.
Kothari, S. P., Jay Shanken and Richard G. Sloan, 1995, Another look at the cross-section of
expected stock returns, Journal of Finance 50, 185-224.
Lakonishok, Josef, Andrei Shliefer and Robert W. Vishny, 1994, Contrarian investment,
extrapolation and risk, Journal of Finance 49, 1541-1578.
Lehmann, Bruce N. and Modest, David M., 1988, The empirical foundations of the arbitrage
pricing theory, Journal of Financial Economics 21, 213-54.
Litzenberger, Robert H. and Krishna Ramaswamy, 1979, The effect of personal taxes and
dividends on capital asset prices: Theory and empirical evidence, Journal of Financial Economics

45
7, 163-195.
Lo, Andrew and A.C. MacKinlay, 1990, Data snooping biases in test of financial models,
Review of Financial Studies 3, 175-208.
MacKinlay, A. Craig, 1995, Multifactor models do not explain deviations from the CAPM,
Journal of Financial Economics 38, 3-28.
Merton, Robert C., 1973, An intertemporal capital asset pricing model, Econometrica 41,
867-87.
Pagan, Adrian, 1984, Econometric issues in the analysis of regressions with generated regressors,
International Economic Reveiew 25, 221-247.
Pannikkath, Sunil K., 1993, Dynamic Asset pricing and the cross-section of expected stock
returns, working paper, Washington University in St. Louis.
Pesaran, M., Timmermann, A., 1995, Predictability of stock returns: Robustness and economic
significance, Journal of Finance 50, 1201-1228.
Pontiff, Jeffrey and Lawrence Schall, 1998, Book-to-market as a predictor of market returns,
Journal of Financial Economics 49, 141-60.
Roll, Richard, 1977, A Critique of the Asset Pricing Theory's Tests - part I: On Past and
Potential Testability of the Theory, Journal of Financial Economics 4, 349-357.
Roll, Richard, 1995, Value and growth, in the Handbook of Equity Style Management,
Association for Investment Management and Research, Charlottsville, VA.
Rosenberg, Barr and Vinay Marathe, 1979, Tests of capital asset pricing hypotheses, Research in
Finance 1, 115-223.
Ross, Stephen A., 1976, The arbitrage theory of capital asset pricing, Journal of Economic
Theory 13, 341--360.
Shanken, Jay, 1996, Statistical Methods in Tests of Portfolio Efficiency, Chapter 23 (pp.693712) in the Handbook of Statistics: vol. 14: Statistical Methods in Finance, G.S. Maddala and
C.R. Rao (editors), North Holland ISBBN: 0-444-81964-9.
Shanken, Jay, 1992, On the estimation of beta pricing models, Review of Financial Studies 5, 134.
____________, 1990, Intertemporal asset pricing: An empirical investigation, Journal of

46
Econometrics 45, 99-120.
Shanken, Jay, and Mark I. Weinstein, 1990, Macroeconomic variables and asset pricing:
estimation and tests, working paper, University of Rochester.
Sharpe, William. F., 1964, Capital asset prices: A theory of market equilibrium under
conditions of risk, Journal of Finance 19, 425-42.
Stambaugh, R., 1998, Predictive Regressions, working paper, Wharton School.
White, H., 1980, A Heteroskedasticity-Consistent Covariance Matrix Estimator and a Direct
Test for Heteroskedasticity, Econometrica, 48, 817-838.

20

Dec-62
Dec-63
Dec-64
Dec-65
Dec-66
Dec-67
Dec-68
Dec-69
Dec-70
Dec-71
Dec-72
Dec-73
Dec-74
Dec-75
Dec-76
Dec-77
Dec-78
Dec-79
Dec-80
Dec-81
Dec-82
Dec-83
Dec-84
Dec-85
Dec-86
Dec-87
Dec-88
Dec-89
Dec-90
Dec-91
Dec-92
Dec-93
Dec-94

Figure 1

Comparison of Cross-Sectional Slope Coefficients
One-Factor CAPM (Line) One-Factor Fit (Dash)

CAPM Slope
Fit Slope

30

10

CAPM Slope
Fit Slope

5

10

0

0

-10

-5

-20

-30

-10

