                                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 THEORY AND HISTORY BEHIND
                                BUSINESS CYCLES: ARE THE 1990S
                                 THE ONSET OF A GOLDEN AGE?


                                             Victor Zarnowitz


                                           Working Paper 7010
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w70 10


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       March 1999




The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not reflect those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

©   1999 by Victor Zarnowitz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Theory and History Behind Business Cycles:
Are the 1990s the Onset of a Golden Age?
Victor Zarnowitz
NBER Working Paper No. 7010
March 1999
JEL No. E3, E30, E31, E32
                                           ABSTRACT

       The disputes over the prospects for the current U.S. expansion reopen the issue of the causes
of business cycles. A recurrent concern about the present is that expectations of business profits and
market returns may be outrunning the economy's potential to deliver.
       The theory presented in this paper ties together profits, investment, credit, stock prices,
inflation and interest rates. I discuss new estimates of profit and investment functions with important
roles for growth of demand and productivity, price and cost levels, risk perception, credit volume
and credit difficulties. The relationships among these endogenous variables are viewed as
constituting an enduring core of business cycles, the exogenous shocks and policy effects as more

transitory and peripheral.
        The U.S. upswing of the past three years provides a vivid example of how profits,
investment, and an exuberant stock market can reinforce each other. Long business expansions
benefit society in several ways but they generate imbalances and are difficult to sustain. Recent
events in Asia demonstrate how investment-driven booms can give way to a protracted stagnation
with tendencies toward deflation and underconsumption or to severe depressions.
        After a deterioration in the 1 970s and early I 980s, U.S. business cycles moderated again, as
in the first two post-W WIT decades. But globally recessions became more frequent and more severe
in the second half of the postwar era. The arguments in favor a new Golden Age are generally not

persuasive.


Victor Zarnowitz
Foundation for International Business and Economic Business
122 East 42nd Street, Suite 1512
New York, NY 10168
and NBER
 victor.zarnowitzgsb.uchicago.edu
        Some have viewed the current business expansion in the United

States as the onset of a Golden Age in which the long-time evils of

inflationary booms followed by recessions with high unemployment

will    never    return.      It     is   not     surprising     that   the   excellent

economic conditions in the mid- and late 1990s -- substantial real

economic growth, falling unemployment rate, low inflation, and a

persistent bull market in stocks -- have led to a widespread

euphoria.       During such earlier notable economic expansions as the

1920s and the 1960s, consumer and investor confidence rose to high

levels, as growing numbers of people came to believe that a seismic

shift has taken place and great new opportunities were opening up

at remarkably low costs and risks.                      The vision of endless and

uninterrupted expansion of total employment, output, real income

and    wealth    is,   of    course,      immensely       attractive    not    only   to

economists, but to all people of good will.

        The happy prophecy of a growing recession-free economy has

been ascribed to a number of different changes in the economy, but

none of these suggested reasons is fully persuasive.1                       Some of the

arguments seem to make the dubious assumption that factors which

raise    productivity       growth    must       also   lead   to   greater    economic

stability.       Others exaggerate the reasons why the economy may be

more stable now than in the past into a claim that economic

instability       is   now     obsolete.          All    leave      ample     room    for




                                             2
counterarguments.

      First, the U.S. economy is allegedly much more stable because

of the successes of the recent "downsizing" or rationalization

efforts of business management.                However, layoffs, cost-cutting,

corporate reorganizations and factor reallocations have long been

part and parcel of the cyclical growth process; for example, Davis,

Haltiwanger    and    Schuh   (1996)      discuss      in    rich   detail   how   job

destruction varies greatly over the business cycle, rising strongly

in recessions, while job creation varies much less.                          Clearly,

effective labor cost reduction might at first raise unemployment

and   the   share    of   profits,   but       later   enhance      productivity   and

growth.      The same companies that become more efficient through

downsizing will then need or want to grow in the future, and so

will turn to "upsizing," from layoffs to hires, from downward to

upward wage adjustments.         It is not clear why such long-standing

frictions associated with cyclical or irregular supply and demand

shifts should permanently alter the cyclical growth process, or why

any allocative shocks due to changes in business policy should have

more than mixed and temporary effects.

      Second, some have claimed that the technological breakthroughs

in computer hardware and software will assure greater economic

stability.    Clearly, technological advances have been indispensable

throughout    the    modern   era    in    promoting        productivity,    economic

growth, rising standards of living, and even effective systems of

government.     But the models that rely on generally unidentified




                                           3
exogenous productivity shocks as the primary explanation of the

"real"   business   cycles,   are,   I   believe,   generally   lacking   in

plausibility and evidence (Zarnowitz, 1992, ch. 1 and 2).            After

all, most technical changes are localized and gradual, with long

half-lives in their adoption and diffusion.            In the 1990s, the

notable progress in computer technology has certainly contributed

to the recent sharp rise in business investment and profits.         But a

strong productivity-enhancing effect of computers is yet to be

documented, and it is not at all clear why and how this particular

technological advance should perpetuate the present U.S. business

expansion.

     Third, inventory control is said to have improved greatly, in

a way that will make the economy more stable.         This claim has some

truth.    Movements in inventories do tend to propagate economic

fluctuations; for example, an economic slowdown causes a build-up

of inventories which then becomes a secondary cause of business

output weakening further.       The ratio of manufacturing and trade

inventories to sales has followed a gradual downward trend in the

1990s, probably thanks to the widespread adoption of just-in-time

inventory control systems, which tend to reduce the average stocks

of purchased materials and finished products on hand.               Leaner

inventories are likely to have smaller macroeconomic effects.

However, it is also true that business inventory investment in

constant dollars was about as volatile and as cyclical in the 1990s

as it had been in the past, and volatility in inventories certainly




                                     4
remains large enough to play a substantial role in propagating

economic cycles.

      A fourth argument is that the share in total U.S. employment

of    the    relatively      volatile       goods-producing       sectors       like

manufacturing    and     construction    has   declined      in   favor    of   the

presumably     more     stable   services      such     as     trade,     finance,

transportation,       entertainment,    education     and    government.        This

shift does tend to moderate business cycles, largely by reducing

the weight of cyclically volatile inventory investment.                   But many

services appear to be becoming more cyclical, as they confront

growing competition at home and abroad.             For example, business and

consumer services actually declined in the recessions of 1981-82

and 1990-91, while their growth had merely slowed down in earlier

downturns (Fosler and Stiroh, 1998).

      Fifth, it is argued that deregulation of financial and other

industries has helped to stabilize the economy. One common example

harks back to the time from the mid-1960s to the early 1980s, when

the Regulation Q ceilings on the interest that could be paid on

bank and savings and loan accounts were in place.                   During this

time, when short-term interest rates rose above the ceilings, funds

poured from banks and thrifts into direct money-market instruments,

which in turn severely reduced the quantity of available consumer

and mortgage credit.       Clearly, excessive or wrongheaded regulation

can   harm   efficient    resource     allocation     and    aggravate    economic

instability.      Also, one can make a strong case that more free




                                        5
competition in banking, airlines, trucking, and other industries

has increased productivity growth; and to the extent that relative

price flexibility is enhanced, less instability in quantities may

be   expected.       But    it    seems      farfetched   to     think   that   more

deregulation will deliver large benefits in stabilizing the United

States economy.

      A sixth claim is that we have learned how to use discretionary

government macroeconomic policies in a way that reduces or ends

cyclical instability.         The Federal Reserve has allegedly learned

how to forecast inflation and how to avert it by timely increases

in short-term interest rates.          Fiscal policy is no longer used for

discretionary stabilization purposes for which it is unsuited; in

the past, it was more often than not misapplied or mistimed,

creating at least as much economic instability as it reduced.

However, there is no clear support in the data for assertions that

government can anticipate business recessions or financial crises,

nor that it can avert such events with preemptive action.                       True,

policy-makers    can    and      sometimes    do   ameliorate     recessions,    but

wrong,   mistimed,     or   bungled    policies     can   also    destabilize    the

economy.

      Finally, globalization is argued to have reduced cyclical

instability.     Global markets diminish the economy's dependence on

domestic demand by creating new markets abroad for U.S.-produced

goods and services.         They also open up new sources of supply for

raw and intermediate materials, final consumer and producer goods,




                                          6
and labor, with the consequence of reducing domestic inflationary

pressures   on   prices    and     wages.        Capital     markets      have   become

increasingly global, too, which was supposed to make them broader

and more liquid and to reduce the risk of market bubbles and

crashes.    But while greater openness of economies can surely bring

benefits, it also can bring increased vulnerability.                        Since the

economic    debacle   in   East     Asia       over    the   last   few   years,   the

attendant risks of financial meltdowns in Russia and Latin America,

and   the   manner    in   which     these       dangers     have   contributed     to

volatility in stock markets everywhere, talk that globalization

will put an end to business cycles has understandably dwindled.


Where and How to Proceed

      The disputes over the prospects for the current U.S. expansion

are far from being merely academic:                   they reopen the fundamental

yet unresolved issue of the underlying causes of business cycles.

One widespread and recurrent concern about the present, which has

long roots in the past, is that expectations of business profits

and market returns may be outrunning the economy's potential to

deliver.     Up to a point, high levels of consumer and investor

confidence are self-confirming in their positive consequences.

However, high confidence can easily shade into overconfidence,

which breeds misdirected or excessive investment.                   Eventually, the

balance of expectations shifts, as people realize that the market

fundamentals no longer support the euphoria.                  The expansion slows,




                                           7
then ends, as spending, employment and output turn down.                                   All of

this has occurred repeatedly in the past and there is no compelling

reason why it should not happen again.

        Believers     in    the    inherent        stability         of   market      economies

attribute recessions to policy errors and external disturbances.

Thus,    misguided     stimulation        by       excessively        easy    credit       causes

inflation,      the    belated      curtailment           of    which     causes          business

activity to turn down.            Some analysts consider the reactive nature

of   government       actions     and    other       possible        shocks    but        give   no

attention at all to any endogenous theories (for example, Temin,

1998).      On the other hand, those who suspect more systematic

instability doubt that the story of the Fed killing each of the

recent U.S. expansions is the right and full one.                             They can point

to many domestic and foreign recessions that originated mainly in

market     developments.           Just    to       take       the    latest        few    years,

overconfidence, overborrowing, and overinvestment contributed to

severe     business        downturns,      financial           crises,        and     incipient

deflation       overseas,       presenting          the    U.S.       economy        with        new

challenges.

        However, it is not with the specific problems and prospects of

the current economic situation that I propose to deal in the body

of this paper. We do not know just when and how the present U.S.

business expansion is going to end: although the business cycle

contains strong self-sustaining elements, it is not predetermined.

Instead,    I    shall     focus    on    broader         theoretical        and     historical




                                               8
perspectives.       The next, central part builds upon selected older

ideas     about     business    cycles,       which    I        believe    still     have

considerable      relevance    today    when   given       some    new    features   and

interpretations.        The theory ties together profits, investment,

credit, stock prices, inflation and interest rates, treating their

interactions as central to the process of economic fluctuations and

growth.      It   purposely    limits     itself      to   essentially        endogenous

variables      representing       private       sector          activities,     leaving

government     policies    and     outside      disturbances         for      subsequent

consideration.       I present and discuss some new estimates of profit

and investment functions with important roles for growth of demand

and     productivity,    the   ratio     of    price       to     cost    levels,    risk

perception, credit volume and credit difficulties. The results of

these regressions are generally consistent with the theoretical

arguments developed in this paper.

        The next, much shorter section contends that these endogenous

interactions belong to an enduring core of business cycles.                           In

contrast to these central elements of an endogenous explanation of

economic fluctuations, exogenous shocks and policy effects are

typically    more    transitory    and    peripheral        in    nature,     and   hence

generally less important. I then return briefly to the 1990s to

apply my views on the history and theory of business cycles to this

period.    The final section offers some conclusions.



Profits, Investment, and Credit in Business Cycles




                                          9
      Business cycles are far from being all alike; their symptoms

and causes differ over time and across economies.                        But a powerful

common     element      runs     through     the    long       history     of    economic

fluctuations around growth trends.                   At the center of business

cycles are interacting movements in business profits, investment,

and credit.       Their rises are cumulative and mutually reinforcing,

and   so   are    their    declines.       Moreover,      the   three     factors    play

critical roles in explaining what happens at the downturns and

upturns     of    total        business     activity       in     market        economies.

Fluctuations of profits, investment, and credit have been a common

feature    of    business      cycles     under    very    different      monetary       and

exchange regimes, through inflations and deflations, in the 19th as

well as 20th century, in Europe and Asia as well as in America.

      Of the components of aggregate demand, it is the investment

spending    by    firms    and     households      that   is    the    prime     mover   in

economic fluctuations, being by far the most cyclical and the most

volatile.       This fact has long been known and recognized.                      On the

income side, profits assume the role of the prime mover.                             This

insight    is    less     widely    accepted,      but    in    good   agreement     with

economic reasoning and evidence.                   Credit from banks and other

private sources provides the finance for the process, whenever the

available reserves permit, under either an external constraint

(such as the gold standard) or domestic constraint of monetary

policy (usually conducted by a central bank).




                                            10
The Profit Accelerator

     In     models   of   long-term    competitive        equilibrium,     expected

economic profits are driven to zero.                    Pure profits are not a

continuous feature of a stationary economy, except where barriers

to market entry or other monopolistic elements persist.                       But not

all profits can be explained by deviations from competition or

exploitation of receivers of wages or rent.               In a dynamic economy,

profits serve as the incentive for innovative and entrepreneurial

activity. Several otherwise very different theories agree on this

point and see the source of profits in dynamic phenomena of growth

and possibly disequilibrium.2

     For profits to thrive over a period of time, both aggregate

demand and productive capacities must be rising in a mutually

consistent way.       If demand increases too quickly, shortages of

labor and/or capital will result in upward pressures on costs and

squeeze     profit   margins.         If    demand      increases    too      slowly,

overcapacity will develop, reducing investment and profits.                      This

balancing act is a delicate one, but overall growth of demand and

output is expected to favor business profitability.                        The main

direction    of   influence   here     should      be   from   growth    to    profit

margins.3

     To decompose corporate profits (Rc) so as to distinguish their

shorter     and   cyclical   movements      from   long    trends,   we    use    the

definitional equation Rc = ðYc, where ð is the profit margin per




                                       11
dollar of corporate income and Yc is that income.                             The profit

margins ð is highly cyclical but approximately stationary, and its

natural logarithm can serve as a measure of profitability.                         Theory

suggests and evidence confirms that profitability is likely to be

determined more by the change than by the level of total economic

activity.      By      analogy    with    the      much    more   familiar    investment

accelerator,       I    shall     refer       to   this     effect     as   the   "profit

accelerator."

      If an economic slowdown reduces profit margins and dims the

outlook for profits, the likely reaction of business firms will

consist first in cutbacks on decisions to invest, then if matters

do   not    improve,      in     reductions        of     inventories,      output,     and

employment.       Indeed, most recessions are preceded by slowdowns, and

by   downturns     in   profit     margins,        which    are     among   the   earliest

leading indicators.             But not all economic retardations depress

profits and degenerate into business contractions. On occasion,

economic activity may slow seriously but this is outweighed by

productivity and price-cost conditions that remain favorable to

business.


The Determinants of Profits: An Illustration

      It is to be expected that the profit margin be positively

associated not only with economic growth but also with technical

progress and the ratio of selling prices to costs of production.

Further,    the     profit      margin    ð    should      depend    inversely     on   the




                                              12
effective market assessment of risk, interest rates, and probably

inflation, particularly when it raises interest and the tax burden

on profits.

     Now, consider a regression where the natural logarithm of the

profit margin ð is the dependent variable.      Specifically, ð is

measured here as the ratio of corporate domestic after-tax profits,

with adjustments for inventory valuation and capital consumption,

to corporate domestic income.    (Profit rates on invested capital

might be conceptually preferred, but income is much easier and

better measured than the present economic value of physical, human,

and intellectual capital.)   The independent variables are the rate

of economic growth in real GDP (g); change in labor productivity,

that is, output per hour of work in nonfarm business sector (h);

the chain-weighted price index for GDP as a measure of the price

level (P); unit labor costs in the business sector (C); change in

the consumer price index as a measure of inflation (p); the long-

term interest rate on Treasury bonds (i); and a measure of risk

aversion (s) given by the difference, yield on new high-grade

corporate bonds minus yield on long-term Treasury bonds.4 All data

except i and s are converted to log form and extend from the fourth

quarter of 1953 to the first quarter of 1998, thus comprising 178

quarterly observations.   Some of the data are lagged one or two

quarters, and a constant term is added. The results of such a

regression, with t-ratio statistics in parentheses, are:




                                13
ðt =2.935+1.486gt+2.657ht+3.248Pt-1-3.343Ct-1-2.278pt-2-0.031it-1-0.094st-1

   (12.52) (1.81) (3.30) (4.24)      (4.31)     (1.85)   (2.87)    (2.83)




All coefficients are significant by conventional standards, and the

R2 of the regression (adjusted for the degrees of freedom) is

0.927. All signs are as expected.                          Productivity h and growth g are

positively interrelated, and rises in either or both are good for

profits.         The ratio of prices to costs P/C should have a strong

positive influence on profit margins, but when P and C are taken

separately, their coefficients should be about equal with opposite

signs, and they are.                 Inflation reduces true profits by increasing

taxes on spurious accounting profits from inventories that keep

appreciating and depreciation of historical instead of replacement

costs      of     capital.           If       one    calculates         profit    margins    without

adjustments for inventory valuation and capital consumption, then

the coefficient on inflation becomes statistically insignificant.

When i is not included, the effect on ð of p is sometimes positive.

 To the extent that transient changes in inflation do not affect

nominal interest rates, they may be associated with a rise in

aggregate         demand       and     a      fall   in     real     interest      rates.     Higher

interest rates and risk, however, are consistently and strongly

reflected in lower profitability.

        These       regression             results       make      intuitive       sense    and   are

generally         robust.            For      example,       one     can      substitute    different

measures of economic growth like the composite index of coincident

indicators (either contemporaneous or lagged one time period) for




                                                      14
real GDP, and find similar results.                  Or one can use largely

analogous    determinants     for    changes   in    the    log    of    total    real

profits.     Sources of gross corporate income include sales to each

of the major sectors of the U.S. economy and abroad; hence the

change in the natural log of Yc is related to the the change in the

natural log terms for consumption, investment, government spending,

exports and imports with the expected signs and roughly according

to their relative magnitudes, but with investment particularly

significant.     However, it must also be noted that the ð regression

still leaves a systematic pattern of change in the error terms.                    An

AR(1)     autoregressive    residual    correction,        which    was    used    to

eliminate that pattern, raised R2 from already high to above 0.9

and the Durbin-Watson DW statistic to near 2.5              I hope to give more

attention to how the equation for ð could be further improved in

form and content in future work.

        But the basic theme should not be lost here. A capitalist

economy    displays   an   ongoing    drive    for   profits,      which    will   be

particularly     successful     under    conditions         of    rising    demand,

productivity and confidence, and falling interest rates and risk

aversion.     Profitability declines when costs encroach on prices:

this is the expansion-restraining factor stressed by Mitchell, and

the dependence of ð on P/C, which is confirmed here, is consistent

with that theory.     But other factors may also weaken profitability,

and   endanger   continued    prosperity,      and   they    relate      broadly   to

changes in demand, technology, and expectations.                        Particularly




                                        15
important    here    are    the   feedback      effects       from    real     investment

decisions that are risky but hard to reverse and from business and

consumer confidence and financial market shifts.                     Actions of firms,

investors, and to a lesser extent consumers are subject to risk and

uncertainty, misperceptions and errors, which at times can result

in aggregate imbalances.



Investment as Source of Growth and Instability
        Various measures of corporate profits show a strong positive

influence on generally lagging business fixed investment (see,

e.g., Carrier, 1997, ch.6).          There are at least three reasons for

the   connection.     First,      rising    profits      from     past    and    current

operations are probably the main source of expectations of higher

profits     on   investments      already       under    way     and     under    active

consideration.       Second, retained profits and cash flow provide the

least    expensive    and   preferred      means    of       financing   investment.

Third, recorded profitability serves as the decisive indicator of

the     appropriateness      of    past     investment          decisions       and   has

reputational     effects     on    the     access       to    credit     for     external

investment financing.

        Indeed, profit variables -- rates, margins and totals -- are

empirically much more strongly correlated with investment than

output growth is.      It is possible that growth affects profits first

and more, investment later and less.             A deep reason for this may be

that early successes of innovational investment are a major source




                                           16
of both economic growth and profits, whereas subsequent imitational

investment has a more mixed impact on both.                         Also, since the

decisions to invest in plant and equipment are long-lived, it would

be   suboptimal     for    such   investment    to    rise    and     fall    in   close

correspondence      with    short-run   changes      in     output    or    sales,   and

wrongheaded for it to respond symmetrically to negative as well as

positive movements in either current or expected economic activity.



      However, the association between business capital formation

and profits is not unidirectional, but rather a complex interaction

with differential lags and common factors such as, notably, the

rate of real economic growth.             In the short run, the dominant

relationship runs from profits to investment, in the longer run

mainly   in   the   opposite      direction    --    that    is,     more    investment

results in more growth, which produces more profits that lead to

more investment and capital accumulation.              The process is fueled on

the financial side by expansions of credit and the monetary base

and on the real side by rising incomes and confidence of consumers,

investors, and business.          It is to some extent self-rewarding and

can endure for considerable time. Successful investment projects

allow profits to be realized and so their stream becomes over time

a continuous, though uneven, process of income creation and saving,

that is, accumulation of capital or wealth.                    Thus, it may be a

useful oversimplification to say that without investment there is

no growth and without growth there is no profit.




                                        17
      In the early stages of a business expansion, the prospects for

its continuing are typically uncertain, which causes relatively

unambitious but safe investment projects to be preferred.                           Although

interest rates move procyclically most of the time, they often

continue declining long after real economic activity has embarked

upon the process of recovery.              The longer the lag of the upturn in

interest behind the upturn of the economy, the better the prospects

that prosperity will strengthen and continue (Cagan, 1969).                                The

waning of uncertainty about the economic outlook inherited from

previous weakness occurs while the liquidity levels are still high,

the   capacity   utilization         rates    moderate,         and    prices      and   costs

relatively    stable.           In   combination,        these    conditions        probably

approach a favorable equilibrium as well as possible.                               By then,

profits will have been improving for some time already, with higher

expected returns and rising incentives to invest likely to follow.

The entrepreneurial search for profit opportunities is at such

times particularly enhanced by improved demand and cost conditions,

as well as by        increasing support from financial institutions and

markets that share the prevailing favorable outlook.

      Profit rates tend to have much larger and earlier procyclical

movements than interest rates.                So have credit flows, that is,

changes in business loans or funds raised by private nonfinancial

borrowers.       This      is   consistent        with    the    theory       that,      during

business expansions, market interest rates tend to stay below the

"natural     rate"    --    that     is,     the    expected          yield   or    marginal




                                             18
productivity of investment -- which is shifting upward with the

investment       demand   function.          Interest    rates    adjust   upward   but

slowly, which reflects the accomodating increases in credit to

finance investment.6

     A rising stock market helps to keep the expansion going in

several ways.        It lowers the costs of capital, which aids real

investment.       Its wealth effect makes for higher consumption.                    It

channels some part of the monetary growth into the demand for

equities, which may result in less inflationary rise in prices of

goods and services and more rise in prices of stocks. But the quest

and competition for higher returns entail increasing risks. The

riskiness of an investment project is likely to be the greater, the

longer     its    duration       and   the    higher      its    prospective   yield.7

Therefore, vigorous and protracted expansions reach into higher

risk layers by raising the volume and share of large-scale capital

spending    projects.       To   overcome     the      higher   risk   barriers,    more

confident expectations of higher yield may have to be entertained

by producers, financiers, and investors.                        There is much prior

belief and some evidence that boom periods and bull markets breed

confidence and indeed raise the danger of overconfidence in real

and financial investment decisions.

     Not all investment projects enhance growth; some turn out to

be malinvestments mismatching resources and demand, others to be
excessive,       creating    overcapacity         in    particular     industries    or

regions.     When discovered, these errors and the resulting losses




                                             19
discourage investment and deter growth.                   According to the notion of

overinvestment common to a variety of Swedish and Austrian theories

of long standing, a cumulation of such poor investments can put an

end to a business expansion. Two simple but important insights can

be offered on behalf of this idea: sound new opportunities to

invest are scarce at any time, and forecasting costs and returns on

long-term business investment projects is often extraordinarily

difficult.       Accordingly,      the     probability        of   serious       errors   in

investment decisions is high, even if massive efforts are made to

study    the    alternatives      and    find       the    seemingly      best   plans    or

gambles.

        Still, so long as the economy expands, the rising risks and

failures tend to be more than offset by increases in the much

larger    volume     of   safe   and     successful        undertakings.         Even     bad

investment projects, as well as good ones, add to the immediate

stream of spending and keep up overall demand.                       Where substantial

gestation      periods    are    required      to    increase      the    capital      stock,

demand is likely to grow faster than capacity.                           It is only when

demand slackens, profits fall, and business retrenchment threatens

that the existence of excess capacities is revealed.                       When the boom

is   over,     the   growing     risks    it     entails     can    no    longer       remain

underestimated       or   even   undetected;         for    example,      the    bad   debts

incurred when credit standards were unduly relaxed, as the deals

seemed too good to miss, show up as such when business turns

sluggish.




                                            20
     It is the cyclically most sensitive processes, such as new

commitments to invest in plant and equipment, and sectors, such as

manufacturing and construction, that are likely to be the earliest

to cease expanding.           This need not imply an immediate downturn,

since there is a backlog of unfilled orders to work off and other

sectors,       particularly     the    largest        and     most     inertial    one,

consumption of nondurable goods and services, may hold up and

maintain economic activity.           But such relief tends to be temporary.

Investment expenditures lag well behind commitments (new capital

appropriations, orders, contracts) but their growth will decline

soon, with adverse feedback effects on profits (Zarnowitz 1973,

1992).


Factors in Recession and Recovery

     Eventually, one or more of the following scenarios can be

expected to make the economy highly vulnerable to recession.

First,     a   growth   slowdown       may    depress       profits     and   business

investment. Second, profit rates will generally fall and meet the

slowly   rising     interest    rates.       Third,    some    large    business   and

financial failures can no longer be ignored.                    Usually, bad loans

and bad investments have already been piling up; now they must be

written off, and costs of legal and industrial conflicts may be on

the rise, too.      Fourth, credit markets begin to turn away from high

risk and leverage to safe and liquid assets.                   This may degenerate

into a credit crunch, that is, curtailment of lending and scramble




                                         21
for liquidity.          Fifth, an increasing number of corporate earnings

reports disappoint prior expectations, and stock prices turn down.

The higher were the price-earnings ratios lifted by a long and

confident bull market, the lower they may fall after a denouement.

It is possible for any of these developments to occur in isolation

and do only transitory harm, but they often appear in combinations,

which is particularly destructive.

       There is no clear causal chain between business recessions and

stock market crashes, banking panics, or credit crunches. Financial

crises more typically follow business downturns, but sometimes

precede them. The worst, severe disruptions in the availability of

credit, with sharp declines in the liquidity and prices of assets,

developed in past periods of deflation.              The relatively mild credit

crunches in the inflationary era of the last half-century occurred

mostly during recessions (Zarnowitz, 1992, ch.3).                       A financial

market disorder always poses the danger that overreaction on the

upgrade will be followed by overreaction on the downgrade, a long

observed "herding" phenomenon of crowd psychology, about which

historical and institutional analysis may have much more to say

than    deductive       theory   based     on   individual      rational    behavior

(Kindleberger, 1989).

       The    slowdowns      preceding   business       cycle   peaks    often   fall

heavily      on   consumption     which,    though      much    more    stable   than

investment,       can   be   highly   sensitive    to    shifts   in    expectations

concerning employment, price and wage trends, and household assets




                                           22
and debts.      This aggravating factor of fallling consumption is best

seen as a part of the cyclical process already described, rather

than as another independent cause of it.                           The source of the

developments to which consumers respond lies mainly elsewhere in

the   economy,    for      example,    in   incomes        earned       in   business    and

government and in interest rates.8

        The   cumulative     process    works       in     reverse      during    business

contractions.      Here the market rate of interest declines less than

the natural rate based on expected profits, which may temporarily

drop very low; so investment demand falls well below saving supply.

 Historically, cash flowed into the banks, money and prices fell,

credit    deflation     replaced      credit      inflation,       and       borrowing   was

strongly discouraged.           In major contractions, such developments

still    need    to   be    considered,          despite    great       changes    in    the

underlying conditions which require modifications of the theory.9

        The cumulative downward movements in profits, credit, and

early investment commitments typically start before business cycle

peaks but they also end before business cycle troughs.                            Costs of

production      and   construction,         marketing        and     finance      fall   in

recessions, as the demands for many cost factors decrease more than

the corresponding supplies.           To the extent that the selling prices,

which may be less flexible, resist the downward pressures better,

profit margins will improve.                Progress in knowledge industries,

technology,     and   organization      does       not     stop    in    recessions,     and

eventually the centers of growth overcome the centers of decline.




                                            23
        There are also certain important asymmetries.          On the upswing,

businesses may have benefited from rises in wages lagging behind

rises in prices, but on the downswing wages may decrease less (or

increase    more)   than    prices,    with   further    profit-squeezing     and

layoff-prompting effects.       Also, when a cumulated decline in prices

is   anticipated    in     contractions,      current    spending     is   slowed,

especially via postponement of large-ticket purchases, whereas if

output prices are expected to keep rising in expansions, current

spending is accelerated.

        As interest rates continue falling and profit margins start

improving, the stock market grows less bearish and bottoms out,

typically in the latter part of the recession.             The early upturn in

equity prices is often hesitant, but gradually a firmer bull market

develops as the recovery gains strength and spreads.                  The longer

the good times roll, the greater the confidence that they will

last.     Business firms, banks, and other suppliers of credit and

capital    increasingly     favor    higher-yield,      higher-risk    investment

projects and instruments.           So in time, the economy returns to the

favorable conditions likely to give rise to another phase of high

growth in credit, investment, and profits.



Cyclical Investment Functions Exemplified
        Consider the determination of gross private nonresidential

investment in constant dollars as illustrated by the following

regression:




                                        24
It=0.788+0.040Rt-1+0.294Ht-1+0.021SPt-1-0.006it-4+0.007it-0.016st-1+0.0008xt+0.851It-1.

  (-3.81) (2.85)   (4.88)    (2.44)     (-2.66)   (4.19) (-2.68)    (4.63)    (31.71)




Here the capital letters refer to natural logarithms of levels for

investment (I), after tax profits in constant dollars (R), labor

productivity (H), and the Standard and Poor's 500 stock price index

(SP); i and s stand for interest rates and risk, as defined before;

and x represents the exchange rate of the dollar.                                             The equation

covers the period Q1 1967-Q1 1998 (125 quarterly observations) and

shows all coefficients to be significant with expected signs (t-

ratios in parentheses) and an adjusted R2 of 0.997. Notice that I

is in part determined by the same variables that influence profits

such      as    the      interest         rate,      risk      aversion,          and         productivity,

although predominantly with longer lags.                               But even after all these

and still other effects are accounted for, real investment in

producers' durable equipment and structures is still found to be

positively influenced by total real profits earned in the United

States during the previous period.

        Some       technical          problems        with       this        particular         regression

deserve        attention.             Business         capital        outlays           are    lagged   and

smoothed functions of the more volatile investment commitments, and

as    such      substantially            autocorrelated            (Zarnowitz,            1973).        This

explains the high and highly significant coefficient of It-1 in the

above equation, but it also suggests that it would be instructive

to    examine        the      sources        of     business        capital         investment       after




                                                      25
properly differencing the relevant variables. The interest rate,

which is represented by the yield on long-term Treasury bonds,

shows the expected negative effect when taken four quarters earlier

but a very similar positive effect when taken in the same quarter.

 This suggests the possibility of a reverse causation: investment,

by raising output closer to capacity, pushes up interest rates.

But this interaction, although plausible, is somewhat complicated

and clearly requires more study and better estimation.                                         Here I add

one more regression cast in form of differences instead of levels:


ÄIt=0.025+1.086gt+ 0.052rt-2+0.041spt-3-0.007Äit-6-0.019st-1+0.021frt-1+0.001Äxt-1-0.002bft.

   (4.06) (6.08)   (2.04)    (1.57)     (-2.18)    (-4.16)    (2.44)    (2.84)    (-0.52)




        The change in the log of business fixed investment (ÄIt)

depends positively on changes in the logarithms of the following:

real GDP (gt), real profits (rt-2), the stock price index (spt-3),

funds      raised       by    private        nonfinancial           borrowers         (frt-1)    and   the

exchange value of the dollar (Äxt-1). The change in It depends

inversely on the increase in the long-term interest rate over the

previous six quarters (Äit-6), on risk (st-1) and the change in log

of the liabilities of business failures (bft). This equation covers

the period Q3 1967-Q11998 (123 observations); its adjusted R2 is

0.512, the Durbin-Watson statistic is 2.108.                                Again, all regression

coefficients have the expected signs and all except the last one

have significant t-statistics.                         Although the lead times were not

systematically selected, they appear to be in approximate agreement




                                                      26
with the relative timing of cyclical movements in the variables

concerned.

      Thus, stock prices tend to have intermediate leads at the

economy's turning points, real business fixed investment tends to

have short lags.     Profits, which the stock market is always trying

to   anticipate,     should   have   sizable     but    shorter     leads   vs.

investment.     Differencing may have magnified the variability of

timing along with the volatility of the data and raised the weight

of   contemporaneous    values,   particularly    for    gt,   an   apparently

strong and close determinant of the change in It.But the effects on

spending of monetary and interest rate changes have repeatedly been

shown to be very slow, and our regressions are consistent with this

finding.

      Further, it is of interest that even the mild risk proxy,

which compares the yields of high-grade corporate and Treasury

bond yields, has a definite adverse effect on investment in the

next quarter.      The influence of credit is reflected with the same

timing in the positive coefficient of the relative change in

funds raised by private nonfinancial borrowers.            The harmful role

of overinvestment and malinvestment shows up in the negative

coefficient of the relative change in current liabilities of

business failures; however, this is probably a weak

representation of this factor and an underestimate.               It will

require more work to capture the elusive channels of influence

whereby rising risk and losses deter further capital




                                     27
accumulation.   Finally, an increase in the dollar's exchange

value has a small but significant influence on the change in I,

presumably because it stimulates direct foreign investment in the

United States.10



Core and Peripheral Elements in Business Cycles


     The classical literature on business cycles preferred

endogenous theories, stressing the interrelated functions for

business investment and profits, credit, interest rates, relative

input and output prices, and the role of the associated risks,

uncertainties, and expectations.     The great expository work of

Haberler first published in 1937 demonstrates this point clearly.

Since then, however, most economists shifted to the view that

exogenous disturbances, stochastic elements, and policy factors,

in short 'shocks' of various kinds, are the true 'causes' of

business cycles.   It is recognized that the shocks must be

propagated in particular ways by the dynamics of an economy of

interdependent markets, but this is believed to be tractable with

a wide range of models and compatible with the postulates of the

modern general equilibrium theory.     The old idea of self-

sustaining cycles is generally given no attention at all, but

just summarily dismissed (Zarnowitz 1992, chs. 1 and 2).

     I view the current emphasis on shocks as way overdone.

Intensive arguments about whether business cycles are due to real




                                28
or monetary shocks, or domestic or foreign shocks, are conducted

as if these were well identified categories that include all that

matters and preclude each other; also, as if the underlying

models could be taken to represent the economy so well as to rule

out the possibility of cycles being endogenous.     But these

premises are simply not credible.      Shocks come in a great variety

of combinations and frequently are not well identified (Blatt,

1978; Eckstein and Sinai, 1986; Black, 1986).     There is little

agreement on which theoretical and econometric models of the

economy are the right ones to use, hence it is difficult to know

what should be taken to constitute a deviation from an

established model relationship.     I feel quite skeptical of our

ability to sort out the shocks as demanded by the desire to

discriminate between current alternative models.

     Moreover, there are good reasons to accept lead-lag

relationships and nonlinearities as important features of the

dynamics that can account for the endogenous content of business

cycles.   But this major aspect of the economy's motion is simply

missed by those analysts who concentrate on the role of shocks in

linear models constructed with little or no attention to timing

differences, interactions between potentially self-generating

movements of strongly fluctuating variables, and likely cyclical

asymmetries.   I see these elements as being at the core of

business cycles, while the outside disturbances whose causal role

is often questionable are more peripheral, transitory and




                                  29
episodic.

     The broad movements of the economy, including its turning

points, are best seen as sequential processes unfolding in

historical time, not as isolated events.   Those historical and

statistical studies of recorded experience that I find especially

revealing assign a deeper causal role to imbalances developing

during the phases of the fluctuations than to exogenous shocks.

Cyclical boom-and-bust imbalances never originate exclusively in

either demand or supply, but instead always refer to the

interplay between the two market sides.    This is so whether the

problem is a shortfall of business or consumer demand; monetary

or real overinvestment; vertical maladjustment (plans to invest

outrun decisions to save) or horizontal maladjustment

(overcapacity in some particular sector or region); financial

instability or crisis of confidence.   Attempting to categorize

shocks as stemming from aggregate demand or aggregate supply

alone seldom reveals anything deep or interesting about the

determinants of economic expansions and contractions.

     The system of leading, coincident, and confirming indicators

consists of time series data that have, in many studies, proved

essential as tools for identifying, dating, analyzing, and

forecasting business cycles.   It is well to know that this

approach originated in the basic working concept of Mitchell and

his associates at the National Bureau of Economic Research, which

was that the recurrent fluctuations of a private enterprise




                                30
economy are caused by changes in the outlook for profits.    When

the outlook is favorable, investment and production expand, when

it is adverse, they contract.   A number of the principal leading

indicators refer to directly profit-related business

expectations, commitments, and activities in financial, labor,

and product markets.11

     However, while the case for business cycles having a

dominant endogenous core is very strong, it should not be

overstated.   Real, monetary, expectational, domestic and foreign

factors all participate in economic fluctuations, and unexpected

changes and combinations occur in all of these categories.

Unquestionably, some identifiable large shocks have been

important.    Major wars have had lasting economic consequences, as

when World War II finally ended the Great Depression, and small

wars influenced at least the timing of some business cycle

turning points, as in the Iraq intervention in 1990.    The OPEC

cartel decisions in the 1970s can surely be viewed as exogenous

events.

     Monetary and fiscal policy actions can cause unexpected

increases or decreases in interest and tax rates.   But even where

it seems clearcut to many that the Fed has created a recession,

matters are much more complex. For example, the monetary policy

shift in October 1979 allowed interest rates to reach

unprecedented double-digit levels, which no doubt had much to do

with the timing and unusual sequence of the two back-to-back U.S.




                                 31
recessions in 1980 and 1981-82.    But the downturn of 1980 was

also preceded by the second oil shock, to which it has been

attributed by some analysts (Temin, 1998).    The business cycle of

1980-92 witnessed other novel developments, too, notably very

large drops in the velocity of money.

     In 1987, 1990, and 1994-95, the Fed failed to anticipate but

reacted successfully to troubles in the stock market, the

economy, and the bond market, respectively.    Much of the time,

monetary policies are accommodating, reactive or passive.    Even

when the Fed seeks to assert active control, its policies operate

with long and variable lags.   Contrary to what might be called

the central bankers' theory of business cycles, economic

expansions do not necessarily generate excessive inflation to be

countered by tight monetary policies.    Also, contrary to some of

their critics, the moves of central bankers to raise interest

rates to prevent or cool a boom do not necessarily either cause

or explain recessions.

     The record of U.S. fiscal policies on the business cycle is

found to be even more mixed, but largely negative. The sharp

post-Korean War cutbacks in defense spending aggravated the 1953-

54 recession; also, the tardiness and errors of fiscal policy

contributed to the setbacks of the 1970s (Blinder, 1979).

     Surprises and disappointments are especially frequent and

important in the markets for financial assets. But what matters

in the present context is not the randomly dispersed individual




                                  32
price shocks that occur in these markets on each business day.

Rather, it is the waves of optimism and pessimism, which spread

through large numbers of investors and traders from time to time

and are often seen later as excessive reactions. Journalists

often refer to these errors as manifestations of "greed" and

"fear", as do many traders themselves.   This opinion (or self-

criticism) is overly rhetorical but not groundless; it does not

deserve a derisive reaction from economists who in turn overstate

the rationality of economic decision-making under uncertainty. As

already noted, such shared errors of judgement in private real

and financial investment decisions can be endogenously market-

moved and market-moving, and hence important indeed.



A View of Some Recent Developments


     The current U.S. business cycle expansion will be eight

years old in March 1999 and is already the longest in peacetime,

second only to the one during the Vietnam period in the 1960s.
However, both the 1960s and the 1980s saw much larger overall

rises in real GDP and total employment as well as larger declines

in the rate of unemployment, as shown in lines 1-2 of Table 1. In

the first five years of this expansion, from March 1991 to March

1996, U.S. output grew only about 13 percent, compared to average

growth of 28 percent in the same stage of the long upswings in

the 1960s and 1980s.   The unemployment rate actually continued to




                                33
rise for 15 months into the 1991-92 recovery, which is highly

unusual.

     Although the recession of 1990-91 was relatively mild and

short, the whole period of late 1980s and early 1990s was

sluggish.   Net private domestic investment declined sharply,

layoffs spread, wages of other than high-skilled workers lagged

badly, household debts increased, and consumer confidence fell.

Slowdowns before recessions are common but sluggish recoveries

like the one in the early 1990s are quite rare: typically, the

first several years of expansion see the highest economic growth.

     A brief, mild slowdown in 1995 followed a year of rising

commodity prices, a bond market downturn, and interest rate

increases driven in part by the Fed's preventive

counterinflationary actions.   It was not until 1996-98 that U.S.

output growth accelerated to surpass the historical pattern.

Real investment in structures, which had been declining in the

early 1990s, has risen smartly in recent years.    Investment in

producers' durable equipment, which includes computers, was

extremely strong, its growth far exceeding the past record (Table

1, lines 3-4 and 5-6).   Corporate profit margins increased

strongly during the upswing in the 1990s, rising from 6 percent

to the range of 8-10 percent. This high and growing

profitability, exceeding the records in previous long expansions,

helps explain the recent boom in business capital investment. The

extraordinary bull market in stocks has served as a powerful




                                34
stimulator of both business and household investment (lines 7-8).

Housing starts, too, increased much faster, longer, and more

steadily in this expansion than in those of the 1960s and 1980s.

     The U.S. inflation rate has actually declined during this

expansion, from 4.2 percent in March 1991 to 1.1 percent in March

1998, which is unique for the last half-century (lines 3-4).

Falling prices of computers and related products, oil, other

commodities, and many imports from countries in conditions of

financial and economic distress help explain the U.S.

disinflation.

     Nominal interest rates declined strongly in 1991-94,

reflecting the weakness of the recovery.   Later, while the short

rates increased mildly and stabilized, the long rates moved

lower.   Presumably, the persistent weakness of prices reduced

expected inflation.   In the past, interest rates increased in the

corresponding cycle stages along with higher inflation (lines 5-

6). For real interest rates, which tend to be negatively

correlated with inflation, the converse apparently applied: they

increased in the current expansion, particularly for the short

rates, whereas they decreased in the previous expansions during

which inflation rose. Consistent with the regression estimates in

this paper, the declines in inflation and long interest rates,

along with the rises in profits and stock prices, had the

combined effect of fueling the investment boom.   I would argue

that it was mainly this process that has allowed the U.S.




                                35
business expansion to last so long.

     However, some technology, pricing, and policy factors

helped, too.   Thus, the six-month smoothed growth rate of the

broad money supply was low and at times negative in 1991-94,

before rising higher more recently.    This shift to a more

permissive or stimulative stance is the opposite to that adopted

in the earlier expansions, when the monetary growth rates tended

to be higher in early than in late stages. Fears that this

acceleration will reignite inflation have been falsified by

events so far, and hence muted.    But there is a new concern, that

the Fed has allowed an overexpansion of credit to feed a bull

market in stocks that may be overvalued and headed toward a

crash.   Growth of federal debt declined steeply and consistently

in 1991-98.    This happy success helped to moderate interest

rates, among other positive consequences.

     Recent estimates show real GDP growth at 3.9 percent in

1998, marking a third consecutive strong year of growth. However,

to infer that the expansion will persist just because it has

persisted so far, is a non sequitur.    The dynamic factors
stressed in this paper are continously at work and they will

shape the economy's course. For example, the question of whether

and when the very high expected profits apparently expected by

the booming stock market will be confirmed by actual profits

retains great importance.

     The theory relating business cycles to the volatility of




                                  36
profits, investment, credit, and financial markets remains

relevant not only in the United States and Europe, where the

theory has its historical roots, but even in Asia's new and

different settings during the 1990s. Japan's economy was for a

long time the envy of the world and the model for the smaller

Asian economies, thanks to its pattern of long and vigorous

expansions interrupted only by mild slowdowns. But then

speculative excesses in Japan's real estate and stocks led to

bubbles that eventually burst.   The result in the 1990s has been

a long stagnation, intermittent price and debt deflation, and two

business cycle contractions (one in late 1992 and 1993, the

second underway since about March 1997). Elsewhere along Asia's

Pacific rim, expectations of high growth and high returns had

attracted large foreign capital inflows. In mid-1997, however,

debt and currency crises undermined investor confidence, causing

panics and massive flight of capital.   Yet Thailand's economy

began to weaken in mid-1995 and entered a recession a year later.

Korea's slowdown started in early 1996, its contraction in August

1997.   The boom-and-bust sequences in East Asia can be traced

back to overinvestment and malinvestment as more and more credit,

much of it short-term, was directed to speculative ventures, weak

financial intermediaries, and industries with excess capacity.

As a result, exports slowed, risk rose, and profits fell rapidly.

The east Asian crises of 1997 and 1998 were in fact triggered by

just the sort of fundamental imbalances in investment, profits,




                                 37
and credit -- for a rich discussion, see Corsetti, Pesenti and

Roubini (1998) -- that are central to an endogenous view of

business cycles.

Concluding Remarks


     Changes of great importance have been and still are

occurring in the economies around the world, including

globalization of production, trade, and finance; structural

shifts from country to city, farming to industry, goods to

services; and vast innovations in technology, business

management, and conduct of economic policies.   After a

deterioration in the 1970s and early 1980s, U.S. business cycles

have become more moderate, as in the earlier part of the post-

World War II era.   However, a study of seven large and seven

smaller economies shows that recessions were more frequent in the

second half than in the first half of the post-World War II

period (Zarnowitz, 1998b).

     Long business expansions benefit society by raising

employment, consumption, productivity, and profitability, but

they generate imbalances and are difficult to sustain.    The

interaction of profits, investment, credit and financial markets

is an enduring feature of market economies, which plays a central

role in business cycles.   The U.S. upswing of the past three

years provides a vivid example of how profits and investment can

reinforce each other, especially when combined with an exuberant




                                38
stock market. Recent events in Asia demonstrate how investment-

dominated booms can give way to a protracted stagnation with

tendencies toward deflation and underconsumption (Japan) or to

severe recessions harking back to the worst depressions of the

past (what used to be called the "newly industrialized economies"

or the "tigers" of east Asia). Of course, there are many deep

differences between the U.S. and the countries in recent crises:

no forecasts or precise parallels are intended here.   What I do

suggest is that the same endogenous domestic variables assume

major roles in business cycles observed in different economies,

and that the relations between them are likely to follow broadly

similar patterns.




                               39
Acknowledgements




     I thank Hans Nilsson for ongoing discussions and expert help

with the regressions; Robin Privman for efficient research

assistance; and Vicky Winslow and Masha Veksler for help with

typing the drafts of this paper.    The paper benefited greatly

from careful reading by Brad De Long and Timothy Taylor.




                               40
                                                Table 1

         Comparing the U.S. Business Expansion of the 1990s with Those
            of the 1960s and 1980s, by Selected Variables and Stages


           Percent Change in Years of Expansion            Value of Series at Month

                1-3         4-5        6-7        1-7         1          36         60      84
                (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)     (8)


                      Real Gross Domestic Product           Unemployment Rate

Current Cycle 7.9          4.6        8.0        22.0        6.8        6.5        5.5      4.7
Past Average 17.3          9.1        6.1        35.8        8.9        6.2        4.8      4.6


                          Nonresidential Structures         CPI Inflation Rate

Current Cycle -13.5       9.8        11.2        5.7         4.2        2.5        3.0      1.1
Past Average 13.8         2.3        -0.6       15.6         2.6        2.5        3.6      4.1


                      Producers Durable Equipment           Corporate Bond Yield

Current Cycle 26.9        22.7       30.8      103.6         9.1        7.6        7.6      6.6
Past Average 37.8          8.6        9.7       64.2         8.2        7.8        7.6      7.9


                        S&P 500 Stock Price Index           Corporate Profit Margin

Current Cycle 22.0       39.5        66.4      183.2         6.0        8.0       10.0      9.0
Past Average 26.4        22.9        27.6       98.1         7.4        8.4        9.3      8.1

Dating: According to the NBER chronology, the current U.S. business cycle expansion
        began in March 1991 (for monthly data) or first quarter of 1991 (for quarterly
        data). Hence, for the “Current Cycle”, the years denote: 1-3, 3/1991-3/1994; 4-5,
        3/1994-3/1996; etc. The months denote: 1, 3/1991; 36, 3/1994; 60, 3/1996; 84,
        3/1998. “Past Average” refers to U.S. expansions of February 1961-December
        1969 and of November 1982-July 1990. Here the years and months are dated
        analogously starting in February 1961 and November 1982.
Sources: The Conference Board, Business Cycle Indicators:




                                                  41
Real GDP, series 55, nonresid. structures, 87; prod. dur. eqpt., 88; stock price
index, 19; unemployment rate, series 43; CPI inflation rate, 320; corp. bond
yield, 116; corp. profit margin, 81.




                                          42
43
References



        Blanchard, O.J.       1993.    "Consumption and the Recession of

1990-91."     American Economic Review, 83, 270-74 (May).

        Black, F.    1986.    "Noise."      Journal of Finance.   41(3).

529-43 (July).

        Blatt, J.M. 1978.       "On the Econometric Approach to Business-

Cycle Analysis." Oxford Economic Papers, n.s., 30: 292-300.
        Blinder, A.S.    1979.        Economic Policy and the Great

Stagflation.        New York: Academic Press.

        Cagan, P.     1969.    "The Influence of Interest Rates on the

Duration of Business Cycles." In J.M. Guttentag and P. Cagan,

eds,. Essays on Interest Rates. New York: Columbia University

Press.

        Carrier, D.J.     1997.       Industrial Restructuring, Financial

Instability, and the Dynamics of the Postwar U.S. Economy.                New

York and London: Garland Publishing, Inc.

        Conference Board. Business Cycle Indicators.          Monthly,

various issues.           Corsetti, G., Pesenti, P., and N. Roubini.

1998.    "What Caused the Asian Currency and Financial Crisis?

Part I.    A Macroeconomic Overview, NBER Working Paper 6833, Part

II.   The Policy Debate, NBER WP 6834 (December).

      Courvisanos, J.         1996.     Investment Cycles in Capitalist




                                          44
Economies: A Kaleckian Behavioral Contribution.           Cheltenham, UK:

Edward Elgar.

     Cowen, T.    1997.     Risk and Business Cycles: New and Old

Austrian Perspectives. London and New York: Routledge.

     Davis, S.J., Haltiwanger, J.C., and S. Schuh.           1996.   Job

Creation and Destruction.        Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

     Dornbusch, R.     1998.    "Growth Forever." Wall Street Journal,

July 30.

     Eckstein, D., and A. Sinai.          1986.   "The Mechanism of the

Business Cycle in the Postwar Era."          In R.J. Gordon, ed., chap.1.

     Fosler, G. and K.J. Stiroh.          1998.   "A Sectoral Perspective

on Economic Stability."        Business Economics, vol. 33, no. 4
(October) 46-52.

     R.J. Gordon, ed. 1986.        The American Business Cycle:

Continuity and Change.      Chicago:      University of Chicago Press.

     Haberler, G.    [1937] 1964.      Prosperity and Depression.

Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

     Hall, R.E.    1986.    " The Role of Consumption in Economic

Fluctuations," chap. 4.

     Kaldor, N.     1955/56.    "Alternative Theories of

Distribution." Review of Economic Studies 23 (2), 83-100.

     Kalecki, M.    1937.    "The Principle of Increasing Risk".

Economica (N.S.), 4(16), 440-6.

     Kalecki, M.    1954.      Theory of Economic Dynamics: An Essay on

Cyclical and Long-run Changes in Capitalist Economy. London:




                                     45
George Allen &Unwin.

     Keynes, J.M.     1930.     A Treatise on Money. London: Macmillan.

     Lahiri, K. and G.H. Moore, eds. 1991.           Leading Economic

Indicators: New Approaches and Forecasting Records.           Cambridge:

Cambridge University Press.

     Laidler, D.E.W.     1972.    "On Wicksell's Theory of Price Level

Dynamics." Manchester School of Economics and Social Studies 40

(2). 125-44 (June).

     Klein, P.A. and J. Cullity.          1998.   "Modern Business Cycles:

Premature Death Knell."        Business Cycle Indicators (March).
     Klein, P.A. ed. 1990.        Analyzing Modern Business Cycles:

Essays Honoring Geoffrey H. Moore.          Armonk, NY: M.E. Sharpe.

     Mitchell, W.C.    1913.      Business Cycles.     Berkeley:

University of California Press.

     Mishkin, F.S.     1981.    "The Real Interest Rate: An Empirical

Investigation." In Brunner K. and A.H. Meltzer.           The Costs and

Consequences of Inflation. Carnegie-Rochester Conference on

Public Policy, vol. 15. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

     Montgomery, A.L., Zarnowitz, V., Tsay, R.S., and G.C. Tiao.

 1998.    "Forecasting the U.S. Unemployment Rate."         Journal of the

American Statistical Association, vol. 93, no. 442, pp. 478-493

(June).

     Moore, G.H. and V. Zarnowitz.          1986.   "The Development and

Role of the National Bureau of Economic Research's Business Cycle

Chronologies" in R.J. Gordon, ed., pp.735-779.




                                     46
     Schumpeter, J.       [1912] 1934.     The Theory of Economic

Development (English translation of German original).         Cambridge,

Mass.: Harvard University Press.

     Shackle, G. L. S.      1970.   Expectations, Enterprise and

Profit: The Theory of the Firm.          London: George Allen & Unwin.

     Stock, J.H. and M.W. Watson, eds., Business Cycles,

Indicators, and Forecasting.        Chicago: The University of Chicago

Press.

     Temin, P.    1976.     Did Monetary Forces Cause the Great
Depression? New York W.W. Norton.

     Temin, P.    1998.    "The Causes of American Business Cycles:

An Essay in Economic Historiography."         NBER Working Paper 6692

(August).

     von Neumann, John.      [1937] 1945-46.     "A Model of General

Equilibrium." Review of Economic Studies 13, 1-9 (translation

from German).

     Weber. S.    1997.    "End of the Business Cycle."      Foreign

Affairs (July).

     Weber, S.    1998.    "Comment."      Business Cycle Indicators

(April).

     Wicksell, K.    [1901-06] 1934-35.        Lectures on Political

Economy. 2 vols. (English       translation by E. Classen of Swedish

original) London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.

     Wood, A.    1975.     A Theory of Profits.     Cambridge: Cambridge

University Press.




                                     47
     Zarnowitz, V.     1973.     Orders Production, and Investment: A

Cyclical and Structural Analysis. New York: National Bureau of

Economic Research.

     Zarnowitz, V. and C. Boschan.        1975.    "Cyclical Indicators:

An Evaluation and New Leading Indexes".           Business Conditions

Digest, May, V-XXII.

     Zarnowitz, V.     1992.     Business Cycles: Theory, History,

Indicators, and Forecasting.        Chicago.: The University of Chicago

Press.

     Zarnowitz, V.     1998 a.    "Has the Business Cycle Been

Abolished?"    Business Economics, vol. 33, no. 4, pp. 39-45
(October).

     Zarnowitz, V. 1998b.      "Cyclical Indicators and National

Accounts".    Expert Group Meeting of the United Nations Statistics

Division.    New York (October).

     Zarnowitz, V. and G. H. Moore.       1986.     "Major Changes in

Cyclical Behavior". In R. J. Gordon, ed., chap. 9.

     Zellner, A., Hong C., and Min, C.       1991.     "Forecasting

Turning Points in International Output Growth Rates Using

Bayesian Exponentially Weighted Autoregression, Time-Varying

Parameters, and Pooling Techniques".        Journal of Econometrics 49,

275-304.




                                     48
1. For an affirmative version of the arguments summarized here, see
Weber (1997); Klein and Cullity (1998) is a rebuttal, and Weber
(1998) is a reply.       For extensions of the debate, see the
proceedings of meetings of the Eastern Economic Association in 1998
and the American Economic Association in 1999, with participation
of Blinder, Boldin, Klein, Stock, Watson, and Zarnowitz.      Other
related articles include Dornbusch (1998); Zarnowitz (1998a); and
several unsigned contributions to selected 1998 issues of the
Conference Board's Business Cycle Indicators.

2. Mitchell (1913) saw the fluctuations in profits arising from
cost-price imbalances as critical for understanding the changing
investment and production decisions of firms and hence for
explaining business cycles. For Schumpeter (1912), profits are the
reward for innovations adopted by pioneering entrepreneurs. In von
Neumann's classical production model (1937), the ultimate source of
profits is exogenous technology that permits growth.      In early
Keynes (1930), profits disappear in equilibrium defined by the
equality of investment and saving.    In Kaldor (1955/56), profits
persist because investment contributes to growth of income and
capital alike.    In most of these models profits include all
nonlabor (property) income, and in some pricing is via a markup
rule, implying the prevalence of imperfect competition or oligopoly
(Kalecki, 1954).

3. Of course, any individual firm under imperfect competition may
choose to expand its market share by accepting a lower profit
margin for a time (Wood 1975).     By choosing to do so, the firm
would give rise to an inverse relationship between growth and
profits. But this occasional counterexample does not vitiate the
more general connection that growth increases profits as a whole.

4. The data used are based on the following series in the Business
Cycle Indicators published by the Conference Board:     profits are
series 81; economic growth, 55; productivity growth, 358; the price
level, 311; employment cost level, 63; inflation rate, 320;
interest rate on long-term Treasury bonds, 115; and interest rate
on new high-grade corporate securities, 116.

5. The correction (AR(1)=0.844) helped explain the large local
trends (up in 1953-65, down in 1966-74, and up again since 1980),
which show up in ð in addition to pronounced cycles and in absence
of any overall trend

6. It is worth noting that these observations are broadly
consistent with certain ideas of economists as original and
influential as Wicksell, Schumpeter, Hayek, and Keynes (1930).
Their theories, though deeply different otherwise, agreed that in
expansions the demand for investment rises above the supply of
saving and is financed by an effectively endogenous process of
creation of credit money. The classical exposition of the two-rate
model is Wicksell (1901-06). Here rising demand for money driven
by the firms' perceived profit opportunities is met by rising
supply of bank credit at costs low enough to permit the profits to
be realized.    This is described as an endogenous "cumulative
process," which gradually reduces the excess of investment demand
over saving supply (and of the natural over the market rate).

7. See Cowen (1997) for further, mainly theoretical discussion of
the role of risk in business cycles inspired by old Austrian ideas
as well as modern financial literature. However, his discussion is
generally silent on the other early line of ideas about risk
increasing in investment upswing, from Kalecki (1937) to Shackle
(1970); on which, see Courvisanos (1996).

8. Nevertheless, shocks such as a sudden market crash, outbreak of
a war and fears of shortages, rationing, or credit restrictions
could and on infrequent occasions probably did produce "autonomous"
destabilizing shifts in consumer demand. For further discussion,
see Temin (1976, 1998), Hall (1986), and Blanchard (1993).


9. The original theory stems from the time when the gold standard
ruled and inflation alternated with deflation so that price level
stability in the long run was widely expected (and reflected in
remarkably stable and low government bond yields).           In the
Wicksellian two-rate model, prices were taken to be perfectly
flexible and changing so as to maintain full employment. However,
changes in real incomes can be readily added to the cumulative
process,   with  quantity   adjustments   either   replacing   price
adjustments (Laidler, 1972) or, more generally, complementing them.
 It is worth noting that in historical periods of declining or
stable prices nominal aggregates reflected business cycles well and
were widely used, whereas when inflation prevailed, as in the last
half-century, business cycles were best measured in real terms.

10. The data used in the investment regressions of this section
include the following series from Business Cycle Indicators (in
addition to some listed in note 4 above): real business fixed
investment, series 86; real corporate profits, 18; stock price
index, 19; exchange value of U.S. dollar, 750; funds raised in
credit markets, 110; and current liabilities of business failures,
14.

11. More generally, I believe that the analysis of economic
fluctuations derived substantial benefits from methods developed by
the NBER, including the historical reference dates, turning-point
identification, emphasis on short unit periods, and efforts at
time-series decomposition, deseasonalization, and detrending. Many
recent studies of business cycles suffer from ignoring the above
matters and relying instead on general methods only.       Some use
annual data which reveal little of what happens during short
recessions, for example.    What is desirable are combinations of
best modern statistical and econometric techniques with insights
from cyclical indicator analysis. For examples of how leading and
other indicators can be used along with univariate and multivariate
time-series models, Bayesian forecasting methods, probability,
econometric, and nonlinear models, the interested reader might
begin with the essays in P.A. Klein (1990), Lahiri and Moore
(1991), and Stock and Watson (1993) and follow with Zellner, Hong
and Min (1991) and Montgomery, Zarnowitz, Tsay and Tiao (1998).




                                51
