NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PATTERNS OF SKILL PREMIA

Daron Acemoglu

Working Paper 7018
http://www.nber.org/papers/w70l8

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 1999

I thank All Burak Guner for research assistance, Joshua Angrist and Jaume Ventura for comments, and the
NSF for financial support. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not reflect those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©

1999

by Daron Acemoglu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.

Patterns of Skill Premia
Daron Acemoglu
NBER Working Paper No. 7018
March 1999

JEL No. 014, 033, J31
ABSTRACT
In this paper, I develop a model to analyze how skill premia differ over time and across
countries, and use this model to study the impact of international trade on wage inequality. Skill
premia are determined by technology and the relative supply of skills. An increase in the relative
supply of skills, holding technology constant, reduces the skill premium. Among countries sharing
the same technology, those with greater supplies will therefore have lower skill premia. An increase

in the supply of skills over time, however, induces a change in technology, increasing the demand
for skills. As a result, the relationship between relative supplies and skill premia over time may be

increasing. Similarly, across countries developing their own technologies, there need not be a
decreasing relationship between relative supply and skill premia.
Holding technology constant, an increase in the volume of international trade increases the
skill premium in countries where skills are abundant, and reduces it in skill-scarce countries. Trade
also induces skill-biased technical change, creating a powerful force towards higher skill premia in

both skill-abundant and skill-scarce countries. As a result, trade opening can cause a rise in
inequality in the U.S. and the LDCs, and thanks to the induced skill-biased technical change, this
can happen without the usual intervening mechanism of standard trade models, a rise in the relative
prices of skill-intensive goods in the U.S.. I also show that an increase in the volume of trade, while
increasing skill premia in skill-scarce countries and the technological leader, the U.S., may actually

reduce skill premia in medium skill, European, countries.

Daron Acemoglu
Dept. of Economics, E52-371
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
daron@mit.edu

I.

Introduction

Figure 1 plots the relative suppiy of graduate equivalent workers and the college
premium in the U.S. between 1949 and 1995.' Despite the large increase in the supply
of college graduates over the past 45 years, the college premium has not fallen. Rather,
it has increased from 37% in 1949 to 62% in 1995.
o skillsup

colipre

.9

.7 -

0

G0

0)

0

.5 -

0
0

a
a

°° °0

E

o090

a)
U)

0 00000

(I)

>

E

U-

D
a)

0

000

.3 -

0

0

CU

000000000

a)

0000

000

U

.1

0
49

.2
519

69

Year

719

89

US DATA

Figure 1: Relative supply of college equivalent workers and the college premium in the
U.S. 1949-1995.

Figure 2 plots the average years of secondary schooling and percentage returns to
schooling across 42 countries.2 Although data quality is an issue in many cases, the
'This figure plots the 25 years of data used by Katz and Murphy [1992] from the CPS and the
data reported by Autor, Katz and Krueger [1998] from the censuses of 1950, 1960, 1990 and CPS
1996. The relative supply of college equivalents is constructed as in Katz and Murphy [1992, p.68].
It is equal to college graduates+0.29xsome college-0.Osxhigh school dropouts divided by high school
graduates+0.69xsome college+0.93xhigh school dropouts. I left out the data from the 1940 census
because college premium appears to be suspiciously high in 1940 at 50%. In fact, there are a number of
problems with this cenus. First, the education variable is different (attendance rather than completion).
Second, interviewing methods were different which, Goldin [1994] argues, led to substantial overstatment
of years of schooling, possibly by as much as a factor of 1.5 or 2 for some cohorts. Third, this was the
first census in which income data were collected and the inexperience of the interviewers led to many

mistakes. Finally, there was no self-employment income in this census and a large fraction of the
population were self-employed.
2The returns data are from the survey by Psacharopoulos [1994] and years of secondary schooling n
1

DOT

HON

S
.5
0
o

IDN

16

KEN

DNA
MDX

0

SGP

Q.

HUN

4J

POL

GRE

Average Years of Secondary Schooling

2

Figure 2: Returns to schooling and average years of secondary schooling for "technological followers".

figure shows a well-defined negative relation, with a coefficient of -2.43 and standard
error 0.80. What explains the different patterns of skill premia over time and across
countries?
In this paper, I develop a framework to analyze this question. Skill premia are determined by the relative supply of skilled workers and the degree of skill bias of technology
Building on Acemoglu [1998], I endogenize the skill bias of technology as a function of
the relative supply of skilled workers and the relative prices in the economy. Given the
equilibrium skill bias, the skill premium is declining in the relative supply of skills as
indicated by the constant technology relative demand curve CT in Figure 3. An increase
1985 are from the Barro-Lee data set (http://www.worldbank.org/html/prdmg/grthweb/ddharle2.htm,

see also Barro and Lee [1993]). Return to schooling is the schooling slope coefficient from micro data log
wage regression on schooling, potential experience and potential experience squared for each country.
The results should be interpreted with caution as data quality differ across conntries and refer to different

dates for different countries. The countries are Argentina, Bolivia, Bostwana, Brazil, Chile, China,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Cyprus, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Chana, Greece, Guatemala,
Honduras, Hong Kong, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iran, Israel, Kenya, South Korea, Kuwait, Malaysia,
Mexico, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Singapore,
Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Thailand, Tunisia, Uruguay, Venezuala. Using different measures of skill supplies,
such as average years of schooling or ratio of workers with secondary (completion or attendence) to
those without, leads to very similar results.
2

Skill premium

ET1--endogenous

technology
demand
CT--constant
technology
demand
Relative Supply of Skills

Figure 3: Relative demand for skills.

in the relative suppiy of skills also induces skill-biased technical change, increasing the
demand for skills. Therefore, the relative demand for skilled workers will be typically
more elastic when technology adjusts to changes in supply, as shown by the curve ET1.
When the impact of supply on technology is powerful, the relation between relative
supply and relative price of skills may even be increasing as shown by the curve ET2
in Figure 3. A possible explanation for the pattern in Figure 1 is therefore a steadily
increasing supply of college graduates in the U.S., inducing the development of more
and more skill-biased technologies, and moving the economy along the curve ET2.
Cross-county patterns, on the other hand, depend on whether technologies are determined locally or globally. The countries depicted in Figure 2 are technological followers,
typically using U.S. technologies. Hence, variations across these countries will be traced
by the constant technology curve CT, and the relationship between skill supplies and
premia across these countries will be decreasing.
This argument does not extend to comparisons across countries developing their
own technologies. Figure 4 plots returns to schooling and average years of schooling
among technologically more advanced countries,3 and shows that there is no well-defined
3The data from Psacharopoulos [1994] and Barro and Lee [1993]. The countries are Austria Australia,
Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Netherlands, Sweden, Switzerland, the U.K., and the U.S..

3

12
C)
C

-

FRA

10

USA

C)

CAN

(U

SER

C
0)

2

0)

0
'TA

2

____________________________________________________________
1

4
3
2
Average Years of Secondary Schooling

5

Figure 4: Returns to schooling and average schooling for advanced economies.

negative relationship. Comparing other measures of returns to skills such as overall
wage inequality, the pattern, if anything, points to higher skill premia in the more skillabundant U. S. than in Europe. For example, in 1984, the log difference of the 90th
and 10th deciles of the hourly wage distribution was 1.40 in the U.S., 1.16 in Britain,
1.23 in France, 1.01 in the Netherlands, 0.88 in Germany, 1.01 in Sweden and 1.04 in
Japan (Freeman and Katz [1995], Table 2). In the context of my model, this pattern
arises because the skill abundant U.S. develops more skilled-biased technologies than
European countries
The most original results of this paper concern the impact of an increase in the volume

of international trade on the patterns of skill premia. Standard trade models imply that
international trade should increase skill premia in industrialized countries and reduce
it in LDCs. But, during the recent period of trade opening, wage inequality appears
to have increased in the U.S. and the LDCs, but not in Continetal Europe.5 I show
that this pattern may arise because trade affects American and European technologies
4An alternative explanation for this pattern is institutional wage compression in Europe. I discuss
this explanation in the concluding section, and argue that instead demand for skilled workers may be
lower in Europe.
5See the evidence in Hanson and Harrison [1994] and Robbins [1995] for changes in inequality in the
LDCs and see, for example, the papers in the Freeman and Katz [1995] volume.

4

differentially.

The key to my analysis is that international trade affects the direction of technical
change. Trade increases the relative price of skill intensive goods in the U.S., making skill-complementary innovations more profitable, and inducing skill-biased technical
change.6 Skill-biased change contributes to the rise in inequality in the U.S. coming
from standard trade reasons. It also implies that since the LDCs use U.S. technologies,
trade may increase, rather than decrease, wage inequality in the LDCs.
This theory therefore avoids two of the major criticisms levelled against explanations

that view trade as the major cause of the rise in U.S. wage inequality. The first is
that given reasonable estimates of the relevant elasticities, the volume of trade is not
sufficient to explain the increase inequality (e.g. Krugman [1995]). The second criticism

is that demand for skills appears to have also increased in the LDCs, contrary to the
prediction of a standard trade model. Since in this theory trade induces skill-biased
technical change, standard calculations would underestimate the impact of trade. With
sufficiently pronounced skill-biased change, demand for skills and inequality can also
increase in the LDCs. The third major argument against trade is the lack of a significant
increase in the prices of skill-intensive goods in the U.S., the main channel through which
trade would affect the U.S. labor market (e.g. Lawrence and Slaughter [1994]). I will
show that this argument also does not apply in my model because relative prices have
to return to their original (pre-trade) level in the U.S. in order to equilibrate incentives
to develop different technologies.

The argument so far explains how trade can have a significant effect on the U.S.
labor market, while also increasing demand for skills in the LDCs. A puzzling feature of
the developments in the patterns of inequality over the past twenty five years has been
the stability of returns to schooling and wage inequality in many European economies,
in the face of sharply increasing inequality in the U.S.. Surprisingly, this model predicts
that increased trade may reduce demand for skills, and hence skill premia in Europe.
6This argument is closely related to a point informally raised by Wood [1994]. Wood argues that
trade with the LDCs led to defensive innovations in the labor-intensive sectors of more developed
countries, and these defensive innovations reduced the demand for unskilled labor. Although related in
spirit, the two arguments are quite different. In my theory, the increase in the relative price of skilled
goods encourages the development of technologies complementary to skilled workers. It is also not clear
in Wood's argument why trade should induce defensive innovations, and why these innovations should
reduce the demand for skills. For example, if machines complement labor, innovations in the unskilled
sector would increase the demand for unskilled labor.

5

Recall that Europe starts out with fewer skilled workers than the U.S. and with a greater
relative price of skill-intensive goods. Trade between the U.S., Europe, and the LDCs,
at a given set of technologies, would increase the relative price of skill-intensive goods in
Europe, increasing the demand for skills. But U.S. skill-biased technical change induced
by trade increases the productivity of skilled workers in the U.S. and the LDCs, so the
world economy after trade may have a substantially larger supply of skill-intensive goods
and relative prices of skilled goods quite close to those in the U.S. before trade, which
were below those in Europe. Demand for skills in Europe can therefore fall as a result
of trade opening.
The related literature includes models of the increase in inequality in the U.S., such as
Acemoglu [1999], Aghion, Howitt and Violante [1999], Caselli [1999], Galor and Tsiddon

[1997], Galor and Maov [1998], Greenwood and Yorkuoglu [1997], Krusell, Ohanian,
Rios-Rull and Violante [1997]. Acemoglu [1998] is most closely related. In that paper, I
use a similar model of directed technical change to show that the increase in the number
of college graduates during the 1960s and 1970s in the U.S. can explain both the fall

of the college premium during the 1970s and its sharp rise during the 1980s. Here,
I extend that model to derive the differential implications across countries and over
time, and offer a detailed analysis of the impact of trade on technology and inequality.
Previous studies, including among others Ahmad [1965], Kennedy [1964] and Samuelson
[1970], Hayami and Ruttan [1970], and David [1975], discuss induced innovations, which
is closely related to the concept of directed technical change. But these studies do not
feature the market size effect—the fact that an increase in the number of skilled workers
increases the size of the market for skill-complementary technologies. The market size
effect is central to the results of this paper, especially to those of Section II. Finally,
previous contributions that emphasize the importance of trade on inequality include
Wood [1994] and Leamer [1995], though they do not model or emphasize the impact of
trade on the direction of technical change.
The plan of the paper is as follows. In the next section, I show that in a natural model
of endogenous technical change where skill- and labor-complementary technologies can
be developed at different rates, there is a strong market size effect. As a result, in a
skill-abundant economy, technologies used by skilled workers may be so advanced that
there could be an increasing relation between the supply of skills and skill premia. This
model can explain the patterns depicted in Figure 1, 2 and 4. In Section III, I develop
6

the argument that trade opening can cause skill-biased technical change in the U.S. and
labor-biased technical change in Europe. Section IV concludes.

II. The Basic Model

A. Preferences
Consider a world economy consisting of the U.S., and a group of Less Developed
Countries (the South). There are two differences between these countries: first, the U.S.
is technologically more advanced, and second, it has a higher fraction of skilled workers
than the LDCs.7 H denotes skilled workers and L denotes unskilled workers, and I
assume HU/LU > Hsi/Lsi for j = 1, .., J, where U denotes the U.S. and S denotes 1th
Southern country. For now, I allow no international trade, and in this subsection, I drop
country superscripts.
All consumers in all countries have identical preferences:

U(t) f exp(—r(r — t))ck(T)dT,

(1)

where c(T) is consumption at time and r is the discount rate, and due to linear utility,
it is also the interest rate. I will drop the time argument when this causes no confusion.
The consumption good is produced from two complementary intermediate goods,
one using skilled and the other unskilled labor. The market for intermediate goods is
competitive. I denote the total output of these intermediate goods by Y and Yh. The
aggregate production of the consumption good is:

Y=

[YP + J'P,

(2)

where p < 1, and the elasticity of substitution is 1/(1 — p). I denote the prices of the

two intermediate goods by Pi and Ph The relative price of the skill-intensive good is:
Ph
p—=7(—J
\YhJ

I use the final good as the numeraire so that [p11_P + pt_P

(3)

= 1. The labor market

is also assumed to be competitive.
7The important feature is not that these countries are less developed, but that they are technological
followers, using U.S. technologies.

7

B. Technology
There are two technologies, one complementing skilled labor in the production of the
skill-intensive good, the other complementing unskilled labor in the production of the
labor-intensive good.
The output of the two goods in country c are:

yc =

f (i)xj(i)1di. (L and =

f (i)x(i)'. (H,

(4)

where (i), for s = 1, h, is the quality of machine i used in the production of good s
in country c, and x(i) is the quantity of this machine used in production. So there is
a range (a continuum 1) of different types of machines used by unskilled workers and a
different set used by skilled workers. This setup is similar to that in Acemoglu [1998]
as it allows skilled and unskilled workers to use different technologies. Technological
progress will take the form of improvements in machine qualities. Having a range of
machines, rather than only one for each skill type, simplifies the analysis by making
technical progress deterministic and continuous.
Producers use the machines developed locally or adopt machines developed in another country, e'. But in this latter case, because these machines are not "appropriate"
to their needs, their productivity will be lower than producers in the country of origin
by a factor 0 < 1. There are many possible reasons for this inappropriateness of technologies. Countries require crops suitable for their own climate, vaccines that deal with
the prevalent diseases in their region, and technologies that exploit their existing knowhow. So technologies developed in the U.S. may be partly "inappropriate" to different
environments, and hence less productive when used in other countries.8
Since producers will adopt the most productive machines, we have

(i) = max (q(i),0rnax {q'(i)})

(5)

where q is the productivity of the most advanced machine developed in country c.
The U.S. is technologically more advanced than the South. In particular, 0q'(i) >
S.

qs3 (i) for

.
s = 1, h and all j and z. This. implies
that it is profitable for the LDCs to

import their machines from the U.S., so (i) 0q(i). I also assume that there are no
SBasu and Weil [1998] and Acemoglu and Zilibotti [1998] emphasize the importance of "appropriateness" of technologies in the context of economic development (see also Atkinson and Stiglitz [1975],
Salter [1966], Stewart [1974]).

8

intellectual property rights between the U.S. and less developed economies, so that if an
LDC uses machines developed in the U.S., it does not pay patent fees to the innovators
of the machine. Instead, in each LDC, an imitator can patent technologies developed in
the North at cost , and become the monopolist supplier of these machines.9 Finally, I
assume that an R&D firm can only develop the machines that are appropriate in its own
country, so that firms in the South cannot perform R&D for machines that are being
developed in the U.S..

I denote the price of machine i for skill type s in country c by x(i). Equation (4)

)p(i)

implies that the demand for machine (i) is x(i) = [(1 —
(N /x(i)]
where N HC and Nf Lc. Product prices, p, are indexed by c as they vary across
countries in the absence of international trade.
The R&D process is modeled as in Aghion and Howitt [1992] and Grossman and
Helpman [1991]: an innovation based on a machine of quality q creates a new vintage
with quality )q where )> 1. The inventor of a new machine obtains a patent, enforced
only in the U.S.. I assume ) < (i—)-(')/ , which ensures that R&D firms in the U.S.
will set a limit price making final good firms indifferent between buying the two newest
vintages. The marginal cost of producing a machine of quality q increases linearly in
q and I normalize it to (1 — 3)(\ — 1)'q. This implies that the price of a machine of
quality q in the U.S. is xU = (1 — /)q. Similarly, the imitating monopolist in each LDC
will also maximize profits by setting the same limit price, so = (1 — /3)q for all c.
Substituting this price into machine demands, we obtain the quantity of machines used
ii1ih/.in country c. Using this expression, output
in production as: x(z) = p3q3(z) (N8)
j
in sector s is:

yc = (pC)(l3)/3 QN,

(6)

where Q f (i)di is a measure of the aggregate productivity of machines used in
sector s in country c. The wage, the marginal product of labor, is therefore: w =
= Q/Q.
3(p)'Q. Since (i) = Oq(i), we have that = OQ, so
Hence, denoting Q = Q5 to simplify notation, the skill premium in country c is:
= (pC)l//i

.

(7)

Skill premia therefore depend on technology and product prices. In two countries with
Bertrand competition, it is not profitable for any other firm to adopt ("steal") the same
patent.

9

the same technology and with the same product prices, the relative wage should the
same. In this section, skill premia will differ between the U.S. and the LDCs because,
in the absence of international trade, their product prices differ. Simple algebra using
(3), (4) and (6) gives the relative price pC as a function of Hd/Lc:
—3(i—p)zi

HC —(i—p)v

(F)

(8)

where v (1 — (1 — /3)p)'. An increase in HC/LC therefore increases the relative supply
of skill-intensive goods and depresses pC Now, combining this with (7), we obtain:
W

='y

(Q\ F)
(Hc

(9)

This is the crucial equation of the paper. For a given state of technological knowhow (skill bias) as captued by Qh/Q1, the skill premium wc is decreasing in the supply of
skills. Therefore, across countries sharing the same technology, there will be a decreasing

relation between the relative supply of skills and the skill premium, as suggested by
Figure 2.

C. Directed Technical Change in the U.S.
I now analyze the forces that determine the equilibrium skill bias of technologies.
Recall that for now, new technologies are developed only in the U.S..
The value of owning the leading vintage of machine i in sector s is:
rV8(i) =

8(i) — z(i)V(i) +

(i),

where z(i) is the flow rate of a new invention, and ir(i) = x'(i)q8(i)/(1 — )

(10)

is the

flow profit from selling a machine of vintage q3(i). Notice that only HU and LU feature
in a(i), and hence in ir(i), because innovators can only sell their technologies in the
U.S. market. Although LDC firms use U.S. technologies, they do not pay patent fees or
royalties to U.S. firms. There will also be no R&D in the LDCs since LDC firms prefer
to use U.S. technologies.

Finally, free-entry into R&D activities implies that an additional dollar spent for
research must yield a return equal to cost. One unit of the final good spent in R&D for
a machine of quality q leads to a discovery of a new machine at the flow rate conveniently
10

normalized to (1 — 3)/(/3q). Since the flow rate of invention is decreasing in q, more
resources need to be spent to discover a higher quality machine. Free-entry then implies
V3(i) =

1q8(i).

(11)

An equilibrium requires that firms choose the profit maximizing technology and rent
the profit maximizing amounts of all inputs; innovators follow the profit maximizing

pricing policy; product, intermediate good and labor markets clear; and there is no
opportunity for any research firm to enter (or exit) and increase its profits. Equations
(5), (8), (9), (10) and (11) ensure these conditions.

I start with the balanced growth path (BGP) along which V = 0. Imposing this
condition, equations (10) and (11) imply that in BGP:

(p3)' N8 = B[r + z8(i)],
for s =

(12)

h. This equation states that innovation effort in sector s will be higher when
profits from technology sales, the left-hand side, are higher. The profits will be higher in
turn when the prices of the goods they produce are higher and/or when more workers use
this technology. It also immediately follows from (12) that z5(i) = z for all i. In other
words, the BGP levels of innovation for all skill-intensive (labor-intensive) technologies
are the same, so we only have to determine two variables, z1 and Zh.
Combining (12) for s = I and s = h, we see that Zh/Z1, relative research effort at
skill-complementary technologies, is increasing in PU (Hu/Lu). It is only the relative
supply in the U.S. that matters because, in the absence of international property rights,
U.S. workers constitute the sole market for new technologies.
We can now see that the direction of technical change is determined by two factors
1,

(see Acemoglu [1998]):

1. The price effect: technologies producing more expensive goods will be upgraded
faster. Since goods using the scarce factor will command a higher price (see (8)
above), this effect implies that there will be more innovation directed at the scarce
factor.
2. The market size effect: a larger clientele for the technology leads to more innovation. Since the clientele for the technology is effectively the workers who use it,
the market size effect encourages innovation for the more abundant factor.
11

Equilibrium bias in technical change is determined by these two opposing forces. A
greater supply of skilled workers, via the price effect, induces the development of more
labor-complementary technologies. When there are more skilled workers, the size of the
market for skill-complementary technologies is also larger, and this encourages further
skil-biased technical change. We will see below that for p E (0, 1], this market size effect
is more powerful.
More formally, for BGP, we need qh/qj to be constant, therefore z1 = z11. Equation
(12) then implies that along the BGP:
(13)

Intuitively, BGP requires both sectors to grow at the same rate, hence z1 = Zh. So the
demand for skill-complementary technologies relative to labor-complementary machines
should be independent of HU/LU, and the price and market size effects should exactly
balance out, which is ensured by (13). Equations (8) and (13) imply that the BGP
relative productivity of skilled workers satisfies:
Qh

=

yl-P

.

(14)

Qi1/Qi, the average quality of skill-complementary machines relative to labor-complementary
machines, is the measure of equilibrium skill bias.
First, consider the case of p> 0 s that skill and labor-intensive goods are relatively
close substitutes. Then, of the two influences on the direction of technical change, the

market size effect is stronger. Since profits to innovation are proportional to market
size, they are proportional to the number of workers using the technology. Therefore,
when HU/LU increases, innovation and R&D in the skill-intensive sector become more
profitable, inducing Qh/Q/ to increase. This case is of interest, as it implies that an
inrease in the relative supply of skilled workers in the U.S. will lead to a higher demand
for skilled workers as suggested by Figure 1.
In contrast, when p < 0, the price effect is more powerful. An increase in HU/LU
leads to a large reduction in pU making innovation and R&D in the skill-intensive sector
relatively less profitable. This causes a reduction in Qh/Ql. Although it is plausible for
the price effect to dominate in many cases,'° the market size effect is likely to dominate
'°For example, Hayami and Ruttan [1970] discuss the different paths of agricultural development in

12

in the case of skilled and unskilled workers.1' So in the rest of the analysis I take p to
be positive.
Returning to the formal analysis, the BGP research effort level can now be determined
from (12), (13) and (14) by imposing z1 = Zh = z, which gives:

+ zc =

(HU)

1-p

+ (LU) 'P

(15)

Finally, using the analysis so far and (9), we have:

Proposition 1:

Suppose

there is no international trade and no intellectual property

rights. Then, there is a unique balanced growth path (BGP) where in all countries,
both sectors and total output grow at the rate (A— 1)z with z given by (15). Along
the BGP, Qh/Q/ is given by (14) and the skill premiumin the U.S. is:

=
where 77
is:

/p2/(1 — p)

—

(1

=

—

13p).

1

H'
yii (1i7-)

(16)

The skill premium in country S in the South

/HY (Hsi\
\LU)

t\JJ)

.

(17)

Notice that in this economy there are no transitory dynamics. Since preferences and
research technology are linear, Qh/Qi immediately jumps to its BGP value.'2
This proposition summarizes the crucial results of our basic analysis. In the unique
BGP there is a 1-to-i relation between the relative supply of skilled workers in the U.S.
the United States and Japan. The scarcity of land in Japan relative to the United States appears to
have induced a faster rate of innovation and adoption of fertilizers, increasing output per acre.
high degree of substitution between skilled and unskilled workers suggested by the increased
share of college educated workers within almost all narrowly defined industries, for example, suggests a
high elasticity of substitution (e.g. Autor, Katz and Krueger [1998]). Moreover, when p < 0, dQ,/Q, <
which runs counter to the presumption that when the skill-complementary technology improves, the
skill-premium increases. Finally, and most importantly, the short-run (constant technology) elasticity of
substitution between high and low education workers in this model is a = (1 — (1 — /3)p)/(l — p). In the
data, most estimates are greater than 1 (see Freeman [1986]), which implies 1/a = (1—p)/(l—(l—3)p) <
1, and therefore p > 0. Since a large part of the substitution between skilled and unskilled workers is
within industries, p should not be interpreted as the elasticity of substitution between different goods.
'2CRRA rather than linear preferences would make adjustment to BGP gradual, without affecting
the rest of the results.

13

and their relative wage. This relation can be either increasing or decreasing. If technology were exogenous in this economy, i.e. Qh/Ql were constant or changing exogenously,
the skill premium would be a decreasing function of H/L. When technology is endogenous, however, a greater H/L encourages more R&D activity in the skill-complementary
technologies. If this directed technology effect, 3p/(l — p) from (14), is large enough, i
will be positive, and the long-run relative demand curve for skills will be upward sloping
as ET2 in Figure 3. In this case, the higher supply of skilled workers in the U.S. may lead
to increasing returns to skills, in line with the developments in the U.S. labor market.

Equation (17), on the other hand, shows that the cross-country relation between
the supply of skills and skill premia will be decreasing as the data in Figure 2 suggest.
In particular, a higher H/LSi leads to a lower skill premium, because among LDCs,
changes in skill supply move a country along the constant technology relative demand
curve for skills, CT, in Figure 3. Interestingly, this proposition implies that an increase in
the U.S. supply of skilled workers, HU/LU, will lead to an increase in the skill premium
in LDCs.

It is also interesting to observe that when p < 0, we always have 17 < 0. But even
in this case the over time behavior of the economy will correspond to a more elastic
(less negatively sloped) curve, such as ET1 in Figure 3, than the constant technology
CT curve describing cross-country behavior. This is because as (14) shows, an increase
H/L reduces Qh/Q1, but in this case, (9) implies that the skill premium is decreasing in
Qh/Ql.
Finally, it is useful to observe that if is positive, a possible explanation for the
increase in the demand for skills in the U.S. and the LDCs is the increase in the supply
of skilled workers in the U.S. labor market during the 1960s and 1970s. As argued in
Acemoglu [1998], this large increase in the supply of skills could have caused skill-biased

technical change, increasing wage inequality in the U.S. and in countries using U.S.
technology. In the next section, I propose a complementary mechanism for the increase
in wage inequality in the U.S. and the LDCs, trade opening, which may also lead to a
decrease in wage inequality in Europe.

D. Intellectual Property Rights in the South
The analysis so far assumed no property rights in the South. It is straightforward
to analyze the other extreme where there is full enforcement of property rights in the
14

South. Define Hw HU + OHS as the market for skill complementary machines, where
HS is the total number of skilled workers in the South. H5 is multiplied by 0 because
U.S. machines are less productive, by a factor of 0, when used in the LDCs, so LDCs use
fewer machines per worker. Similarly, the market for labor complementary machines is
LV LU + OLS. The only difference from our analysis so far is that equation (14) is
replaced by
Qh

__=11P

H\'

and equation (16) and (17) are replaced by
wc = ,.Yl_p

(H 1-p

I

I

kLW)

I

I

Ld)

for c = U or 83.
In this case, the relation between the relative supply of skills and skill premia across
countries continues to be decreasing, consistent with Figure 2. However, the link between
the U.S. supply of skills and the skill bias of the U.S. is weakened. An increase iii the
U.S. supply of skills, HU/LU, will have only a small effect on HW/LW, and hence on

Qh/Qi, though the sign of the relation is unchanged. So as long as i > 0, an increase
in HU/LU will continue to induce skill-biased technical change, but this effect is likely
to be small. An increase in the relative supply of skills in the world, on the other hand,
will induce skill-biased technical change in the U.S.. Since over the period 1950-1996,
the world supply of skills was also increasing rapidly, this version of the model is still
consistent with Figure 1.

E. The U.S. versus Europe
To address the contrast between the U.S. and Europe, I now introduce another
developed country, "Europe", denoted by superscript E. In contrast to the LDCs,
Europe is relatively technologically advanced. In particular, I assume q'(i) > q(i) >
Oq(i) for s 1, h and all i.'3 This implies that the U.S. is more advanced than Europe,
but Europe is sufficiently developed that European firms will prefer to use technologies

designed for their own needs rather than the U.S. ones. So there will be research in
'3The results generalize to the case of many "Europan" countries and to the case where Europe
develops oniy a fraction of the machines, using U.S. technology in the rest.

15

Europe, improving European technologies. Since the U.S. is more advanced than Europe,
the LDCs will continue to use U.S. technologies.
The equations that describe technology choice in the U.S. now apply in Europe as
well. Specifically, the equivalent of (14) now holds for Europe:

Q = -Y1-p

HY

.

(18)

It is therefore clear that differences in the relative supply of skills between the U.S.
and Europe will cause different degrees of skill bias in the two economies. As long
as p is positive, equations (14) and (18) imply that the U.S. will develop more skillbiased technologies than Europe. Interestingly, if this induced technology effect is strong

enough, that is, if ij is positive, the U.S. may have higher returns to skills despite its
greater supply of skills. In general, therefore, we expect no definite relation between
the relative supplies of skills and skill premia among economies developing their own
technologies. So, the pattern discussed in the introduction whereby inequality is higher
in the U.S. is certainly possible.
To fully characterize the equilibrium in the world economy consisting of the U.S.,
Europe, and the LDCs, first recall that because U.S. technologies are more advanced
than the European ones, LDCs will use U.S. technologies, so
(i) = Oq(i) for all S.
Additionally, I impose:

Assumption 1: [

(H') + (LU)] = [

() + (LE)]

The role of Assumption 1 is to ensure that the U.S. and Europe grow at the same
rate. Otherwise the general argument here continues to apply, but because either European or U.S. technologies improve faster, both economies will eventually use the same
technologies. The following proposition is now immediate:

Proposition 2: Suppose that there is no international trade, no intellectual property
rights and Assumption 1 holds. Then, there is a unique BGP in both sectors and
total output in all countries grow at the rate (\ — 1)z with z given by (15). Along
the BGP, Q/Q1U is given by (14), Q/Qf is given by (18), the skill premium in
the U.S. is given by (16), and the skill premium in Europe is:
W

1 (H\

E

16

where ?7

3p2/(1 — p)

—

(1

—

/3p). The skill premium in country S3 in the South

is given by (17).

The important conclusion is that skill premia between the U.S. and Europe differ
not only because of differences in product prices, but also because the two economies
are using different technologies. As a result, if 11 > 0, then the greater suppiy of skills in
the U.S. induces the development of sufficiently skill-biased technologies and increases
the U.S. skill premium above that in Europe, that is wU > wE. This is despite the fact
that E > U so if the two economies had used the same technologies, (7) would have
implied wU < wE. Also if ij > 0, increases in the supply of skills in the U.S. raise skill
premia there. The relation between the suppiy of skills and the skill premium among
the LDCs continues to be decreasing. So in the case with?] > 0, the model is consistent
with the range patterns outlined in the introduction.

III. Trade Opening and Changes in Skill Premia
I now consider the impact of an increase in the volume of trade on patterns of
skill premia. Once again, I start with an economy that consists of the U.S. and the
LDCs, and then add Europe. In all of these cases, I compare the two extreme cases
of no international trade and free international trade. Although a gradual opening is
certainly more realistic, the sudden opening illustrates the main forces at work and is
much simpler. I also assume that intellectual property rights continue not to be enforced
in the South. Finally, it is useful to observe at this point that despite the emphasis on
the case with?] > 0 in the previous section, the results in this section do not depend on
the sign of?], but simply on p> 0, which is a much weaker requirement.

A. Trade and Skill-Biased Technical Change
Consider the world economy consisting of the U.S. and the LDCs in BGP as described

in Proposition 1. Now open the world economy to free trade. This will immediately
equalize the prices of intermediate goods and Yh, in all countries, so the relative price
of skill-intensive goods in all countries after trade is T.
Equation (7) links the skill premium to technology and prices. In the previous section,
skill premia differed across the LDCs and the U.S. because goods prices differed. Trade
17

equalizes prices at T, and hence skill premia are also equalized, so

=

w

This result is independent of whether there is property rights enforcement in the South.
Notice, however, that this observation does not guarantee factor price equalizations since

U.S. technologies are less productive when used in the LDCs. So U.S. workers will be
earning higher wages than LDC workers.
Next, consider the determination of the equilibrium skill bias. To start, I assume that
there are no property rights in the LDCs irrespective of whether there is international
trade. This means that the market sizes for new technologies are not affected by trade
opening, and therefore equation (13) has to hold, so = (HU/LU) = pU This has
a striking implication: trade will not affect the relative prices of skill intensive goods in
the U.S. because of its effect on technical change! Therefore, the world relative price
of skill-intensive goods after trade, T, must equal U1, the U.S. relative price of skillintensive goods before trade. Since p1' > U, this also implies that trade opening will
reduce the relative price of skilled goods in the LDCs.
To fully characterize the equilibrium, we only need to determine equilibrium skill

bias, Qh/Q1, after trade. Recall that prices are determined by the world supply of
skill-intensive and labor-intensive goods. Therefore, equation (3), instead of (8) in the
previous section, gives the relative price of skill-intensive goods as:
—j3(l—p)v

T_

w

Lw

Qi

'

(19

where Hw and Lw are, as before, the effective world supplies.

Combining this with equation (13), we obtain the equilibrium skill bias after trade:

(Q)T =

yT' () p,

(20)

where (is defined as HW/LW ((HU/LU). (is naturally less than 1, hence:

(Qh)T> (Qh)NT

(21)

where NT denotes no trade.

Equations (20) and (21) are another important result of our analysis. They imply
that trade opening induces skill-biased technical change in the U.S.. To understand this,
recall that the direction of technical change is determined by a market size effect and a
18

price effect. Since property rights continue not to be enforced in the South, the market
size effect is unchanged. Trade, however, increases the price of skill-intensive goods in
the U.S. because the LDCs are more abundant in unskilled workers. The increased price
of skilled goods makes skill-complementary innovations more profitable and induces skillbiased technical change. This effect is so strong that the relative prices of skilled goods
return to their initial level before trade opening.'4
It is now possible to characterize the response of skill premia in different countries
to trade opening. Once again using supscripts T and NT to denote pre and post-trade
values, we have
(wU)T = (wS)T =
(wU)NT.

Since < 1, this implies that skill premia in the U.S. necessarily increase (still focusing
on the case p > 0). In the South, skill premia converge to the new U.S. skill premia.
Whether they increase overall or not depends on their pre-trade values. In particular,
recalling equation (17), we see that wage inequality will increase if
LSj

> 3p/(1-P)

LU

LDCs for which this inequality holds will experience an increase in inequality, while the
rest will experience a decline.
The analysis in this section therefore leads to a number of conclusions significantly
different from the standard trade models. First, directed technical change implies that

trade with the LDCs induces skill-biased technical change. The impact of trade on
labor markets may therefore be much larger than predicted by standard trade models.
Second, there is a force counteracting the decline in inequality in the LDCs implied
by trade: these economies use U.S. technologies, which are becoming more skill-biased.
Third, and quite strikingly, trade leaves the relative price of skill-intensive goods in the
U.S. unchanged! Changes in relative prices are the usual intervening mechanism in trade
models. So in evaluating the impact of trade on labor markets, previous work has looked
for evidence of an increase in the relative prices of skill intensive goods (e.g., Lawrence
and Slaughter [1994], Lawrence [19941, Sachs and Shatz [1995], and Krueger [1997]).
'4Therefore, along the equilibrium path, there is no actual increase in the relative price of the skillintensive good. With transitory dynamics, the relative price of skill-intensive goods would increase first,
and then return to its initial level.

19

In this model, however, we should expect no such changes; the relative price of skillintensive goods in the U.S. is unaffected by trade. More generally, induced skill-biased
technical change in the U.S. implies that trade will increase the price of skill-intensive
goods by only a limited amount, but will still have a major effect on the U.S. labor
market. The inconclusive or paradoxical evidence reported in these papers does not
constitute a rejection of trade as the main driving-force-of-rising-inequality view.

B. The Importance of Property Rights
Exactly the same results would be obtained, if intellectual property rights were enforced fully in the South before trade. Once again, trade does not affect the market sizes
for new technologies, so it will induce skill-biased technical change.
Very different results would be obtained, however, if before trade property rights
were not enforced in the South, and trade led to the enforcement of these rights. To
see this, consider the extreme case of no property rights before trade, and full property
rights enforcement after trade. The impact of trade on skill premia in the U.S. and on
the direction of technical change is now given by our analysis in Section II by considering
an increase in H/L in equation (14). In this case, provided that p > 0, trade will not
lead to skill-biased technical change. On the contrary, it will induce the creation of
more labor-intensive technologies because with the addition of unskilled workers from
the LDCs to the world economy, the market size for these technologies has increased.
In fact, if j is positive, trade opening can reduce the skill premium in the U.S., which
contrasts sharply with standard results from trade theory. I believe, however, that the
more relevant case is the one in which trade does not affect the degree of intellectual
property right enforcement, and therefore induces skill-biased technical change.

C. The Impact of Trade on Europe
I now add Europe to the analysis, and show that trade opening may reduce the
demand for skills in Europe. In this subsection, I use the simplest model of trade
where U.S., European, and LDC goods are perfect substitutes, which leads to extreme
results. In the next subsection, I generalize the framework by introducing some Ricardian
elements. Throughout, I simplify the analysis by assuming that Europe is small relative
to the rest of the world economy.
20

First, consider the world economy before trade. The equilibrium is given by Proposition 2. Notice that at this point, pU < pE < Si for all j, so the relative price of
skill-intensive goods is highest in the LDCs, next in Europe, and then in the U.S..
Now suppose the world economy opens to trade, and hypothetically hold technologies
fixed. Trade would lead to a new, common, relative price p as in the previous subsection
(I am using lower case superscript to distinguish this hypothetical fixed technology case).
It is clear that S3 > pt > U, so the relative price of skill-intensive goods would increase
in the U.S. and would fall in the LDCs. The effect on Europe is ambiguous. It depends on
the relative sizes of the U.S. and the LDCs, and the distance between Europe and these
other countries. Throughout, I assume that without a change in technologies, the prices
of skill-intensive goods in Europe will increase, that is > E, which is the reasonable

case in practice.15 Therefore, in the absence of an induced change in technology, the
impact of trade would be to increase the demand for skills in Europe. However, we will
see that when technical change is endogenous, demand for skills in Europe will fall.
Now consider the world economy with endogenous technology opening to trade. We
know from the previous subsection that the relative price of skill-intensive goods, T, will
have to adjust to satisfy (13) in the U.S.. This implies that the technology equilibrium
condition in Europe, p = (HE/LE) , will not be satisfied. In fact, we have

=

= (HU/LU) <

(HE/LE) =

(22)

Skilled goods are now too cheap, given the number of skilled workers in Europe, for
skilled innovations to be profitable. European firms will therefore develop only laborcomplementary technologies, and European skill-complementary technologies will stagnate. As U.S. skill-complementary technologies advance, at some point it will be profitable for European firms to begin using U.S. technologies in the skill-intensive sector.
As a result, trade has induced labor-biased technical change in Europe, while causing
skill-biased technical change in the U.S..
The behavior of the skill-premium in Europe is simple to characterize. From equation

(22), the price of skill-intensive goods in Europe falls after trade opening. Equation
'5The exact assumption to ensure this is:

(H'\" (H'+OH (HE\11 (HE
7J) Lt+9L5)<LE) \_
21

(7) implies that at given technologies, Q/Q, the skill premium in Europe, wE, will
fall. Next, since T < (HE/LE) , European research firms will invest in developing
labor-complementary machines while skill-complementary technologies stagnate. After
a while, as U.S. technologies advance enough, European firms will switch to using U.S.
technologies. Overall, Europe will definitely end up with a lower skill premium than
before trade.

It is useful to reiterate at this point that if Q/Q remained constant after trade,
we would have (by assumption) p > E, so from (7), the skill premium in Europe would
increase. It is therefore the skill-biased technical change in the U.S. that is at the root
of the labor-biased technical change and the declining skill premia in Europe.
The result in this subsection is quite extreme because there are only two kinds of
goods, and their relative prices have to adjust to ensure equilibrium in the technology
sectors of both the U.S. and Europe. However, the force at work is general. To illustrate
this, in the next section I will use a modified model with differentiated products.
Also notice that the assumption that the LDCs use U.S. technologies is important.
World price adjusts to satisfy the U.S. technology equilibrium condition because Europe
is small relative to the world economy, and that LDCs are using U.S. technologies rather
that European ones. In practice, since U.S. technologies appear to be more advanced,
it seems reasonable that the LDCs should use predominantly U.S. technologies.

D. The Impact of Trade on Europe—A Modified Model
1 now use a modified model where trade is a mixture of Ricardian and HeckscherOhlin to analyze the impact of trade on European technologies. The purpose of this

analysis is to show that the results of the previous subsection are not special. Each
different technology produces a slightly different variant of the same goods. The final
good can be produced as in (2) as in the previous section, but since there are U.S. and
European technologies, we now have:

c=

(yu+ys)

+()

(23)

where s = 1, h and yS is total supply from the South, and I have made use of the fact
that all Southern countries employ U.S. technology. When there is no trade, this is
equivalent to the formulation in the Section II. If = 1 (i.e. if elasticity of substitution
22

is infinity), then we have a pure Heckscher—Ohlin world as in the previous subsection.
Generally > p, so that labor-intensive goods produced in different countries are good
but imperfect substitutes, and the same for skill-intensive products.
Relative product prices are now:

=—

(Y) (y)-(l
(y1)Pb (ycy-(l)

Due to the Ricardian elements, product prices now differ across countries. Using (3),
(6) and profit-maximizing technology choice implies:

p

—

(}(P5)P (Qc\\_I3(l_P) (HC\\_3(l_P)I3

Lc)

Q)

(25)

Since market sizes for new technologies have not changed,
where '/ (1 — (1 —
equilibrium still requires (13) to hold in the U.S. and Europe.
Since (6) applies, the LDCs use U.S. technologies, and prices in the South and the
U.S. are the same, we also obtain
c5

[((u)1-P/Qu (N +ON)) +

.

(26)

Recall that I continue to assume that Europe is small relative to the world economy,

i.e. N is small relative to N + 6N. Also again, denote the pre-trade BGP relative
price in country c by (T and the post-trade BGP price by (c)T. Then, equilibrium
condition (13) requires that (f)VT (c)T for c = U and E. Using (3) and (24), in
the U.S. we have:

l/(—p)

where the left-hand side is the ratio of the world aggregates given by (26).

Now (yh(/ylU)T and (Yhh/yl1)T are given by (6), and when Europe is small,

(p [(Q/QV)T]

[(HU + OHS)/(LU + OLS)]. Defining,

as before, ((HU + 9Hs)/(L + OLS)) (Hu/Lu) where is naturally less than 1, we
have:

/cIU\T

'QJ)

- (p—)/(1—p) (/c)UYVT
—

23

Since

p, we have _(1 > 1, and so trade causes skill-biased technical change

in the U.S.. The reason for this induced skill-biased technical change is again the price
effect on the direction of technical change. Equation (13) still applies because the market
sizes for different technologies have not changed—intellectual property rights continue
not to be enforced in the LDCs. Everything else equal, trade would increase the relative
price of skill-intensive goods, and this will make skill-complementary innovations more
profitable. This induced technical change effect is once again strong enough that the
equilibrium productivity of skilled workers increases to leave the relative price of skillintensive goods unchanged.

Next, notice that f (yhE/y!E)T = Yh/Yj, then trade-opening will not affect the
direction of technical change in Europe. That is, (Q/Q)T (QE/QE)NT But, if

(y/yE)NT > Y/Y,, then trade will also cause skill-biased technical change in Europe.
In contrast, if (YE/YE)NT <Yh/Y, then trade causes labor-biased technical change in
Europe. When will this condition be satisfied?
Straightforward algebra establishes that if

/i3> (1i)

,

(27)

then (YhE/yE)T <Yh/ and trade induces labor-biased technical change in Europe.
What happens to skill premia in different countries? Once again using supscripts T
and NT to denote pre and post-trade values,
(wU)T = (ws)T =

(p)/(lp)

(wU)N.

So, skill premia in the U.S. necessarily increase. In the South, skill premia converge to
the new U.S. skill premia. As in the previus subsection, whether they increase overall
or not depends on their pre-trade values. In particular, recalling equation (17), we see
that wage inequality will increase if
HSi
L3i

> p(—p)/(1—p)2
''

lt
LU
tHU

which is similar to the result obtained above. LDCs for which this inequality holds will
experience an increase in inequality, while the rest will experience a decline.

24

For Europe, we have

(E /ET
(ET_
th/1)
(wEYT
I
J
(QE/QE)NT

so if (27) holds, inequality will decline in Europe.16

Therefore, we find once again that trade may reduce inequality in Europe. The
induced skill-biased technical change in the U.S. resulting from trade may improve the
technologies used by U.S. and LDC skilled workers sufficiently to reduce the relative
price of skill-intensive goods in Europe, encouraging labor-biased technical change there.
Although this result needs to be studied further, both theoretically and empirically, it
offers a potential explanation for why the demand for skills appears not to have increased
as much in Europe as in the U.S..

IV. Concluding Remarks
This paper has constructed a model to analyze the patterns of skill premia we observe

across countries and over time. Skill premia are determined by the relative supply
of skills, the degree of skill bias in technology, and international trade. Skill bias is
endogenous, determined by the relative profitability of developing different types of
technologies. An increase in the number of skilled workers expands the market size
for skill-complementary technologies, and induces skill-biased technical change. This
increase in the demand for skills implies that skill premia may increase in response to an
expanding supply of skilled workers. The relation between the relative supplies and skill
premia across countries is quite different in nature, however. Among countries using
the same technology, there will be a well defined negative relation between the relative
supply of skills and the skill premium. In contrast, among countries developing their
own technologies, the relation may be increasing. This may account for why the U.S.
has higher inequality than European countries despite its greater supply of skills.
An important implication of this framework is that increased international trade
will have an effect on skill premia by changing the nature of technologies that are being
'6Since in Europe H/L increased over this period, a positive value of would create a force towards
a higher demand for skills. Overall, therefore, demand for skills in Europe may have increased over the
past twenty years, but much less than in the U.S. where both the rise in H/L and trade increased the
demand for skills, which is consistent with the findings of Berman, Bound and Machin [1998].

25

developed, as well as its more direct standard effect. Under most plausible circnmstances,

trade between the U.S. and the LDCs will induce skill-biased technical change in the
U.S., and will cause a large increase in U.S. skill premia. Contrary to the standard
models, this induced technology effect also implies that trade may increase skill premia
in the LDCs.
The most speculative results of the paper concern the impact of trade on Europe.
One of the puzzling developments over the past twenty years has been the stability of
returns to schooling and wage inequality in many European economies, in the face of
sharply increasing inequality in the U.S.. Although many economists believe that labor
market institutions in Europe may be responsible for this, evidence for this hypothesis
has been difficult to find. The institutional wage compression explanation predicts that
if skill-biased technical change is a world-wide phenomenon, unskilled unemployment
should have increased in Europe relative to skilled unemployment. This prediction
receives no empirical support (see for example, Nickell and Bell [1995], Card, Kramartz
and Lemieux [1995], Krueger and Pischke [1998]). So the reason may be that demand for
skills has increased much less in Europe than in the U.S.. My model suggests a possible
explanation. Trade may cause labor-biased technical change in Europe, contrary to its
effect in the U.S.: most LDCs use U.S. technologies, and with the increased productivity
of skilled workers both in the U.S. and in the LDCs following trade, the supply of skillintensive goods in the world economy may increase so much that their relative world
price may be below their pre-trade European level. In this case, trade will cause labor-

biased technical change in Europe, and will tend to reduce inequality there. Future
theoretical and empirical research investigating this paradoxical result further may be
useful.

26

V. References
Acemoglu, Daron, "Why Do New Technologies Complement Skills? Directed Tech-

nical Change and Wage Inequality" Quarterly Journal of Economies, CXIII (1998),
1055- 1090.

Acemoglu, Daron "Changes in Unemployment and Wage Inequality: An Alternative
Theory and Some Evidence" forthcoming American Economic Review (1999).
Acemoglu, Daron and Fabrizio Zilibotti, "Productivity Differences" MIT Mimeo,
1998.

Aghion, Philippe and Peter Howitt, "A Model of Growth Through Creative Destruction" Econometrica, LX (1992), 323-351.
- and Gianluca Violante, "Technology, Knowledge, and
Inequality" Harvard mimeo, 1999.
Ahmad, Syed, "On The Theory of Induced Invention," Economic Journal LXXVI,
(1966), pp. 344-357.
Autor, David, Alan Krueger and Lawrence Katz, "Computing Inequality: Have Com-

puters Changed the Labor Market?" Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXIII (1998),
1169-12 14.

Atkinson, Anthony B. and Joseph E. Stiglitz (1969). "A New View of Technological
Change," Economic Journal 79, 573-78.
Barro, Robert J. and Jong-Wha Lee "International Comparisons of Educational At-

tainment," Journal of Monetary Economics 32, (1993), 363-94.
Basu, Susanto and David N. Weil "Appropriate Technology and Growth," Quarterly
Journal of Economics, CXIII, 1025-1054.
Berman, Eli, John Bound and Stephen Machin "Implications of Skill-Biased Tech-

nological Change: International Evidence," Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXIII
(1998), 1245-1280.

Card, David, Francis Kramartz and Thomas Lemieux (1995); "Changes in the Relative Structure of Wages and Employment: A Comparison of the United States, Canada
and France" Mimeo (1996).
Caselli, Francesco "Technological Revolutions" forthcoming American Economic Review (1999).
27

David, Paul, Technical Choice, Innovation and Economic Crowth: Essays on American and British ETperience in the Nineteenth Century, London, Cambridge University
Press, 1975.

Freeman, Richard "Demand For Education" Chapter 6 in Orley Ashenfelter and
Richard Layard (editors) Handbook of Labor Economics, North Holland, Vol I (1986),
357-386.

Freeman, Richard and Lawrence F. Katz, "Introduction and Summary," in R. Freeman and L. Katz (eds.), Differences and Changes in Wage Structures, Chicago, IL: The
University of Chicago Press, pp. 1-22.
Galor Oded and Daniel Tsiddon, "Technological Progress, Mobility and Economic
Growth" American Economic Review, LXXXVII, pp 363-382.
Galor, Oded and Omer Maov (1998) "Ability Biased Technological Transition, Wage
Inequality and Economic Growth" Brown University Mimeo.
Grossman, Gene and Elhanan Helpman, "Quality Ladders in the Theory of Growth"
Review of Economic Studies, LIIX (1991), 43-61.
Greenwood, Jeremy and Mehmet Yorukoglu, "1974" Carnegie-Rochester Conference
Series on Public Policy, XLVI (1997), 49-95.
Habakkuk, H. J., American and British Technology in the Nineteenth Century: Search

for Labor Saving Inventions, Cambridge University Press, 1962.
Hanson, Gordon H. and Ann Harrison, "Trade Technology, and Wage Inequality:
Evidence from Mexico," (September 1994), mimeo.
Hayami, Yujiro and Vernon Ruttan, "Factor Prices and Technical Change in Agricultural Development: the U.S. and Japan, 1880-1960" Journal of Political Economy,
LXXII (1970), 1115-1141.
Katz Lawrence and Kevin Murphy, "Changes in Relative Wages: Supply and Demand
Factors" Quarterly Journal of Economics, CVII (1992), 35-78.

Kennedy, Charles, "Induced Bias in Innovation and the Theory of Distribution"
Economic Journal, LXXIV (1964), 541-547.
Krueger, Alan "Labor Market Shifts and the Price Puzzle Revisited" Princeton University, Industrial Relations Section Working Paper. No. 375, 1997.

Krueger, Alan B. and Jorn-Steffen Pischke "Observations and conjectures on the
U.S. employment miracle," NBER Working Paper No. 6146, (1997).
28

Krugman, Paul "Growing World Trade: Causes and Consequences" Brookings Papers
on Economic Activity (1995), pp 327-377.
Krusell, Per, Lee Ohanian, Victor Rios-Rull and Giovanni Violante, "Capital Skill
Complementary and Inequality", University of Rochester Mimeo, 1997.
Lawrence, Robert and Matthew Slaughter "Trade and U.S. Wages: Giant Sucking
Sound or Small Hiccup?" Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, (1993) pp. 161-226.

Lawrence, Robert Z., "Trade, Mulitinationals, and Labor," NBER Working Paper
No. 4836.

Learner, Edward E., "Trade, Wages and Revolving-Door Ideas," NBER Working
Paper No. 4716.
Nickell Stephen and Brian Bell "The Collapse in Demand For the Unskilled and
Unemployment Across the OECD" Oxford Review of Economic Policy Vol 11, (1996)
pp 40-62.

Psacharopoulos, George, "Returns to Investment in Education: A Global Update,"
World Development Vol. 22, no. 9 (1994), pp 1325-1343.
Robbins, Donald J., "Trade and Inequality in Seven Developing Countries: Summary
and Synthesis of Country Studies," (December 1995), mimeo.
Romer, Paul, "Endogenous Technological Change" Journal of Political Economy, TIC
(1990), S71-S102.

Sachs, Jeffrey and Howard Shatz "Trade and Jobs in US Manufacuring" Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, (1994) pp. 1-84.
Salter W. E.G., Productivity and Technical Change, 2nd edition, Cambridge University Press, (1966) Cambridge, United Kingdom.
Samuelson, Paul, "A Theory of Induced Innovations Along Kennedy-Weisacker Lines"
Review of Economics and Statistics, XLVII (1965), 444-464.

Schrnookler, Jacob, Invention and Economic Growth, Cambridge, Harvard University
Press, 1966.
Stewart, Frances, Technology and Underdevelopment, The Macmillan Press, Ltd.,

(1978) London, England.
Wood, Adrian, North-South Trade, Employment and Inequality: Changing Fortunes
in a Skill Driven World, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1994.

29

