NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

USING EMPLOYEE LEVEL DATA
IN A FIRM LEVEL ECONOMETRIC STUDY
Jacques Mairesse
Nathalie Greenan

Working Paper 7028
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7028

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 1999

We are grateful to Zvi Griliches for discussion and for referring us to Fuller's 1987 book, and to Bruno
Crepon, Bronwyn Hall and a referee for useful comments. We are also thankful to the Statistical Office of
the Ministère du travail and to INSEE for providing us with the employee survey and firm data bases which
are being matched. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not reflect those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 1999 by Jacques Mairesse and Nathalie Greenan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is

given to the source.

Using Employee Level Data in a Firm Level
Econometric Study
Jacques Mairesse and Nathalie Greenan
NBER Working Paper No. 7028
March 1999

JELNo. 033
ABSTRACT

In this paper, we make the general point that econometric studies of the firm can be
effectively and substantially enriched by using information collected from employees, even if only
a few of them are surveyed per firm. Though variables measured on the basis of the answers of very

few employees per firm are subject to very important sampling errors, they can be usefully included

in a model specified at the firm level.
In the first part of the paper, we show that in estimating parameters of interest in a regression

model of the firm, the biases arising from the sampling errors in the employee based variables can
be assessed, as long as we have a large enough sub-sample of firms with at least two or with more
(randomly chosen) surveyed employees.

As an illustration in the second part of the paper, we consider the estimation of the
relationship between the firm average wage (directly obtained from the firm accounts) and estimates

of the proportion of female workers based on the gender of one, two or three surveyed employees

per firm. As a test, we compare the estimates that we find in this way with those using the "true"
proportion of female workers (i.e., based on all the employees), which we could also directly obtain

at the firm level from a firm survey. The analysis is performed on two linked employer-employee
samples of about 2500 firms in the French manufacturing and services industries in 1987 and 1993,

with one, two or three surveyed employees per firm (for respectively 75%, 15% and 10% of the
firms).

Jacque Mairesse
INSEE-CREST
15, boulevard Gabriel PERT
92245 MALAKOFF Cedex
France
and NBER
mairesse@ensae.fr

Nathalie Greenan
Centre d'Etude de l'Emploi
Noisy-le-Grand
France

3

1. INTRODUCTION

One of the main reasons explaining the rapid development of micro-econometric analyses
over the last twenty years, and in particular the rise of panel data econometrics, is a negative

one: the discontent with the small number of observations in annual (or even quarterly)
aggregate data, the high degree of collinearity of macro-variables, and hence the poor
precision of estimates and lack of power of statistical tests. Over the years, however, applied
econometricians have become increasingly aware that large sample sizes are not enough, even

if crucial for the use of some of the more recent sophisticated techniques. They have
discovered (or rediscovered) that the quality of the measurement of the variables is an
important factor, but also that the sheer existence or availability of certain variables is often an

even more critical concern, setting drastic limits on the questions that can be consideredand
the ways in which they can be investigated. To push away such limits and go beyond what can

be done with the more traditional sources of information, such as the firm accounts,
population census or consumption and employment surveys, empirical economists are tending

to put more efforts in conceiving and constructing new data bases of their own, or in helping

official statistical offices to do so. A prominent example of such promising evolution is the
recent very rapid development of employee-employer matched data. Labor economists are the

driving force in this construction, trying mainly to complement the available information on

the individual characteristics and wages of workers, with information on the firms and
professional environment in which they work. What we propose here is in a sense the dual
attitude.

In this paper, we make the general point that using information collected from employees can
effectively and substantially enrich econometric studies of the firm. More specifically, we try

to make the case that this is so even if only very few employees are surveyed per firm,
provided they are randomly chosen in the firm. Though variables measured on the basis of
very few employees per firm are subject to very important sampling errors, they can be
usefully included in a model specified at the firm level.

The variables that can be estimated on the basis of the answers of the employees surveyed in

the firm may be of very different types. They may be quantitative and continuous, as we

4
assume in the errors in variables regression framework presented in this paper. But very
frequently they will also be in the nature of a proportion based on the employee 'yest or 'no'

answer to a qualitative question, as in the application considered in the paper, or more
generally in the nature of a vector of proportions based on the employee assignment to given
categories. They may correspond to some objective and simple enough characteristics, such as

the age of the interviewed employee, or the number of years of job experience, or the sex, or

the fact that he or she uses a computer at work, etc.. But they may also be related to more
subjective features, possibly concerning the firm itself as a whole that will be defined from
employee's answers to a set of questions. Examples of such features range from the autonomy

at work and on the job satisfaction of employees to the managerial ability of executives, the

organizational flexibility of the firm or its social climate, etc.. Variables of this sort raise
problematic definitional issues but they could be of particular interest in many analyses of

firm behavior and performance; being difficult, both conceptually and practically, to
comprehend and measure directly at the firm level, they have to be constructed from employee

surveys, and one will have to analyze them in an error in variables framework similar to the
one presented here.

In the second section of the paper, we show that in estimating parameters of interest in a
regression model of the firm, the biases arising from the sampling errors in the employee
based variables can be assessed, as long as we have a large enough sub-sample of firms with
at least two or with more (randomly chosen) surveyed employees.

As an illustrative exercise in the third section of the paper, we consider the estimation of the

relationship between the firm average wage (directly obtained from the firm accounts), and

estimates of the proportion of female workers based on the gender of one, two or three

surveyed employees per firm. For the sake of our demonstration, we also compare the
estimates that we find in this way with those using the "true" proportion of female workers,
(i.e., based on all the employees), which we could also directly obtain at the firm level from a

firm survey. The analysis is performed on two linked employer-employee samples of about
2500 firms in the French manufacturing and services industries in 1987 and 1993, with one,
two or three surveyed employees per firm, for respectively 75%, 15% and 10% of the firms.

In the conclusion, we stress again the usefulness of the method in showing that it can also be

applied in the context of firm panel data, and end with a few words of advice on how to
proceed in matching an employee survey to firm data.

5

2. ASSESSING THE BIASES FROM USING EMPLOYEE LEVEL VARIABLES IN

THE ESTIMATION OF A FIRM LEVEL MODEL
2.1 - A simple sampling errors in variables model
We consider the following simple regression model specified at the firm level:

y= ax +
for i =

1

to N, where i is the subscript for the i th firm in the sample of N firms considered,

where y1 is "explained" by x, and a is the parameter of interest. As usual s denotes the
disturbance term in the regression, summarizing all sources of "errors", which we assume to
be uncorrelated with x15.' However, unlike the dependent variable y , the explanatory variable

x is not known at the firm level, either simply because it is "unobserved" or more deeply
because it should be thought of as an "unobservable" latent variable: that is either a variable

which is not recorded in the firm information available for the analysis, but could be in
principle measured and included in future investigation, or a variable which is too costly or
too problematic, or both, to define and directly measure at the firm level.

The "true variable" xis can however be estimated or proxied by the firm level empirical
average x1 of an employee survey based variable. If there is nj surveyed employees in the i th
firm and if h denotes the h th surveyed employee among the n surveyed employees, we have

x=( hXIh)/flj
=I

where the variable Xjh directly corresponds to the answer of the surveyed employee h in the

firm i to an appropriate question or can be constructed from his or her answers to a relevant
set of questions, and where the summation is over all the n surveyed employees in firm i.2 As

we already stress in the introduction, the scope of firm level variables x which can be
constructed from employee level variables is extremely large; evidently, however, all firm

variables do not fall in this category. In particular it should clear that we do not need to

and we delete the constant in the regression for
We also assume that e is i.i.d., with E(c1) = 0 and Var(c) =
simplification without real loss of generality.
2
For simplicity and since our model of interest is specified at the firm level, we use the notation x rather than
the usual notation x, (where the dot subscript indicates over which index the mean of x,, is computed). Note also

6

assume that this is the case for the dependent variable y (or for other variables than x in the
equation), although it will be in our application in the next section.3

Depending on the number nj of surveyed employees per firm, the observed x1 is more or less

affected by sampling errors, and using it to approximate the "true" x in the model will cause

the ordinary least squares estimator of a to be more or less severely biased. It is easy to see
that we are in a classical case of random errors in variables, but fortunately in a case where we

can estimate the error variance and hence compute a corrected least squares estimator, which
will be consistent.

Assuming first that the nj surveyed employees are randomly drawn among all the employees

of firm i, then x1 is a consistent (and unbiased) estimate of the "true" x,, and its variance is
decreasing with nj . This assumption will evidently be fulfilled by construction, in the case

where the employee data set is obtained by choosing at random the surveyed employees in
each of the firm of the firm sample to be considered. But it is also fulfilled in the more usual

case where the employee and the firm data sets to be linked are independently constructed,

and where the persons surveyed in the employee sample are randomly chosen in the total
population or labor force. This is the case of our application in the next section.4

Assuming further that the individual answers xlh of the surveyed employees in firm i are

independently distributed, the variance of x1 is in fact just that of x1 divided

by n .

More

precisely, we can write:

that we simply use x1 rather than the more precise x or x (with the overbar or the overhat reminding that it is an
estimate over the random sample of the n surveyed employees in firm i).
In our application all the firm variables can be viewed as employee variables aggregates, y being the log of the
average firm wage per employee (not though the average log wage), x the proportion of female employees and
the control variables z the proportions of employees according to three types of skills (or occupations). In fact
the wage equation we estimate, although we consider it at the firm level, can be simply viewed as resulting of
the agregation of underlying employee level wage equations (see for example Haegeland and Kiette in this
volume for an explicit derivation). However, this of course does not need to be. We could have considered for
example a productivity equation, where the production function is directly defined as a firm (or plant) level
relationship and where the productivity variable measured by output or value added per employee or the capital
variable by gross book values or insurance values of fixed assets per employee cannot be really considered as
employee level agregates (see again Haegeland and Klette in this volume, who estimate gender, education and
experience effects for both wage and productivity equations at the plant level, or Greenan and Mairesse, 1996,
who do the same at the firm level for computer use impacts).
4Note that in this case the number of surveyed employee per firm n1 will tend to be larger with the firm size.
This will be the case if x is a continuously distributed variable as we assumed in this section. For a discrete
variable, this will also be the case if in principle the surveyed employees are randomly drawn in the firm with

remise, or if in practice the total number of employees in this firm is not too small. This is true for our
application in the next section, where we consider a sample of firms with twenty or more employees. This
should also be true, however, for firms of about 10 employees. For firms of a smaller size, one will have to make
appropriate corrections in deriving the variance of x, from that of Xih.

7
Xjh

= X + eh

with:

E(xh Ii) = x , or E(e1h Ii) = 0 , and Var(xlh Ii) = Var(elh Ii)

=

and hence:

x = x + e1
with:

E(x1 Ii) =

, or E(e1 Ii) = 0 , and Var(x1 Ii) = Var(e1 Ii) = o2 / n1

where e is the sampling error on Xih of variance a,2, and where e, is the sampling error on x1 of
variance cy,2 / nj , that is by definition:

e1=(

eh)/n, and yi2=yar(x.jj)=E{( (xh-xI)2/(nI- 1))li]

It is important to note that a12 cannot be estimated for n, = 1. Note also that when needs be, in

what follows, we will simply assume that o12 is independent of the x,'s and equal for all firms

(i.e., a2 = a2)6

Considering next that the sample of firms itself arises at random from an underlying (large)
population of firms, we can see that the sampling errors e11s are uncorrelated across firms with
the true values of the x1's. More precisely, we can write:

E(e1 ) = E[E(e1 Ii)] = 0 , and Cov(e x1*) = E(e1 x1*) = E{E(e x'Ii)] = 0
and hence:

E(x, ) = E(x1*), and Var(x1 ) = Var(xt) + Var(e)
where Var(x, ) and Var(e1 ) are respectively the (across firms) variance of the estimated x's
and that of the sampling errors e1ts, and where Var(x1) is the corresponding "true" variance.

Note that in the usual terminology of the analysis of the variance, Var(x1 ), Var(e, ) and
Var(x,) are simply the "between firm" variance of the "firm-employee" variables Xih , eI and
X1h

respectively.7

Considering finally the approximate equation where one uses the estimated x1 instead of the

"true" ones x , we have:

This assumption can be relaxed in different ways. It is not made in our application in the next section, where x1
is the estimated mean p, of a binomial variable B(p1; n, ) and where of is thus equal to p1(l-p1'). See below 2.3.
Note also that while expectations or variances, such as E(x, Ii) and Var(x Ii), are only taken over the random
sample of surveyed employees in firm i, expectations and variances like E(z1 ) and Var(z1 ) are also taken over
6

8

y1=ax1+v1 with v= c1-ae
and see that we are in the pure classical textbook case of a random uncorrelated errors in
variables model.

2.2 - Correcting the least squares estimator
We know (and can easily verifi) that the ordinary least squares (OLS) estimator c2 of the

parameter of interest a, in the approximate equation with the measured x1's, is biased
downward in proportion to 2c, where . is the share of the sampling error variance of the x1's in

their measured variance, or equivalently (1- 2) is the share of the true variance in the
measured variance.
More precisely, we have:

plim( a ) = Cov(x1 y ) / Var(x1 ) = (1- ?) ct
with

= Var(e1 ) / Var(x ) = Var(e ) / [Var(xt ) + Var(e1)]
or

(1- = Var(xj* ) I Var(x, ) = Var(xj* ) / {Var(xj* ) + Var(e1)
The important point here is that as long as we have at least a (large enough) sub-sample with
more than one employee surveyed per firm, we can estimate the error and true variances, and
hence we can simply obtain a consistent estimate of a.
Consider first a sub-sample with a constant number n of surveyed employees per firm (n1

n),

we can write:

Var(e1 ) = E[Var(e1 Ii)] + Var[E(e1 Ii)] = E[Var(e1 Ii)] = E(o2 )/ n = o2/n
and

=2

/ [n Var(x1)] = 2 / [n Var(xj* ) +

Note that & (equal o2 ) and Var(x1 ) can be respectively viewed as the sub-sample "within

firm" (across employee) variance and the sub-sample "between firm" variance of the
individual employee variable XIh

8

the (random) sample of finns. Again for the sake of easiness and in the absence of ambiguity in the present
context, we do not use the more precise notations E1(z1) and Var1(z1).
S
Note that the expression n Var(x) =n Var(x1 ) + can also be seen as the between -within decomposition of

&

the total variance in the analysis of variance model Xh =

+ eh.

9

It is clear from these formulas that the relative bias ? decreases with n. For example, if we
suppose that Var(xj* ) = a2 , we have 2 equals one half, one third or one fourth for the sub-

samples with respectively one, two or three surveyed employees. If indeed we consider
separately such sub-samples, as we shall do in our application in the next section, we should
be able to check that the biased least squares estimates of our parameter of interest tend to be

greater (in absolute value) in sub-samples with two surveyed employees than in those with
only one, and in those with three surveyed employees than in those with two.9 Although these
formulas apply for all n (including n=1), it must be remembered that a2 can only be estimated
in the sub-samples with n larger than one.

Considering next the full sample, we can immediately generalize the above formulas by
combining them for all the sub-samples with two or more surveyed employees per firm. This
amounts to simply taking for a2 the overall within firm (across employee) variance and for n
the weighted harmonic mean of the numbers of surveyed employees per firm, for all the firms
with more than one surveyed employee.

More precisely, let us suppose that the full sample is made of S sub-samples with different
numbers of surveyed employees per firm, the sth sub-sample consisting of the N, firms with s
surveyed employees per firm, the weighted harmonic mean n is such as:

(1 In) =

s2

IT5 (1

/n5) with IT = N / 2

N5]

where [1 is the proportion of firms with s more than one surveyed employees among all the
firms with more than one surveyed employees.

Using now this value for n, the previous formulas apply, and we can write:

Var(e1 ) =

(2 / n)

and

Var(xi* ) = Var(x) - Var(e1)
where a2 and Var(xj, that we can also denote a2 and at,2 from now on, are respectively the
overall (across employee) within firm and overall between firm variances of the individual
employee variable x11,

"Note that one could in principle retrieve consistent estimates of ? and a from such relations between the OLS
estimated a and the observed variances of the measured x' s for the different sub-samples with a constant number
of surveyed employees per firm, that is just using the fact that of being able to identify these sub-samples. It is
likely, however, that these estimates will be much more inaccurate than the estimates we considered here, which
are also using the within firm across employees information in these sub-samples to estimate & , and hence X.

10

Finally one obtains a consistent corrected least squares (CLS) estimator ä of the parameter
of interest a by substituting in the formula of the OLS estimator c? the estimated true variance
for the measured one, that is:

[ar(x )] [Ôov(x1 y1)]
or

= [J2ar(x1 ) - Jar(e )i'

[ov(x y1)] = [Sb2 - (s2 In)] [ov(x1 y1)]

Applying this corrected estimator is in practice simple enough. To do so, we only need to
obtain a consistent estimate of the error variance, and hence of the true variance of the x1's. For

this we can rely on estimating the (across employee) within firm variance

, which in turn

is possible if we have at least one sub-sample with two or more surveyed employees per firm.

2.3 - Remarks and extension

It is worthwhile to make a number of remarks on the above corrected least squares (CLS)

estimator, and in particular that it easily generalizes to the case of the multivariate linear
regression.

1) It is interesting first to note that the usual t-ratio test of significance of a, based on
the ordinary least squares estimate d and its estimated standard error, remains valid. Actually

under the null hypothesis of a =

0

, whatever the sampling errors, the OLS estimate d is

unbiased (i.e., E(a) = 0), and the distribution of the t-ratio is unaffected (following a Student's
t distribution in a small sample if the error in the equation is itself normal). Thus even if one

has to use a variable which happens to be only based on the answers of one interviewed
employee per firm, one can in principle find out whether this variable is significant or not as
an explanatory variable.

2) In the same vein, it is always possible to use an employee based variable as the right

hand side variable to be explained in a firm level regression. This simply amounts to adding
another source of (uncorrelated) error to the regression, and this is not per se a cause of bias of
the OLS estimator, but will affect its precision, and possibly quite severely so.

3) One has to be aware, however, that in small samples the corrected estimator (as
defined) is not always a proper estimator. This will be the case if the estimated error variance

Var(ej) happens to be larger than the observed variance Var(x) , implying that a non
positive estimate Var(xj*) of the true variance. Fuller (1987) proposes a partial adjusment

11

technique to take care of this case, but it remains in practise much preferable when the
estimated error variance is not a very large fraction of the observed variance.'0

4) This last remark raises the problem of the precision of the corrected estimator à as
compared to that of the OLS estimator a . In terms of its formula, the corrected estimator can
simply be viewed as an OLS estimator performed on the true equation, where one would be

using the true variance Var(x1) of the xs (and since we have Cov(x1 y ) = Cov(x1ty1 )). One
might thus expect the standard error of & to be larger than that of the corresponding (biased)

least square estimate a

because

of its smaller denominator, equal to [Var(xj*)i1 instead of

[Var(x1 )]h12 , and therefore smaller by a factor of(1-X )h/2.

This is in fact too simplistic. It is better, but also not quite right, to view the corrected

estimator as an instrumental variable estimator where one would be using the true x1s (if one
knew them!) to instrument the measured xi's (since we also have Var(x1) = Cov(xx1 )). Thus

another reason of why the standard error of

is larger than that of its least squares

counterpart a , is a larger estimated numerator (equal to Var(v1), the estimated variance of
v1, the error in the estimated equation, which by definition is minimum at the least squares
estimation). Yet another reason will be the fact that the error variance Var(e1) is not exactly
known but is estimated with varying precision.

5) Actually the derivation of the standard error of the corrected estimator ä is not too

easy; and one has to use large sample theory to obtain its limiting distribution. The formula
for the asymptotic variance of & (assuming normality of the sampling error e1 and the error in

the equation ) is the following when the error variance Var(ej) is exactly (very precisely)
known:

Var(a) = (N-i)-1 [Var(xj*)J2 [Var(x) Var(vj) +

2 Var(e) Var(e)]

where the first term (N-i)-' [Var(xj*)]2 [Var(xj) Var(vj)J is that of the instrumental
variable estimator as just suggested. When the error variance is estimated, the formula

*2

includes an additional third term1 (n) (N-i) [Var(xj )] [2 a Var(ej) Var(ej )J, which
decreases in proportion to n , the average number of surveyed employee per firm (and can be
neglected relatively to the other terms for large n

Note thai one must pave in fact the following conditiop, which is moreyestrictivethan Varej) < Var(x1)
Var (e1) = Var(yg - cx Xj) positive, that is [C ov(xjyj)]2 < Var(yj) [Var(x1) - Var(ej)J.
"The formula for a known error variance is the one given in Fuller 1987, theorem 1.2.1. See theorem .2.2.1 for

a more general formula in the multiple regression case and when the error variance-covariance matrix is

12

6) The results so far directly generalize to the multivariate linear regression model. This is the

usual extension in the case of a regression with only one employee survey based variable x,
and a number of firm level measured variables z . If we just want to focus on the coefficient
of the employee based variable x, we can rely on the so-called Frisch-Waugh procedure. That
is first compute the residuals from the least squares projections of y (to be explained) and of x

on the z (including the constant or a set of industry dummies), and then consider the simple

regression between these residuals. We are back to the previous one explanatory variable
specification, and the main change in the above formulas amounts to taking the partial or net
variances of x and y, remaining unexplained by z, and the corresponding net covariance. One
can see in particular that the relative bias X can be much larger; it is now equal to the share of

the unchanged error variance to the net observed variance of the xi's, and is thus equal to the

previous X in the equation without the additional control variables z, divided by (1-R2),
where R,2 is the multiple correlation coefficient of the regression of x on the z.

7) The extension to the multivariate regression where there are several employee
variables x is also straightforward. In practice one has first to compute an estimated variance-

covariance matrix of the sampling errors in the (across employee) within firm dimension as
before, and hence compute by difference with the observed variance-covariance matrix of the

xi's an estimate of the true variance-covariance matrix; then one has simply to substitute the

estimated true matrix for the observed one (in the overall variance-covariance matrix of the

xs and z's) to obtain a consistent corrected least squares estimator of all the regression
parameters.'2

8) Until now, we have assumed that o2 = Var(xlh

Ii) is

independent of the x's ; this is

not true, however, in our application in the next section, where the underlying process Xh = Pjh

is one of a zero-one binomial variable of observed mean p1 , with true mean p and variance

=

(1-pt ) for a given firm i.'3 Looking at this case of a binomial variable, we can see that

in fact the only difference with what precedes is in the expressions of the error and true
variances. We can write as before for the given firm i:

estimated in a situation as ours (that is independently from the variance-covariance matrix of the x's , but with a
precision increasing with the size N of the sample).
'2Note that in principle non-linear terms in the employee based x variables can be included in the regression.
One must be must be aware, however, that non-linear errors in variables models raise important additional
difficulties. See Chapter 3 in Fuller 1987; see also the note by Griliches and Ringstad, 1970.

13

= pi*+ e1

with
E(p1 Ii)

=

or

E(e1 Ii)

=0

and

Var(p1 Ii) = (p1*j)

+ Var(e1 Ii) = Var(pj*) + o2/n1 = Var(pj*) + p1*(1_pj*)/n1

from which we can directly derive that for the full sample of firms:

Var(p ) = Var(pj*) + Var(e1 ) = VarQ,j*) + E[p1*(1p*)/n J
or

Var(p1 ) = VarQj*) + [p*(l_p*) - VarQj*)J/n = (n-1)Var(p1t)/n + p*(1_p*) /

where p denotes the full sample true mean, and where n is now defined as the weighted
harmonic mean of the number of surveyed employees per firm for the full sample (and not
only for the sub-samples with more than one surveyed employee as before). If there is only
one surveyed employee per firm for all the firms in the sample, we see, as could be expected,

that n=1 and Var(p ) = p(1-p), and hence the true variance Var(pj*) cannot be estimated.
However, if we have at least a sub-sample with more than one surveyed employee, n is larger
than one and the true variance can simply be expressed as:

VarQj* ) = [nVar(p ) -pt (1_pt )] / (n-i)
and thus be consistently estimated on the basis of the full sample empirical variance Var(pj)
and empirical mean ji (and the value of n).'4

3. LOOKING AT THE RELATION BETWEEN THE FIRM AVERAGE WAGE AND
THE PROPORTION OF FEMALE EMPLOYEES

3.1 Variables, sample and sub-samples
Mainly as an illustration of our formal analysis, we consider the estimation of the relationship
between the firm average wage (directly measured at the firm level from its current accounts)

13

Note that the problem is the same for a multinomial variable defined over a given set of categories,

corresponding to the extension from one binomial variable to a vector of interrelated binomial variables (i.e., one
for each category).
14
We also verif', as before in the continuous variable case, that the difference between the observed and true
variances (i.e., the sampling errors variance) decreases in inverse proportion to n, when n increases.

14

and the proportion of female employees which we can obtain at the firm level by matching an
employee survey to the firm data bases maintained by the French statistical office [NSEE. The

survey is "l'enquête sur les Techniques et l'Organisation du Travail", known as TOTTO,
which has been conducted in 1987 and in 1993, by the French "Ministère du Travail". TOTTO

concerns a sample of individuals who have been working during the year, randomly drawn
from the French labor force.'5 TOTTO is a rich source of knowledge on the organisation of
work and use of new technologies in the firm. It provides in particular unique information on

computer use at work, which we have already matched to firm information in GreenanMairesse (1996), in an attempt to assess computer impacts on firm productivity.

We start here from the same matched samples as in this previous study, but for our present
purpose we prefer to focus on the regressions of the firm average wage on the proportion of
female workers, for which we expect moderately to strongly negative coefficients, depending

on whether we (roughly) control for skill composition or we do not. The main reason for the
choice of this example is that we can also know the average proportion of female employees

among all the firm employees from a regular firm survey, "l'Enquête sur la Structure des
Emplois"(ESE). The obvious interest is of course in allowing us to compare the estimates
using the proportion MFEM of female workers in the firm, as estimated on the basis of the
gender of the very few interviewed employees per firm in TOTTO, and the true proportion
PFEM, or if not exactly true much more accurate proportion, as known by ESE. Also, we will
be able to regress MFEM on PFEM, and thus directly verify whether a number of implications

of the classical random (non correlated) errors in variables framework, as developed in this
paper, are indeed verified.

We linked the ESE firm surveys for 1987 and 1993 to the INSEE firm data sets, providing the
usual accounting data from which we constructed the firm average wage variable LW (in logs)

considered here.16 The ESE firm survey also allowed us to obtain the variables of the general
skill composition of labor in the firm, which we use for controls in our firm wage regressions.

We have estimated all the regressions with and without including the three skill variables

PCA, PCP and PEA. These are defined respectively as the proportions in the firm total

'5TOTTO is conducted as an occasional supplement to the regular survey on employment 'L'Enquête Emploi,
which gives a selection probability of 1/1000 to each person in the French labor force, that is a sample of about
20 000. TOITO proper concerns all the respondents who have been working during the year.
16
These data sets come from SUSE ("Système Uniflé de Statistiques d'Entreprises"), which combines the

information of the firm annual surveys ("Enquetes Annuelles d'Entreprises, EAE") and the firm fiscal
declarations ("Declarations de Bénéfices Industriels et Commerciaux, BIC").

15

number of employees of the managers and executives in "administrative" occupations
("admistrateurs"), of the managers and executives in "productive" occupations ("ingenieurs"),
and of the employees in admistrative subordinate positions or white-collars ("employes"). The

remaining category, that of the blue-collars ("ouvriers"), is the left out category in the
regressions; its proportion PEP adds up to 100% with PCA, PCP and PEA and is still the
largest in many industries and overall.

Quite obviously the main restriction on our final sample size results from the need to match
the employee and firm data files. This we did by first tracing the SIREN identification number

of the firm on the basis of its name and address as declared by the interviewed employees in

TOTTO, and then using the SIREN to do the matching with the firm files. At both stages,
important losses occur in the numbers of interviewed employees and firms that can in fact be

linked. In the first stage this is in particular the case of self-employed persons; in the second
one, this is mainly true for the interviewed employees working in the smaller firms. For that
last reason, we excluded from our samples the firms with a total of less than 20 employees.'7

In total, if we consider the population of the French firms of 20 and more employees in the

Manufacturing and Services industries, any strong (non random) selectivity in the sample

construction seems rather unlikely; we can be fairly confident that we obtain two random

samples of firms in 1987 and 1993, and more importantly we can maintain that the
interviewed employees are taken at random within these firms. Note in that respect that the
probability that the individuals surveyed in TOTTO (since they are randomly drawn) would

be employed in a given firm is increasing with its size; and indeed the median sizes of the

firms in our sub-samples with one, two and three interviewed employees are respectively
about 120, 330 and 730 employees. In all our regressions, we include three size dummies (two
in addition to the constant), as well as seven industry dummies (six and the constant).

In the end, we have two samples of respectively 2563 and 2213 firms in 1987 and 1993, each

consisting of three sub-samples of about respectively 75 percent of firms with only one
interviewed employee, 15 percent with two, and the remaining 10 percent with three.'8 To

simplify matters, we have in fact abstracted from sub-samples with more interviewed

We have also excluded public enterprises and-non profit organizations, and we have not considered the
Building, Construction, Energy, Transportation and Telecommunications industries, because of their specific
features and/or because of the relatively small number of private firms concerned.
Because of the new match with the ESE survey, the size of these samples is about 10% smaller (in number of
firms) than that of our previous samples in Greenan and Mairesse, 1996.

16

employees per firm, by keeping only three interviewed employees chosen at random in the
firms where there were four or more. To fully control for the actual differences between sub-

samples (in size and industry composition and otherwise), and ascertain that the differences
between the sub-samples estimates arise from the different number of interviewed employees,

we have also considered what we call "restricted sub-samples" with one or two interviewed
employees. These are constructed from the sub-samples with three interviewed employees by

keeping only one or two of them at random, and similarly from the sub-samples with two
interviewed by keeping only one of them at random.

The Table in the Appendix gives the average and standard deviations of the log wage LW, and

of the estimated and true female proportion variables MFEM and PFEM, for the full samples,

sub-samples with one, two or three interviewed employees (sub-samples 1,2 and 3 with
respectively NS=1, 2 or 3), and the corresponding restricted sub-samples with one or two
interviewed employees (sub-sample 2 with NS=1 and sub-sample 3 with NS1 or 2). We see

that the average wage is (in average) about the same across all sub-samples, increasing by

nearly 30 percent in absolute terms between 1987 and 1993.' Our estimated and true
proportions of female workers MFEM and PFEM are also about the same across all different
sub-samples, and stayed about 35 to 40 percent in the two years. But mainly we verify that the

averages of the two variables are, as expected, very close, within 2 or 3 percent. We can also

see, as expected too, that the standard deviations of the error-ridden MFEM are much larger
than that of the true PFEM, from roughly the double in the sub-samples with one interviewed

employee to 50 percent larger for those with three. Likewise we see that the standard
deviations of MFEM are decreasing when we go from the sub-samples with one interviewed
employee to the ones with two, and again, but less so, when we go from the ones with two to
the ones with three.2° Much of what we find in what follows can in fact be traced back to these
simple observations.

3.2 The ordinary least squares estimates

19

Note that our average wage variable is really the average labor cost by employee for the firm, including social
security and other employee related charges paid by the firm. It amounts at the geometric mean (or roughly the
median) to about 150 000 FF in 1987 and 200 000 FF in 1993 (or roughly 30 000 and 40 000 US $).
20 One can also note that these standard deviations decrease by a factor of about (1 .7) between the sub-samples
with one and two interviewed employees, and of about (2.2)' between those with two and three. This is less
than (2) and (3)1/2 which will the values to be found if the differences in MFEM across firms only reflected
sampling errors. There is thus room left for systematic true variance in MFEM: see Table 2 below.

17

f Insert Table 1 in this subsection J

The ordinary least squares estimates of the gender coefficients in our firm average log wage
regressions are given in Table 1, both for the estimated proportions MFEM of female workers

and for the true proportions PFEM, and with and without controlling for skill composition
differences. On the whole, the estimates agree remarkably well with what we expect.

First, nearly all of our estimates are significantly negative, but much smaller when we control

for skill composition. The only non significant estimates we find are in fact obtained for the

restricted sub-samples (of a relatively small size) with one interviewed employee per firm,
when using the estimated MFEM (i.e., 0 or 1 on the basis of the gender of this interviewed
employee).

Second, the estimates using the estimated proportions MFEM are quite low relatively to the

ones based on the true proportions PFEM, confirming that indeed they are severely biased
downward due to sampling errors. For the full sample, for which these estimates are much
more precise, the order of magnitude of the biases is roughly about 75 percent, which is what
we could expect from the fact that the standard deviation of MFEM is twice that of PFEM.

Third, the estimates based on MFEM tend, as also expected, to increase when we go from the
restricted sub-samples with one interviewed employee to the corresponding ones with two and

with three interviewed employees. This evidence, however, is rather weak because of the lack

of precision of the estimates on the sub-samples with two and three interviewed employees,
due to their relatively small size.2'

3.3 The corrected least squares estimates
[Insert Tables 2 and 3 in this subsectionJ

In our previous study (Greenan and Mairesse, 1996), the similar evidence concerning our estimates of the
impact coefficients of computer use on the firm productivity (and average wage) is stronger. One reason is that
we constructed our sub-samples with one and two interviewed employees differently, by taking the firms with
exactly one or two interviewed employees (as we do here), but also taking the firms with more interviewed
employees and keeping one or two at random among them, The consequence is that the size of these subsamples (and the corresponding restricted sub-samples) is larger. In particular the size of the sub-samples with
two interviewed employees is about double, and hence the precision of the estimates on these sub-samples is

appreciably better. The drawback, however, is that the sub-samples with different number of interviewed
employees so defined overlap, and the estimates on them are not independent anymore. With our present
definition, the sub-sample estimates are independent and can be combined easily.

18

We show in Table 2 the estimates of the sampling error variances and true variances of the
estimated proportion MFEM of female employees in the firm, for the sub-samples with two or

three interviewed employees where we can compute them. Table 2 also gives the estimates of

the observed variances of MFEM and the ratios (1- ?) of the true variances to the observed
ones for these sub-samples, as well as the observed variances of MFEM for the sub-samples
with only one interviewed employee. For comparison, it also reports the observed variances of

PFEM, which should not differ much from the true variances since PFEM can be taken as the

true measure of the proportion of female workers in the firm, or at the least a very accurate
measure compared to MFEM. In Table 3 we present the corrected least squares estimates of

the gender coefficients in the firm wage regressions for the sub-samples with two or three
interviewed employees, which are based on the estimates of the sampling error variances and

true variances of MFEM given in Table 2. For an easy comparison, we also show the similar
OLS estimates using PFEM already given in Table 1.

From Table 2 we see that the estimated error variances amount to the major part of the
observed variances of MFEM, but with an order of magnitude of about 2/3 smaller in the subsamples with three interviewed employees than in the ones with two, which is precisely what

we expect. In contrast, but also as expected, the estimated true variances for these two sets of

sub-samples fall, at the second decimal place, in a same range of values: from 0.04 to 0.05
in1987 and 0.03 to 0.04 in 1993. These values agree at least very roughly with the observed
variances of PFEM, which is again what we hope. If anything, however, we find a rather clear

tendency for them to be smaller, with specially large differences for the sub-samples with two

interviewed employees (where the estimated true variance of MFEM compared to the
observed variance of PFEM is of about 0.04 as against 0.06 in 1987, and 0.03 as against 0.05

in 1993). One can view that as an indication that PFEM is not really a perfect "true" measure
and is in fact also affected by some significant random errors of measurement, much smaller
of course than the sampling errors in MFEM.22 One can also suspect that such differences may

well be very largely accounted by the relative lack of precision of our estimates of the true

22

Following this interpretation, the ratio X of the error variance to the true variance would be roughly of an order
of magnitude in the range of 20% for PFEM as compared to 80%, 70% or 60% for MFEM depending on the
sub-samples (with respectively 1, 2 or 3 number of surveyed employee per firm). Although PFEM is in principle
a most simple variable to define and measure, it is in fact very plausible that it is indeed affected by to some
degree by errors of measurement, because of specific difficulties in the implementation of the ESE. However, a
"noise to signal" ratio ? of 20% seems quite high. The values for X that we found for our computer use indicator
in Greenan and Mairesse, 1986, are in the same range as the ones we obtain here for MFEM.

19

variances of MFEM. Indeed, considering that the true variance estimates are obtained as the

differences between the (independent) estimates of two variances, and given that in the
present application these are actually based on fairly small sub-samples (of about 300 firms),
one cannot hope for very precise results.

Compared to the corresponding OLS estimates in Table 1, the estimates in Table 3 correcting
for the downward biases from sampling errors are indeed much larger (in absolute values), as

they should be. They are in fact larger by a higher factor than the (l-?y' that can be computed
from Table 2. This magnification occurs because we control for industry and size dummies in

our first set of regressions, and also for skill composition in the second set (and what matters
are the net variances conditioned on the control variables, as indicated in sub-section 2.3.6).23

While the discrepancies between the OLS estimates with MFEM and those with PFEM are
very important and significant, the corrected estimates using MFEM come much closer, on the
whole, to the ones based on PFEM. Actually if one takes into account the large standard errors

shown in Table 3 for these estimates, and if one also keeps in mind that the two sets of
standard errors computed for corrected estimates with MFEM are in fact both underestimated

(as explained in sub-section 2.3.4), most of the differences between them do not appear
statistically significant (at the 5% conventional level of confidence). But again, despite such
large standard errors, one may find some evidence in the numbers that the corrected estimates

with MFEM are somewhat higher than those with PFEM. These differences of course reflect

the ones we just noted in the estimated true variances of MFEM and observed variances of

PFEM, and are consistent with the existence of some sizeable errors of measurement in
PFEM.

Our corrected estimates of wage gender differentials are quite large on the whole but
consistent with other comparable estimates in the literature. Taking them at their face value
(with an average estimate of—O.4 with skill controls and one of—O.8 without), and considering

for example a cross-sectional difference of 20% in the firm proportion of female employees

(that is about the true between firm dispersion [(VarQ1*)2that we find), they amount to

23

This magnification of the sampling errors reflects an order of magnitude of the R2 of the auxiliary regressions
of MFEM on the control variables which remains relatively modest (in a range of about 0.15 to 0.20 including

only the industry and size dummies, and about 0.20 to 0.25 including also the skill variables). Such
magnification will be much more pronounced in an application in which the employee based variables will be
strongly correlated with the other explanatory variables.

20

accounting for about a quarter of the observed cross-sectional dispersion in the firm average
wage to about half, with and without controlling for the firm skill composition.

3.4 A direct check of the sampling errors in variables framework
(Insert Table 4 in this subsection]

In this illustrative application where we have both the sampling error-ridden employee-based
variable and the true firm level variable (or at least a rather good measure of it), we can in fact

directly regress the former on the latter. We thus can check whether in such regressions the

slope coefficients p are indeed about equal to one as expected. If this is the case, the
regression correlation coefficients R2 will give us new estimates of the ratios (1- X) of the true

variances to the measured ones, or equivalently the regression mean square errors (MSE) will

give us new estimates of the sampling error variances. 24 We can then verify whether these

estimates of (1- X) and of the error variances are about equal to the ones independently
computed on the basis of the (across employee) within firm variance of the employee based
variable.

Our estimates of the slope and correlation coefficients p and R2 in the regressions of MFEM
on PFEM are shown in Table 4 for the full sample and the different sub-samples. What we see

is clearly what we expected. The estimated slope coefficients are not significantly different
from one. The R2 agree roughly, on the whole, with the corresponding estimates of (1- X) in

Table 2. They tend, however, to be higher, which again points in the direction of a modicum
of random errors in PFEM: respectively 0.42 as against 0.31, and 0.34 as against 0.25 for the
sub-samples with two interviewed employees in 1987 and 1993; and similarly 0.49 as against
0.39, and 0.39 as against 0.39 in the sub-samples with three surveyed employees.25

4. CONCLUSION

24 Note that if the OLS estimated q are about equal to one, the estimated slope coefficients in the reverse
regressions of the true variable on the observed one are the regression R2 (and therefore less than one).
25 Note that, although they reflect the same evidence, the corresponding differences in terms of the regression
MSE and of the estimated error variances seem more pronounced; they are the following: 0.08 as against 0.04,

21

We hope to have convincingly shown in this paper that information collected from employees
can be a great help in overcoming some of the major data difficulties increasingly encountered

in firm econometric analyses, whether simply due to the unavailability of an easy measured

variable or more deeply related to intrinsic problems in defining the relevant variables. We

have also tried to convey the optimistic idea that this can be done by only surveying a few
randomly chosen employees per firm, and would be very worthwhile even at the limit when

one has only sub-samples with two or three surveyed employees, as in our illustrative
application. We have also explained that the method to be followed, in the usual case of a

linear regression model, is easy enough to implement, consisting of an application of the
classical errors in variables framework, when one can obtain an independent estimate of the
error variance-covariance matrices.26

Our framework and method, as we have presented and illustrated them here, can be in fact
extended or generalized in various other contexts. We have considered them in particular in
the case of a cross-sectional analysis of firms, but they can be similarly applied to a panel data
analysis. In a panel data application we will not need that the surveyed employees be the same

(or even be the same number) for the same firm in the different years of the panel (as long as

being randomly chosen each year). The real problem will be in fact the basic one of the
magnification of random errors of measurement in variables, and in the present instance the
sampling errors in the employee-based variables, when one typically turns to within firm or
differencing transformations in an attempt to control for unobserved correlated firm effects.27

We have also considered that the employee based variable (x1) is a mean variable and
estimated as such (as the firm average of the individual xlh for the surveyed employees in the

firm), but in principle this variable could also be for example a variance or any given quantile

and 0.09 as against 0.03 for the sub-samples with two interviewed employees in 1987 and 1993; and similarly
0.06 as against 0.04 in the sub-samples with three surveyed employees in both 1987 and 1993.
26 Besides the application of our framework in this paper and previously in Greenan and Mairesse, 1996, the only
application which is to our knowledge quite comparable is that by Cockbum and Griliches, 1988. In their firm
level investigation of the stock market's valuation of R&D and patenting activities, the two authors try to take
advantage of error-ridden indicators of appropriability at a detailed industry level (not the firm level), which are

based on the answers of the surveyed firms by industry (not the surveyed employees by firm) in the "Yale
survey on industrial R&D". They find, however, contrary to us, that in many cases their estimates of the true
variance of these indicators are about zero (with estimated error variance being as large as the observed variance
conditional on the other variables in the analysis), implying that these indicators do not bring new information
beyond that already captured by the other variables.
27 For a recent exposition of the problem in the context of the estimation of a production function, see Griliches
and Mairesse, 1998.

22

and estimated accordingly (by the firm variance and quantiles of the xlh). Here also the
problem will be the magnitude of the sampling error variance (involving for example in the
case of a variance the within firm fourth moment of xlh).

Our framework can be extended as well in contexts where the units of observation can be
different from that of the employee and the firm as considered here. Indeed it has been already

used in such contexts. One which is now well known in practice is that of so called pseudo-

panel, where the units are 'cohorts defined by some common characteristics (like age, sex
and occupation). In this case all the aggregate variables measured for the observed cohorts are

error-ridden estimates of the true values for the full cohorts; and an errors in variables
approach like the one considered here can be implemented to correct for the problem when of
importance (i.e., when the number observations within cohort is small).28

In fact both our approach and the pseudo-panel approach for correcting errors in variables
biases go back to a much earlier literature on either using repeated observations on the error-

ridden variables in the equation of interest, or in grouping observations and estimating the
equation on the group means.29 These two methods are technically equivalent, but they differ

in terms of the requirement they put on the data, and in terms of exact interpretation of the
estimated equation. Both can be applied the context of a cross-section, a single time-series or

a panel.3° The originality of our approach like that of pseudo-panels is not really in the
technique but in its potential domains of application. In recent years the development of

pseudo-panels has been fruitful in providing new sources of data and in extending the
possibilities of investigation in consumer or labor economics in particular; we hope that our

approach will have a similar success in allowing for the construction and use of more
comprehensive data sets in econometric studies of the firm.

28

See Deaton, 1985, for an original exposition of the method, and Verbeek, 1996, for a survey. For an
interesting related application to an analysis of wage differentials in which in particular the authors extend the
method to wage quantiles estimated on cells by age, education, sex and race, see Card and Lemieux, 1996.
29
See Tukey, 1951, and Madansky, 1959, for using repeated observations in an errors in variables model and
Malinvaud (chapter 10), 1970, for grouping observations.
° One of the advantage of a panel with repeated observations for the error-ridden variables, as we just suggested
above, or a pseudo-panel with group observations is of course in allowing to directly control for unobserved

correlated fixed effects and therefore in helping to correct for both errors in variables and omitted variables
biases.

23

REFERENCES

CARD, David and LEMIEUX, Thomas "Wage Dispersion, Returns to Skill, and Black-White
Wage Differentials", Journal of Econometrics, 74, (1996): 3 19-361.

DEATON, Angus "Panel Data from Time-Series of Cross-Sections", Journal of
Econometrics, 30, (1985): 109-126.

COCKBURN, Ian and GRILICHES Zvi "Industry Effects and Appropriability Measures in
the Stock Market's Valuation of R&D and Patents, The American Economic Review, 78(2),

1988: 419-423. For more details, see Appendix A, "Sampling Errors in the Appropriability
Measures", in NBER Working Paper 2465 (December 1987).

FULLER, Wayne A. "Measurement Error Models", John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1987.

GREENAN, Nathalie and MAIRESSE, Jacques (1996) "Computers and Productivity in

France: Some Evidence", NBER Working Paper 5836. Forthcoming in Information
Technology and the Productivity Paradox, edited by Paul A. David and Edward W.
Steinmuller, London, Harwood Academic Publishers, (1999): 141-167.

GRILICHES, Zvi and RINGSTAD, Vidar "Errors in the Variables Bias in Nonlinear
Contexts", Econometrica, 38, (1970): 368-370.

GRILICHES, Zvi and MAIRESSE, Jacques "Production Functions: The Search for
Identification", in Econometrics and Economic Theory in the 20th Century: The Ragnar Frish
Centennial Symposium, edited by Steinar Strom, Cambridge University Press, 1998.

HAEGELAND, Torbjorn and KLETTE, Tor Jacob "Do Higher Wages Reflect Higher
Productivity? Education, Gender and Experience Premiums in a Matched Plant-Worker Data",

in The Creation and Analysis of Employer-Employee Matched Data, edited by John D.

24

Haltiwanger, Julia Lane, James Spletzer, Jules Theeuwes and Kenneth C. Troske, Amsterdam,
North Holland, 1999.

MADANSKY A. "The Fitting of Straight Lines When Both Variables Are Subject to Error
Journal of the American Statistical Association, (1959): 173-205.

MALINVAUD Edmond, Statistical Methods of Econometrics, 2d ed., Amsterdam, NorthHolland, 1970.

TUKEY J. W. "Components in Regression", Biometrics, (1951): 33-70.

VERBEEK Marno "Pseudo Panel Data" in The Econometrics of Panel Data, edited by
Matyas Laszlo and Sevestre Patrick, Boston, Kiuwer Academic Publishers,1996.

Table 1: Ordinary Least Squares estimates
of the coefficients of the estimated and true female proportions
LW on

MFEM

PFEM

MFEM

PFEM

With Controls for Skills

Without Controls for Skills

93

87

93

87

93

87

93

87

-0.14

-0.12

-0.46

-0.48

-0.09

-0.08

-0.39

-0.40

(0.01)

(0.01)

(0.03)

(0.03)

(0.01)

(0.01)

(0.02)

(0.02)

-0.13

-0.12

-0.45

-0.47

-0.08

-0.09

-0.39

-0.41

(0.02)

(0.02)

(0.03)

(0.03)

(0.01)

(0.01)

(0.03)

(0.03)

-0.14

-0.04

-0.51

-0.49

-0.11

-0.01

-0.39

-0.37

(0.03)

(0.04)

(0.06)

(0.08)

(0.03)

(0.03)

(0.06)

(0.06)

-0.21

-0.11

idem

-0.14

-0.05

idem

idem

(0.04)

(0.05)

idem
"

(0.04)

(0.03)

-0.08

-0.11

-0.63

-0.63

-0.03

-0.06

-0.36

-0.42

(0.03)

(0.04)

(0.08)

(0.10)

(0.02)

(0.03)

(0.06)

(0.08)

-0.14

-0.18

idem

idem

-0.06

-0.08

idem

(0.04)

(0.05)

(0.03)

(0.04)

idem
"

-0.08

-0.10

idem

dem
"

FULL SAMPLE

SUB-SAMPLE I
NS = 1

SUB-SAMPLE 2
NS = 1

NS = 2

SUB-SAMPLE 3
NS = 1

NS =2

NS =3

-0.14
(0.05)

-0.21

idem

idem

"

(0.08)

(0.03)

(0.04)

'

MFEM estimated female proportion; PFEM : true female proportion ; and LW: log of the firm average wage.
AJI regressions indude industry and size dummies.
The regressions In the two laat columns also control for skill composition differences as measured by : PCA. PCP and PEA.
N=2563 in 1987 and N2213 In 1993;
The number of ftmis N is in the Full Sample:
in the First Sub Sample (with one interviewed employee):

N1882 in 1987 and N1667 In 1993;

in the Second Sub Sample (with two interviewed employees):

N= 363 in 1987 and N= 314 in 1993;

N= 318 in 1987 and N 232 in 1993.
in the Third Sub Sample (with three or more interviewed employees) :
idem means unchanged: PFEM being the true variable, the OLS estimates do not vary with the number ot interviewed employees, for a given subsample.

Jacques MAIRESSE

Page:1 / 5

Date:3/4199- 11:02AM
File: Northht(Table 1)

Table 2 : Observed variance, estimated error and true variances.
and estimated true variance ratio (1-lambda) for the estimated female
proportion and observed variance of the true female proportion.
PFEM

MFEM
87

93

87

93

0.207

0.209

0.060

0.059

Obs.Var.

0.237

0.238

0.060

0.061

NS = I

Obs.Var.

0.241

0.232

0.064

0.054

NS = 2

Obs.Var.

0.139

0.132

0.064

0.054

Error Var.

0.096

0.099

0.0

0.0
0.054

FULL SAMPLE
Obs. Var.

SUB-SAMPLE 1
NS = I

1

SUB-SAMPLE 2

True Var.

0.043

0.033

0.064

(1—X)

0.310

0.250

1.0

1.0

NS = I

Obs.Var.

0.239

0.230

0.050

0.045

NS = 2

Obs.Var.

0.145

0.133

0.050

0.045

Error Var.

0.094

0.100

0.0

0.0
0.045

SUB-SAMPLE 3

NS = 3

True Var.

0.051

0.033

0.050

(1—?)

0.350

0.250

1.0

1.0

Obs.Var.

0.109

0.107

idem

idem

Error Var.

0.066

0.065

True Var.

0.043

0.042

(1—A)

0.390

0.390

"

MFEM estimated female proportion; PFEM : true' female proportion.
See Table I for the numbers of firms N in the full sample and the three sub-samples In 1987 and 1993.
idem means unchanged: PFEM being the tnie vanable, the observed and true variances are identical for a given subsample.

Date:3/4/99- 11:06AM
Jacques MAIRESSE

Page: 1 /4

File: North ht(Table 2)

Table 3: Corrected Least Squares estimates
of the coefficients of the estimated female proportion
and Ordinary Least Squares estimates
of the coefficients of the true female proportion
PFEM

MFEM

PFEM

MFEM

LW on

With Controls for Skills

Without Controls for Skills
87

93

87

93

87

93

87

93

-0.90

-0.73

-0.51

-0.49

-0.72

-0.41

-0.39

-0.37

(0.08)

(0.12)

(0.06)

(0.08)

(0.07)

(0.09)

(0.06)

(0.06)

[0.12]

[0.15]

n.r

n.r

[0.11]

[0.111

n.r

n.r

-0.66

-1.28

-0.63

-0.63

-0.35

-0.86

-0.36

-0.42

(0.08)

(0.01)

(0.08)

(0.10)

(0.07)

(0.12)

(0.06)

(0.08)

[0.11]

[0.24]

n.r

n.r

[0.08]

[0.22]

n.r

n.r

-0.70

-0.84

idem

idem

-0.48

-0.47

idem

idem

(0.10)

(0.11)

(0.08)

(0.09)

[0.10]

[0.11]

SUB-SAMPLE 2
NS = 2

SUB-SAMPLE 3
NS = 2

NS =3

[0.13]

[0.14]

"

MFEM estimated female proportion; PFEM : lnje female proportion and LW: log of the firm average wage.
The first set of regressions (first four columns) indude industiy and size dummies as in Table 1.
The second set of regressions (last four columns) also control for skill composition differences ( measured by: PCA PCP and PEA), as in Table 1.
The standard errors shown in parentheses and in brackets are respectively the OLS and IV standard errors;
both are underestimated for the coffected estimates with MFEM; the latter are not relevant ("n.r.) for the OLS estimates for PFEM.
idem means unchanged: PFEM being the true vanable. the OLS estimates do not vary with the number of interviewed employees
(for a given subsample) and do not need to be corrected.
See Table 1 for the numbers of firms N in the three sub-samples in 1987 and 1993.

3/4/99 - 11:06 AM
File: Northht(Table 3)

Date:
Jacques MAIRESSE

Page : 2/4

Table 4: Regressions of estimated female proportion
on true female proportion : slope coefficient Phi and
R2 (= true variance ratio (1-lambda) if Phi =1)
MFEM on PFEM

1993

1987
Phi

R2 (=1-lambda)

Phi

R2 (=1-lambda)

0.99
(0.03)

0.28
[0.148)

1.00
(0.03)

0.28
[0.151]

1.00
(0.04)

0.25
[0.177]

1.02

0.27

(0.04)

[0.175]

1.07
(0.09)
0.95
(0.06)

0.30
[0.168)
0.42
[0.081]

0.83
(0.11)

0.16
[0.195]
0.34
[0.087)

0.98
(0.11)

0.20

0.93
(0.13)
0.83
(0.10)
0.96
(0.08)

FULL SAMPLE

SUB-SAMPLE I
NS = 1

SUB-SAMPLE 2
NS = 1

NS = 2

0.91

(0.07)

SUB-SAMPLE 3
NS = 1

NS = 2
NS = 3

1.05
(0.08)
1.03
(0.06)

[0.1931

0.38
[0.091]
0.49
(0.0561

0.17
[0.191]

0.24
[0.102]
0.39
[0.065]

MFEM estimated female proportion; PFEM : 'true' female proportion.
The regressions do not indude indushy and size dummies and do not control for skill composition:
they differ only slightly from the regressions with industry and size dummies and skill composition variables
Standard errors are shown in and mean square errors (MSE) in J.
For other footnotes see Table 1.

Jacques MAIRESSE

Page : 3 /4

Date:3/4/99 - 11:06AM
File: Northht(Table 4)

Appendix: Averages and standard deviations of firm average log wage,
and estimated and true female proportions

PFEM

MFEM

LW

93

87

93

87

93

87

5.04

5.29

0.39

0.38

0.38

0.37

(0.33)

(0.33)

(0.45)

(0.46)

(0.24)

(0.24)

5.03

5.27

0.38

0.39

0.38

0.38

(0.33)

(0.34)

(0.49)

(0.49)

(0.25)

(0.25)

5.03

5.32

0.4

0.36

0.39

0.37

(0.33)

(0.31)

(0.49)

(0.48)

(0.25)

(0.23)

idem

idem

0.38

0.36

idem

idem

(0.37)

(0.36)

FULL SAMPLE
(N=2563, 2213)

SUB-SAMPLE 1)
NS = 1

(N=1882, 1667)

SUB-SAMPLE 2
NS = I
(N=363, 314)

NS=2
(N=363, 314)

"

SUB-SAMPLE 3
NS = I
(N=318, 232)

5.1

5.35

0.39

0.35

0.37

0.36

(0.29)

(0.31)

(0.49)

(0.48)

(0.22)

(0.21)

idem

idem

0.4

0.37

idem

idem

NS =2
(N=318, 232)

(0.38)

(0.36)

0.4

0.38

"

NS 3
(N=318, 232)

idem

idem
"

(0.33)

(0.33)

idem

idem

'

LW is the log of the average firm "wage", precisely the average labor cost per employee for the firm (in 1000 FRF).
MFEM the estimated female proportion; PFEM the 'true' female proportion.
idem means unchanged: PFEM being the true variable, its averages and standard deviations are identical for a given

subsample.

Date:3/4/99- 11:06AM
Jacques MAIRESSE

Page : 4/4

File : Northht(Table 5)

