1. Introduction

All over the world, declining population growth rates and rising                                    life

expectancy are creating problems for public retirement systems. With a

constant    population       structure,    a     pay-as-you-go          (PAYGO)     social    security

system could operate at constant tax and replacement rates. But when the

ratio of retirees to workers rises, either tax rates must be raised or the

replacement rate must be reduced. These demographic changes are the driving

force for the current social security reform debate.

        This paper considers the design of social security from an ex ante

perspective. Once a demographic shock is realized, a debate on how to

adjust taxes and benefits is necessarily a distributional debate. A lighter

burden on one generation implies a heavier burden on other generations.

From an ex ante perspective, in contrast, demographics is a stochastic

process    and    the      design    questions    are      about     risk    sharing.        Different

realizations of birth rates and survival rates have an                               impact    on    the

financial status of government programs and, more broadly, on the set of

feasible    allocations       of    national     resources.        Policy   questions        are    then

questions of efficiency rather than redistribution: How can the financial

risks     created      by    demographic       uncertainty         be     shared      by     different

generations? What are the risk-sharing implications of alternative policy

rules? Moreover, we can evaluate specific policy actions (“reforms”) taken

in   response     to    demographic     changes       in   terms    of    whether     or     not    they

represent efficient responses to the underlying shocks.

        I examine demographic changes in a Diamond (1965) style neoclassical

growth    model     with    overlapping     generations,        building       on    Bohn     (1998a).

Government       policy      is     potentially       welfare      improving        because     future

generations are naturally excluded from financial                          markets.     They    cannot


                                                  1
insure themselves against macroeconomic or                  demographic       risks.1     In    this

setting,    I   characterize    the     general      properties    of     alternative      social

security systems, with a focus on four specific alternatives: A                                PAYGO

social security systems with defined benefits (DB), a PAYGO system with

defined    contributions        (DC),     a     private/privatized            system,     and      a

“conditionally prefunded” system.

       The two PAYGO systems are relevant because existing social security

systems in many developed countries are pure PAYGO systems, including the

U.S. until 1983. If the worker-retiree ratio is constant, DB and DC are

observationally equivalent. But when the retiree-worker ratio rises, the

key issue for PAYGO social security is if taxes are held constant and

benefits are reduced       or    if    benefits      are   held   constant       and    taxes    are

increased. This choice is at the heart of the current U.S. policy debate.

       The analysis of a privatized system is motivated by the                            current

discussion about systems in which individuals fund their own retirement, at

least in part. A fully privatized system represents this policy option in

pure form.2

       Finally,    the   “conditionally       prefunded”     social      security       system   is

intended to capture key features of the post-1983 U.S. system. The U.S.

social    security   debate     is    heavily       influenced    by    the   Social     Security

Administration’s 75-year extrapolations of current policy. Whenever the 75-

year forecast shows a significant revenue gap, public pressure seems to

arise to reform the system.3 If one takes                   this       linkage   seriously       and

1 To simplify, I abstract from private risk sharing and from Ricardian bequests.
2 Some of the privatization literature distinguishes between private savings without
government intervention and “privatized” social security, meaning a funded system that is
mandatory and government-regulated. For the intergenerational issues in this paper, this
distinction is irrelevant.
3 For example, the 1983 reform was supposed to cover the then-existing revenue gap through
tax increases that would accumulate a trust fund sufficient to carry social security
through the years of baby boom retirement. Much of the current debate is also about
closing the projected funding gap.



                                                2
assumes that projected funding gaps systematically trigger tax and benefit

changes, one obtains a well-defined pattern of intergenerational transfers,

namely a system in which trust funds are accumulated or drawn down in

response to demographic shocks. For the stylized representation of such a

system, I assume that net benefits are fixed one generational period in

advance, at a level that depends negatively on anticipated changes in the

retiree-worker ratio.4

       The   paper   derives   four   main   sets   of   results,   namely   about   the

implications of variable birth rates, about variations in longevity, about

the different positive effects of alternative policies, and about their

efficiency properties.

       First, members of a small cohort generally benefit from being in a

small cohort even if the government operates a DB social security system.

This finding deserves emphasis because the main concern in the current

reform debate has been about the plight of the baby bust generation, about

the fact that DB imposes relative high taxes on small cohorts that support

preceding larger cohorts. Large cohorts are, however, worse off than small

ones if there is no DB social security: Their high labor supply drives down

the wage rate when the cohort is young. Their desire to save reduces the

return on capital as they age. Conversely, small cohorts enjoy favorable

factor price movements. They are better off than large cohorts even with a

DB social security system unless taxes are so high that the fiscal burden

dominates the factor price effects.




4 There is an apparent consensus that benefit changes ought to be phased in slowly and
that the benefits of current retirees are untouchable. The reform debate is about varying
FUTURE benefit levels in response to anticipated demographic pressures, not about moving
to a true PAYGO-DC system with variable benefits to current retirees. McHale (1999)
suggests that social security reforms in other countries follow a similar pattern.



                                             3
       In the model, the magnitude of the factor price effects relative to

the fiscal burden depends on the elasticity of factor substitution and on

the   level   of   social    security      taxes.    With     Cobb-Douglas        technology   (as

benchmark), the factor price effects dominate if the ratio of tax rate (θ)

to one minus the tax rate, θ/(1-θ), is below the capital share in output.

For the U.S., this condition is satisfied by a wide margin, suggesting that

the factor price effects of birth rate changes should dominate the fiscal

effects. The current debate about social security reform, in contrast,

focuses on fiscal pressures and virtually ignores factor price effects.5

       One may wonder, of course, to what extent the results from the two-

period    model    are    empirically       realistic.        The   empirical       evidence       is

unfortunately very limited, largely because it takes decades of data to

obtain    a   single     generation-length         observation.       Empirical     evidence       in

related   areas--cross      country       growth     and    studies      of     relative   wages--

suggests,     however,    that    demographic       changes    have      wage    effects   broadly

consistent with the OG model (see Section 6).

       The second set of results is about unexpected changes in old-age

mortality. The implications for the allocation of risk depend significantly

on the individual predictability of death, on the availability of fair

annuities, and on who            might    receive    any    accidental        bequests.    Under    a

variety of assumptions, lower old-age mortality increases the need for

retirement     consumption.      The     efficient    response      to    a   longer   retirement

period is then to increase social security benefits. This argument applies,


5 The Social Security Administration’s long run projections of the social security
system’s financial status are, for example, based on extrapolating historical trends.
Neither the linkage between cohort size and factor prices nor the insurance role of DB
social security are new ideas. Easterlin (1987) provides much broader arguments about the
advantages of being in a small cohort. Smith (1982) provides a numerical example
illustrating the insurance role of DB social security. The point here is that the factor
price effects are large relative to the fiscal effects under empirically plausible
assumptions and therefore important for social security reform.



                                               4
if deaths are individually foreseeable or if savings are annuitized, so

that   accidental    bequests      are    small,     or    if       accidental     bequests    are

distributed within a cohort. Reduced benefits might be efficient, however,

if lower old-age mortality reduces the accidental bequests received by

workers.6

       Third,   a   comparison     of    alternative      policies        shows   that    a   fully

privatized system has essentially the same risk-sharing properties as a

defined-contribution PAYGO system. This is because neither a DC-PAYGO nor a

privatized system impose higher taxes on the young when the worker retiree-

worker ratio rises, whereas a DB system does. For risk-sharing purposes, a

partially-privatized      system    (say,        combining      a    smaller      DC   plan   with

individual accounts) is therefore equivalent to a mixture of a DB and DC

system.   A   conditionally-funded        DB    system    mimics      a   partially-privatized

system with regard to anticipated demographic changes, but it behaves like

a pure DB system when unexpected changes occur.

       Fourth, none of the above               systems    is    fully     efficient.     Efficient

policy responses (if any) should take place as soon as a demographic shock

is revealed. Moreover, efficiency requires that all risks are shared by all

generations, making no exception for current retirees. This requirement is

violated by DB and DC systems because both fail to vary current retiree

benefits in anticipation of future changes in the retiree-worker ratio,

e.g., when the current birthrate changes. I have argued elsewhere (Bohn

1998b) that the political viability of social security requires at least a

one-period-ahead commitment to retiree benefits (see also McHale 1999).



6 In the current reform debate, increased longevity is often cited to justify an increased
“normal” retirement age, i.e., reduced benefits for a given retirement age. Some proposals
even call for an indexing of the retirement age to life-expectancy. The efficiency
considerations of this paper provide support for such proposals only if the accidental
bequest channel is empirically important. This is an open question.



                                                 5
This may explain why the political debate takes for granted that current

retirees are exempt from reforms. From a risk-sharing perspective, such an

exemption is nonetheless a glaring inefficiency.

        Though this paper focuses on demographic risks, I should briefly

comment on other sources of uncertainty, notably on productivity risk and

stock market risk.7 Productivity shocks are arguably the most important

source of long-run uncertainty about wages and capital income (Bohn 1998c).

In   an    OG    setting,    productivity      risk      is    not    necessarily     allocated

efficiently across cohorts. Policy tools such as government debt and social

security     implicitly     shift     risk   across      cohorts      (Bohn   1998a).      Social

security, especially a wage-indexed system, has an important role in this

context, because it provides a means of intergenerational redistribution

that is more “neutral” with regard to risk-shifting than government debt.

        Stock market risk has recently received considerable attention in the

social     security      literature.    Here       one     should     distinguish     work     on

“privatized” retirement (investment options in “individual accounts”) from

work on intergenerational risk sharing through the social security trust

fund. Individual accounts are essentially irrelevant from a generational

perspective because the returns accrue to the contributors (Bohn 1997).

Trust     fund   investments,    on    the   other       hand,   re-allocate       risk    across

generations, because future tax payers are the residual claimants in any DB

system. Bohn (1997, 1988c), Smetters (1997, 1999), Shiller (1998), and Abel

(1998, 1999) discuss some of the positive and normative implications of

alternative      trust    fund   investments.       This      paper    abstracts    from     most

financial market issues to focus on demographics. But I include a simple

7 There is also a huge literature on how social security helps to share individual-level
risks such as disability, mortality, and cross-sectional income uncertainty (see, e.g.,
Storesletten et al. 1998). Such risks may well be responsible for the existence and
popularity of social security, but they are beyond the scope of this paper.



                                               6
productivity shock to demonstrate that shocks to the labor force have very

different welfare implications than productivity shocks even though both

have the same impact on effective capital-labor ratio. The productivity

shock also illustrates how easily other shocks could be added.

        The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the model.

Section 3 examines the risk sharing implications of alternative social

security policies. Section 4 studies the implications of missing annuities

markets and of accidental bequests. Section 5 derives necessary conditions

for efficient risk sharing and       their   implications   for   social     security

policy. Section 6 comments on extensions of the model and on empirical

issues. Section 7 concludes.


2. A Model with Stochastic Population Growth

This section examines risk sharing in a modified Diamond (1965)-style OG

model   with   stochastic   population   growth   and   stochastic   total     factor

productivity.


2.1. Population Dynamics and Preferences

In the Diamond model, generation t enters as working-age adults in period t

and retires in period t+1. For modeling demographic uncertainty, it is

important, however, that individuals are born long before they enter the

labor force. In terms of generational time units, society has about one

period advance notice about changes in the retiree-worker ratio. Hence, I

will assume that generation t is born in period t-1, works in period t, and

retires in period t+1. At time t, NCt is the number of generation t+1

children, NWt the number of generation t workers, and NRt the number of

generation t-1 retirees.




                                         7
        To       limit   the    scope       of    the       paper,     I    assume        throughout    that

childbearing is exogenous. Each of the NWt workers of generation t has bt

children, so that NCt = NWt⋅bt. To                       make   the        future    workforce    somewhat

unpredictable, I assume that only a fraction µ1t+1 of children survives into

adulthood.8 Then the growth rate of the workforce, N Wt+1/NWt = µ1t+1⋅NCt/NWt =

µ1t+1⋅bt     =    1+nWt+1,     is    partially         predictable,         but     not    perfectly.    The

variables        µ1t   (survival      rate)      and    bt    (birth       rate)    are    assumed     i.i.d.

Throughout, individuals in a cohort are                         identical,          individual    survival

probabilities equal the aggregate survival rate, and all variables are

treated as continuous, including bt.

        Parents care about their children’s consumption when the children

live in their household. Their preferences do not include an altruistic

bequest motive, however. This assumption is important because fiscal policy

would      be    irrelevant     if    all     generations       were       linked     through    Ricardian

bequests. Since Altonji et al. (1996) find that private intergenerational

risk sharing is highly imperfect empirically, it is a reasonable assumption

in this context. Bequests may nonetheless occur “accidentally” if mortality

is stochastic and annuity markets are imperfect, as I will explain below.

        Parents make decisions about their own consumption cWt and about their

childrens’ consumption c0t (per child). Throughout, I assume homothetic

(CRRA) preferences to obtain balanced growth. Let
                   1
            u1t =    ⋅ [ρW⋅(cWt)1-η + bt⋅ρ0(bt)⋅(c0t)1-η ]
                  1-η

be the parent’s period-t utility, where η>0 is the inverse elasticity of

intertemporal substitution. The per-child weight ρ0(bt) may depend on the

number of children: it seems reasonable to assume that 0<ρ0(bt)≤ρW and that


                t+1=N t would be known at time t. One may also interpret µ1t+1 as
8 Otherwise, NW      C
reflecting uncertainty about immigration. But since immigration would raise subtle welfare
questions (how to include immigrants in the welfare function), I will not address
immigration explicitly and interpret all uncertainty about NWt+1 as survival uncertainty.



                                                        8
bt⋅ρ0(bt) is non-decreasing in the number of children. For any level of

household consumption c1t = cWt + bt⋅c0t, the parent’s optimality condition

bt⋅ρW⋅(cWt)-η = ρ0(bt)⋅(c0t)-η then implies that u1t can be written as an

indirect utility over household consumption, u1t(c1t) = ρ1(bt)⋅(c1t)1-η /(1-η),

where ρ1(bt) = ρW⋅[1+bt⋅(ρ0(bt)/bt/ρW)1/η ]η depends on the number of children.

Under the assumptions above, the elasticity of the weight ρ1 with respect to

the birth rate, γ ρ = ∂ρ1/∂bt·(bt/ρ1), is in the interval 0≤ γ ρ≤η.

       Overall, children matter for the analysis for two reasons. Their

birth provides advance notice about the size of future adult cohorts, and

they affect their parents spending needs. Thus, the model accounts not only

for   old-age    dependency    but   also     for    variations     in    youth-dependency.

Otherwise, the model with children works just like Diamond’s two-period OG

model.

       Now consider retirement. As old-age survival improves, more workers

survive into the retirement period and those who survive live longer. For

social security, these changes matter only through their combined impact on

the ratio of retirees to workers.9 For individual behavior, however, an

anticipated longer life span may have different implications than a reduced

probability of a sudden death. For a known life span, retiree consumption

needs are presumably proportional to the length of the retirement period.

Retiree consumption needs will also increase if the rate of unanticipated

deaths   declines    in   a   setting   with       fair    annuities.     This   is   because

individuals     without   bequest    motive       will    place   all    their   assets   into

annuities. The return on fair annuities is inversely related to the average



9 The two changes may have different effects if the social security replacement rate
varies with age or if one accounts for Medicare. In the U.S., social security is fixed in
real terms at retirement, so that the replacement rate tends to fall with age, but the
value of Medicare is rising with age. In the model, the replacement rate is assumed
constant within each generational period.



                                              9
survival rate. Hence, a rising survival rate will require more retirement

savings to support a given consumption level, as in the case of a longer

life span. If annuities are unavailable, however, or too expensive to be

commonly         used,   a     rising    survival   rate   increases   the    probability       that

retirees can enjoy their savings. It mainly reduces accidental bequests and

does not increase retirees resource requirements. These different cases

have different policy implications and therefore deserve to be modeled

carefully.

             To capture a variable life-expectancy in the OG setting, I model the

retirement period as a fractional period. At the start of period t, a

fraction 1-µ2t of all generation t-1 workers dies. The remainder,                               µ2t,

learns that they will live for a period of length                        φ t∈(0,1]. Both the

survival probability and the conditional length of life have predictable

and unanticipated components: µ2t=µ2 et-1⋅µ 2 ut and φ t=φ et-1⋅φ ut, where µ2 ut and

φ ut are i.i.d. shocks revealed at the start of period t, while µ2 et-1 and

φ et-1 are i.i.d. shocks revealed in period t-1.10 The product µ2 et-1⋅φ et-1 may

be        interpreted     as    the     life-expectancy    at   retirement.       Conditional    on

survival, the period-t utility of the old is assumed proportional to the

length of life, u2t+1 = φ t⋅(c2t+1)1-η /(1-η).11

             Finally, generation t’s overall preferences combine the utility over

working age consumption u1t(c1t) and retirement consumption u2t+1(c2t+1),



10 For simplicity, I treat φ and µ
                            t       2t as level-stationary even though technicalprogress
in medical technology suggest an upward drift. Drift terms would require an analysis of
“unbalanced” growth paths. This could be done (see Bohn 1998b for a deterministic
analysis), but it would be cumbersome and not provide new insights about risk-sharing.
Autocorrelation could also be accommodated, but it would not affect the main results and
is therefore omitted.

                                                                              ∫
11 One may interpret u2 as an indirect utility obtained by maximizing φ t [c(s)]1-η /(1-η)
                       t
                                                                      0
ds over a continuous consumption stream c(s), subject to a resource constraint limiting

∫0φ   t   c(s)ds. Implicitly, this abstracts from within-period interest and discounting.



                                                    10
(1)              Ut = I1t ⋅ [u1t(c1t) + I2t+1 ⋅ ρ 2 ⋅ u2t+1(c2t+1)]
                       1
                    =     ⋅I ⋅ [ρ1(bt)⋅(c1t)1-η + ρ2 ⋅φ t+1⋅I2t+1⋅(c2t+1)1-η ],
                      1-η 1t

where the random variables I1t and I2t+1 are 0-1 indicators for individual

survival into adulthood and retirement, and ρ2 captures time preference. In

expectation, E[I 1t] = E[µ1t] = µ1 and Et[φ t+1⋅I2t+1] = φ et⋅µ 2et are equal to

the respective aggregate values.

        Overall, the population dynamics are such that the future labor force

and the future worker-retiree ratio are quite predictable one period ahead,

but not perfectly. This limited predictability is important for modeling

social security because it motivates why policy reforms are debated with

some lead time before demographic changes actually take place.


2.2. The Macroeconomic Setting

The macroeconomic setting is intentionally kept simple to focus on the

demographics. Each working-age person inelasticly supplies                        one    unit   of

labor. Output is produced with capital Kt and labor NWt,

(2)              Yt = Ktα ⋅(At⋅NWt)1-α ,

where   α   is     the   capital   share   and     At   is   the    economy’s    total    factor

productivity. Productivity follows a stochastic trend At = (1+at)⋅At-1 with

i.i.d. growth rate at. Capital depreciates at                      the   rate   δ,   implying   a

national resource constraint

(3)              Yt + (1-δ)⋅Kt = c1t⋅NWt + c2t⋅φ t⋅µ 2t⋅NWt-1 + Kt+1.

Some extensions are examined in Section 6.12

        The wage rate wt = (1-α)⋅At⋅[Kt/(At⋅NWt)]α and the return on capital Rkt

= α⋅[Kt/(At⋅NWt)]α-1 + (1-δ) both depend on the capital-labor ratio. Since Kt

is known in period t-1, it is convenient to define the state variable kt-1 =


12 Bohn (1998a) has shown how this setting can be generalized, e.g., to include a variable
labor supply, temporary productivity, CES-technology, and government spending, but such
complicating features would be distracting here.



                                              11
Kt/(At-1⋅NWt-1) that scales the capital stock by lagged productivity and the

lagged labor force. Wages and interest rates then depend on kt-1, on current

productivity growth, and on the current workforce growth.

      To model policy, I abstract from all government activity but social

security.13 The government collects payroll taxes on wages wt at a rate θt

from all workers and pays benefits to retirees at a replacement rate βt. The

cost of social security is the product of the number of surviving retirees,

NRt=µ2t⋅NWt-1, their length of life φ t, and the level of benefit βt⋅wt. The

system’s revenues are θt⋅wt⋅NWt. For given replacement rate βt, the PAYGO

budget constraint therefore implies a payroll tax rate of
                               NW           φ t⋅µ 2t
(4)         θt = βt ⋅ φ t⋅µ 2t⋅ t-1 = βt ⋅           .
                                NWt        bt-1⋅µ 1t

The ratio (φ t⋅µ 2t)/(bt-1⋅µ 1t) can be interpreted as the “average” retiree-

worker ratio (after smoothing over φ t).

      Interesting special cases of the PAYGO system are the defined-benefit

(DB) system with βt=β* and the defined-contribution (DC) system with θt=θ*

and βt=(1+nWt)/(φ t⋅µ 2t)⋅θ*. Since individuals are not liquidity-constrained,

government-mandated savings (sometimes called “privatized” or “individual

accounts” systems) would simply reduce          private   savings    (Bohn   1997).   A

privatized social security system is therefore equivalent to θ*=0. In a

mixed system consisting of individual accounts plus a PAYGO component, one

should interpret θt and βt as the taxes and benefits of the PAYGO component.

      A   system    with   government-run     trust    funds    is   somewhat    more

complicated, if the system promises benefits that do not depend on the

performance of the trust fund (as in the U.S.). Generational accounting

implies that each cohort’s net benefits are equal to the system’s PAYGO


13 This approach is nonetheless quite general because government transfers matter only
through different cohorts’ generational accounts. Hence, social security can be
interpreted broadly as a stand-in for other intergenerational transfers.



                                         12
component, i.e., to the statutory benefits minus the proceeds from the

trust fund built up by the same cohort’s payroll taxes (see Bohn 1997). In

the U.S., the buildup of the current trust fund started in 1983 in response

to    a   funding     gap   in   the    Social     Security     Administration’s      long      run

projections. Projected funding gaps are similarly influencing the current

debate. Such gaps arise from two principal sources, rising life-expectancy

and reduced birth rates. Hence, one may interpret the current U.S. system

as a defined-benefits system that accumulates trust funds in response to

either a rise in life-expectancy, µ2 et⋅φ et, and/or a fall in the birth rate

bt.   Since    a    trust   fund   buildup    is      equivalent   to    a   reduction     in   net

benefits,      such    a    “conditionally         prefunded”      system     can   represented

parsimoniously by a benefit function                   βt =   β(µ2 et,φ et,bt) with   ∂β/∂µ 2 e<0,

∂β/∂φ e<0, and ∂β/∂b>0.

          McHale’s (1999) analysis of recent pension reforms around the world

suggests that a variable benefit function of this type is                           empirically

realistic for other countries, too. In the countries studied by McHale,

reforms were generally triggered by anticipated funding gaps. Benefits to

current     retirees    remained       virtually      unchanged,   but   benefits     to   future

generations were reduced. This implies a benefit function with the same

features as in the conditionally prefunded system.

          More generally, a variety of social security systems with and without

prefunding can be reinterpreted as PAYGO systems with an appropriately

state-contingent benefit function. Hence, I will use the PAYGO notation

throughout the paper.




                                                 13
2.3. Individual Behavior

Individuals maximize their expected utility (1) subject to their budget

constraints. The main complications are potential                  imperfections     in   the

market for private annuities.

       When working, individuals earn an after-tax wage income wt⋅(1-θt) and

possibly receive accidental bequests Q1t (defined below). Denoting savings

by st, the first period budget equation is

(5)           c1t = wt⋅(1-θt) + Q1t - st.

If fair annuities exist, they offer a return Rkt+1/µ2t+1, which is above the

return on non-annuitized savings.14 Hence, all savings should be annuitized.

Empirically, private annuities are so costly, however, that the bulk of

private savings is not annuitized (Congressional Budget Office 1998).

       To gauge the significance of this apparent market imperfection, first

consider the case with         fair      annuities.   If   all   assets   are   annuitized,

surviving retirees will spend their private resources Rkt+1/µ2t+1⋅st at the

rate 1/φ t+1, and there are no bequests. Retirement consumption (including

receipts from social security) is then
                      Rst+1
(6a)        c2t+1 =             ⋅ st + βt⋅wt+1,
                    µ2t+1⋅φ t+1

and savings are determined by the individual optimality condition
                                                      Rst+1
(7a)        ρ1(bt)⋅(c1t)-η = ρ2⋅Et[φ t+1⋅I2t+1]⋅Et[            ⋅(c2t+1)-η ]
                                                    µ2t+1⋅φ t+1

                              = ρ2⋅Et[Rkt+1⋅(c2t+1)-η ].

Note that mortality cancels out in (7a). Also, all individual and policy

constraints depend on the length of life and on the survival rate only

through   their    product   φ t⋅µ 2t.    Hence,   under   the   assumption     of   perfect


14 One may either assume that individual annuity payoffs are indexed to the ex-post
survival rate µ2t+1; or, if annuity contracts promise a payoff Rkt+1/µ2et linked to the
expected survival rate, one may note that annuity firms are owned, like all other firms,
by the old, so that the annuity firms’ aggregate profit Rkt+1-µ2t⋅ Rkt+1/µ2et accrues to the
old. In either case, the old bear the risk of unexpected mortality changes.



                                              14
annuities, survival uncertainty µ2t can be subsumed into φ t and does not

have to examined separately.

        In contrast, if annuities do not exist, those who die at the start of

their    retirement       period    must     leave      accidental   bequests.      On    aggregate,

bequests of

(8)              Rkt+1⋅st⋅(1-µ2t+1)·NWt = Q1t+1·NWt+1 + Q2t+1·NRt+1

accrue either to workers (the next generation, Q1t+1) or to other retirees

(the same generation, Q2t+1).

        The surviving retirees will spend their private resources Rkt+1⋅st at

the    rate    1/φ t+1.    Including       bequests       and    social    security,      retirement

consumption is
                           Rkt+1        Q2t+1
(6b)            c2t+1 =          ⋅ st +       + βt⋅wt+1.
                           φ t+1        φ t+1

Savings are determined by the first order condition
                                                   Rs
(7b)        ρ1(bt)⋅(c1t)-η = ρ2⋅Et[φ t+1⋅I2t+1]⋅Et[ t+1⋅(c2t+1)-η ]
                                                   φ t+1

                                   = ρ2⋅µ 2et⋅Et[Rkt+1⋅(c2t+1)-η ].

Savings decisions now involve the probability of survival, µ2et, and they

are     distorted      because     individuals       do    not    value     bequests.      Moreover,

accidental bequests affect the distribution of resources across cohorts to

the extent that they go to the young (if Q1t>0).15

        Despite     this      multitude      of   effects,       annuities       turn    out    to    be

relatively       unimportant         except       for     studying        time-varying         survival

probabilities       per se     (see Section 4).           Intuitively,       savings     distortions

(µ2et<1)      affect    the    level    of    economic      activity       but    they    leave      the

propagation of other shocks and their impact on the different                                   cohorts


15 If all bequests go to the old, missing annuities have only an incentive effect but no
redistributional effect, because (6b) would then imply that the retirement income
        Rkt+1         Q2t+1     Rst+1
               ⋅ st +       =              ⋅ st
         φ t+1        φ t+1   µ2t+1⋅ φ t+1
is the same as with annuities.



                                                   15
largely unchanged. And bequests (Q1>0) give the young some exposure to

shocks affecting capital income, but the impact is proportional to the size

of such bequests relative to wage income, which is likely small.

       Because of these complications and the fact that annuitized survival

risk is economically equivalent to length-of-life risk, I will abstract

from old-age survival risk for much of the analysis and instead focus on

length-of-life uncertainty (setting µ2t≡µ 2et≡1). Since shocks to survival

uncertainty with fair annuities can be subsumed into φ t, the φ t-shocks in

this analysis can be interpreted as reflecting both shocks to the length of

life and “diversifiable” (through annuitization) survival uncertainty. When

I   explicitly   add   survival   uncertainty    later    (Section   4),    it   will    be

sufficient to model the case without annuities, because annuitized survival

uncertainty is already covered under φ t.

       With   either   assumption   about    annuities,    the   basic     dynamics     are

similar to the Diamond (1965) model. Each period, the young divide their

wage income (and bequests, if any) between consumption and savings. Savings

determine the next period’s capital stock, Kt+1 = NWt⋅st, which determines

the wage rate for the next young generation. Since I am not interested in

issues of dynamic inefficiency, I assume that ρ2⋅µ 2et/ρ1(bt) is low enough

(for all µ2et, bt) that the economy is dynamically efficient.

       With all the shocks and flexibly parametrized preferences, the model

does not generally have a closed form solution. As in Bohn (1998a), I

therefore follow the RBC and finance literature and examine log-linearized

solutions--analytically derived ones, however, not numerically simulated

ones. To ensure balanced growth, I assume a stationary policy rule for the

replacement rate βt. Without government, the model would have a Markov

structure with kt-1 and the shocks Z = {bt, b t-1, µ1t, φ ut, φ et, φ et-1, µ2ut,




                                            16
µ2et, µ2et-1, a t} as state variables. Adding more state variables would be

uninteresting. I assume therefore that the policy rule is a function of at

most these variables, so that the model with government                  has   the   same

structure.16

       Given the Markov structure, the log-deviation of any variable (y)

from the perfect foresight path is an approximately linear function of the

log-deviations of the state variables. Unless otherwise noted, let symbols

without time subscript refer to steady states and hats (^) denote log-

deviations.17 The log-linearized law of motions for any variable y can be

written as18
               ^           ^                 ^
(9)            yt = π yk ⋅ kt-1 +   ∑ π yz ⋅ zt.
                                    z∈Z

where π yz denotes the coefficient for state variable z. The π yz coefficients

can be interpreted as elasticities of y with respect to z.

       The main variables of interest are the consumption of workers and

retirees and the level of capital investment. Since the young divide their

labor income between consumption and savings, c1t and kt depend on all

shocks affecting the wage rate, on the incentives to save (Rkt+1), and on

the payroll tax. The consumption of the old depends on all shocks affecting

capital income and social security benefits; see (6a,b). The resulting

elasticity coefficients for various specifications of the model are listed

in several tables that will be discussed in the following sections.


16 Without government, one could treat nW and φ as state variables instead of their
                                            t       t
components. The components will have different effects, however, if policy treats expected
and unexpected changes differently, e.g., in the conditionally prefunded system. Hence, I
treat the components of nWt and φ t as distinct state variables throughout.
17 For example, c^1 = ln(c1 )-ln(c1). When growth rates are involved, the “1+” is
                    t          t
                                              ^
suppressed for notational convenience, as in nWt=ln(1+nWt)-ln(1+nW).
18 An intercept term could be added to reflect average “displacements” from the
deterministic paths caused, e.g., by risk aversion and precautionary savings; see Bohn
(1998a). But since the focus here is on fluctuations and not level variables, intercept
terms are omitted.



                                              17
       To illustrate the practical implications of the model, I will also

provide the elasticity coefficients implied by a simple numerical example.

For the example, assume a capital share of α=1/3, full depreciation (δ=1),

payroll taxes of      θ=0.15, zero population growth (n=0), a              steady   state

productivity growth factor of 1+a=1.35 (1% annual growth for a 30-year

generational period), and an elasticity of substitution of 1/η=1/3. The

effective retirement period--length times probability--is               λ⋅µ 2=1/2 (where

λ=1/2 and µ2=1, except in Sec. 4) and the time preference ρ2 is set such

that in steady state workers save 25% of their disposable income.19


3. The Risk-Sharing Properties of Alternative Systems

This section examines the positive effects of demographic shocks on the

fortunes of different cohorts. The main sources of demographic uncertainty

are shocks to the workforce and shocks to the number of retirees. For this

section, I abstract from shocks that would trigger accidental bequests

(setting µ2t≡µ 2et≡1) and assume that all variations in old-age mortality are

either changes in the known length of life or annuitized.


3.1. Defined Benefits

To start, consider an economy with constant social security benefits (DB).

It will provide a benchmark for studying variable benefits below. Table 1

summarizes the log-linearized equilibrium responses of workers and retirees

to various shocks.




19 The example is motivated by the calibrated OG model in Bohn (1998c); see there for a
discussion of calibration issues. The assumed full depreciation is a convenient
simplification, but it implies a caveat: Setting δ=1 reduces the autocorrelation of
capital (πkk) and therefore understates the propagation of shocks. This is acceptablehere,
because the analysis focuses on the impact effects. Setting δ=1 also reduce the level of
Rk, which I offset by raising ρ2 enough that the savings rate roughly matches the empirical
investment share in GDP. This is why I calibrate savings and not the time preference.



                                            18
         First, consider an unanticipated shock to the number of workers
 ^ ^
(nWt=µ1t; Panel A). A large number of workers has a clear positive effect on

the old (π c2µ1>0) because the reduced capital-labor ratio increases the old

generation’s capital income. The               impact      on     the    young   is    in   principle

ambiguous. With a defined-benefit system, members of a large cohort pays

less social security taxes (θ). But a large workforce also reduces the wage

rate,   as   captured    by     negative      α-terms.      The    negative      effects     dominate

whenever     α   >   θ/(1-θ).    For     plausible        capital       shares    (0.3-0.4),        this

inequality holds unless the tax rate is well                            over   20%.   If    α>θ/(1-θ),

workers’ income, consumption, and savings decline in response to a positive

shock to the workforce, whereas retiree consumption rises. This is also

true in the numerical example: α=1/3 > θ/(1-θ) = 0.176, π c1µ1 = -0.131 and

π kµ1 = -0.235 are negative, and π c2µ1 = 0.436 is positive.

        The main conclusion, to be reexamined below, is that for plausible

parameters,      large   cohorts       tend    to    be     demographically           disadvantaged.

Conversely, being in a           small     cohort    is    beneficial.         Even    though   small

cohorts face relatively high taxes under a defined-benefit system, they

also enjoy high wages and high returns on savings.

        Second, consider shocks to the current birth rate bt (Table 1, Panel

B). If one ignores children’s expenses (setting γ ρ=0 for this argument),

shocks to the birth rate are like shocks to the labor force that become

known one period in advance. With defined benefits, such shocks have no

impact on the old (π c2b=0). News               about      next     period’s     labor      force    are

relevant for the young, however, because they expect to be alive when the

shock actually hits the retiree-worker ratio. Looking forward, they know

that changes in bt have the same impact in period t+1 as the µ1t+1-shocks

discussed above: A high birth rate bt has a positive effect on retired



                                                19
generation t workers. But provided α>θ/(1-θ), it has a negative effect on

generation-(t+1) workers.

       The response of period-t         workers    is   most   likely   an   increase   in

current consumption and a reduction in savings. Specifically, Table 1 shows

that the elasticities       π c1b and   π kb depend on the interaction          of    three

effects. First, expected retirement income rises because a high future

workforce reduces next period’s capital-labor ratio and raises the return

on current savings. This income effect is captured by the positive γ c2nw-

term in π c1b and π kb. Second, the increased return triggers a substitution

effect in the opposite direction (the -π Rk/η term). Finally, expenses for

children increases the consumption needs of working-age families (the γ ρ

term with γ ρ>0). Unless the elasticity of intertemporal substitution is

high enough to offset both other effects, the net                  effects    are    higher

consumption (π c1b>0) and lower investment (π kb<0). In the numerical example,

these signs apply even for γ ρ=0: π c1b = 0.08 and π kb=-0.24.20

       Overall, a change in the birth rate triggers changes in consumption

and capital investment before it actually affects the labor supply. The

impact over time is traced out in Figures 1-2. For the figures, I consider

a one-time 20% reduction in the birth rate bt applied to the elasticities

of the numerical example.21 In period t, retirees (generation t-1) are

unaffected. Workers (generation t) realize that the next working-age cohort


20 Recall that γ ∈[0,η]. For the upper bound γ =η=3, one obtains π
                  ρ                              ρ                    c1b = 0.455 and πkb=-
1.365. Unless otherwise noted, I will use γ ρ=0 for the example numbers, for simplicity and
to avoid exaggerating the birth rate effects.
21 The 20% is somewhat less than both the projected increase in the retiree-worker ratio
from 1990 to 2020 (the baby boom retirement) and the decline in the ratio of the age 0-29
population to the age 30-59 population between 1960 to 1990 (the baby bust). The example
is indicative of the shape of the impulse-response functions in general, provided α>θ/(1-
                                                                     ^
θ) and γ c2nw+γ ρ/η>πRk/η. One exception: For large γ ρ, the sign of c2t+1 and the relative
                ^        ^
magnitude of c1t and c2t+1 could be reversed, namely if reduced expenses for children
dominate the baby boomers’ behavior; but this seems unrealistic.



                                            20
will be small, which will reduce the return on                     savings.   Assuming     the

negative income effect dominates the substitution effect, generation t will

reduce their consumption c1t and raise savings kt. In period t+1, the lower

return reduces generation t’s consumption despite the increased savings

(see Fig.1). Generation (t+1)’s consumption rises, in contrast, because of

higher wages. Wages are higher because of the low labor supply and because

of the higher capital stock (see Fig.2). The increased wage outweighs the

increase   in    tax     rates.    Since     the   capital   stock     rises,    subsequent

generations are better off, too.

       Note that the increased period-t savings merely magnify the change in

period-(t+1) wages. A reduction in bt would make the baby bust generation

better off even if the preceding generation did not save more (say, if 1/η

were   large    enough   that     π kb=0).   Increased   savings    further     improve    the

consumption opportunities of the baby bust generation and their successors,

but this savings response is not crucial.22

       In terms of the current policy debate, the analysis here suggests we

are perhaps too worried about the baby bust generation and its ability to

pay defined benefits to the baby boomers. Instead, the baby bust generation

can look forward to a substantial growth in wages, whereas the baby boom

generation may suffer because the              small   succeeding    cohort     reduces    the

return on capital.

       The OG model produces strikingly different results than one would

obtain in a partial equilibrium analysis (say, a trend extrapolation of the

type used by the Social Security Administration). This is                       due   to   the

endogenous factor prices. If one took wages and interest rates as given, a

22 For proof, recall the analysis of µ -shocks, where anticipation effects did not arise.
                                      1t
This point is worth noting because the prediction of higher savings is specific to the OG
approach. If one assumed Ricardian bequests instead, a fertility decline would likely
trigger a slight decline in savings; see Cutler et al. (1990).



                                              21
small workforce would leave retirees unaffected, it would make workers

worse off because of higher taxes, and since workers would save less, it

would make future generations worse off. If one accounts for factor price

effects, however, the partial equilibrium results are reversed. The impact

of   factor   price    movements   dominate      the   fiscal   impact    of    labor    force

changes.

       The latter finding relies, of course, on the general equilibrium

properties     of     this   particular    two-period      OG    model.        Perhaps   most

significantly, the factor price effects would be smaller if the elasticity

of factor substitution were higher, e.g., with CES-technology. This and

other robustness issues are examined in Section 6.23

       Third, returning to Table 1 (Panel C), consider a shock to the number
             ^ ^
of retirees, φ t=φ ut. A large number of retirees directly reduces retiree

consumption because the old have to spread their capital income over a

longer period (or in case of annuitized savings, over more people). Capital

investment and worker consumption are also reduced to the extent that an

increased     retiree-worker    ratio     triggers     higher    payroll       taxes.    Thus,

defined-benefits social security helps to share the risk of shocks to the

length of life across cohorts.

       Fourth, consider a current shock to φ et, the expected length of life

(“life expectancy”) in period t+1. Table 1, Panel D shows that current

life-expectancy has an impact on the young, who will experience a longer

life, but no impact on the old (π c2φe=0, as in the case bt shocks). Looking

forward, a lagged length-of-life shock matters through its impact on the

actual number of retirees (φ t+1), like the unexpected shock φ ut+1. The young



23 To avoid clutter, I proceed with the basic model and defer all extensions and empirical
issues.



                                            22
have an incentive to increase their savings and to reduce their current

consumption (π kφe>0, π c1φe<0).24 This risk is not shared with the old.

       Finally, consider the capital and productivity coefficients in Table

1, Panel E. Not surprisingly, a high capital-labor ratio raises capital and

labor incomes, hence consumption and savings. This makes kt autocorrelated

and   propagates   shocks.   Productivity      shocks   have   a   negative   impact   on

consumption and capital when scaled by productivity (c1t/At, c 2t/At, and kt)

because a rise in At raises output less than one-for-one. In level terms,

however, a positive shocks to at raises consumption (c1t, c 2t) and the per-

capita savings kt⋅At.

       Since a shock to productivity affects the capital-labor ratio like an

unexpected shock to the workforce, one may wonder to what extent the µ1t and

at shocks have similar effects. If social security is small (θ≈0), positive

shocks to at and µ1t will indeed increase retiree consumption by the same

amount (1+π c2a=π c2µ1 for θ=0). They have very different effects on current

workers, however, since an increase in At raises the wage while a rise in

NWt reduces the wage rate. For θ>0, at and µ1t shocks also have different

effects on retirees because they have            different     distributional   effects

through social security.


3.2. Variable Benefits

The analysis so far has shown that most shocks affect different generations

differently or even in opposite directions. This suggests some scope for

improved risk sharing. The section examines how the allocation of risk is

modified by policies with variable social security benefits.




24 The overall effects of increased life-expectancy over time could be traced out as in
Table 2, but the results would just confirm the increase in savings and the reduction in
per-capita consumption.



                                          23
       Alternative policies are defined by their elasticity coefficients π βz,

i.e., by how the replacement rate β responds to different shocks. Table 2

shows how the equilibrium dynamics of consumption and capital investment

are affected in general by alternative π βz-values. To help interpret the

general results, Table 3 displays the elasticity coefficients corresponding

to   the   four     main    policy    alternatives--the            DB,   DC,    privatized,       and

conditionally prefunded social security systems--in the numerical example.25

       In general, the elasticity formulas in Table 2 include the                                 same

elements as the corresponding formulas in Table 1, but there are additional

terms that capture the effects of a changing replacement rate. The policy

coefficients are generally weighted by the size of government transfers

relative to the cohort’s income, which is γ c2β for retirees and -θ/(1-θ) for

workers. For workers, the impact is then divided between consumption and

savings in proportions ∆ c:∆ k.

       Any policy that reduces prospective benefits when the birth rate

declines   and/or     the      life-expectancy        rises   is    characterized       by   policy

coefficients      π βb1>0   and/or   π βφe1<0.    A    pure   defined-contributions          system

would have π βµ1=π b1=1 and π βφu=π βφe1=-1. Since U.S. retirees have generally

been protected against unexpected shocks, the U.S. system seems to maintain

defined    benefits     with    respect   to     unexpected        changes     (π βφu=π βµ1=0),    but

allows benefits to change after a phase-in, suggesting π βb1≠0 and π βφe1≠0.

The tax increases and the trust fund buildup since 1983 suggests that the

U.S. system is somewhere between a DC and a DB system with respect to

anticipated changes, i.e., 0<π βb1<1 and 0>π βφe1>-1. These stylized facts are

captured by the conditionally prefunded system (“Prefunded” in Table 3).




25 The numerical example is broadly indicative of how the elasticities compare in general.



                                                 24
For the numerical illustration of this system, I assume π βb1=0.5 and π βφe1=-

0.5.

        In case of shocks to the workforce, Table 3 (Panel A) shows that

defined contributions and privatized systems magnify the negative exposure

of workers to such shocks as compared to the DB case. They also magnify the

positive exposure of retirees. Table 2 (Panel A) shows that this is true in

general, whenever π βµ1>0 and π βb1>0. In addition, π βb1>0 increases workers

instantaneous      negative    response   to     birth   rate    shocks     (π kb<0    rises    in

absolute value; see Table 2, Panel B). By making the capital-labor ratio

more volatile, π βb1>0 also exposes future generations to more risk. These

observations reinforce the insights from Table 1: Large cohorts are already

demographically disadvantaged at fixed benefits (DB). Hence, a policy of

giving    them   reduced      benefits    in    order    to     stabilize     tax      rates   is

counterproductive.26

        In case of shocks to the current length of life, a system of defined

contributions leaves the old more exposed and allocates less risk to the

young than a DB system: In Table 2 (Panel C), if π βφe1<0 and/or π βφu<0, then

π c1φu, π c1φe1, π kφu, and π kφe1 are all lower in absolute value, whereas π c2φu

and    π c2φe1 are increased. With        a    DC   system,   length-of-life          risk   falls

entirely on the old. The policy                coefficient    π βφe1   also   influences       how

period-t voters response to news about changes in the future length of life

(φ et-shocks; see Table 2, Panel D). If workers anticipate reduced future

benefits, they save more (π βφe1<0 raises π kφe) and consume less (π βφe1<0

reduces π c1φe).

        Table 2 provides several additional insights. First, the government

can influence the propagation of shocks through the capital-labor ratio

26 This verdict may raise questions about the welfare criterion. This will be addressed
below.



                                               25
(π kk) by making benefits a function of kt-1 (setting π βk≠0; see Panel E).

Second, the government can influence the incidence of productivity shocks

by varying π βa. Third, note that for π βb=π βφe=0, only the workers bear the

risk of “bad” news about birth rates and life-expectancy (see Panels B and

D). By setting π βb,π βφe≠0 the government could spread such risks over young

and old. This is not done under any of the policies discussed above.

      Overall,   Table    3    provides    a   comparison      of        the    main    policy

alternatives. Under DC and private savings systems, all length-of-life risk

is carried by the old and none by the young. The DB and prefunded systems

shift some of these risks to the young. Under DC and private savings

systems, birth rate uncertainty and other shocks to the workforce have a

positive impact on the old but a negative                 impact    on    the    young.   This

negative comovement of worker and retiree consumption is reduced by the DB

and prefunded systems, but provided θ/(1-θ)<α, it is not eliminated.


4. Missing Annuities and Accidental Bequest

This section examines the ramifications of missing annuities and accidental

bequests.   Without   annuities,   some    shocks    to    old-age       survival      lead   to

accidental bequests (µ2-shocks). In addition, the existence of accidental

bequests affects the propagation of the shocks examined previously.

      The   macroeconomic     dynamics    of   the   log-linearized            model   without

annuities are summarized in Table 4. Recall that in the basic model, φ-

shocks reduced retiree consumption while affecting worker consumption only

through a change in taxes. In contrast, if savings are not annuitized,

fewer unexpected deaths (higher µ2ut or µ2et-1) have a direct negative effect

on the young because of reduced bequests, while the old are affected only

through changes in benefits (see Panel A). If benefits are held constant,

the consumption of the young is further reduced because of higher taxes.


                                          26
       Table 4, Panel A, also provides numerical values for the limiting

case of q≈0 and a DB social security system. For q≈0 and DB, survival

shocks affect the worker exactly like a length of live shock (see Table 1,

Panel C). The key difference is that retirees are unaffected. Hence, for

dealing with µ2-type shocks, a movement towards defined contributions or

privatization looks much more promising than for φ-type shocks.

       Table 4, Panel B, illustrates how an increase in the expected future

probability of survival (µ2e) increases workers’ incentives to save. Panels

C-G show how accidental bequests modify the other policy coefficients as

compared to Table 2.         The    modifications     are   proportional    the    ratio   of

accidental bequests to bequests plus wage income (q). If this ratio is

small,   as   one   might   expect    in    practice,     the   previous   results     remain

virtually     unchanged.    For    this    reason,   no   new   illustrative     values    are

provided.


5. Efficient Risk Sharing

If there is scope for risk-sharing, what exactly should be done? This

section derives a simple efficiency                benchmark    and   explores   its   policy

implications. In general, the set of efficient (ex-ante Pareto-optimal)

allocations can be obtained by maximizing a welfare function
                    ∞
(10)        W = E{ ∑ Ω t-1⋅Nt-1⋅Ut}
                   t=-1

with welfare weights Ω t-1>0, subject to the feasibility constraints (1)-(4)

and given K0.27 The efficiency conditions are


27 The definition of efficiency is non-trivial because one might instead consider a
welfare function with state-contingent weights. In a model without childhood period, Peled
(1982) has shown that the market allocation without government is Pareto-efficient if one
interprets generation-t individuals born in different states of nature as different
individuals and applies state-contingent weights. With a childhood period, the market
allocation is inefficient even with state-contingent weights. Moreover, Peled’s definition
is too weak here, because it would rationalize any shift of risk from current to unborn
generations as efficient (under some state-contingent welfare weights) and therefore make
the policy analysis vacuous. Readers who object on philosophical grounds to the notion of



                                              27
                                          dEtUt
(11)             Λt⋅NWt = Ω t-1⋅Nt-1⋅µ 1t⋅       ,
                                           dc1t
                                                 dU
                 Λt⋅NRt = Ω t-2⋅Nt-2⋅µ 1t-1⋅µ 2t⋅ t-1  ,
                                                  dc2t

                 and             Λt = Et[Λt+1⋅Rkt+1],

where Λt is the shadow value of the resource constraint (4). Equivalently,

(12a)            ρ1⋅(c1t)-η = Et[Rkt+1⋅ρ2⋅(c2t+1)-η ],
                                  Ω t-2
(12b)            ρ1(bt)⋅(c1t)-η =       ⋅ ρ2⋅(c2t)-η
                                  Ω t-1

define     the    efficient      linkages     of    consumption    over        time    and   across

generations.       Note   that    equation     (12a)    is   identical    to     the    individual

optimality condition (7a) for generation t’s savings with annuities. The

fundamentally new equation is (12b). It links period-t worker and retiree

consumption and it depends only on population growth and on the welfare

weights.

        For risk sharing issues,             it    is   again   useful    to    distinguish    the

economy’s perfect foresight path (obtained by setting all shocks to zero)

from the stochastic fluctuation around this path. For the log-deviations

from the perfect foresight path, equation (12b) implies
                 ^     ^            ^
(13)             c1t = c2t + γ ρ/η⋅ bt.

This is a strong restriction on the co-movements of worker and retiree

consumption: In any efficient allocation, both generations consumption must

respond in equal proportions to ALL unexpected disturbances, except to the

extent that parents’ consumption needs vary with the number of children

(bt).

        The key underlying assumption is CRRA utility, which assigns an equal

relative risk aversion to both generations. For utility functions with age-


unborn individuals may instead interpret the state-independent weights as an assumption of
“distributional neutrality,” meaning that we are looking for allocations in which the
government does not arbitrarily value individuals born in one state of nature more highly
than individuals with equal consumption born in another state.



                                                   28
dependent risk aversion, Bohn (1998a) has shown that macroeconomic risks

would be shared in inverse proportion to the relative risk aversions. The

same    would        be   true     here,   but        age-dependent       risk-aversion      would

unnecessarily complicate the analysis. Age-dependent risk aversion would

not, in any case, overturn the basic point that all risks should be shared

across generations.

        In addition to sharing risks between living generations, government

policy has the ability to re-allocate risks between current and future

generation      by    imposing     history-dependent          policies.     This   is    generally

necessary to obtain a first-best                 allocation      and   it   typically     involves

making policies a function of the capital-labor ratio kt-1 (see Bohn 1998a).

For the analysis here, making βt a function of kt-1 would be a distraction.

Instead, I focus on the necessary efficiency condition (13) when comparing

alternative social security systems. Its key implication for the elasticity

coefficients is that             for all   shocks,      the   consumption     coefficients      for

workers and retirees should be equal. The only                         exception   are    the   bt-

coefficients to the extent that expenses for children matter.

        Applied to the different demographic shocks, the optimality condition

(13) yields a set of optimal policy coefficients π *βz that are displayed in

Table 5.

        For shocks to the actual workforce (µ1t, bt-1), the optimal policy

coefficients π *βµ1 and π *βb1 are clearly negative for reasonable α and θ

values. This is true not only for α>θ/(1-θ), but even for higher θ values,

provided

(14)            α + (γ c2nw+∆ c⋅q⋅π Rk)/∆ ∗ c > θ/(1-θ).

Since   the     bracketed    term     is   positive,      this    strengthens      the   previous

observation that large cohorts are worse off than small cohorts even with



                                                 29
PAYGO-DB. Intuitively, the bracketed term captures the impact of interest

rate    movements   that       favor   small    cohorts.       In   the   numerical    example,

π *βµ1=π *βb1=-1.5 are far below zero. Applied to the current baby boom/bust

situation, this implies that benefits should be increased as the baby boom

cohort retires. This is contrary to most proposals in the current policy

debate.

        The optimal response to a current birth rate shock (bt) is somewhat

more complicated. In the formula for π *βb in Table 5, if γ c2nw-π Rk/η>0, the

positive income effect of higher future returns on capital exceeds the

substitution effect and tends to increase worker consumption. Efficiency

would call for this “windfall” to be shared with the old through higher

benefits. On the other hand, if                π βb1=π *βb1<0 takes its optimal negative

value, worker income is reduced, which would call for a benefit reduction.

The γ ρ term reflects the cost of children. If workers have higher expenses

for    more   children,    a    reduction      in    social   security    benefits     would   be

efficient. The sum of these effects has an ambiguous sign.

        In the numerical example, π *βb=0.212 is positive if π βb1=0 (e.g., with

DB), π *βb=0.441 is even higher if π βb1=1 (e.g., with DC), but π *βb=-0.131

takes a negative value if π βb1=π *βb1=-1.5 is set optimally. Intuitively, the

lagged policy response          π βb1 matters because workers’ period-t decisions

depend on how they expect to be treated by the government as retirees. If a

rise in the birth rate signals no change in future benefits (with DB) or

increased retirement benefits (with DC), workers expect to be very well off

as     retirees   and   increase       their    current       consumption.   The      optimality

condition (13) implies that the good fortune should be shared with current

retirees.     A reduced birth rate--the current U.S. scenario--would then call

for an immediate benefit cut. If future benefits are set optimally, on the



                                                30
other hand, a rise in the birth rate signals a benefit cut, and workers

will reduce their consumption. Then the optimal current policy response has

the reverse sign.

       In any case, efficiency calls for current retirees to share                                  the

impact of birth rate shocks. And unless the baby boomers are confident that

future policy-makers will follow the advice of this paper (that π *βb1<0)

rather than the thrust             of    the    current       social    security    debate    (moving

towards π βb1>0), they are well advised to reduce current consumption and to

save more.

       Next, consider length-of-life shocks without impact on                              accidental

bequests     (φ ut,   φ et-1).    Recall       that    in    a   DB    system    both    generations’

consumption falls in response to an increase in the length of life. The

optimal policy response therefore depends                        on    the    relative    impact.   For

reasonably small θ values, the old are more affected than the young (recall

Table 1, Panel C). Then the benefits to the old should be increased in

response to longer life expectancy, i.e., π *βφu=π *φe1>0. In the numerical

example, π *βφu=π *φe1=1.647 is indeed far above zero.

       Without annuities, the results are different. With defined benefits,

only the young would bear the cost of survival shocks (µ2ut, µ2et-1). A

benefit reduction, π *βµ2u=π *µ2e1<0, is therefore efficient. Provided µ2 and q

are small enough that γ c2β > q·µ2/(1-µ2)⋅θ/(1-θ), the optimal policy is in

the range -1 < π *βµ2u=π *µ2e1 < 0, so that efficiency calls at most for a

partial movement to DC. In the numerical example, one finds π *βµ2u=π *µ2e1=-

0.389.

       Overall, if one asks the broad question of how social security should

respond to lower mortality per se, the right answer is that it depends on

the   type    of   shock.    If    the     type       is    unknown,    the     large    positive   π *-



                                                      31
coefficient for φ-shocks in the numerical example as compared to the small

negative coefficient for µ2-shocks suggests that there is no strong case

for a benefit reduction.

      Finally, for shocks to current life-expectancy (φ et and µ2et), recall

that both shocks reduce the consumption of the young without                  directly

affecting the old (See Table 1, Panel D; Table 4, Panel B). Hence, the

optimal policy response is to reduce the benefits to the old, π *βφe<0 and

π *βµ2e<0.28 Intuitively, increased life-expectancy requires resources in the

future, so that the young need to save more. For the old to share the

burden, current social security benefits should be reduced immediately.

This conclusion applies regardless of the state of annuity markets.

      In the current reform debate, many proposals call for a reduction in

benefits as mortality declines, e.g., by increasing the retirement age. The

analysis here suggests that the efficiency of such benefit cuts depends

importantly on their timing. Cuts are efficient if they are imposed quickly

(at time t, π *βφe<0), but not if they are imposed so late that they fall on

the longer-lived cohort itself (at time t+1, π *βφe1>0). None of the systems

discussed in the current reform debate is efficient in this sense, nor is

the current policy debate moving in the direction of cutting benefits to

current retirees.


6. Extensions and Empirical Issues

The magnitude of factor price movements in response to demographic shocks

was a key issue in the analysis above. Is the model consistent with the



28 In the numerical example, one finds π*
                                               βφe=-0.76 if πβφe1=0 and π βφe=-1.14 if
                                                                           *
πβφe1=π βφe1=1.647. Without annuities, π βµ2e=-0.057 if πβµ2e1=0 and π βµ2e=-0.146 if
       *                                  *                              *
πβµ2e1=π*βµ2e1=-0.389. The πβφe1 and πβµ2e1 coefficients matter because workers take the
expected future policy response to any shock to life-expectancy into account when they
decide about their consumption (as explained in the case of bt shocks).



                                          32
empirical evidence? Are there natural extensions of the model that would

yield different results? To address these concerns, this section comments

on the empirical evidence and on some extensions of the model.


6.1. Empirical Evidence

The most direct way to settle questions about the factor price effects of

demographic change would be to refer to empirical evidence, if convincing

evidence were available. This is not the case, however. The main problem is

that for generational issues, a single observation takes 20-30 years of

data. In terms of generational time units, we have only 2-3 observations

for the U.S. economy with social security, perhaps 4-5 for countries like

Germany. Even the idea of retirement--that it is normal for non-disabled

adults to stop working just because of their age--is fairly novel. Hence,

there   are     no   time    series    data    of   sufficient      length      and    stationarity

(without      serious       structural       breaks)     to     allow   credible        statistical

inferences.29

        There    is,    however,      some    indirect    evidence      about    the    impact   of

demographic changes on wages. First, there is a large literature on cross-

country growth that suggests a negative                       correlation    between    population

growth (or fertility) and per-capita income (notably Mankiw et al, 1992;

see also Cutler et al. 1990). Assuming near-constant labor shares (Cobb-

Douglas production), this suggest a negative correlation between population

growth and wages.30

        Second, there is a labor economics                     literature    examining    linkages

between demographics and relative wages (e.g., Welch, 1979; Berger, 1985;


29 Poterba (1998) makes similar arguments.
30 There is some debate about the strength of this relation; see Barro and Sala-i-Martin
(1995) and Temple (1998). While cross-sectional evidence is attractive to circumvent the
lack of multi-generation time series, it also raises new concerns about causality and
control variables. Hence, the evidence should be interpreted cautiously.



                                                 33
Easterlin, 1987; Murphy and Welch, 1992; Macunovich, 1998).31 Easterlin and

Macunovich focus almost exclusively on demographics and argue that the

effects are large. Welch (1979) and Berger (1985) find significant negative

effects of cohort size on cohort wages, though they disagree about the

persistence over a worker’s career. Murphy and Welch (1992) argue that

demographic variables are only a minor determinant of relative wages, but

even they find non-trivial cohort effects.

      To be conservative, I will focus on Welch (1979) and Murphy-Welch

(1992). Welch’s (1979) elasticity estimates for the “persistent” impact of

cohort-size (narrowly defined as a 5-year age window) on annual wage income

are around -0.20, with some variation across education categories. Murphy

and Welch’s simulations (1992, p.324) imply that a 20% increase in the

number   of   young   workers    reduces   their   wages   by   6-15%,   suggesting   an

elasticity of relative wages in the range -0.30 to -0.75.

      For comparison, the OG model assumes an elasticity of wages with

respect to the aggregate workforce of -α or about -0.33, a value well

within the range of elasticities above. Moreover, if capital-owners have

some ability to substitute labor across narrowly defined age cohorts, the

elasticity of wages with respect to the aggregate workforce should be at

least as high as the relative-supply elasticities. Thus, the assumptions of

the OG model are not inconsistent with the labor economics evidence.

      Finally, I should comment on the relation between demographics and

the return on capital. The recent review by Poterba (1998) finds little

evidence of a systematic relation. Poterba suggests that this may be due to

the   small    number   of      generational    degrees    of   freedom.   Theoretical

considerations suggest an additional rationalization: If old capital is a

31 This literature should also be interpreted cautiously. Despite the richness of panel
data, the data provide aggregate information about only 1-2 generations.



                                           34
large share of the total return               (if    (1-δ)/Rk   is    near   one),      then   the

elasticity of Rk with respect to the capital-labor ratio is small and may

be difficult     to    detect   empirically.32        Thus,   the    inability     to   find    an

empirical link between demographics and stock returns is not inconsistent

with the model.


6.2. CES-Production

From a theoretical perspective, the magnitude of factor price movements

depends importantly on the elasticity of factor substitution. By assuming

Cobb-Douglas    technology,      the   analysis      above    implicitly     assumes     a     unit

elasticity. An elasticity of factor                 substitution     above   1.0   will      imply

smaller factor price changes than with Cobb-Douglas, and hence, a different

allocation of risk. To examine the importance of this issue, this section

replaces Cobb-Douglas by CES production.

       For this section only, let output be produced with a CES-technology,

Yt = [α ϕ ⋅Kt1/(1-ϕ)+(1-α ϕ )⋅(At⋅NWt)1/(1-ϕ)]1-ϕ , where         ϕ is the elasticity of

substitution between capital and labor, and 0<α ϕ <1. Cobb-Douglas technology

is   covered   as     the   limiting   case    ϕ→1.     Leaving      all   other   assumptions

unchanged (and setting µ2=1 for simplicity), the economy is still a Markov

process with unchanged state variables, but with modified dynamics.

       Table 6 summarizes the consumption and investment dynamics with CES-

production. The key difference to Table 2 is that the elasticities of the

wage and the return on capital with respect to movements in the capital-

labor ratio are scaled down by a factor ϕ.33 In the young generation’s


32 For annual data, Bohn (1998c) suggest (1-δ)/Rk ≈ 85% so that π ≈0.10. (In the numerical
                                                                 Rk
example, the role of δ was ignored for simplicity.) The same argument suggests that the
transmission of demographics to the stock market may occur in part through variations in
the value of old capital (say, if 1-δ is stochastic), and not only through the production
function. This is an open question left for future research.
33 A variable factor share also complicates the calculation of the old generation’s income
and it alters the propagation of shocks.



                                              35
response to birth rate shocks, α is replaced by α/ϕ, and in π Rk, (1-α)/ϕ

replaces (1-α), where α is now the steady state capital share.

       The impact of birth rate and other workforce shocks on the fortunes

of differently-sized cohorts now depends on the relation between α/ϕ to

θ/(1-θ). Given a defined-benefit social security system, unexpected shocks

to the labor force are beneficial to a small cohort if and only if

(15)          α/ϕ > θ/(1-θ).

For elasticity values ϕ<1, this inequality is satisfied even more clearly

than for Cobb-Douglas. To overturn (15), one would have to argue that the

capital-labor elasticity is far above one. In the numerical example with

θ=15% and α=1/3, one would need an elasticity above 1.88. The empirical

production literature suggests, however, that the elasticity is probably

below rather than above one (e.g., Lucas 1969). Hence, it is difficult to

question (15) on the basis of production theory.

       Outside the model, one might think of international capital and labor

movements    as   factors   that     could    weaken    the    link    between        U.S.   factor

supplies    and   factor    prices.    If     one     interprets      1/ϕ     more    broadly     as

parametrizing     the   magnitude     of    factor     price   movements       in     response    to

demographic change, increased openness might be interpreted as an increased

ϕ-value.    Feldstein    and   Horioka       (1980)    have    documented,       however,       that

international      savings-investment          linkages        have         historically        been

unimportant, justifying a closed economy analysis.34

       Thus, concerns that the Cobb-Douglas assumption might over-emphasize

factor   price    movements    are    probably       unwarranted.      Based     on    production




34 Also, openness would presumably matter most if demographic change abroad were
orthogonal to the U.S. But many other countries are undergoing a similar demographic
transition as the U.S.



                                               36
function estimates, Cobb-Douglas might even understate the factor price

movements, which would give small cohorts an even better starting position.


6.3. Elastic Labor Supply

Elastic labor supply is another consideration that could change the impact

of demographics. The most serious concern is that if small cohorts supplied

more labor, birth rate changes would have a reduced impact on the capital-

labor ratio and on factor prices.

      A complete model with endogenous labor supply would complicate the

analysis too much to fit into this already long paper. Some results can be

obtained quite easily, however. Assume DB social security and Cobb-Douglas

technology. Then at any level of per-capita labor supply, a large cohort

will face a lower after-tax wage than a smaller cohort if and only if the

inequality α>θ/(1-θ) is satisfied. Thus, large cohorts face a relatively

reduced opportunity set. This shows that labor supply considerations cannot

overturn   the   basic    qualitative      finding       that   large   cohorts     are

demographically disadvantaged for α>θ/(1-θ).

      Quantitatively, the implications of a variable labor supply depend on

a tradeoff between income and substitution effects. The negative income

effect of a low wage may induce a large cohort to work more, while the

negative   substitution   effect   would     encourage     taking   leisure.   If   the

substitution effect is weak, a variable labor supply might even magnify

movements in the effective capital-labor ratio.


6.4. Time-Aggregation

Factor price changes and cohort welfare may also be affected by time-

aggregation. If one used a more elaborate model of the life-cycle with

multiple working-age periods, large and small cohorts might overlap in the

labor force, leading to reduced fluctuations in the labor force and in the


                                        37
retiree-worker ratio. In addition, “middle-aged” workers might supply both

capital and labor, which would reduce the welfare-impact of factor price

changes.35 Are such extensions likely to overturn the results obtained here?

       A   more    disaggregate          approach     would    clearly      yield     different

quantitative implications, but it is doubtful that these modifications will

overturn any important results. To see why, first consider labor supply.

Suppose one started out with, say, cohorts defined by the year of birth.

Then the significance of being in a small or large birth cohort depends on

the persistence of birth rate shocks and on the substitutability of wages

across birth cohorts. If workers of different age are close substitutes,

wage   movements    are    small     unless     the     aggregate     labor       force   varies

significantly. And if shocks are temporary, they would have little impact

on the labor force. The baby boom/bust phenomenon suggest, however, that

demographic    shocks     have    enough    persistence       to   matter    at    generational

frequencies.      And    the     labor     literature     (see     above)     suggests       that

substitution across cohorts is not perfect.

       To sidestep any controversy about relative wage effects, assume for

the sake of argument that all workers are perfect substitutes.36 If small

and large cohorts overlap in the labor force, it is true that the magnitude

of wage fluctuations would be less than in a crude model that abstracts

from   such   overlap.    However,       the   same    overlap     would    also    reduce   the

fluctuations in the PAYGO tax rate, and by the same percentage. Provided

α>θ/(1-θ), changes in the workforce still affect wages more than taxes.

Thus, an overlap of large and small cohorts in the workforce is unlikely to

affect the relative importance of fiscal versus factor price effects.

35 I would like to thank Kevin Murphy, the discussant, for raising this issue. Kevin also
raised the issue of retirees receiving labor income, but I doubt that this is
quantitatively as significant.
36 Otherwise, even changes in narrowly defined cohorts would have factor price effects.



                                               38
      Second, consider the issue of middle-aged            workers    receiving     both

capital and labor income. This issue is not about the size of factor price

changes but about their welfare impact. Members of a large cohort are less

worse off than in the basic model, if they receive some of the high capital

incomes generated by their own large cohort size. Note, however,                    that

demographically driven changes in the return to capital were only one of

several “transmission mechanisms” in the analysis above. Smaller cohorts

would be better off than large ones even if the return on capital were held

constant. To make large cohorts better off, the demographic effects trough

the return to capital would have to outweigh the effects through the after-

tax wage. Empirically, most of the gross return on aggregate capital on an

annual basis is due to the value of old capital (see above). The “within-a-

generation” elasticity of Rk with respect to the capital-labor ratio is

therefore   likely   small.   In   addition,   households     tend    to   accumulate

financial assets fairly late in their careers (Poterba 1998). Hence, the

receipt of capital income by worker households is unlikely to overturn the

results from the basic OG model.


7. Conclusions

The paper examines demographic uncertainty in a neoclassical growth model

with overlapping generations. I compare the allocation of risk implied by

alternative social security policies to the ex-ante efficient allocation.

The policy answers depend significantly         on   how   strongly   factor      prices

respond to demographic change. For plausible tax rates and elasticities of

factor substitution, small cohorts are         actually    better    off   than    large

cohorts even in a defined benefits social security system. This is because

small cohorts enjoy favorable wage and interest rate movements. Benefit




                                        39
cuts and/or pre-funding in response to an unexpected decline in the birth

rate would be inefficient.

        The      efficient     responses         to    changes        in     life-expectancy            depend

significantly on the type of change. If individuals know that the will live

longer    or     if   fair    annuities     are       available       to     diversify         the    risk     of

unexpected deaths, a longer life-expectancy should trigger an increase in

retirement benefits to those who live longer, but a benefit reduction to

the previous cohort. Reduced benefits to those who expect to live longer

are     efficient      only    if   increased          old-age        survival         leads    to     reduced

accidental bequests to the next generation.

        Overall,       the    efficiency     analysis          yields       policy      conclusions          that

differ significantly from the proposals                         in    the    current         reform    debate.

Notably,      the     efficient     response      to       a   baby    boom       is    to     increase      the

retirement benefits of the baby boomers, even at the cost of tax increases

to the baby bust generation; and the efficient response to news about

increased future life-expectancy is to cut benefits to current retirees.

        With regard to birth rate shocks, I obtain conclusions that differ

from    the    conventional       wisdom,    because           my    analysis      includes          endogenous

factor price movements. Factor price effect are largely ignored in the

current policy debate. The Social Security Administration, for example,

makes     long      run   projections       of    future        wages       and    interest          rates     by

extrapolating past trends. The analysis of this paper suggests that the

omission of endogenous factor price movements is seriously misleading under

empirically realistic parametric assumptions.




                                                      40
                                      References

Abel, Andrew, 1998, The Aggregate Effects of Including Equities in the
   Social Security Trust Fund, mimeo, University of Pennsylvania.
Abel, Andrew, 1999, The Social Security Trust Fund, The Riskless Interest
   Rate, and Capital Accumulation, Paper presented at the NBER Conference
   on Risk-Aspects of Investment-based Social Security Reform.
Altonji, Joseph, Fumio Hayashi, Laurence Kotlikoff,                      1996,    Risk    Sharing
   between and within Families, Econometrica 64, 261-294.
Barro, Robert, and Xavier Sala-i-Martin, 1995, Economic Growth, New York:
   McGraw-Hill.
Berger, Mark, 1985,     The    Effect    of    Cohort        Size   of   Earnings      Growth:   A
   Reexamination of the Evidence, Journal of Political Economy 93, 561-573.
Bohn, Henning, 1997, Social Security Reform and Financial Markets, in:
   Steven Sass and Robert Triest (eds.), Social Security Reform: Links to
   Savings, Investment, and Growth, Boston: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston,
   193-227.
Bohn, Henning, 1998a, Risk Sharing in a Stochastic Overlapping Generations
   Economy, mimeo, University of California Santa Barbara.
Bohn, Henning, 1998b, Will Social Security and Medicare Remain Viable as
   the   U.S.   Population    is    Aging?”,       Paper     presented    at     the   Carnegie-
   Rochester Conference on Public Policy.
Bohn, Henning, 1998c, Should the Social Security Trust Fund hold Equities?
   An Intergenerational Welfare Analysis, mimeo, University of California
   Santa Barbara.
Congressional Budget Office, 1998, Social Security Privatization and the
   Annuities Market, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Cutler, David, James Poterba, Louise Sheiner, and Lawrence Summers, 1990,
   An Aging Society: Opportunity or Challenge? Brookings Papers on Economic
   Activity, 1-56.
Diamond,   Peter,   1965,    National    Debt       in   a    Neoclassical       Growth   Model,
   American Economic Review 55, 1126-1150.
Easterlin, Richard, 1987,          Birth and Fortune: The impact of numbers                      of
   personal welfare, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2nd ed.
Feldstein, Martin, and C. Horioka, 1980, Domestic Savings and International
   Capital Flows, Economic Journal 90, 314-329.




                                              41
Lucas, Robert, 1969, Labor-Capital Substitution in U.S. Manufacturing, in
   Arnold Harberger and Martin Bailey (eds.), The Taxation of Income from
   Capital, Washington: Brookings Institution, 223-274.
Macunovich, Diane, 1998, Relative Cohort Size and Inequaliy in the United
   States, American Economic Review 88, 259-264.
Mankiw, Gregory, David Romer, and David Weil, 1992, A Contribution to the
   Empirics of Economic Growth, Quarterly Journal of Economics 107, 407-
   437.
McHale, John, 1999, The Risk of Social Security Benefit Rule Changes: Some
   International Evidence, Paper presented at the NBER Conference on Risk-
   Aspects of Investment-based Social Security Reform.
Murphy, Kevin, and Finis Welch, 1992, The Structure of Wages, Quarterly
   Journal of Economics 107, 285-326.
Peled, Dan, 1982, Informational Diversity over Time and the Optimality of
   Monetary Equilibria, Journal of Economic Theory 28, 255-274.
Poterba,    James,   1998,    Population     Age   Structure     and    Asset     Returns:    An
   Empirical Investigation, NBER Working Paper No. 6774.
Shiller,     Robert,      1998,     Social        Security      and      Institutions        for
   Intergenerational,        Intragenerational      and     International    Risk    Sharing,
   Paper presented at the Carnegie Rochester Conference on Public Policy.
Smetters,   Kent,    1997,    Investing    the     Social    Security     Trust    Fund   into
   Equities: Unmasking the Large Hidden Actuarial Tax Liabilities on Future
   Generations, mimeo, Congressional Budget Office.
Smetters, Kent, 1999, Arbitrage Pricing of Unfunded Pension Guarantees:
   Rationale and Computations, Paper presented at the NBER Conference on
   Risk-Aspects of Investment-based Social Security Reform.
Smith, Alasdair, 1982, Intergenerational Transfers as Social                        Insurance,
   Journal of Public Economics 19, 97-106.
Storesletten, Kjetil, Chris Telmer, and Amir Yaron, 1998, The Risk-Sharing
   Implications      of   Alternative      Social      Security        Arrangements,      Paper
   presented at the Carnegie-Rochester Conference on Public Policy.
Temple, Jonathan, 1998, The New Growth Evidence, mimeo, Oxford University.
Welch, Finis, 1979, Effects of Cohort Size on Earnings: The Baby Boom
   Babies’ Financial Bust, Journal of Political Economy 85, S65-S97.




                                             42
       Table 1: Macroeconomic Dynamics with Defined-Benefits




Impact on            Elasticity Coefficients                            Numerical
                     (Symbols defined below)                             Example

Panel A. Shocks to the current workforce, µ1t and bt-1:

  Retirees:           π c2µ1 = π c2b1 = γ c2nw > 0                        0.436
                                                  θ
                      π c1µ1 = π c1b1 = -∆ c⋅[α-    ]
  Workers:                                       1-θ                     -0.131
                                                         θ
                             is negative, provided α >     .
                                                        1-θ
                                                θ
                      π kµ1 = π kb1 = -∆ k⋅[α-    ] < 0
  Investment:                                  1-θ                       -0.235

Panel B. Shocks to the current birthrate, bt:

  Retirees:           π c2b = 0                                             0

  Workers:            π c1b = (1-∆ c⋅(c1/A)/y1)⋅(γ c2nw-π Rk/η+γ ρ/η)     0.080

  Investment:         π kb = -∆ k⋅(c1/A)/y1⋅[γ c2nw-π Rk/η+γ ρ/η]        -0.240

Panel C. Shocks to the current length of life, φ ut and φ et-1:

  Retirees:           π c2φu = π c2φe1 = -γ c2φ < 0                      -0.769
                                                θ
                      π c1φu = π c1φe1 = -∆ c⋅      < 0
  Workers:                                     1-θ                       -0.147
                                              θ
                      π kφu = π kφe1 = -∆ k⋅      < 0
  Investment:                                1-θ                         -0.265

Panel D. Shocks to life expectancy (future length of life), φ et:

  Retirees:           π c2φe = 0                                            0

  Workers:            π c1φe = -(1-∆ c⋅(c1/A)/y1)⋅ γ c2φ <0              -0.288

  Investment:         π kφe = ∆ k⋅(c1/A)/y1⋅ γ c2φ >0                     0.865

Panel E. Changes in lagged capital and productivity, kt-1 and at:

  Retirees:           π c2k = -π c2a = γ c2k >0                           0.333

  Workers:            π c1k = -π c1a = ∆ c⋅α >0                           0.278

  Investment:         π kk = -π ka = ∆ k⋅α >0                             0.500
Notes to Table 1:
1. The impact on retirees, on workers, and on investment refers to the
impact of the shock(s) named in the panel header on the variables
  ^        ^          ^
(c1/A)t, (c2/A)t, and kt. Since these variables are scaled by the
productivity trend At, the coefficients for productivity shocks at are
negative. The impact of productivity shocks on consumption and investment
levels, 1+π c2a>0, 1+π c1a>0, and 1+π ka>0, are nonetheless positive.
2. The last column refers to the elasticity values in the numerical example
described in the text.

3. Variables without time subscripts refer to the steady state. The symbols

not already defined in the text are as follows:
           δ⋅k/an
δ* =                   ∈(0,1), share of old capital in retiree income.
       (c2/A)⋅φ/(1+nw)

γ c2k = (1-δ*)⋅α+δ* ∈(0,1), impact of a higher capital-labor ratio on the old.
                              θ⋅(1-α)    (1-δ*)⋅(1-α)⋅α⋅(1-θ)
γ c2nw = 1 - γ c2k - (1-δ*)⋅           =                      ∈(0,1), impact of a
                             α+θ⋅(1-α)        α+θ⋅(1-α)

        higher current labor force on the old.
                     θ⋅(1-α)
γ c2φ = 1 - (1-δ*)⋅           ∈(0,1), impact (absolute value) of a longer life
                    α+θ⋅(1-α)

        span on the old.

π Rk = (1-δ/Rk)⋅(1-α) ∈(0,1), impact (absolute value) of a higher capital-

        labor ratio on the return to capital.

y1 = w/A⋅(1-θ), income of the young scaled by productivity.
                   [γ c2k+π Rk/η]
∆c =                                            >0, marginal effect on consumption
     (c /A)/y ⋅[γ c2k+π Rk/η+γ c2β⋅π βk] + k/y1
       1      1


     when the income of the young rises.
                         1
∆k =                                            >0, marginal effect     on   capital
     (c1/A)/y1⋅[γ c2k+π Rk/η+γ c2β⋅π βk] + k/y1

        investment when the income of the young rises.
     Table 2: Dynamics with variable Social Security Benefits


Impact on         Elasticity Coefficients

Panel A. Shocks to the current workforce, µ1t and bt-1:

  Retirees:       π c2µ1 = γ c2nw + γ c2β⋅π βµ1,         π c2b1 = γ c2nw + γ c2β⋅π βb1
                                    θ          θ                            θ          θ
                  π c1µ1 =-∆ c⋅[α-    ]-∆ c⋅     ⋅π      π c1b1 = -∆ c⋅[α-     ]-∆ c⋅    ⋅π
                                             1-θ βµ1                                  1-θ βb1
  Workers:                                           ,
                                   1-θ                                     1-θ
                                    θ          θ                           θ          θ
                  π kµ1 = -∆ k⋅[α-     ]-∆ k⋅    ⋅π      π kb1 = -∆ k⋅[α-     ]-∆ k⋅     ⋅π
                                              1-θ βµ1                                1-θ βb1
  Investment:                                        ,
                                   1-θ                                    1-θ

Panel B. Shocks to the current birthrate, bt:

  Retirees:       π c2b = γ c2β⋅π βb

  Workers:        π c1b = (1-∆ c⋅(c1/A)/y1)⋅[γ c2nw-(1-δ/Rk)⋅(1-α)/η+γ ρ/η]
                                         θ
                                 - ∆ c⋅    ⋅π  + (1-∆ c⋅(c1/A)/y1)⋅ γ c2β⋅π βb1
                                        1-θ βb

  Investment:     π kb = -∆ k⋅(c1/A)/y1⋅[γ c2nw-(1-δ/Rk)⋅(1-α)/η+γ ρ/η]
                                         θ
                                 - ∆ k⋅    ⋅π   - ∆ k⋅(c1/A)/y1⋅ γ c2β⋅π βb1
                                        1-θ βb

Panel C. Shocks to the current length of life, φ ut and φ et-1:

  Retirees:       π c2φu = -γ c2φ + γ c2β⋅π βφu,         π c2φe1 = -γ c2φ + γ c2β⋅π βb1
                                  θ           θ                           θ           θ
                  π c1φu = -∆ c⋅      - ∆ c⋅    ⋅π       π c1φe1 = -∆ c⋅      - ∆ c⋅    ⋅π
                                             1-θ βφu                                 1-θ βφe1
  Workers:                                          ,
                                 1-θ                                     1-θ
                                 θ           θ                           θ           θ
                  π kφu = -∆ k⋅      - ∆ k⋅     ⋅π       π kφe1 = -∆ k⋅      - ∆ k⋅     ⋅π
                                            1-θ βφu                                 1-θ βφe1
  Investment:                                        ,
                                1-θ                                     1-θ

Panel D. Shocks to current life-expectancy, φ et:

  Retirees:       π c2φe = γ c2β⋅π βφe
                                                                            θ
                  π c1φe = -(1-∆ c⋅(c1/A)/y1)⋅(γ c2φ -γ c2β⋅π βφe1) - ∆ c⋅    ⋅π
                                                                           1-θ βφe
  Workers:
                                                                      θ
                  π kφe = ∆ k⋅(c1/A)/y1⋅(γ c2φ -γ c2β⋅π βφe1) - ∆ k⋅    ⋅π
                                                                     1-θ βφe
  Investment:

Panel E. Changes in lagged capital and productivity, kt-1 and at:

  Retirees:       π c2k = γ c2k + γ c2β⋅π βk,     π c2a = -γ c2k + γ c2β⋅π βa
                                        θ                               θ
                  π c1k = ∆ c⋅α - ∆ c⋅     ⋅π , π c1a = ∆ c⋅α - ∆ c⋅      ⋅π
                                       1-θ βk                          1-θ βa
  Workers:
                                        θ                               θ
                  π kk = ∆ k⋅α - ∆ k⋅        ⋅π , π ka = -∆ k⋅α - ∆ k⋅      ⋅π
                                       1-θ βk                          1-θ βa
  Investment:

Notes: The notation is as in Table 1. In addition, define
                 θ⋅(1-α)
γ c2β = (1-δ*)⋅           >0.
                α+θ⋅(1-α)
      Table 3: Alternative Policies in the Numerical Example



Panel A. Shocks to the workforce, µ1t and bt-1:

Alternative Systems:        DB               DC          Privatized       Prefunded     Prefunded

     Shock to:         µ1t or bt-1      µ1t or bt-1      µ1t or bt-1         µ1t           bt-1

Policy coefficient           0              1.0              N/A              0             0.5

Impact on Retirees        0.436            0.667            0.667           0.436          0.551
                                                         (=DC Case)       (=DB Case)    (in between)

Impact on Workers        -0.131           -0.278           -0.278          -0.131         -0.204
                                                         (=DC Case)       (=DB Case)    (in between)

Impact on Investment     -0.235           -0.500           -0.500          -0.235         -0.368



Panel B. Shocks to the length of life, φ ut and φ et-1:

Alternative Systems:        DB               DC          Privatized       Prefunded     Prefunded

     Shock to:         φ ut or φ et-1   φ ut or φ et-1   φ ut or φ et-1      φ ut          φ et-1

Policy coefficient           0             -1.0              N/A              0            -0.5

Impact on Retirees       -0.769            -1.0              -1.0          -0.769         -0.885
                                                         (=DC Case)       (=DB Case)    (in between)

Impact on Workers        -0.147              0.0              0.0          -0.147         -0.074
                                                         (=DC Case)       (=DB Case)    (in between)

Impact on Investment     -0.265              0.0              0.0          -0.265         -0.111



Notes: The notation is as in Tables 1-2.

For DB, DC and privatized social security, µ1t & bt-1 and                      φ ut &   φ et-1,

respectively, have the same effects.

In the conditionally prefunded system, policy coefficients are generally in

the range π βb1∈(0,+1) and π βφe1∈(-1,0). For the numerical example, I use

+0.5 and -0.5, respectively.
    Table 4: Macroeconomic Dynamics without Annuities Markets



Impact on         Elasticity Coefficients                                       Numerical
                                                                                 Example


Panel A. Shocks to retiree survival without annuities, µu2t and µe2t-1:

  Retirees:       π c2µ2u = γ c2β⋅π βµ2u,  π c2µ2e1 = γ c2β⋅π βµ2e1                 0
                                              θ/µ2·(1-α)
                      where γ c2β = (1-δ*)⋅                   >0
                                             α+θ/µ2·(1-α)
                                                        µ       θ
                  π c1µ2u = -∆ c⋅[(1-q)⋅(1+π βµ2u)+q· 2 ]⋅         ,
  Workers:                                            1-µ2 1-θ                   -0.147
                                                          µ        θ
                  π c1µ2e1 = -∆ c⋅[(1-q)⋅(1+π βµ2e1)+q· 2 ]⋅
                                                         1-µ2 1-θ
                                                      µ        θ
                  π kµ2u = -∆ k⋅[(1-q)⋅(1+π βµ2u)+q· 2 )⋅         ,
  Investment:                                        1-µ2 1-θ                    -0.265
                                                         µ       θ
                  π kµ2e1 = -∆ k⋅[(1-q)⋅(1+π βµ2e1)+q· 2 )⋅
                                                       1-µ2 1-θ

Panel B. Shocks to future retiree survival without annuities, µe2t:

  Retirees:       π c2µ2e = γ c2β⋅π βµ2e                                            0

  Workers:        π c1µ2e = -(1-∆ c⋅(c1/A)/y1)⋅(1/η-γ c2β·π βµ2e1)                -0.125
                                              θ
                                    - ∆ ∗ c·
                                             1-θ βµ2e
                                                ·π


  Investment:     π kµ2e = ∆ k·(c1/A)/y1⋅(1/η-γ c2β·π βµ2e1)                       0.375
                                              θ
                                    - ∆ ∗ k·
                                             1-θ βµ2e
                                                ·π

Panel C. Shocks to the current workforce, µ1t and bt-1:*

  Retirees:       π c2µ1 = γ c2nw + γ c2β⋅π βµ1,π c2b1 = γ c2nw + γ c2β⋅π βb1
                                                        θ/µ2·(1-α)
                      where γ c2nw = (1-δ*)·(1-α -                     ) > 0
                                                       α+θ/µ2·(1-α)
                                                        θ             θ
                  π c1µ1 = -∆ c⋅[(1-q)⋅α+q·π Rk-(1-q)      ] - ∆ c*⋅    ⋅π
                                                                     1-θ βµ1
  Workers:
                                                       1-θ
                                                        θ             θ
                  π c1b1 = -∆ c⋅[(1-q)⋅α+q·π Rk-(1-q)      ] - ∆ c*⋅    ⋅π
                                                       1-θ           1-θ βb1
                                                       θ             θ
                  π kµ1 = -∆ k⋅[(1-q)⋅α+q·π Rk-(1-q)      ] - ∆ k*⋅     ⋅π
                                                                    1-θ βµ1
  Investment:
                                                      1-θ
                                                       θ             θ
                  π kb1 = -∆ k⋅[(1-q)⋅α+q·π Rk-(1-q)      ] - ∆ k*⋅     ⋅π
                                                      1-θ           1-θ βb1
Table 4 (continued):

Panel D. Shocks to the current length of life, φ ut and φ et-1:*

  Retirees:         π c2φu = -γ c2φ + γ c2β⋅π βφu, π c2φe1 = -γ c2φ + γ c2β⋅π βb1
                                                  θ/µ2·(1-α)
                    where γ c2φ = 1-(1-δ*)·                     > 0
                                                 α+θ/µ2·(1-α)
                                      θ                                 θ
  Workers:          π c1φu = -∆ ∗ c·     ·(π βφu+1), π c1φe1 = -∆ ∗ c·     ·(π βφe1+1)
                                     1-θ                               1-θ
                                     θ                                 θ
  Investment:       π kφu = -∆ ∗ k·     ·(π βφu+1), π kφe1 = -∆ ∗ k·      ·(π βφe1+1)
                                    1-θ                              1-θ

Panel E. Shocks to the current birthrate, bt:*

  Retirees :        π c2b = γ c2β⋅π βb
                                                                                       θ
                    π c1b = (1-∆ c⋅(c1/A)/y1)⋅[γ c2nw-π Rk/η+γ ρ/η+γ c2β⋅π βb1]-∆ c*⋅     ⋅π
                                                                                      1-θ βb
  Workers:
                                                                                     θ
                    π kb = -∆ k⋅(c1/A)/y1⋅[γ c2nw-π Rk/η+γ ρ/η+γ c2β⋅π βb1] - ∆ *k⋅    ⋅π
                                                                                    1-θ βb
  Investment:

Panel F. Shocks to the future length of life, φ et:*

  Retirees:         π c2φe = γ c2β⋅π βφe
                                                                                 θ
                    π c1φe = -(1-∆ c⋅(c1/A)/y1)⋅(γ c2φ -γ c2β·π βφe1) - ∆ c*⋅      ⋅π
                                                                                1-θ βφe
  Workers:
                                                                          θ
                    π kφe = ∆ k·(c1/A)/y1⋅(γ c2φ -γ c2β·π βφe1) - ∆ ∗ k·
                                                                         1-θ βφe
  Investment:                                                               ·π

Panel G. Changes in lagged capital and productivity, kt-1 and at:*

  Retirees          π c2k = γ c2k + γ c2β⋅π βk, π c2a = -γ c2k + γ c2β⋅π βa
                                                        θ
                    π c1k = ∆ c·[(1-q)⋅α+q·π Rk]-∆ c*⋅     ⋅π
                                                       1-θ βk
  Workers:
                                                          θ
                    π c2a = -∆ c·[(1-q)⋅α+q·π Rk]-∆ c*⋅      ⋅π
                                                        1-θ βa
                                                       θ
                    π kk = ∆ k·[(1-q)⋅α+q·π Rk]-∆ k*⋅     ⋅π
                                                      1-θ βk
  Investment:
                                                         θ
                    π ka = -∆ k·[(1-q)⋅α+q·π Rk]-∆ k*⋅      ⋅π
                                                       1-θ βa

Notes:
1. The notation is as in Tables 1-2, except for the following symbols:

      q = Q1/(w⋅(1-θ)+Q1) = share of bequests in worker’s income;

      ∆ c*=∆ c⋅(1-q), ∆ k*=∆ k⋅(1-q).

* As in Table 2, but with modified coefficients if q≠0 or µ ≠0.
                                                           2
     Table 5: Optimal Policy Responses to Demographic Shocks



Policy response to changes in the current workforce:
                             γ c2nw+∆ c⋅q⋅π Rk + ∆ *c⋅[α-θ/(1-θ)]
      π *βµ1 = π *βb1 = -
                                       γ c2β+∆ *c⋅θ/(1-θ)

Policy response to changes in the current birthrate:

                       (c1/A) γ c2nw-π Rk/η+γ c2β⋅π βb1        (c1/A)      γ ρ/η
      π *βb =(1-∆ c⋅         )⋅                         - ∆ c⋅        ⋅
                         y1      γ c2β+∆ *c⋅θ/(1-θ)              y1 γ c2β+∆ *c⋅θ/(1-θ)

Policy response to changes in the current length of life:
                         γ c2φ -∆ *c⋅θ/(1-θ)
      π *βφu = π *βφe1 =
                         γ c2β+∆ *c⋅θ/(1-θ)

Policy response to changes in current retiree survival without annuities:
                                ∆ c⋅[1-q+q·µ2/(1-µ2)]⋅θ/(1-θ)
      π *βµ2u = π *βµ2e1 = -
                                       γ c2β+∆ *c⋅θ/(1-θ)

Policy response to changes in the future length of life:

                          (c1/A)      γ c2φ -γ c2β⋅π βφe1
      π *βφe = -(1-∆ c⋅          ) ⋅
                            y 1      γ c2β+∆ *c⋅θ/(1-θ)

Policy response to changes in future retiree survival without annuities:

                           (c1/A)      1/η-γ c2β⋅π βµ2e1
      π *βµ2e = -(1-∆ c⋅          ) ⋅
                             y1       γ c2β+∆ *c⋅θ/(1-θ)




Note: The notation is as in              Tables     1-2     and   4.   The   stars   (*)   denote

efficient values.
         Table 6: Macroeconomic Dynamics with CES-Production


Impact on          Elasticity Coefficients

Panel A. Shocks to the current workforce, µ1t and bt-1:

  Retirees:        π c2µ1 = γ c2nw + γ c2β⋅π βµ1, π c2b1 = γ c2nw + γ c2β⋅π βb1
                                  α      θ             θ
                   π c1µ1 = -∆ c⋅[ -        ] - ∆ c⋅       ⋅π
                                                     1-θ βµ1
  Workers:
                                  ϕ    1-θ
                                  α     θ             θ
                   π c1b1 = -∆ c⋅[ -       ] - ∆ c⋅       ⋅π
                                  ϕ   1-θ           1-θ βb1
                                 α      θ           θ
                   π kµ1 = -∆ k⋅[ -        ] -∆ k⋅       ⋅π
                                                   1-θ βµ1
  Investment:
                                 ϕ    1-θ
                                 α      θ           θ
                   π kb1 = -∆ k⋅[ -        ] -∆ k⋅       ⋅π
                                 ϕ    1-θ          1-θ βb1

Panel B. Changes in lagged capital and productivity, kt-1 and at:

  Retirees:        π c2k = γ c2k + γ c2β⋅π βk,       π c2a = -γ c2k + γ c2β⋅π βa
                                         θ                                     θ
                   π c1k = ∆ c⋅α/ϕ-∆ c⋅     ⋅π ,     π c1a = -∆ c⋅α/ϕ - ∆ c⋅     ⋅π
                                        1-θ βk                               1-θ βa
  Workers:
                                         θ                                   θ
                   π kk = ∆ k⋅α/ϕ-∆ k⋅        ⋅π ,   π ka = -∆ k⋅α/ϕ - ∆ k⋅      ⋅π
                                        1-θ βk                              1-θ βa
  Investment:




Notes:
1. The notation is as in Tables 1-2, except for the following symbols:
                 α ϕ ⋅(k/an)ϕ
      α =                         = average capital share
           α ϕ ⋅(k/an)ϕ + 1-α ϕ
           β⋅(w/A)
      β* =             /(1-δ*) = share of old income that is wage-indexed
            (c2/A)

      γ c2k = (1-δ*)⋅[α+(1-α-β*)⋅(ϕ-1)/ϕ] + δ*
                                                       θ⋅(1-α)
      γ c2nw = (1-δ*)⋅ {1-α - (1-α-β*)⋅(ϕ-1)/ϕ -                }
                                                      α+θ⋅(1-α)

      π Rk = (1-δ/Rk)⋅(1-α)/ϕ

2. For the impact of shocks not listed here, the formulas in Table 2 apply

      with the modified symbols defined here.
      Figure 1: Consumption Responses to a Birth Rate Shock

   6.0%



   4.0%



   2.0%



   0.0%



  -2.0%



  -4.0%



  -6.0%



  -8.0%
            t-1      t      t+1     t+2      t+3    t+4     t+5     t+6

                  Generation i Consumption when Young (Period i)
                  Generation i Consumption when Old (Period i+1)


Notes: The bars show the percentage deviations of consumption from the

steady state in response to a one-time, 20% reduction in the birth rate in

period t, applied to the parameter values of the numerical example with

defined benefits social security system.

The responses are collected by generation, not by period. The responses

under generation i=t+2 refer, e.g., to the changes in c1t+2 (generation t+2

when young) and c2t+3 (generation t+2 when old).
Figure 2: Response of the Capital-Labor Ratio to a Birth Rate Shock




   8.0%


   7.0%


   6.0%


   5.0%


   4.0%


   3.0%


   2.0%


   1.0%


   0.0%
             t      t+1     t+2     t+3      t+4        t+5   t+6    t+7



Notes: The bars show the percentage deviations of the capital labor ratio

kt from its steady state in response to a one-time, 20% reduction in the

birth rate at in period t, applied to the parameter values of the numerical

example with defined benefits social security system.
