                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              THE RISK OF SOCIAL SECURITY
                                BENEFIT RULE CHANGES:
                             SOME INTERNATIONAL EVIDENCE


                                             John McHale


                                         Working Paper 7031
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w703l


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 1999




My thanks go to John Campbell, Martin Feldstein, Estelle James, and Janos Kornai for very helpful
comments. A special thanks goes to the discussant David Wise for his suggestions and encouragement. The
comments of participants at the Reform of the Welfare State seminar at Harvard University, the pre-
conference in Cambridge, and the actual conference in Florida are also appreciated. The views expressed
in this paper are those of the authors and do not reflect those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 1999 by John McHale. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Risk of Social Security Benefit Rule Changes:
Some International Evidence
John McHale
NBER Working Paper No. 7031
March 1999

                                            ABSTRACT

       Against a background of projections of sharply increasing elderly dependency rates, workers
in the major industrial economies are apprehensive that their social security benefit entitlements will
be cut before or after they retire, leaving them with inadequate retirement income. This paper looks
at recent benefit rule changes in the G7 countries to see what can be learned about such political risk
in PAYG pension systems. From this small sample, I find that projections of rising costs under
current rules are inducing reforms, and that these reforms often have a major impact on the present
discounted value of promised benefits for middle-aged and younger workers. Usually, however, the
benefits of the retired and those nearing retirement are protected. The phasing in of benefit cuts
raises the question as to why younger workers are willing to take significant cuts in their implicit
wealth while protecting the currently old. One possible answer is explored through a simple model:
these workers fear even larger cuts in their benefits if the tax burden on future workers rises too high.


John McHale
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer 230
Cambridge, MA 02138
jmchaleharvard.edu
1. Introduction,
          Issues of risk are, understandably, receiving a lot of attention in the debate over

the relative merits of investment-based (IB) and pay-as-you-go (PAYG) social security

systems. The risks to retirement income associated with lB systems are well known, and

at least partly offset the attractiveness of their higher expected returns relative to a PAYG

system.2 Yet PAYG systems are not free from risk either. An important source of risk

associated with these more traditional social security systems is commonly referred to as

political risk—defined here to be the risk that benefit rules will be changed through the

political process before or during your retirement, thereby changing the value of

retirement benefits. For the United States, evidence that people perceive such a risk

comes from opinion surveys that show low confidence in the ability of Social Security to

pay them the benefits due to them under current rules, although those surveyed do expect

to receive some benefits (see Reno and Friedland, l997). It is also interesting to note

how the reform debate has been framed in terms of "saving Social Security," especially

after President Clinton's 1998 State of the Union speech, which had saving the program

as its centerpiece. In part, this is an attempt to take make use of risks people perceive

about the sustainability of current rules to spur reform.

          Under the social security benefit rules for current retirees, the share of state-

funded pension expenditures in GDP are set to rise as populations in the major industrial




2
      Geanakopolos et al. (1998) and Feldstein and Ranguelova (1998) for different
    See
perspectives on how risk affects the attractiveness of lB systems.
  Interestingly, although respondents claimed to have low confidence in Social Security,
they still expressed strong support for the program.

                                                                                                2
economies becone older.4 Population aging is most pronounced for Germany and Italy,

where it is projected that there will be one person over 65 for every two people of

working age by 2030, compared to roughly one in four at present. If current high levels

of pension generosity were maintained,5 old age cash benefits would grow to account for

almost one quarter of GDP in both countries. In the other G7 countries, were projected

aging is not as pronounced and/or current pension benefits are less generous, projected

GDP shares are lower, although the increases are still considerable in some cases. These

projections of more costly state pension programs have led to concerns about increased

labor market distortions (including higher unemployment), inadequate national saving

and declining returns on contributions for future generations of workers. Another

possibility, however, is that greater costliness under current rules will lead to changes to

those rules and, unless replacement provision is made, inadequate retirement incomes for

current workers. Indeed, rule changes that reduce future benefits are not just something

that might happen in the future. A number of countries, including Germany and Italy,

have already responded by legislating downward adjustments to future benefit generosity.

       While reasonably easy to describe, political risk of this kind is hard to quantify.

The problem is similar to the problem of estimating credit (or default) risk on fixed-

income assets; history is a poor guide to the probabilities and sizes of infrequent discrete

adjustments. Nonetheless, given the importance of political risk to economic




 Population aging will become pronounced after about 2010 because of the retirement of
the post-World War H baby boom generation and the fall in fertility rates in recent
decades. Populations are also aging because of increased longevity.
  Generosity is defined here as the ratio of the average benefit per elderly person to GDP
per working age person. I elaborate on this in Section 2.

                                                                                               3
comparisons of risky retirement income systems and to an understanding of the political

economy of reform, it is important to have at least a sense of what these risks are.6

        This paper takes a small step in assessing political risk. To see what can be

learned about the effect on future benefits of the type benefit reforms that have been

pursued in recent years, I examine redefinitions of PAYG benefit rules in the G7

countries from the mid-1980s through the mid-l990s. Until recent decades, rule changes

tended to make systems more generous rather than less. This was possible because

favorable demographics (as baby boom generations entered the labor forces) and the

immaturity of earnings-related pension systems made obligations under existing rules

easily affordable.7 Now that rapid population aging is on the horizon and most systems

are mature, reform efforts are now aimed at curtailing program costs. Recent rule

changes have included increases in retirement ages (especially for women), changing the

way post-retirement benefits are indexed, and increasing the number of.years of earnings

included in the calculation of the initial benefit.8 To gauge the impact of these reforms,



6 A common measure of the return (or money's worth) on PAYG contributions is the
ratio of the present discounted value of benefits to the present discounted value of
contributions (see Geanakoplos et al. (1998). From the perspective of a worker at a
particular point in time, there are a number of factors that make this return uncertain. The
worker does not know with certainty his or her subsequent earnings profile, date of
retirement, tax rates, length of life, rules for defining benefits, and so on. For this paper, I
concentrate on the numerator of this return measure—the present discounted value of the
stream of benefits. Moreover, to focus on the effects of changes in benefit rules, I assume
fixed expectations for the earnings profile, retirement date and length of life. The extent
of this political risk depends, then, on the impact of various discrete rule changes on the
stream of benefits and the probabilities of those changes.
   Small numbers of people were eligible for full pensions, while the contributor pools
 were large. As a consequence, low tax rates could support quite generous state pensions.
 8 In this paper, I concentrate on reforms to the benefits rules of PAYG systems in the 07.
 Other major reforms aimed at curbing future tax increases include efforts to pre-fund
 future benefit obligations (Canada, Japan, and the United States) and allowing workers to
 Continued...
                                                                                              4
my approach is to estimate the change in the present discounted value of the benefits an

"average" household can expect to receive—or gross social security wealth (SSW)—as a

result of a reform.

        The results from this small sample show that benefit rule changes that

substantially reduce SSW are not unusual responses to projections of sharply rising costs

15 to 30 years into the future. In some cases, the reforms do reduce the SSW of workers

who are already at retirement age, although the sizes of the reductions are typically small.

More often, however, the reforms are phased in so that their main burden does not fall on

the currently retired or those close to retirement. Young and middle-aged workers appear

to be willing to accept large reductions in their gross social security wealth while

protecting the currently old. Assuming the reforms are fully phased in by the time the

worker retires, reductions in SSW of between one quarter and one third have not been

uncommon. For middle-aged workers, this almost certainly means a loss of net social

security wealth as well,9 since they are unlikely to benefit to a great extent from resulting

lower contribution rates given how the benefit cuts are phased in. One possible

explanation for this apparent sacrifice is that these workers see future political risk as

related to the size of future contribution rates. By reducing the burden on future

 generations of workers through legislated future benefit cuts (and/or pre-funding through

 tax increases as in the U.S.), it might be that they hope to stem even more draconian cuts

 later on.


 partially opt out of the state system into occupational and personal saving schemes
 (United Kingdom).
  Net social security wealth is defined as the difference between the present discounted
 value of expected benefits less the present discounted value of the expected future social
 security taxes (see Feldstein, 1974).

                                                                                                5
       These calculations show that governments have responded to projections of sharp

increases in dependency rates by curbing future benefit promises. It is not clear, however,

how much of the adjustment to the projected demographic trends have already been

made, and what further adjustments are still to come. A number of factors point to the

likelihood of significant further cuts. First, even with the recent reforms, the costs of

state pension systems are still projected to rise steeply in most countries. Second,

governments have proved willing and able to curb future benefit promises when they

threaten to become too costly—which is probably the main message of this paper. And

third, proposals for additional reforms are being formulated and debated in most

countries.10

        The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 outlines how demographics and the

maturing of benefit systems are creating financial problems in industrial country social

security systems, and documents that these looming strains have not significantly reduced

the generosity benefits for current beneficiaries. Section 3 then describes the mainly

forward-looking reforms that have taken place in the I 980s and 1 990s, and estimates their

impact on SSW. In Section 4, I use a simple political economy model to help think about

the puzzle of why self-interested current workers are willing to accept large cuts in their

benefits while protecting the currently old. Section 5 concludes with some comments on

how the response to population aging of cutting PAYG benefits might affect the adequacy

 of retirement income in the future, and on the possibility of replacing rather than simply

 reducing retirement income using a mandatory lB system.


 '°When assessing the overall risk of future benefit rule changes, we must also keep in
 mind that, while we are sure that dependency rates will increase sharply over the next 30
 years, there is uncertainty about what the exact dependency rates will be.
 Continued...
                                                                                              6
                p



Section 2. Demographic Trends, Pension Generosity and Fiscal Strains

       It is well known that under current benefit rules spending on state pensions as a

share of economy will grow dramatically as populations age.' This will impose a heavy

burden on future workers if they are willing to meet this higher cost, in part because of

the expanded distortions brought about by the higher required taxes. If they are not

willing to meet this tax burden, future retirees (that is, current and future workers) are

faced with the prospect of having inadequate retirement incomes. One might expect that

this prospect would lead to a cut in the generosity of current benefits. Such a cut would

free up tax revenues to use to pre-fund future benefits, or at least provide a better return

on the taxes that are paid (for any given future benefits).

        Figures la to ig show that there has not been any significant scaling back in the

generosity of benefits during the 1980s and 1990s. The figures use the fact that the cost

rate for state pensions (i.e., the state pension expenditure to GDP ratio) can be

decomposed into the product of the elderly dependency rate and the benefit rate. The

elderly dependency rate that is used is the ratio of the population aged 65 or older to the

population aged between 15 and 64. And the implied benefit rate is then the ratio of the

benefit per elderly person to GDP per working age person.




 " See, for example, OECD (1997) and the papers collected in Bosworth and Burtless.
 (1998).

                                                                                               7
         Expenditure = Elderly Population x Expenditure/Elderly Population
(2.1)
            GDP       Working Age Population GDP/ Working Age Population

                        = Dependency Rate x Benefit Rate



Care must be taken in interpreting the benefit rate as a measure of generosity. The

denominator in the average benefit expenditure calculation is the number of elderly

(defined as those 65 and over) and not the number of retirees. Of course, people younger

than 65 can be retired and receiving benefits and not all of those over 65 are retired. This

broad generosity measure has the advantage, however, that it captures both the ease of

eligibility for benefits (including the ability to access benefits at younger ages) and the

average level of benefits paid to those who are actually retired. To see this, note that that

the broad generosity measure can be decomposed as,



                            Expenditure/Elderly Population
(2.2)     Benefit Rate =
                            GDP/Working Age Population

                                 Retirees           Expenditure/Retirees
                        =                      x
                            Elderly Population GDP/ Working Age Population



Other things equal, the system will tend to become more generous if there is a trend

toward early retirement12 andlor if the benefits paid to the retired rise relative to income

per working age person.




12 Gruber and Wise (1998) document a strong trend toward early retirement in the
industrialized economies.

                                                                                               8
       The expnditure data used in the calculations are from the OECD Social

Expenditure (SOCX) database, and include all public old age cash benefits. Survivors'

benefits are not included for these calculations, although I consider them briefly below.

For the United States, to take an example, this comprehensive measure includes

retirement benefits paid by the Social Security and public employee retirement systems,

means-tested benefits paid under Supplemental Security h1come (SSI), and benefits paid

through a number of smaller programs.'3



[Figures la to ig about here]



       Over this period, the implied generosity of benefits has been in a range of 20 to 25

percent in Canada, Japan and the United States, a bit more than this in the United

Kingdom, and in a higher range of 35 to 50 percent in France, Germany and Italy. The

most generous benefits in this sample were recorded in Italy in 1993 at almost 50 percent.

The least generous were in Canada in 1980 at just less than 20 percent. Generosity in

Canada, France and Italy has risen over the period (in the latter two quite sharply), has

been reasonably stable in Germany and Japan, and has fallen in the United States.



13
  These expenditures are only part of the state expenditures that are set to rise as
populations become older. Another important category of spending that is positively
related to the elderly dependency rate is medical care. Kornai and McHale (1999) present
time series and cross section evidence that the total health spending per person is
positively related to the elderly dependency rate with an elasticity of between 0.1 and 0.2.
They also report regressions that show that the share of total health spending undertaken
by the public sector is positively related to the elderly dependency rate. A one percentage
point increase in the elderly dependency rate is associated with roughly a 3 percentage
point increase in the share of total spending undertaken by the public sector, although the
size of the coefficient is sensitive to specification.

                                                                                            9
Generosity endeI up higher in the United Kingdom, following an increase rise in the

implied benefit rate betweenl988 and 1991.     '
        The combination of generosity and demographics led the expenditure to GDP

ratio to drift upwards or remain stable in all countries. The real action, however, is still to

come as post-war baby boomers begin to retire. Table 1 a shows what projected increases

in elderly dependency rates would imply for the cost of old age benefits if 1995 benefit

rates were maintained. (Table lb shows how adding in survivors' benefits changes these

projections.) These mechanically projected trends in this cost rate are quite startling in

some cases. At 1995 levels of generosity, old age benefits account for close to a quarter

of GDP in Germany and Italy. hi France, given somewhat less pronounced aging, these

pensions account still account for more than 17 percent of GDP. The shares in 2030 are

considerably lower in the remaining four countries, primarily because they start with

lower shares; although even for these countries, there is close to a doubling of the share of

the economy devoted to state pensions. Japan is an interesting case because the aging of

its population leads the other countries, but the severity of its problem is still notably less

than the large continental European countries by 203O.'


'   Given that benefit generosity is usually based on a comparison of benefits with the
wages rather than GDP per working age person, it is helpful for getting an intuitive sense
of the generosity involved to divide the benefit rate by the labor share of GDP. The result
can be interpreted as the ratio of the benefit per elderly person to the wage per working
age person. I calculate this labor share as 1 minus the capital income share as reported by
the OECD (1998). For 1995 the labor shares were: 0.677 for Canada, 0.589 for France,
0.637 for Germany, 0.577 for Italy, 0.682 for Japan, 0.676 for the United Kingdom, and
0.638 for the United States. The implied benefit rates expressed as a percentage of wage
income per working age person were: 36.7% for Canada, 75.7% for France, 7 1.3% for
Germany, 8 1.8% for Italy, 39.4% for Japan, 39.3% for the United Kingdom, and 43.7%
for the United States.
15
   OECD projections for Japan after 2030 indicate that the share of state pension
expenditure continues to rise until 2050, reaching about 16 percent of GDP (OECD,
 Continued...
                                                                                              10
[Table la about here]



[Table lb about here]



       These mechanical projections are based on the assumption that the cost rate rises

at the same rate as the elderly dependency rate. To get a better sense of how the cost rate

has varied with the dependency rate across the OECD over the recent past, I used a simple

log-linear OLS regression using a the SOCX data for a pooled sample of OECD countries

for the period 1980 to 1995. The basic regression equation is:



               (Exp \ Constant      ( Population 65
        (2.3) Log)   =         +/3Log15 Population 64



The results are reported in Table 2. The coefficient on the demographic variable is highly

significant in the regressions without country dummies.'6 The addition of other potential

determinants of generosity—GDP per capita, the share of the population living in urban

areas and the share of women in the labor force—have little effect on the size or

significance of the demographic variable. The regressions (without country dummies)

show that a 10 percent higher elderly dependency rate is associated with a more than 16

percent higher expenditure to GDP ratio. This non-linear relationship might be explained


 1997). For the other G7 countries the OECD projections show a leveling off or even a
fall in this share after about 2040.



                                                                                           11
by the increased political influence of the elderly as they grow in numbers—an influence

that is surely set to grow. However, given what this relationship implies about the future

share of total income going to state retirement benefits, it is hard to believe that such a

relationship can persist. For instance, if this relationship were to hold for Italy, the share

of old age cash benefits alone would rise to 36 percent of GDP by 2030! Nonetheless, the

regression results do suggest how difficult a task it will be to hold the growth the

expenditure share below the growth in the elderly dependency ratio.



[Table 2 about here]



[Figure 2 about here]



          The main focus so far has been on recent trends in state pension spending, and the

future implications for this spending if current levels of generosity are maintained. The

picture of limited reform hides the anticipated impact of already legislated on future

benefits and thereby on future generosity. In the next section, I will attempt to estimate

the impact of these reforms on the social security wealth for certain stylized individuals

 and households. Before doing so, it is instructive to look at the projected aggregate

 implications of the legislated future changes. This is done in Table 3. For each country

 the first line shows the percentage change in the expenditure to GDP ratio for various

 years relative the level of that ratio in 1995. The second line shows the OECD

 projections of the percentage change in the ratio taking into account changes to benefit


 '   With country dummies the coefficient is significant at the 5 percent level, but size of
 Continued...
                                                                                               12
rules that have leen already legislated. Caution must be used in interpreting this

comparison since the definitions of state pensions used do not coincide exactly (see the

note to the table). The basic trend is clear, however: already legislated changes appear to

have significantly curbed the future expansion of state pensions as a share of the

economy. What are these legislated changes? And what impact do they have on the

benefits that people can expect to get when they retire? I provide tenative answers to

these questions in the next section.



[Table 3 about here]



Section 3. Recent Reforms, and their Impact on Social Security Wealth

3.1 Assumptions

        My goal in this section is to get a sense of the magnitudes of changes to SSW that

have resulted from recent reforms. Of course, a given reform will affect different people

differently, depending on such factors as gender, age, dependents, place in the earnings

distribution, age-earnings profile, and so on.

        The approach I adopt is to look at the impact on some "average" households.

Characterizing these individuals requires a number of assumptions, and thus should be

only seen as suggestive of the impact of the reform on workers around the middle of the

earnings distribution. I make six main assumptions:

 1. The worker earns the average production wage (as defined by the OECD) at age 4517


 the coefficient on the dependency rate variable is much smaller.
 17
    The OECD defines an Average Production Worker (APW) as "an adult full-time
 production worker in the manufacturing sector whose earnings are equal to the average
 Continued...
                                                                                           13
2. The worker's age-earnings profile is based on that estimated by Mincer (1974)18 using

   cross sectional U.S. data.'9 Mincer's cross sectional estimate is combined with

   Assumption 1 and data on real earnings/wage growth from the llvIF's International

   Financial Statistics (or the World Bank's World Tables for Italy), to produce a

   stylized age-earnings profile.20 It is important to have some estimate of the age-

   earnings profile, since different countries use different averaging procedures in

   assessing relevant lifetime earnings.2'

3. Expected length of retirement (assuming retirement at the standard retirement age) is

   based on average life expectancy for workers of given ages at the age at the time of

   the reform, and is taken from the United Nations Demographic Yearbook (1996) or

   the OECD Health Data (1998).

4. The household is not entitled to any means-tested retirement benefits. This allows us

   to concentrate on universal flat-rate benefits and earnings-related benefits. Since I

    concentrate on workers earning the average production wage, this is probably realistic

    in most cases. Clearly, my estimates are a poor guide to the effect of reforms on low-


earnings of such workers [male and female]" OECD (1995). The values for the wage of
an APW are taken from the OECD publication The Tax/Benefit Position of Production
Workers, various editions.
18 Also see Berndt (1991, Chapter 5)
19 The assumed profiles are based on the following equation:
 in Earnings = k + O.O8lAge — 000l2Age2. To determine the value of k, the earnings of an
average production worker and an age equal to 45 are substituted into the equation.
Given this value of k, the profile is traced out by varying the age.
20 The real earnings growth is based on actual numbers up to 1996. From 1997 onwards,
real earnings are assumed to grow at a rate of 1 percent per year for all countries.
21 The limitations of this assumption are obvious enough. First, age-earnings profiles
differ between countries, depending, in part, on such institutional features as union
density and deferred compensation arrangements. (See Koike, 1988, for example.)
Second, age-earnings profiles tend to be steeper for high than for low lifetime earners.
Continued.

                                                                                           14
   income indiyiduals, for whom means-tested benefits are likely to provide a significant

   portion of their retirement income.

5. The worker retires at the standard retirement age, and has sufficient years of

   contributions to be eligible for full (flat and earnings-related) social security benefits.

   The worker is not affected by maximum or minimum limits for earnings-related

   pensions.

6. The real discount rate for discounting future benefits is 3 percent.

       With these assumptions, I look at the impact of the reforms on the SSW of single

men and women who are 45 at the time of the reform. For the countries where a non-

means-tested dependent spouse allowance is available, I also note the impact on a 45-year

old man with a dependent spouse. In addition, I look at the impact of the same reforms

on men and women at their respective standard retirement ages, again assuming that these

individuals earned the average production wage when aged 45.



3.2 Stylized Benefit Formulas and Their Use in SSW Calculations

        Formulas for calculating retirement benefits differ significantly from country to

country. Nonetheless, there are a number of common elements. I will focus on three: the

standard retirement age (R); the calculation of the benefit at the time of retirement; and

the post-retirement indexation of benefits. Of these, the calculation of the initial benefit

is the least straightforward. Following the approach of the OECD (1988), I model the

calculation of the initial benefit as the sum of a flat-rate (lump sum) benefit and an




Indeed, the hump-shaped profile that I assume, tends to be more pronounced for low
income workers.

                                                                                             15
earnings-related component. The benchmark benefit equation at the initial retirement age

is,




        (3.2.1)         B(R) = B1 +/3Ea,



where B(R) is the benefit at retirement age R, Bf is the flat-rate benefit, fi is the

replacement rate,22 and E is assessed earnings. E' is some function of the annual

earnings of the various years of the individual's working life. There are two key elements

to this calculation: first, the years that are included; and second, how the earnings are

revalued based on average earnings growth. Other things equal, the greater the weight

given to peak earning years (roughly the worker's fifties given my assumed age-earnings

profile), and the more completely earnings are revalued in line with national earnings

growth (assuming this is positive), the more generous is the benefit formula.

        Once the initial benefit is set, I assume that future benefits can be calculated based

on a simple indexation rule. The benefit h years into retirement is given by,



                                           R+h

        (3.2.2)          B(R + h) = B(R) fJ(i +




22 The concept of the replacement rate—i.e., the relevant earnings that are to be
replaced—being used here is thus country specific. Since most countries under study use
earnings over a significant portion of the workers life in the calculation of assessed
earnings, the replacement rate concept is typically close to the fraction of lifetime
earnings that are being replaced. The significant exception is Italy before the 1992
reform, where assessed earnings are based only on the earnings for the five years prior to
retirement.

                                                                                            16
where i(t) is the,real indexation factor for year t. When benefits are indexed to consumer

prices, the benefit will be constant in real terms.23 When benefits are indexed to nominal

wages, the benefit will rise at the rate of real wage growth.24

       My approach is to calculate gross social security wealth (SSW) for a given benefit

formula viewed from a given age, T, during the worker's life. SSW is the present

discounted value of implied future benefits, evaluated at the given point in the worker's

life. Looked at from this age, SSW is affected by changes in the retirement age, the

benefit formula, and the post-retirement indexation of benefits. (In addition, of course, to

the discount rate for future cash flows and the expected years of retirement.) This

simplified case should give us an idea of the magnitude of wealth changes brought about

by changes in the definition of benefit rules.

        Letting H be the duration of retirement and d the discount rate, the equation for

SSWat age Tis,



                                     H B(R+h)
        (3.2.3)         SSW(T) =
                                       (1+   d)T
This formula calculates SSW based on the simplification that the length of remaining life

 in known with certainty, where that length is set equal to the average remaining life for

 someone of age T. Of course, a person's remaining life is rarely known with certainty. In




 23 From the viewpoint of a given age during the workers life, the discounted real benefit
 falls with the length of the individual's retirement.
 24 The real discounted benefit will rise (fall) with the length of the retirement if the real
 wage grows at a faster rate (slower rate) than the discount rate.

                                                                                             17
Appendix 1, I di,scuss how the certain life-span assumption can lead to a biased estimate

of SSW when the length of remaining life is uncertain.



3.3 Recent Benefit Formula Reforms in the G7 Countries and their Impact on SSW

         Over the last decade and a half or so, six of the seven major industrialized

countries have significantly redefined their retirement benefit formula. The exception is

Canada. Among the six, the reforms I will consider are France (1993), Germany (1992),

Italy (1992), Italy (1995), Japan (1994), United Kingdom (1986), United Kingdom

(1994), and United States (1983).25 These reforms range from the relatively major (e.g.,

Italy (1992) and (1995) and the United Kingdom (1994)) to the relatively minor (e.g.,

Japan (1993) and the United States (1983)).

         The stylized benefit formulas prior to the reforms used in the calculations are

 outlined in Table 4. Table 5 then outlines the reforms. It is worth noting once again that

 only a subset of possible reforms are being focused on; to wit, changes to the standard

 retirement age, the initial benefit formula for a worker earning the average wage with a

 full contribution record, and the post-retirement indexation of benefits. For example, the

 effects of changes eligibility conditions for a full pension, in the maximum or minimum

 pension, in the generosity and eligibility for means-tested benefits, in early retirement




 25
      Since the mid-1980s, a number of other OECD countries have also reformed their
 defined benefit retirement systems. Significant reforms were introduced in Australia
 (1992), Austria (1985, 1988, and 1993), Greece (1990 and 1992), Portugal (1993), and
 Sweden (1994).



                                                                                             18
benefits and corditions, in accrual rates for later retirements, and so on, are not

included.26




[Table 4 about here]



[Table 5 about here]



        As can be seen from the first column of Table 5, a number of countries (Germany,

Italy, Japan [tier 1 benefits], United Kingdom and United States) have raised their

standard retirement age, although typically with a long lead time. There has also been a

tendency for a convergence of the standard retirement ages for men and women

(Germany, United Kingdom, and Italy [Dini reforms]). Thus we will see that women

tend to lose more wealth from the reforms than identically situated men.

       France, Italy (Amato reforms) and United Kingdom have also significantly

changed the way they assess "average earnings" for their earnings-related pensions. In its

1986 reform, the United Kingdom also reduced its replacement rate from 25 percent to 20

percent. The Dini reforms in Italy went even further, by moving from an average

earnings-based method for calculating benefits to a contribution-based method.27 Beyond

its impact on SSW, this reform has the potential of reducing labor market distortions
                                                                                      by
strengthening the link between contributions made and benefits received, thereby making

contributions seem less like a tax. This reform will have quite different impacts on


26 The benefit streams are calculated before taxes. Since the United States (1983) reform
included a major change in the tax treatment of benefits, I also estimate the impact on the
stream of net of tax benefits for that reform.


                                                                                           19
employees as cojnpared with the self-employed. The reason is that the self-employed

faced lower contribution rates under the old system, so that the shift to a contribution-

based system will hurt them more.

        A number of countries have also changed the way they index benefits after

retirement. France and Italy have shifted from wage indexation to price indexation,

which leads to cumulative benefit cuts over time when real wages are growing. Germany

and Japan (for its tier 2 pensions) have changed from gross wage indexation to net wage

indexation. Given that contribution rates are expected to grow over time to meet rising

benefit costs, this reform is also a form of benefit cut. Tax rate projections are difficult to

make, but given that payroll tax rates must rise substantially (even with recent benefit

reforms) it is important to allow for the slower growth of net real wages in the

calculations. In Germany, the payroll tax is projected to rise from 18.9 percent in 1995 to

27 percent in 2030.28 If we assume that the gross real wage rises at an average annual

compound rate of 1 percent, this implies that the net real wage (assuming that non-payroll

taxes remain constant) rises at a rate of 0.7 percent. For Japan, the contribution rate is

projected to rise from 16.5 percent in 1995 to 29.5 percent in 2030.29 if we again assume

1 percent real wage growth (and constant non-payroll taxes), this implies that thenet real

wage rises at the rate 0.5 percent per year over this period.



[Table 6a about here]




27 Sweden is also moving toward such a notional defined contribution (NDC) system.
28 Franco and Munzi (1996), based on estimates made by Germany's Social Advisory
Board in 1994.


                                                                                             20
          Table 6a,contains the estimates of the changes in the present value of SSW for

 single men and women who are 45 at the time of the reform and are earning the average

 production wage. I assume that all the reforms are fully phased in by the (new) standard

 retirement age. In most cases this is accurate, but in some cases the lead times are so long

that the reforms are still a long way from being fully phased in (e.g., the Italian and US

reforms). Given the previously noted differential impact on employees and the self-

employed of the second set of Italian reforms, I include separate estimates of the change

in SSW for these two types of worker.

          The estimated losses in SSW are substantial, although, as noted above, the range is

quite large. The largest change is for men after 1992 Italian reforms (-38 percent).3°

Other big losses occurred for women in the German, Italian and UK reforms. More

generally, the impact on SSW tends to be especially large when there is a change in the

retirement age and when there is a shift from wage to price post-retirement indexation.31

Given their longer expected duration of retirement, the impact of the latter reform on

women tends to be greater than the impact of identically situated men. In addition, given

the women in some cases had a lower standard retirement age pre-reform, they have been

disproportionately targeted for standard retirement age increases in Germany and the




29
     These estimates are taken from Takayama (1996).
30
  Male Italian employees retiring at the standard retirement age appear to have gained
back some wealth in the 1995 reforms. On the other hand, women and the self-
employed—especially the latter—suffered further loses in this second round of reforms.
Moreover, Hamann (1997) estimates that male employees retiring before 63 are also net
'
losers.
  Both of these were part of the Italy (1992) reform.

                                                                                             21
 United Kingdon.32 The German reform led to just a —7.3 percent change in SSW for men,

 and a —26.2 percent change for women. The corresponding numbers for the 1994 reform

 in the United Kingdom are -5 percent and -29 percent. On the other hand, an equal

 increase in the retirement age for men and women tends to hurt men proportionately

 more. The reason is simply that men have shorter life expectancies, so that the lost

benefits represent a larger fraction of the present discounted value of the pre-reform

benefit stream. For example, the increase in the retirement age that took place as part of

the US reform reduces the SSW of men by almost one quarter while reducing the SSW of

women by 16 percent. These estimates are based on average life expectancies for a 45-

year old in the US at the time of the 1983 reform, which were 29 years for men and 34

years for women. If retirement takes place at the standard retirement age (65 prior to the

reform), these life expectancies imply pre-reform expected retirements of 9 and 14 years

for men and women respectively. Raising the standard retirementage to 67, and

continuing to assume that retirement takes place at standard retirement age, lowers the

expected retirements by 2 years for both men and women. Given the relatively short

expected retirement for men to begin with, the loss of two years means a large percentage

cut in the present discounted value of benefits.

          Of course, retirement does not always take place at the standard retirement age.

Indeed, Gruber and Wise (1998) document that in many countries most retirements take

place before the standard age, with a large number of people leaving the labor force at the

earliest possible date that they can receive benefits. For a number ofcountries, they also


32
     The shift to a contribution-based system with declining coefficients for earlier
retirements in the second Italian reform also disproportionately hurts women, given their
earlier retirement age under the older system.

                                                                                             22
 document significant use of disability and unemployment benefit programs to finance

 early retirement even when state pension benefits are not available. Given this behavior,

 it is less clear how raising the standard retirement age affects SSW. For someone who

 retirees before the standard retirement age, and continues to retire at the same age after

the standard retirement age has risen, we need to know how the increase in the standard

retirement age affects the benefits for those taking advantage of early retirement. To take

the US as an example once again, retirement benefits are available as early as age 62. A

worker availing of early retirement benefits, however, receives just 80 percent of the

annual benefit they would have received if they had waited until age 65. As we have seen

the 1983 reform will eventually increase the standard retirement age to 67, but a worker

will still be allowed to retire at 62 with permanently reduced benefits. The benefit

penalty for early retirement is now 30 percent rather than 20 percent, however. By itself,

this implies a benefit cut (for men and women) of 12.5 percent. For men in particular,

this is a smaller cut than the close to 25 percent cut (which waspredominantly due to the

increase in the standard retirement age) reported in Table 6a. This demonstrates how the

results are sensitive to the assumption we make about retirement behavior, and the

reported estimates of the impacts of raising standard retirement ages probably reflect the

upper bound of the negative impacts of such reforms.

       The second to last column of Table 6a also reports the change in SSWas a fraction

of the APW. This figure gives us another way of gauging the impact of the reform on the

worker. For example, the first number in the column can be interpretedas saying that the

1993 reform of the General Regime in France reduced the present discounted value of

future benefits (measured in 1993 money units) by an amount equal to 73 percent of the

French APW in 1.993. On this measure, the first of the Italian reforms is shown to have
                                                                                          23
been especially evere, reducing SSW (if fully phased in) by more than three times the

APW for both men and women.



[Table 6b about here]



        Table 6b contains estimates of the impact of the reforms on those who retired in

the year of the reform at the standard retirement age. With the exception of changes in

the form of post-retirement indexing, all the reforms in Table 5 are phased in, and so do

not affect the initial benefit of newly retired. For the countries that switched from wage

to price indexation—France and Italy—the estimated loss of SSW is between 6 and 11

percent, which is certainly not insignificant. Under the assumptions for tax increases

discussed above, the shift from gross wage to net wage indexation—Germany and

Japan—leads to cumulative losses of about 2 to 3 percent.

       Although the estimates of wealth changes should be seen as indicative only, the

difference between the impacts on middle-aged and younger workers on the one hand,

and the retired and those close to retirement on the other, is striking. What accounts for

this difference in treatment? One reason is almost certainly that those who are still some

distance from retirement still have the opportunity to save for retirement, so they are in a

better position to adjust to the benefit cuts. Yet these adjustments will be painful

nonetheless given the magnitude of wealth loss. Putting aside intergenerational altruism,

why is it that middle-aged workers are willing to make these adjustments instead of

forcing future workers to pay the previously promised benefits? The rhetoric of reform

debates suggests the current workers fear that, with rising dependency ratios,

overburdened future workers will redefine—or even completely eliminate—PAYG
                                                                                          24
benefit arrangements. With this in mind, the next section explores a simple model in

which self interested current workers can actually raise their expected benefitsby cutting

the benefits they promise themselves.



 Section 4. Repudiation Risk as an Inducement to Early Reform: A Simple Model

        The reform case studies produced two main findings about benefit cuts: (i) the

currently retired and those close to retirement are usually spared; and (ii) middle-aged and

younger workers can sometimes face large reductions in their implicit gross SSW. In this

section, I briefly explore one explanation for these findings with a simple model. The

idea behind the model is that workers bear a fixed cost when they cut the benefits of the

old, as well as bearing a (non-linear) cost to paying them benefits. Benefit cuts are

avoided unless benefits reach a level that makes it worthwhile to incur the fixed cost.

Once benefits are cut, the cuts can be large. If current workers believe that the benefits

they are promising themselves will trigger future reform, then it will be in their interests

to preemptively cut their own benefits.

       This model relies on the self-interest of current workers to explain why they cut

their own future benefits. The are of course other reasons to do so, such as a concern for

the fairness of the intergenerational distribution (see Kotlifoff, 1992, for a discussion of

intergenerational accounting) or a concern for economic efficiency (see Feldstein, 1996,

for an overview of the distortions caused by PAYG social security). The costs to current

generations of reducing the unfunded liability of social security are often seen, however,

as a major obstacle to reform. Thus the model suggests how reforms that are considered

good on more impartial grounds might still take place even in a world with quite partial

individuals.
                                                                                           25
         The model has the following main elements:

 • Current workers promise themselves social security benefits to be paid forby future

     workers. This is an inherited unfunded liability from the point of view of the future

     workers.

• The actual level of benefits is chosen by future workers (say because they have a

     majority). This represents political risk from the point of view of current workers.

     However, future workers face political (or repudiation) costs when they redefine the

    benefits that the retired had promised themselves; i.e., when they repudiate on part of

    the inherited liability. I assume that there is a fixed cost to repudiation and that the

    cost of repudiation rises linearly with the size of the benefit reduction. We will see

    that this gives current workers influence over the benefits they will receive. (I take it

    that the political costs are sufficiently high to prevent cutting the benefits of the

    currently retired. Attention is thus on the decision of current workers about what

    benefits to promise themselves.)

• The welfare loss to a future worker of funding benefits rises non-linearly with the

    PAYG tax they must pay.

        To solve the model, I first determine the optimal choice of benefit reduction by

the second generation of workers for a given level of the inherited unfunded liability.

There will be some maximum level of benefit that they will choose not to repudiate at all.

I show that this level is greater than the level that they would choose if they decide to

repudiate. Given that current workers anticipate the responses of future workers (there is

no uncertainty in the model), it follows that it is optimal for them to promise themselves

benefits at this "maximum" level. If the promised benefits are currently higher than this

level, it is in their interest to scale them back.
                                                                                             26
        For simpjicity, I assume that there is a single member in the (first) generation of

current workers. Each generation lives for two periods, working in the first and retired in

the second. The population grows at the rate n, so that there are 1 +n workers in the

second generation. This implies that the dependency ratio, D, in the second period is

equal to
           1+n


        There is a PAYG social security system whereby the working generation is taxed

and the tax revenue is paid out as a benefit to the retired. For a given actual benefit

payment paid to the retired, B( 1), a tax of D x B(1) is levied on each worker to ensure

budget balance.

        The current worker knows that a future worker will have utilitygiven by,




                        u=k
        (4.1)
                              _T2 — D(F —cAB) with repudiation (i.e., zlB<O)


                       and u = k —                    without repudiation (i.e., zlB=O),




where T the per worker tax, F is the total fixed cost of repudiation, and zIB is the
                                                                                       change
in benefits. Note that the adjustment cost (F —cAB) is multiplied D (=1/(1+n)) to put it

in per worker terms. Writing the benefit as the sum of the inherited unfunded liability,

B(O), and the change in that benefit, the constraint faced by the future worker is



       (4.2)           T = DB(1) = D(B(O) +

                                                                                            27
 Assuming that the future worker does repudiate, I can find what the optimal repudiation

 will be by substituting the budget balancing constraint into the utility function and

maximizing with respect to zIB. The optimal change in the benefit is,



                               C
        (4.3)           AB=——B(O),
                           aD



so that the actual benefit paid is



                                   C
        (4.4)           B(1)=—.
                             aD



       The next step is to find out when the future generation will in fact repudiate. I

assume that repudiation will take place if it increases utility (taking into account, of

course, the costs of repudiation). The repudiation condition is then,



                             1c2                        a
       repudiate if:    k+         — DF — cDB(O) > k
                                                       —D2B(O)2,



                       lc2
where I assume that —— — DF <0 (which implies that future workers have higher utility
                       2a
by not repudiating when the unfunded liability that they face is very low, as can be seen in

Figure 1).




                                                                                           28
        I now turn attention to the current worker's choice of unfunded liability to place

on the future worker. The current worker wants this to be as large as possible, so chooses

the largest B(O) that is consistent with no repudiation. This can be found by replacing the




                                                               cf cf
inequality in the repudiation constraint with an equality and solving the resulting


quadratic for B(O). The roots of this equation are:            +     and      —
                                                                                        Given


                           1 c2
that I have assumed that          —   DF <0, the first root is positive and the second is

negative. If I rule out negative benefits, then the optimal unfunded liability to place on

future workers is.




                             *           *       C
        (4.5)           B(0) = B(l)          =        +
                                                 aD       aD



That is, the benefit is equal to the repudiation benefit plus a premium that is negatively

related to the dependency ratio. The determination of the maximum future benefit

consistent with no repudiation is shown graphically in Figure 3.



[Figure 3 about here]



       The optimal benefit increases with c and F, and decreases with a and D. Smaller

repudiation costs or more distorting taxes will lower the feasible benefit for a given

dependency ratio. Most importantly, an increase in the future dependency ratio, D, will

cause current workers to cut the benefits they promise themselves.


                                                                                             29
        Figure 4 shows how the actual benefits paid, B(1), correspond to the promised



  cf
benefits, B(O). The two rise together until the repudiation threshold is reached at


    +           At that level of the unfunded liability, repudiation occurs, and actual

                   C
benefits   fall to
                 aD
                    .   This is a rather extreme form of debt "laffer curve" (as discussed in


Krugman, 1989 [1993]). Debt "forgiveness" in the sense of voluntary reducing the

unfunded liability on the next generation can actually raise the benefits received, making

both generations better off. The earlier generation receives higher benefits, and the latter

generation avoids the unpleasantness of cutting redefining benefits for the old.



[Figure 4 about here]



        We can use the PAYG budget constraint to see how the tax rate changes with the

dependency rate,



                                     c I2FD
                         T = DB(1) = —
        (4.6)
                                        a ya
                                       + .j




        Given our assumptions, current workers know that future workers will be willing

to bear part of the burden of an increase in the dependency ratio with higher tax rates.

The marginal willingness of future workers to share the burden, however, decreases with

the dependency ratio. In other words, when the dependency ratio (and thus the tax rate) is

already high, their willingness to increase the tax rate further in response to an even

higher dependency ratio is low.
                                                                                           30
        In conchjsion, this simple model produces three main results that are not

inconsistent with recent reforms. First, repudiation on retirement benefit obligations to

the currently retired should not take place even when the dependency rate is high

(assuming that this high rate was anticipated). Second, benefit promises should be

reformed in anticipation of the high dependency ratio to prevent costly repudiations. And

third, an anticipated increase in the dependency rate should lead ultimately to a mix of

lower benefits and higher taxes.



Section 5. Concluding Comments

        This paper has shown that in response to projections of sharply rising costs of

state-provided retirement income, governments have succeeded in legislating significant

cuts in future benefits. In most cases, these cuts have not been enough to stabilize the

share of GDP being spent by governments on retirement benefits, so it is reasonably safe

to predict more benefit cuts if this approach to "saving" social security programs

continues to be pursued. Although this paper has focused on attempts to scale back

PAYG programs, I conclude with some comments on the alternatives to this approach to

curbing the cost to future taxpayers.

       There are two main competing approaches:33 (i) pre-fund (using current taxes)

future defined-benefit obligations; or (ii) substitute privately pre-funded defined-

contribution (DC) accounts for these obligations—the lB option. What these approaches

have in common is that they force current workers to pay for themselves what future

workers were to have paid for. This is clear with the pre-funding of existing obligations,


  I ignore large-scale cuts in benefits to the currently or soon to be retired as an option.

                                                                                               31
but a bit obscured under the privatization option. For the US, where privatization has

received a lot of attention, there appear to be two approaches to moving to an lB system.

The substitution element is clearest is proposals to increase the payroll tax (or use the

budget surplus) to fund accounts from which the proceeds would replace an increasing

proportion PAYG benefits over time.34 The increase in the tax is temporary, as the

amount need to fund existing DB obligations declines over time as these obligations are

replaced by the proceeds from the DC accounts. The alternative approach is to shift some

or all payroll taxes into the funding of private DC accounts and to fund remaining PAYG

obligations with a combination of government debt and increases in payroll and non-

payroll taxes (such as a consumption tax).35 How much of the burden falls on current

workers depends on the split between tax increases and debt finance.36

        What I have stressed so far is how these reforms all place a burden on current

workers to partly relieve the burden on future workers. One important difference between

the cut future benefits and substitute current funding approaches might their effects on the

adequacy of future retirement income. It is possible that current workers will respond to

large cuts in the benefits they are promised by raising their private saving, thereby

maintaining their living standards (without having to work longer) in later life. But it

seems unwise to rely on this. In the countries where future benefits rules have already

been reformed substantially, do younger workers even know how much the benefits that


   See, for example, Feldstein and Samwick (1998)
   For a proposal of this type, see Kotlikoff and Sachs (1997).
36
     current taxes are not raised at all, then future tax-payers are not being helped. Instead
of having to meet unfunded social security obligations they will have to meet government
debt obligations. Thinking in terms of the model of Section 4, however, there might a
difference in the willingness to repudiate on social security obligations and the
Continued.

                                                                                            32
they should be anticipating have fallen? The advantage of pre-funding is that an

alternative (albeit potentially uncertain) source of retirement income is put in place

directly.

        This brings back to where I started and the fact that there is risk in both lB and

PAYG systems. Although there are different ways to characterize the risk, one aspect is

the possibility of having inadequate income in retirement. The main finding of this paper

is that politically imposed changes in PAYG benefit rules that have a large impact on the

flow of benefits in retirement are not just a possibility—they have already occurred in a

number of major economies. And given that costs are still set to escalate substantially, it

is almost certain that more are in store. The decision about partially or fully substituting

an lB for a PAYG system depends, of course, on more than just risk factors (notably the

impacts on economic efficiency and inter- and intra-generational distribution). In

considering reform options, however, the vulnerability of existing PAYG defined benefit

rules needs to be kept in mind.




willingness to repudiate on government debt. Thus this form of asset swap could still
benefit existing workers.

                                                                                             33
Appendix 1 A Note on the Bias Induced by the Certain Length of Life Assumption

        How serious a limitation is the assumption of a certain remaining lifetime? In

general, the expected SSW of someone with an uncertain remaining lifetime with an

expected duration of R-T+H years is not the same as the as the SSW of someone with a

certain remaining lifetime of that length. The two are equal under the following

restrictive conditions: (i) the real discounted annual benefit is constant over time (this

requires that real benefits grow at a rate equal to the real discount rate); and (ii) the

worker is certain to reach retirement age.

        The first assumption implies that SSW is a linear function of the length of

retirement. If the worker is certain to reach the retirement age, but the discounted real

benefit falls over time, so that SSW rises at a decreasing rate with the length of retirement,

then SSW will be lower under the uncertain lifetime assumption.37 In other words, the

estimate of SSW based on the certain remaining lifetime assumption is biasedupward.

On the other hand, if the discounted real benefit rises over time (which will be the case if

benefits grow at a faster rate than the discount rate), then the estimate is biased

downward.



[Figure 5 about here]




  The reasoning here is similar to that which shows that expected utility is less than the
utility of the expected income for a risk averse individual. A risk-averse individual has
diminishing marginal utility in income. In the case considered here, the individual has
diminishing marginal SSW in the number of years of retirement. Given this and assuming
Continued,

                                                                                             34
       A further complication is added if there is a positive probability of not surviving

until retirement age. A simple example of with a linear SSW schedule is shown in Figure

5. Given the constant discounted real benefit, SSW is higher under the uncertain lifetime

assumption. The worker will live to A0 with probability p or A1 with probability l-p,

which I assume leads her to expect to live until R+H. Note that A0 is less than R so there

is a positive probability of not reaching retirement age. The expected SSW given the

uncertain length of life is SSW4, which is a probability weighted average of the zero

benefits that are received if the worker does not survive until retirement and the present

discounted value of benefits if she survives until A1. Inspection of the diagram reveals

that this level of SSW is greater than the SSW of someone who is certain of dying at age

R+H (SSW in the diagram above).38 Thus the possibility of dying before retirement tends

to bias the estimate of social security wealth upwards. Our primary concern, however, is

with the percentage change in social wealth that results from a benefit reform rather than

with the actual levels of wealth, and there is some reason to hope that the bias is smaller

less for this calculation. In the case of a linear SSW schedule, for example, a change in




the individual is certain to reach retirement, then the expected SSW is less than the SSW at
expected remaining length of life.
   It is easy to demonstrate that substituting the expected length of life, R+H = p A0 + (1-
p) A1, into the equation for the dashed upward sloping line linking the points (A0, 0) and
(Aj, SS W(A1)), yields a level of SSW equal to SSWU. Thus a graphical comparison shows
that, with a linear SSW schedule, a positive probability of early death means that expected
SSW is greater than the SSW at the expected lifetime. That is, the latter is a downward
biased estimate of expected SSW. Of course, if the marginal social security wealth is
 diminishing with the length of the retirement, it is still possible that SSW at the expected
 lifetime is upward biased.

                                                                                             35
the level of the (,.constant) discounted real benefit level will lead to an equal percentage

changes in SSW under the certain and uncertain lifetime assumptions.39

          Summing up, the assumption of the fixed remaining length of life assumption

does introduce a potential bias in estimates of SSW. It is not obvious, however, which

way the bias goes. A positive probability of not reaching retirement leads to a downward

bias, while the likelihood that the real benefit growth rate is less than the discount rate

(which is assumed to be 3 percent for the calculations in the paper) leads to an upward

bias. Finally, if the benefit growth rate and the discount rate are reasonably close, there is

reason to hope that biases in the percentage change calculations that are the focus of the

paper are less serious.




   Let b be the initial discounted value of the social security benefit for all periods after
retirement, and b* be the benefit after reform. For a retirement with acertain length of H,
the relative change in SSW is equal to the relative change in the benefit,           For an
                                                                               b
uncertain retirement of length H, and with a positive probability of dying at the pre-
retirement age A0, some geometry reveals that the relative change in expected SSW wealth


     - b1k
                - R)(R + H -
                   A1—A0           ) =b*_b . Thus, even though making the lifetime
      (
       _______                           b

                Ai-k           )
uncertain raises the social security wealth for a given benefit level and expected life-span,
Continued..

                                                                                               36
the relative change in wealth that results from a change in the benefit level is, under our
special assumptions, the same in each case.

                                                                                          37
References

Berndt, Ernst (1991). The Practice of Econometrics: Classic and Contemporary.
Reading, Massachusetts: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company.

Bosworth, Barry and Gary Burtless (editors) (1998). Aging Societies: The Global
Dimension. Washington D.C.: The Brookings Institution.

Disney, Richard (1996). Can We Afford to Grow Older. Cambridge: The MiT Press

Feldstein, Martin (1974). "Social Security, Induced Retirement and Aggregate Capital
Accumulation." Journal of Political Economy, September/October, pp. 905-926.

Feldstein, Martin (1996). "The Missing Piece in Policy Analysis: Social Security
Reform." American Economic Review, Vol. 86, No 2 (May), pp. 1-14.

Feldstein, Martin, and Andrew Samwick (1998). "The Transition Path in Privatizing
Social Security." In Privatizing Social Security, edited by Martin Feldstein. Chicago:
The University of Chicago Press.

Feldstein, Martin, and Elena Ranguelova (1998). "Individual Risk and Intergenerational
Risk Sharing in an Investment-Based Social Security System." Mimeo.

Franco, Daniele, and Teresa Munzi (1996). "Public Pension Expenditure Prospects in the
European Union: A Survey of National Projections." European Economy, No. 3.

Geanakoplos, John, Olivia S. Mitchell, and Stephen P. Zeldes (1998). "Social Security
Money's Worth." NBER Working Paper 6722 (http://www.nber.org/papers/w6722).

Gruber, Jonathan, and David A. Wise (1998). "Introduction and Summary," in Social
Security and Retirement around the World, Jonathan Gruber and David Wise eds.
Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.

Hamann, A. Javier (1997). "The Reform of the Pension System in Italy." IIMF Working
Paper 97/18.

Helter, Peter, Richard Hemming, and P. Kohnert (1986). "Ageing and Social
Expenditures in the Major Industrialized Countries." IMF Occasional Paper, No. 47.

Hemming, Richard (1998), "Should Public Pensions be Funded." IMF Working Paper,
98/35.

Kalisch, David, and Tetsuya Aman (1997). "Retirement Income Systems: The Reform
Process Across OECD Countries." Paper delivered at the ILO-OECD Workshop on
Pension Reform, Paris, December 1997.


                                                                                         38
 Kotlikoff, Laurence (1992), Generational Accounting: Knowing Who Pays, and When,
for What We Spend, New York: The Free Press.

Kotlikoff, Laurence, and Jeffery Sachs (1997). "It's High Time to Privatize Social
Security." The Brookings Review (Summer).

Krugman, Paul (1988), "Financing versus Forgiving a Debt Overhang." Journal of
Development Economics, 29. Reprinted in Paul Krugman Currencies and Crisis.
Cambridge: The MiT Press.

Leibfritz, Willi, Deborah Roseveare, Douglas Fore, and Echard Wurzel (1995). "Aging
Populations, Pension Systems and Government Budgets: How do they Affect Saving?"
OECD Economics Department Working Paper No. 156.

Kornai, Janos, and John McHale (1999). "Is Post-Communist Health Spending Unusual?
A Comparison with Established Market Economies.

Mincer, Jacob (1974). Schooling, Experience and Earnings, New York: Columbia
University Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research.

OECD (1988). Reforming Public Pensions. Paris: OECD.

OECD (1995, and other editions). The Tax/Benefit Position of Production Workers. Paris:
OECD.

OECD (1995). Economic Outlook 57. June. Paris: OECD.

OECD (1997). Ageing in OECD Countries: A Critical Policy Challenge. Paris: OECD

OECD (1998). Economic Outlook 64, December. Paris: OECD.

Reno, Virgina P., and Robert B. Friedland (1997), "Strong Support but Low Confidence."
In Social Security in the 21st Century, edited by Eric. R. Kingston and James H. Schulz,
Oxford: Oxford University Press

 Roseveare, Deborah, Willi Leibfritz, Douglas Fore, and,Echard Wurzel (1996). "Ageing
 Populations, Pension Systems and Government Budgets Simulations for 20 OECD
 Countries." OECD Economics Department Working Paper No 168.

 Takayama, Noriyuki (1996) "Possible Effects of Ageing on the Equilibrium of the Public
 Pension System in Japan." European Economy, No 3.

 US Social Security Administration (1997, and other editions—published biannually).
 Social Security Programs Throughout the World. Office of International Policy, US
 Social Security Administration, Washington.


                                                                                      39
World Bank (1994), Averting the Old Age Crisis, Oxford: Oxford University Press,
Published for the World Bank.




                                                                                   40
                                                             Figure la
                                          Canada: Old Age Cash Benefits
                                   OECD Expenditure (SOCX) and Demographic Data
           30.0



           25.0               Implied Benefit Rate (Average benefit as a percentage of
                              GDP per working age person)

           20.0
                                                                                                       ——
                                                                                 ———

     0
     C)
     0
           15.0


           10.0
                            Elderly Dependency Rate (Populafion aged :5
                            and over as a percentage of population aged 15
                                                                             t
                            to 64)

                                                                        Age Cash Benefits (% of GDP)

                     — — — — S — — —jd— — — —
            5.0


            0.0
                   1980 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995
                                                                 Year




                                                          Figure lb
                                       France: Old Age Cash Benefits
                                OECD Expenditure (SOCX) and Demographic Data
     50.0

     45.0

     40.0
                                                         Implied Benefit Rate (Average benefit as a
     35.0

     30.0
C,

     25.0
0
C)
- 20.0
     15.0

      10.0

          5.0

          0.0
                  1980 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995
                                                               Year
                       p

                                                                 Figure ic
                                 Germany: Old Age Cash Benefits
                           OECD Expenditure (SOCX) and Demographic Data

      60.0
                                                        Implied Benefit Rate (Average benefit as a
                                                        percentage of GDP per working age person)
      50.0


     40.0
                           Elderly Dependency Rate (Population aged 65
                           and over as a percentage of population aged 15
      30.0
U
a
a.            ——_—_                   a—————————                                ———          —      ——           —    —-
      20.0
                                                                        Old Age Cash Benefits (% of GDP)
      10.0 —                                                                        ————p
       0.0                      I                   p                                               I


             1980 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995
                                                                       Year



                                                                Figure   id
                                   Italy: Old Age Cash Benefits
                           OECD Expenditure (SOCX) and Demographic Data

     60.0
                                                           Implied Benefit Rate (Average benefit as a percentage of
                                                           GDP per working age person)




                                    Elderly Dependency Rate (Population aged 65
     30.0
                                    and over as a percentage of population aged 15
                                    to64)
              ————a—                                                                ———
     20.0                                                  ———

                                                                       9d Age Cash Benefits (% of GDP)
                                                               — —. — —                                 ————
     10.0
              —————
      0.0                   I               I   I          I      I             I     F      I


             1980 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995
                                                                       Year
                                                      Figure le
                                   Japan: Old Age Cash Benefits
                           OECD Expenditure (SOCX) and Demographic Data
     35.0
                   ImpIied Benefit Rate (Average benefit a
                   GDP per working age per
     30.0


     25.0

0)
     20.0                       Elderly Dependency Rate (Population aged 65                      —   —-
                                and over as a percentage              aged 15            —
C
0)                              to 64)
0
0w 15.0                           -      -      -        ofpopiiation


     10.0

                                                             ,OId Age Cash Benefits (% of GDP)
                                                                                                 ——
      5.0
             — — — ——
      0.0
            1980 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995
                                                              Year




                                                             Figure   if
                                   United Kingdom: Old Age Cash Benefits
                                OECD Expenditure (SOCX) and Demographic Data
     30.0
                     Implied Benefit Rate (Average benefit as a percentage of
                     GDP per working age person)

     25.0



     20.0
0)
C)
0)
     15.0
0
Q.

      0.0



      5.0



      0.0
            1980 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995
                                                              Year
                                                    Figure ig
                              United States: Old Age Cash Benefits
                          OECD Expenditure (SOCX) and Demographic Data


     35.0


     30.0

     25.0
                         nefitRate(Aveneitapercen
                GDP per working age person)
0)
     20.0
C
0)
C)
     15.0
                 Elderly Dependency Rate (Population aged 65
                 and over as a percentage of population aged 15
     10.0
                 b4)                                          Old Ag Cash BeneMs (% of GD

      5.0
                                                                                            -
      0.0
            1980 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995
                                                          Year
Table la.
Total Public Expenditure on Old Age Cash Benefits
Assuming Benefit Rate (Average Benefit I GDP per Working Age Person) at 1995 level
OECD Social Expenditure (SOCX) Data Base (all public programs)

                                                             1995       2000        2010      2020    2030
Canada
   Dependency Rate                                            17.7       18.2        20.4      28.4   39.1
   Benefit Rate                                               24.5       24.5        24.5      24.5   24.5
   Expenditure to GDP Ratio                                    4.3        4.5         5.0       6.9     9.6
France
   Dependency Rate                                            23.2       23.6        24.6      32.3    39.1
   Benefit Rate                                               44.6       44.6        44.6      44.6   44.6
   Expenditure to GDP Ratio                                   10.4        10.5       11.0      14.4    17.4
Germany
   Dependency Rate                                            22.7       23.8        30.3      35.4    49.2
   Benefit Rate                                               45.4       45.4        45.4      45.4    45.4
   ExpendituretoGDPRatio                                      10.3        10.8       13.8      16.1    22.3
Italy
   Dependency Rate                                            23.3       26.5        31.2      37.5    48.3
   Benefit Rate                                               47.2       47.2        47.2      47.2    47.2
   ExpendituretoGDPRatio                                      11.0       12.5        14.7      17.7    22.8
Japan
   Dependency Rate                                            20.4       24.3        33.0      43.0    44.5
   Benefit Rate                                               26.9       26.9        26.9      26.9    26.9
   Expenditure to GDP Ratio                                    5.5         6.5        8.9      11.6    12.0
United Kingdom
   Dependency Rate                                            24.3        24.4       25.8      31.2    38.7
   Benefit Rate                                               26.6        26.6       26.6      26.6    26.6
   Expenditure to GDP Ratio                                    6.5         6.5        6.9       8.3    10.3
United States I
World Bank Demographic Projections
  Dependency Rate                                             19.2        19.0       20.4      27.6    36.8
  Benefit Rate                                                27.9        27.9       27.9      27.9    27.9
  Expenditure to GDP Ratio                                     5.4         5.3        5.7       7.7    10.3
United States II
Social Secuity Administration Demographic Projections
   Dependency Rate                                             19.2       18.7        19.1     24.8    31.9
   Benefit Rate (1995)                                         27.9       27.9       27.9      27.9    27.9
   Expenditure to GDP Ratio                                     5.4        5.2        5.3       6.9     8.9

Note: Expenditure to GDP Ratio = [(Dependency Rate)(Benefit Rate)]/100
Sources: OECD Social Expenditure (SOCX) Data Base; OECD (1997); and Bosworth et al. (1998).
Table lb.
Total Public Expenditure on Old Age and Survivors Benefits
Assuming Benefit Rate (Average Benefit I GDP per Working Age Person) at 1995 level
OECD Social Expenditure (SOCX) Data Base (all public programs)

                                                              1995       2000       2010      2020    2030
Canada
   Dependency Rate                                             17.7       18.2       20.4      28.4   39.1
   Benefit Rate                                               27.2        27.2       27.2      27.2   27.2
   Expenditure to GDP Ratio                                    4.8         5.0        5.6       7.7   10.6
France
   Dependency Rate                                            23.2        23.6        24.6     32.3    39.1
   Benefit Rate                                               52.6        52.6        52.6     52.6    52.6
   Expenditure to GDP Ratio                                    12.2       12.4        12.9     17.0    20.6
Germany
   Dependency Rate                                            22.7        23.8        30.3     35.4    49.2
   Benefit Rate                                               47.9        47.9        47.9     47.9    47.9
   ExpendituretoGDPRatio                                      10.9        11.4        14.5     17.0    23.6
Italy
   Dependency Rate                                            23.3        26.5        31.2     37.5    48.3
   Benefit Rate                                               58.7        58.7        58.7     58.7    58.7
   Expenditure to GDP Ratio                                   13.7        15.6        18.3     22.0    28.3
Japan
   Dependency Rate                                             20.4       24.3        33.0     43.0    44.5
   Benefit Rate                                                30.7       30.7        30.7     30.7    30.7
   Expenditure to GDP Ratio                                     6.3        7.5        10.1     13.2    13.7
United Kingdom
   Dependency Rate                                             24.3       24.4        25.8     31.2    38.7
   Benefit Rate                                                29.9       29.9        29.9     29.9    29.9
   Expenditure to GDP Ratio                                     7.3        7.3         7.7      9.3    11.6
United States I
World Bank Demographic Projections
  Dependency Rate                                              19.2       19.0        20.4     27.6    36.8
  Benefit Rate                                                 32.9       32.9        32.9     32.9    32.9
   ExpendituretoGDPRatio                                        6.3        6.2         6.7      9.1    12.1
United States II
Social Secuily Administration Demographic Projections
    Dependency Rate                                            19.2       18.7        19.1     24.8    31.9
    Benefit Rate (1995)                                        32.9       32.9        32.9     32.9    32.9
    Expenditure to GDP Ratio                                    6.3        6.2         6.3      8.2    10.5

Note: Expenditure to GDP Ratio = [(Dependency Rate)(Benefit Rate)]/100
Sources: OECD Social Expenditure (SOCX) Data Base; OECD (1997); and Bosworth et al. (1998).
Table 2.
Pooled OLS Regression for State Pension Expenditure as a Share of GDP
OECD Countries, 1980-1995

Dependent Variable Log(Pension Expenditure/GDP)
                                       (1)           (2)       (3)        (4)     (5)
Independent Variables:
Log(Elderly Dependency Rate)          1.64         1.63        1.63      1.64     0.20
                                   (24.94)    (19.57)      (19.23)    (24.50)   (1.98)
Log(GDP Per Capita)                                0.01       -0.06
                                                  (0.08)    (-0.73)
Log(Urbanization Rate)                                        0.11
                                                            (1.06)
Log(Female Share of LF)                                       0.22
                                                            (1.03)
Time Dummies                                                             Yes

Country Dummies                                                                   Yes


Constant                             -3.10         -3.14     -3.85      -3.16     1.07
Adjusted R-Squared                    0.65         0.64       0.64       0.63    0.96
No. of Observations                    343          343        343        343     343

t-statistics are in parentheses
                          Figure 2. Aging and Public Pension Spending
                                   OECD Countries, 1980 - 1995


      12




      10
               Regression Line:
               Pension ExpJGDP=0.045(Dependency Rate)164
               [see Regression (1), Table 2]


0      8                                                                     .
'I-
 0

(I)
4-
C)
C)     6

.c
(
U)
C)
C)
C)


0      4




       2




       0
           0             5           10           15             20     25       30

                                      Elderly Dependency Rate
Table 3.
OECD Estimates of the Impact of Legislated Reforms
Percentage Change in Expenditure to GDP Ratios Relative to 1995 Ratio

                                                                               2000       2010        2020          2030


                                                                                         % Change
Canada
 Assuming Constant 1995 Benefit Rate (From Table 1)                              2.6       14.9        60.0         120.3
 OECD Estimates Given the Impact of Legislated Reforms                          -3.8        1.9        32.7          73.1
France
 Assuming Constant 1995 Benefit Rate (From Table 1)                              1.6        5.9        39.1          68.4
 OECD Estimates Given the Impact of Legislated Reforms                          -7.5       -8.5         9.4          27.4
Germany
 Assuming Constant 1995 Benefit Rate (From Table 1)                             10.9       41.1        64.9         129.2
 OECD Estimates Given the Impact of Legislated Reforms                           3.6        6.3         10.8         48.6
Italy
 Assuming Constant 1995 Benefit Rate (From Table 1)                             13.9       34.1        61.1         107.5
 OECD Estimates Given the Impact of Legislated Reforms                          -5.3        -0.8        15.0         52.6
Japan
 Assuming Constant 1995 Benefit Rate (From Table 1)                             19.2       61.9       110.9         118.3
 OECD Estimates Given the Impact of Legislated Reforms                          13.6       45.5        87.9         103.0
United Kingdom
 Assuming Constant 1995 Benefit Rate (From Table 1)                              0.3        6.1        28.3          59.1
  OECD Estimates Given the Impact of Legislated Reforms                          0.0        15.6       13.3          22.2
United States
  Assuming Constant 1995 Benefit Rate (From Table 1)                            -1.2         6.1        43.5         91.4
  OECD Estimates Given the Impact of Legislated Reforms                          2.4         9.8        26.8         61.0


Note:
The measure of pension expendiuture used in OECD (1997) for their estimates does not exactly match the measure
based on all state old age cash expendiutures from the OECD Social Expenditure (SOCX) database used in Table 1.
Thus the comparision of percentage changes with and without legislated reforms should be seen as indicative only.
 Both sets of estimates are based on the World Bank demographic projections.

Source: OECD (1997) and author's calculations.              -____________________________________
Table 4. Stylized Benefit Formulas Prior to Recent Reforms
                                 Tierl             Tier2              Tier2              Tier2
                 Retirement      Flat-Rate         Assessed           Replacement        Post-
                 Age             Benefit           Earnings for       Rate'              Retirement
                 MenlWomen                         Earnings-                             Indexation
                                                   Related
                                                   Pension
France (1993)    60/60           No universal      10 highest         50%                Gross wage
[Regime                          flat-rate benefit years, revalued                       inflation
General]2                        (A means-         for nominal
                                 tested benefit    wage inflation
                                 does exist)
Germany          63/60           No universal      Average            60%                Gross wage
(1992)                           flat-rate benefit earnings,          (Based on 40       inflation
                                 (A means-         revalued for       years of
                                 tested benefit    nominal wage       coverage at
                                 does exist)       inflation          1.5% per year)
Italy (1992)     60/55           No universal      Last five years    Progressive        Gross wage
[Prior to                        flat-rate benefit of earnings;       formula;           inflation
Amato                            (A means-         earnings for       80% at APW
reforms]                         tested benefit    first 3 years
                                 does exist)       indexed for
                                                   inflation
Italy (1995)     65/60           No universal      Lifetime           Progressive        Price inflation
[Prior to Dini   (being phased   flat-rate benefit earnings (being    formula;
reforms]         in)              (A means-        phased in)         80% at APW
                                  tested benefit
                                  does exist)
Japan (1994)     60/60            National         Average            30%                Tier 1: Price
                 (effective)3     Pension           lifetime          (based on 40       inflation
                                  Program—Old earnings,               years of
                                  Age Basic         revalued for      contributions at   Tier 2: Gross
                                  Pension: 737,     nominal wage      0.75% per          wage inflation4
                                  300 Yen per       inflation         year)
                                  Year
                                  ($5967.62)
United           65/60            Old Age           Average           25%                Price Inflation
Kingdom                           Pension: Basic earnings
(1986)                            component         (between upper
                                  £1861.60          and low limits)
                                  ($2233.92)        of best 20
                                                    years, revalued
                                                    for nominal


  Assuming full eligibility for an earnings-related pension.
2
  Most of the population are covered by a two-pillared system comprising of the Regime
General and a complementary scheme organized on a socio-professional basis. Analysis
of the french system is complicated by a number of regime speciaux, which substitute for
the regime general for some workers. The 1993 reform was limited to the regime general
and some related schemes, so I concentrate on that plan here.
  The formal retirement age for Tier 2 benefits is 65, but workers can retire at 60 without
loss of benefits (see Takayama, 1996).
  Updated every five years rather than annually.
                                                    wage inflation
United           65/60             Old Age          Average           20%               Price Inflation
Kingdom                            Pension: Basic   earnings
(1994)                             component        (between upper
                                   £2185.80         and lower
                                   (4266.36)        limits5) of
                                                    working life,
                                                    revalued for
                                                    nominal wage
                                                    inflation
United States    65/65             No universal     Average         Progressive         Price Inflation
(1983)                             flat-rate benefitcovered         formula,
                                   (A means-        earnings of     43% at APW
                                   tested           best 35 years,  based on 1983
                                   benefit—         revalued for    bend points
                                   Supplementary    nominal wage
                                   Security         inflation
                                   Income
                                   (SSI)—does
                                   exist)
Sources: Disney (1996), Franco and Munzi (1996), Hamann [IMFI (1997), Leibfritz et al. [OECDI (1995),
OECD (1988), Takayama (1996), U.S. Social Security Administration (Various Years)




  The upper and lower limits are indexed to price inflation.
Table 4. Stylized Benefit Formulas Prior to Recent Reforms
                                 Tierl               Tier2             Tier2           Tier2
                 Retirement      Flat-Rate           Assessed          Replacement     Post-
                 Age             Benefit             Earnings for      Rate'           Retirement
                 Men/Women                           Earnings-                         Indexation
                                                     Related
                                                     Pension
France (1993)    60/60           No universal        10 highest        50%             Gross wage
[Regime                          flat-rate benefit   years, revalued                   inflation
General]2                        (A means-           for nominal
                                 tested benefit      wage inflation
                                 does exist)
Germany          63/60           No universal      Average          60%                Gross wage
(1992)                           flat-rate benefit earnings,        (Based on 40       inflation
                                 (A means-         revalued for     years of
                                 tested benefit    nominal wage     coverage at
                                 does exist)       inflation        1.5% per year)
Italy (1992)     60/55           No universal      Last five years Progressive         Gross wage
[Prior to                        flat-rate benefit of earnings;     formula;           inflation
Amato                            (A means-         earnings for     80% at APW
reforms]                         tested benefit    first 3 years
                                 does exist)       indexed for
                                                   inflation
Italy (1995)     65/60           No universal      Lifetime         Progressive        Price inflation
[Prior to Dini   (being phased   flat-rate benefit earnings (being formula;
reforms]         in)             (A means-          phased in)      80% at APW
                                 tested benefit
                                 does exist)
Japan (1994)     60/60           National           Average         30%                Tier 1: Price
                 (effective)3    Pension            lifetime        (based on 40       inflation
                                 Program—Old earnings,              years of
                                 Age Basic          revalued for    contributions at   Tier 2: Gross
                                 Pension: 737,      nominal wage    0.75% per          wage inflation4
                                 300 Yen per        inflation       year)
                                 Year
                                 ($5967.62)
United           65/60           Old Age            Average          25%               Price Inflation
Kingdom                          Pension: Basic earnings
(1986)                           component          (between upper
                                 £1861.60           and low limits)
                                 ($2233.92)         of best 20
                                                    years, revalued
                                                    for nominal


 'Assuming full eligibility for an earnings-related pension.
 2
   Most of the population are covered by a two-pillared system comprising of the Regime
 General and a complementary scheme organized on a socio-professional basis. Analysis
 of the french system is complicated by a number of regime speciaux, which substitute for
 the regime general for some workers. The 1993 reform was limited to the regime general
 and some related schemes, so I concentrate on that plan here.
   The formal retirement age for Tier 2 benefits is 65, but workers can retire at 60 without
 loss of benefits (see Takayama, 1996).
   Updated every five years rather than annually.
                                                    wage inflation
United           65160            Old Age           Average          20%               Price Inflation
Kingdom                           Pension: Basic    earnings
(1994)                            component         (between upper
                                  £2185.80          and lower
                                  (4266.36)         limits5) of
                                                    working life,
                                                    revalued for
                                                    nominal wage
                                                    inflation
United States    65/65             No universal     Average         Progressive        Price Inflation
(1983)                             flat-rate benefitcovered         formula,
                                   (A means-        earnings of     43% at APW
                                   tested           best 35 years,  based on 1983
                                   benefit—         revalued for    bend points
                                   Supplementary    nominal wage
                                   Security         inflation
                                   Income
                                   (SSI)—does
                                   exist)
Sources: Disney (1996), Franco and Munzi (1996), Hamann [IMF] (1997), Leibfritz et al. OECD] (1995),
OECD (1988), Takayama (1996), U.S. Social Security Administration (Various Years)




  The upper and lower limits are indexed to price inflation.
Table 5. Se1ectd Reforms to State Retirement-Income S stems
                                   Tier-i      Tier- 2           Tier-2             Tier-2
                 Retirement Age    Flat-Rate   Assessed          Replacement        Post-
                                   Benefit     Earnings for      Rate               Retirement
                                               Earnings-                            Indexation
                                               Related
                                               Pension
France (1993)                                  Assessment                           Wage
                                               period, 10 —3                        indexation
                                               25 years                             —* price
                                               (phased in by                        indexation2
                                               2008)'
Germany          Men: 63 —÷ 65                                                      Gross wage
(l992)           years (by 2009)                                                    indexation
                                                                                    —3 net wage
                 Women: 60 —3                                                       indexation
                 65 years (by
                 2018)

Italy (1992)     Men: 60 —* 65                 Assessment                           Wage
[Amato           years (over 10                period: 5 —* 10                      indexation
Reforms]         years)                        years (over 10                       — price
                                               years);                              indexation
                 Women: 55                     lifetime for
                 60 years (over                younger
                 10 years)                     workers.
                                               Revaluation of
                                               past earnings:
                                               inflation plus
                                               1%
Italy (1995)                                   Lifetime          New System:4
[Dini Reforms]                                 earnings,         For those
                                               revalued at       retiring at 65,
                                               inflation plus    benefits are
                                               1% —÷             equal to 6.1% of
                                               contributions     capitalized
                                               over working      contributions.

1 In addition, the number of years required for a full pension is to be gradually raised
from 37 1/2 years to 40 years.
2
  In fact, pensions had been indexed to prices since 1987, with wage indexation being
suspended on a yearly basis. The reform institutionalized the new indexation procedure.
  Other reforms not included here include: more strict rules on early retirement, reduced
pension credits for years in higher education, and increases in pensions for low wage
workers.
  Since employees pay a higher contribution rate than the self employed, the shift from
average earnings-based benefits to contributions-based benefits means that the reform has
a more negative impact on the self-employed. Employees currently face a contribution
rate of 32 percent, as compared to a 15% rate for the self employed. In fact, the benefits
are calculated using "notional" contribution rates of 33 and 20 percent for employees and
the self employed respectively. Thus, even though the self-employed take a bigger hit
from the change of system, they continue to receive a subsidy (see Hamann, 1997).
                   .                            life, revalued    Smaller
                                                at the growth     coefficients
                                                rate of a five-   apply to earlier
                                                year moving       retirements.5
                                                average of
                                                nominal GDP
Japan (1994)       60 —> 65 years,                                                   Gross wage
                   for Tier-I                                                        indexation
                   pensions                                                          —* net wage
                   (by 2014 for                                                      indexation
               .   menandby20l9                                                      for Tier2
                   for women)                                                        pensions
United                                          Assessment        25% —÷ 20%
Kingdom                                         period, 20 best   (phased in for
(1986)6                                         years — all       those reaching
                                                working years     retirement age
                                                                  between 1999
                                                                  and 2009)




United             60 —÷ 65 years               Lower
Kingdom            for women                    earnings limit
(1994)             (phased in by                (LEL) in year
                   2020)                        prior to
                                                retirement
                                                subtracted
                                                from revalued
                                                earnings —*
                                                revalued LEL
                                                subtracted
                                                from revalued
                                                earnings.7
                                                (starting in




5For those retiring at 60, the coefficient is 5.1 percent. The earliest allowable retirement
age is 57, at which the coefficient drops to 4.7 percent (Hamann, 1997). The stated
intention is that these coefficients will be periodically adjusted downwards in response to
lengthening
6
              life expectancy.
  Other reforms of the earnings related pension (SERPS) include a reduction of the
survivor's pension from 100 percent to 50 percent of the pension that was to be paid to
the deceased contributor and an extension of arrangements for contracting out of
earnings-related pensions.
  The lower earnings limit (LEL) is set equal to the flat-rate basic benefit, and is thus
adjusted only for price inflation. When real wage growth is positive, this seemingly
minor technical adjustment can lead to a substantial benefit cut over time (see Disney,
1996).
                                                     2000)
United States    65 —÷ 67 years                                       Benefits not       One-time six
(1983)8          by 2022 (for                                         subject to         month delay
                 workers reaching                                     income tax —*      in the cost-of
                 the early                                            benefits subject   -living
                 retirement age of                                   to income tax in    adjustment
                 62)                                                 certain             (COLA)
                                                                     circumstances9
Sources: Disney (1996), Franco and Munzi (1996), Hamann [IMF] (1997), Leibfritz et al. [OECD] (1995),
OECD (1988), Takayama (1996), U.S. Social Security Administration (Various Years)




8 Other reforms not treated here include increased taxation of benefits, expansion of the
program to include new federal employees, and a small payroll tax increase.
  If a taxpayer's combination of adjusted gross income, interest on tax exempt bonds, and
50 percent of Social Security benefits exceeds certain threshold amounts, benefits equal
to the lesser of 50 percent of benefits or 50 percent of combined income over the
threshold amount is subject to income tax. The additional revenue is added to the trust
funds. The taxation of benefits was further modified in 1993, when a secondary (higher)
threshold was introduced. An amount equal to 85 percent of combined income over the
secondary threshold is now added to the benefits that are subject to income tax. The
additional tax revenues are added to the Medicare health insurance trust fund.
Table 6a. Impact of Selected Benefit Reforms on Social Security Wealth (SSW)
45 year old woiker earning the average production wage
(Assuming reforms are fully phased in by standard retirement age)
                         Average         Pre-Reform     Post-Reform   Change in   % Change in
                         Production      SSWas %        SSWas %       SSWas %     SSW
                         Wage (APW)      of APW         of APW        of APW
France (1993)
Men                      113200FF        543%           469%          -74%        -13.5%

Women                    113200FF        680%           576%          -104%       -15.3%
Germany (1992)
Men                      49904 DM        354%           328%          -26%        -7.3%

Women'                   49904 DM        596%           438%          -15 8%      -26.2%
Italy (1992)
Men                      28302000 Lire   841%           525%          -316%       -38%

Women                    28302000 Lire   1374%          975%          -399%       -29%
Italy (1995)23
Men (retiring at 65)
 Employee                31599600Lire    470%           580%          +110%       +23%
 Self Employed           31599600 Lire   470%           352%          -118%       -25%
Women (retiring at 60)
 Employee                31599600 Lire   791%           717%          -74%        -9%
 Self Employed           31599600 Lire   791%           420%          -371%       -45%
Japan (l994)
Men5                     4064645 Yen     447%           381%          -66%        -14.8%

Women                    4064645 Yen     568%           495%          -73%        -12.4%
UK (1986)
Men6                                     229%           177%          -52%        -22.8%




  The post-reform numbers are based on the assumption that the increase in the retirement
age is fully phased in by the time the worker retires. Since the increase in the retirement
age for women (to 65 from 60) is not due to be fully phased in until 2018, these
calculations overstate the effect on a worker who is 45 at the time of the reform.
2 This reform will affect employees and the self employed very differently, so the effects
on the SSW of these different types of workers are included separately. The reason for
the differential effects is that the self employed pay a much low contribution rate than
employees. Thus a shift to contribution-based benefits has a larger negative impact on
the implicit wealth of this group.
  Post reform calculations are based on a real GDP growth rate of 1.5 percent
  These calculations are made on the assumption that the worker retires at age 60, but
after the reform does not receive tier- 1 benefits until aged 65. If the reform leads
retirement to be postponed until aged 65, then the benefit losses are larger. Under this
assumption, the benefit losses for men and women are 34.9 and 28.7 percent respectively.
  A married man with a dependent spouse received benefits with a present value equal to
502 percent of the APW before the reform and equal to 411 percent after the reform (a
 18.1 percent reduction in SSW).
                     £9118
Women7                               469%         390%         -79%         -16.9%
                     £9118
UK ( 1994)
Men8                 £14607          201%         192%         -9%          -5%

Women                £14607          374%         265%         -109%        -29%
US (1983)
Men'°"               $18357          163%          123%        -40%         -24.6%

Women'2              $18357          250%         210%         -40%         -16.0%




6 A married man with a dependent spouse received benefits with a present value equal to
288 percent of the APW before the reform and equal to 236 percent after the reform (a
18.2 percent reduction in SSW).
  The post-reform numbers are based on the assumption that the increase in the retirement
age is fully phased in by the time the worker retires. Since the increase in the retirement
age for women (to 65 from 60) is not due to be fully phased in until 2020, these
calculations overstate the effect on a worker who is 45 at the time of the reform.
8
  A married man with a dependent spouse received benefits with a present value equal to
267 percent of the APW before the reform and equal to 258 percent after the reform (a 3
percent reduction in SSW).
  The post-reform numbers are based on the assumption that the increase in the retirement
age is fully phased in by the time the worker retires. Since the increase in the retirement
age to 67 is not due to be fully phased (for a worker reaching the early retirement age of
62) until 2022, these calculations overstate the effect on a worker who is 45 at the time of
the reform.
10
   A married man with a dependent spouse received benefits with a present value equal to
224 percent of the APW before the reform and equal to 196 percent after the reform (a
20.0 percent reduction in SSW).
"If the income of the retiree is high enough so that the 50 percent of benefits are now
subject to income taxation, then the loss of SSW rises to 30.2 percent.
12
   If the income of the income of the retiree is high enough so that the 50 percent of
benefits are now subject to income taxation, then the loss of SSW rises to 22.3 percent.
Table 6b. Impact of Selected Benefit Reforms on Social Security Wealth (SSW)
Worker at standard retirement age who earned the average production wage at 45
                             %Change in SSW     Reason for Change
         France (1993)                          Wage indexation —* Price
         Men                 -8.5%              indexation

         Women               -10.0%
         Germany (1992)                         Gross wage indexation —> Net
         Men                 -2.1%              wage indexation (assuming gross
                                                real wage growth of 1 percent and
         Women               -2.8%              net real wage growth of 0.7
                                                percent (see text)

         Italy (1992)                           Wage indexation —÷ Price
         Men                 -3.4%              indexation

         Women               -11.2%
         Italy (1995)                           No change, given the long phase
         Men                 --                 in of reforms

         Women               --
         Japan (1994)                           Gross wage indexation — Net
         Men                 -2.5%              wage indexation (assuming gross
                                                real wage growth of 1 percent and
         Women               -3.1%              net real wage growth of 0.5
                                                percent (see text)
         UK (1986)                              No change, given the long phase
         Men                 --                 in of reforms

         Women               --
         UK (1994)                              No change, given the long phase
         Men                 --                 in of reforms

         Women               --
         US (1993)                              Six month cost of living
         Men                 -1.7%              adjustment freeze (assuming
                                                annual inflation of 3.5%)
         Women               -1.7%
Figure 3
John McHale




              U
              k

    lc
 k+—— -DF
    2a




                            B(O)
                  aD   —+
                       aD
Figure 4
John McHale




              B(1)

                                      I

          cf
         aDaD
                                 I/
                              ,,-' 45° Line


              C

              aD

                     C
                     + 11
                     aD VaD
                                          B(O)
Figure 5      p
John McHale




              ssw




              ssw
              ssw


                    T   AR   R+H   4j   Age
