I.

Introduction
There is strong empirical evidence that demand and supply shocks can affect individual

stock prices. Event studies focusing on compositional changes in the S&P 500 index, for
example, find that announcements of addition to the index increases share prices and delisting
decreases share prices. 1 Shleifer (1986) and Harris and Gurel (1986) interpret this as evidence
that demand curves for stocks slope down. Lynch and Mendenhall (1997) and Beniesh and
Whaley (1996) examining data since announcement and delisting days were separated, support
downward-sloped demand curves, but also find that some of gains or losses due to index fund
purchases or sales on the day of an addition or deletion is reversed the following day. The
literature on block purchases and sales of stock generally finds evidence of temporary price
pressure on individual securities conditional upon unusual demand or supply.2 Lakonishok,
Shleifer and Vishny (1992) find that stocks purchased by institutions in a quarter show a
significant rise. Chan and Lakonishok (1993, 1995) document price reactions to institutional
trades. The implication of these studies is that share prices may not represent “fundamental”
values but depend significantly upon how much money is invested and when.
Recent research by Warther (1995) and Zheng (1997) suggests that these supply and
demand effects may aggregate to the level of the stock market itself. Zheng (1998) uses
investment sector flows, including households, from 1952 to 1996 and finds that quarterly
institutional demand shocks, but not household demand shocks, are contemporaneously
correlated to stock market returns. Using monthly returns and flows for the mutual fund industry
1

See Shleifer (1986), Garry and Goetzmann (1986) Harris and Gruel (1986), Dhillon and Johnson (1991) and Lynch
and Mendenhall (1997).

2

from 1984 to 1993, Warther (1995) finds that returns and flows are strongly contemporaneously
correlated. He argues that this is not due to DeLong et al (1990) feedback trading, i.e. to that
investors chasing the market by increasing inflows when the market is rising and increasing
outflows when the market is falling. His argument is based on finding no lagged relationship
between market returns and subsequent month net flows. Without daily data, however, he cannot
reject the hypothesis that the feedback trading is simply occurring at a higher frequency that he
has data. Also Fridson and Jonsson (1995) show, with quarterly data, that net inflows in highyield bond mutual funds tend to improve liquidity and reduce bond liquidity risk premia. At the
very long horizon, papers by Bakshi and Chen (1994) and Constantinides, Donaldson and Mehra
(1998) provide theory and evidence that the age distribution of the population is a significant
determinant of the equity premium and hence stock prices relative to the riskless asset.
Presumably the mechanism for such fundamental shifts in the equity premium is the gradual shift
in individual demand for equities with aging.
In this paper, we use daily data on three S&P index funds to investigate the relationship
between demand shocks and the movement of the S&P 500 index. We focus on index funds
because their goal is to simply track the S&P. As a result, index fund managers have little
incentive to delay or spread-out orders to avoid adverse trading conditions. While economic
gains may be had by delayed trading, tracking error is increased as well. Thus, for S&P index
funds, is possible to precisely identify the day on which flows could affect the market.

In

addition, we know that “speculative” flows are not based on beliefs about manager skill, but
about beliefs about the stock market itself.

2

A third advantage of focusing solely on S&P index

See Scholes (1972), Holthausen, Leftwich and Mayers (1984) and Michaelson and Partch (1985), for example.

3

funds is that we know exactly what portfolio of stocks are demanded on that day and we have an
index that precisely matches that portfolio.
Shiller (1997) points out a problem endemic to all studies correlating fund flows with
stock price dynamics. Unless it is possible to prove that the proceeds from sales of fund shares
are not re-invested in equities, then it is difficult to infer that flows out of mutual funds in fact
represents a shift in sentiment about the stock market. Without individual account information,
we cannot address this problem directly, since we do not know whether the inflows derived from
sales of equities, or from a cash account. In the work that follows, we implicitly assume that
purchases and sales reflect re-balancing towards or away from equities.
Despite the limitations of using aggregate data at the fund level, our analysis of daily
index fund flows indicates a strong contemporaneous correlation between fund inflows and S&P
market returns. We also document a strong negative correlation between fund out flows and
S&P market returns with the exception of outflows from a back-end load fund. These effects
may be interpreted in two ways. Either investor supply and demand affects S&P market prices,
or investors condition their demand and supply on intra-day market fluctuations. To sort out
these effects, we examine trailing investor reaction to market moves. Our results suggest the
market reacts to daily flows. A lack of any next-day reaction to positive market moves suggests
that investors are not chasing short-term trends.
We also investigate whether index investor demand shocks are permanent or temporary.
Demand shocks might simply exert temporary price pressure on S&P 500 stocks at the end of the
day that reverse themselves in the next trading session. This would be consistent with the
findings by Harris and Gurel (1986) and Lynch and Mendenhall (1997) and others that stock
price moves on a listing or delisting day partially reversed themselves in the next session.

4

Otherwise demand shocks can be permanently incorporated in asset prices. Indeed, evidence
pointing towards this direction has been found by Shleifer (1986) who has shown that the S&P
inclusion price effect is permanent. Also Garry and Goetzmann (1986) did not find any evidence
of rebound in prices. Unlike all these studies we do not focus on the listing-delisting
phenomenon, concentrating, instead, on the analysis of the effects of clearly identified “liquidity
shocks” (flows into investment funds) on asset pricing in general.
This provides us with an opportunity to answer two interesting questions. First what is the
driving force behind the increase in the relative value of the S&P 500 index in the recent years.
The S&P index has outperformed broader stock indexes, recently causing analysts to question
whether this is due to fundamental differences in index composition, or to investor preference for
the index itself. We give evidence to support the investor preference hypothesis. Second, we can
test a long-standing tenet of the financial microstructure literature, that demand shocks due to
liquidity trading are temporary and tend to mean revert over time. In particular, in their paper
Campbell, Grossman and Wang (1992) show that assets react to information shocks over time in
a different way, according to the nature of the shocks. Prices mean-revert if the information
shock is transitory and idiosyncratic. No mean reversion takes place if the public flow of
information is about permanent news. Usually idiosyncratic shocks are loosely identified with
“liquidity trading”, while permanent shocks are traced back to more systematic structural factors
(e.g. dividends or earning announcements). However a formal test to identify permanent vs.
temporary shocks is difficult to perform. Our dataset provides us with the opportunity to test this
important issue. We examine shocks to prices originated by demand flows into index funds
(typically “liquidity trading” types of shocks). If they are temporary, then we expect them to
revert overnight or in the following days, resulting in a negative correlation between flows and

5

future returns. If the shocks are permanent they should be incorporated into prices and no
reversion or lagged relation in returns should exist. To further examine this effect, we also
consider the related behavior of the S&P futures index. The question of whether liquidity shocks
are transitory is a fascinating one. If the recent growth in the S&P has been entirely due to
uninformed inflows, this lends support to the Bakshi and Chen (1994) and Constantinides,
Donaldson and Mehra (1998) thesis about the changing equity premium, as well as revealing the
mechanism of the change.
Finally, what influences demand? Research by Cohen (1998) suggests that individuals
have a tendency towards positive-feedback trading, but other factors beyond past price dynamics
may affect demand. Both Cohen (1997) and Zheng (1997) find evidence that bond yields affect
equity purchase and sale decisions. Recent empirical studies by Sirri and Tufano (1993) and
Chevalier and Ellison (1995), carried out with low frequency (quarterly) data and using net
inflows3 in the funds, show that investors seem to react non-linearly to fund performance,
asymmetrically flocking in when performances have been high and staying in after bad
performance. These results seem to suggest performance-chasing behavior by investors and low
risk aversion. In this paper, we will show that, at higher frequency (daily) and breaking down
flows into inflows and outflows, the behavior for investors in index funds turns out being
completely different. It appears that only investors’ outflows are affected by past performance,
while inflows are not. Also, the investors’ behavior appears to be mainly motivated by risk
aversion, instead of return-chasing4.

3

Given that a separate breakdown into inflows and outflows is not available for mutual funds, such authors construct
flows as “the proportional growth in total assets under management for the fund “ in the considered period.
4
An alternative hypothesis is that if the investor has constant relative risk aversion and wishes to maintain constant
proportion of risky/riskless assets, he will sell equity when its value rises. In this case we would expect a negative
relationship between assets demand and asset returns.

6

Furthermore, among the different potential motivating factors we focus on expert
recommendations. Using the average market-timing newsletter recommendation over the period,
we find that investors appear to react to expert advice about the market. Bullish newsletter
sentiment is associated with greater inflows and smaller outflows, but, again, more than by the
average recommendation, investors seem mostly influenced by uncertainty. Indeed, dispersions
of analysts’ opinions reduce inflows and increase outflows.

II. Data Description
II.1 Funds
Our study focuses on three Fidelity index funds: the Spartan U.S. Equity Index ($12.9
Billion), the Spartan Market Index ($ 5.8 Billion) and the VIP Market Index ($3.0 billion) over
the period 1993 to the present. We have daily dollar-valued share purchases and share
redemptions for each of the three funds, as well as their daily returns. Together, the three funds
represent approximately 20% of the mutual fund money indexed to the S&P 500 -- while they are
not as large as the Vanguard Market Index Trust ($64 Billion) their assets are considerable.
The Spartan U.S. Equity Index is a no-load fund, the Spartan Market Index has a 1/2 % charge
for redemption within 90 days and the VIP Market Index is sold principally through insurance
channels. Also there is a strong difference between the two Spartan indexes in terms of minimum
initial investment that is equal to 10,000 Dollars for the Spartan market Index (1/2 % load fund)
and equal to 100,000 Dollars for the Spartan U.S. equity Index (no-load fund). The difference in
initial investment provides a way of testing investors’ behavior according to their wealth. We
expect that, in general, richer investors will have a lower sensitivity to short term market swings

7

either because their sensitivity to risk is lower5 or because their investment horizon is longer, or
because they are better informed on long run trends. This effect should overcome the one due to
the absence of back-end fee traditionally considered in the literature (Chordia (1996)). And
Indeed, we find that outflows are not sensitive to returns in the fund with the highest investment
requirement (Spartan U.S. Equity Index)
There are no precise numbers for how much mutual fund money is indexed to the S&P
500, but it is probably between $80 to $100 billion as of mid-1998.6 The Spartan U.S. Equity
index is the second-largest S&P index fund, and The capitalization of the S&P in mid-1998 was
about $8,900 billion and so the Fidelity funds hold no more than about 1/4 of a percent of the
total capitalization of the S&P portfolio.

Never-the-less, they may represent the marginal

investors in S&P 500 stocks – only a small portion of shares of stocks in the S&P 500 (1/4
percent) turn over each day.7 The correlation in investor flows across the Fidelity funds is high
suggesting that the timing of inflows and outflows of these funds is likely to be representative of
the other index mutual funds.
Even if the investors in our sample were perfectly representative of the investors in other
index mutual funds, they represent only a fraction of the equity indexed to the S&P.

A

substantial portion of institutional money is indexed. To the extent that institutional managers
5

This can be explained if investors have CARA utility function.
This estimate is based upon a list of 19 index funds managing $78 billion as of May, 1998, listed by Index Funds
Online (http://www.indexfundsonline.com/reports/qtr982c0.html) . This is certainly an underestimate, since only
one of the three funds in our sample is included in the list. Of the 19 funds, Fidelity Spartan Market Index Trust is
the second largest, behind the Vanguard Market Index Trust. CNNfn estimated in June 1997 that 59 S&P Index
funds managed $83 billion in assets (http://europe.cnnfn.com/yourmoney/9706/24/yomo_indexfunds/).
7
No daily turnover information for the S&P 500 stocks is available, but dollar-valued turnover information about the
NYSE is probably fairly representative since S&P 500 stocks represent most of the capitalization of the NYSE (more
than 90%).
NYSE capitalization as of 6/98 was $9,900 billion and trading activity for the first six months of 1998 was $3,474
billion, suggesting 60% of share transacted per year, or about 1/4 percent. Thus the daily volume of the S&P 500
6

8

behave differently from individual investors, we might expect the flows to mutual funds to be
only partly correlated to flows by institutions. Thus, we expect to find modest price effects
conditional upon fund flows. Share purchases, due to automatic dividend re-investment, are
treated separately. There is a strong increasing trend in the flows for each of the funds through
time. This trend is undoubtedly due to both the growing popularity of indexing as well as the
efforts by Fidelity to attract customers. It may also simply reflect increasing demand for mutual
funds in general and for equities in particular. Although this is an interesting issue, in this paper
we are concerned with very short-term shifts in demand. Thus, it is important to control for these
long-term effects.

In the analysis below, we normalize the flows to account for both market

growth and fund growth. Market growth is important since the total capitalization of the S&P
500 grows over the interval of study. A $100 million demand shock in the early part of the
sample period cannot be equated with a $100 million demand shock in the later part of the
period, given that the S&P has averaged more than 20% return in the period.
Simply dividing by the capitalization, however, does not account for the fact that we are
using the funds as proxies for daily demand shocks by other index fund customers. While
Fidelity’s index funds are not as large as Vanguard’s Market Index Trust, particularly early in the
sample, we expect their flows to have been correlated, and thus to provide us information about
what index customers behavior in general. Thus we also normalize by dividing standardized
flows by their 180-day moving average. In effect, we examine the behavior of local deviations in
inflows and outflows expressed as percentage “market share.”

must currently be over $20 billion. While volume cannot be equated exactly with the percentage of the company that

9

II.2 Stock market variables: S&P 500 and S&P 400 spot and futures
We consider both the spot and futures total return on the two indexes, the S&P500 and the
S&P400. The stocks that compose the S&P400 basket are approximately the next 400 biggest
after those represented in the S&P500. Although not formally tested in this paper, we expect
them to be subject to the same type of systematic shocks and, on average, to react to them
similarly due to similar betas8.
We treat futures and spot prices as contemporaneous end-of-day observations, however as
Miller, Muthuswamy and Whaley (1994) point out, this may not be a well-founded assumption,
due to non-trading or delayed trading in the spot.

They suggest that the reversion in the futures

basis may be due not to arbitrage, but rather to stable spot prices. To address this, we separate
the basis into the spot and futures prices and find evidence consistent with their assertion that
daily basis reversion is not arbitrage-related.
We also consider the total volume of transactions in the S&P500 index, the open interest
on the futures, the market capitalization and the implied volatility.

In particular, implied

volatility is calculated as the volatility on the S&P500 index derived by the options on the S&P
futures. Call options at the money for the shortest maturity period are used. Both open interest
and implied volatility can be defined either as measures of investors’ uncertainty or as measures
of dispersion of beliefs. Open interest, in particular, has been identified with dispersion of
beliefs. We will show how our analysis can lead to a reformulation of such a definition. In
particular we will show that investors react more strongly to risk than to expected return. This is

changes hands in a given period, it does indicate the order of magnitude.
8
The fact that we consider indexes helps us as it eliminates most of the idiosyncratic effects specific to any stock.
(We thank R. Shiller for helpful discussion on this point).

10

consistent with recent results (Busse (1997)) that, using a frequency of data analogous to ours
(daily), show how mutual fund managers’ exploit this feature explicitly timing volatility 9.

II.3 Market- Timing Newsletter Data
Forbes columnist Mark Hulbert provided us with a dataset compiled by the Hulbert
Financial Digest covering 101 investment newsletter during the period June 1980-December
1997.

This database has been studied carefully in Harvey and Graham (1996). They find no

evidence of market-timing ability by managers but Graham (1998) finds some evidence that
newsletters herd in their recommendations. This database allows us to address the issue of how
analysts' reports affect financial markets. The "recommendations" contained in the dataset are
defined as a proposed portfolio composition, expressed as a percentage of stocks vs. t-bills to be
held in the portfolio. The average recommendation changes daily, although most newsletters are
published weekly or at longer intervals. Thus, even though all newsletter publishers may have
changed their opinions at once on a given day, it takes about a week for these opinion changes to
find their way to print. At, the same time, the dataset has been constructed in such a way that
each new observation is “added to the raw file the date Hulbert receives it in the mail or over the
phone for letters with free hotlines, rather than the date published on the newsletter”. This should
properly account for the time it takes to reach the investors. To allow for additional delay in the
time it takes to reach investors (on top of the time already allowed for to reach Hulbert), we
considered the average value of the recommendations at t and t-1.

9

In particular, using daily data, Busse shows that volatility timing is an important factor in the return generating
process of the fund industry as a whole, leading to varying degrees for individual funds and significantly contributes
to traditional fund performance estimates.

11

We use the sub-sample covering the period January 1993-December 1997 and construct
the average recommendations by the newsletters as well as the cross sectional standard deviation.
Given that the distributions are skewed and the mean may not be the correct locational measure
to use, we also use the median recommendation.

III. Tests and Results
The first goal is to test if fund inflows move the index or if changes in the index
determine investors’ flows or both. To this purpose, we regress the S&P500 returns on funds’
flows. In addition, we reverse the regressions and examine the response of flows to lagged S&P
500 returns. In addition we run an explicit test of causality to test the direction of causality.
Next, we explore the potential motivation for trading by regressing inflows and outflows on the
newsletter recommendation series. Finally, we consider the extent to which the S&P price
changes due to demand shocks are permanent or temporary by using the changes in the S&P 500
futures prices in place of spot and by considering whether price reversals in the basis are due
principally to the spot reversing or the future reversing. The logic of using the futures price is
that it represents a future claim on the S&P. If changes are expected to revert before the exercise
date, then the futures price will not react to dynamics due to demand. All the specifications have
been estimated using a Cochrane-Orcutt correction for autocorrelation. Also, to check the
robustness of our estimations, all the functional specifications have been re-estimated using a
White-correction for the errors to control for heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation.
We checked if flows and returns are unstationary, using Dickey-Fuller tests for unit roots.
The tests reject at 99% confidence the existence of unit roots for all the considered series.

12

III.1 Spot Returns on Flows
We are interested in seeing if there is any relationship between each fund’s flows and
market returns. To pursue this goal we look at both the relationship between funds' flows and the
S&P500 return, and the one between flows and the difference between S&P500 returns and
S&P400 returns. The implied assumption is that if there is any strong underlying relationship
between funds' flows and asset returns, it should manifest itself mostly on the stocks composing
the index and not on the other stocks. We therefore conduct a set of linear regressions of both
S&P 500 returns and of the difference between S&P 500 and S&P 400 returns on normalized
contemporaneous inflows and outflows from each of the three funds. The specification of this
test is straightforward. Since the fund flows are only proxies for index fund flows in general, we
do not allow for time-variation in coefficients due to changes in fund size. We estimate the
equations:

Rt = α + β * I t + ε t
and

Rt = α + β * Ot + ε t
where R is the daily return on the S&P, while I and O represent normalized daily fund inflows
and outflows respectively. We start simply, focusing on the contemporaneous relationships, even
if it is conceivable there is some complex, lagged structural relationship among returns and
flows that would demand a more sophisticated specification.
Tables 3-4 show the results of the first set of regressions of S&P 500 returns on fund
inflows and outflows. For consistency with Warther (1995) we report results for the flows
normalized by the trailing 160-day moving average of the S&P 500 capitalization. To test for the
robustness of the results to the type of standardization technique used, we re-estimated all the

13

functional specifications using a different standardization procedure based on the daily
“innovation” component of the flows. In particular, we used the following standardization
procedure:

SFlows =

RFlows
MAFlows
.
−
RMAMKT RMAMKT

where SFlows are standardized flows, RFlows are the “raw” flows, before standardization,
MAMKT is the rolling moving average of market capitalization in the previous 160 days and
MAFlows is the moving average of the flows in the previous 160 days.
Given that the results agree, we report only one specification. Each fund is reported separately.
While the explanatory power of the regressions is modest10, the results are consistent across
funds -- the coefficient on contemporaneous flows is positive and significant at the 5% level. The
results show a positive correlation between inflows and returns and a negative one between
outflows and returns.
The results for the specification where the difference between S&P 500 and S&P 400 returns and
funds' flows agree with the previous ones, showing a positive relationship between inflows and
returns differentials between S&P500 and S&P400 index returns and a negative one between
them and outflows (Tables 22 and 23). We will come back more in depth in the end of the paper.

10

The low explanatory power of the regressions, both when regressing market returns on flows and when regressing
flows on past returns is due to the limited sample available. It is hard to expect that the behavior of a single fund
could affect the market index, explaining a large portion of its variation. This is confirmed by the fact that, running
the same regressions on the aggregate flows of the three funds added together, the explanatory power rises. On the
other hand, in terms of explaining funds inflows with market returns, there are idiosyncratic effects that get washed
out once more funds are pooled together. We report the disaggregated results because they provide an interesting
view on how investors’ heterogeneity (captured by differences in minimum investment requirements among funds)
affect their investment behavior.

14

To test the direction of causality more formally, we run a Geweke-Meese-Dent (1983)
test of causality, using market returns and flows into the funds. The results are represented in
Table 5. This test is robust to autocorrelation and to misspecification in the determination of the
correct number of lags11. Both types of specifications reject the null of no-causality from flows to
market returns, while fail to reject the null of no-causality in the other direction (from market
returns to funds’ inflows).
Of interest in is the lack of significance for the outflows on the second fund. This is the
fund with a minimum initial investment requirement equal to 100,000 dollars. We expect that the
investors in such a fund are more “sophisticated” and wealthier. This should reduce their
sensitivity to market short-term swings and, therefore, the sensitivity of outflows to market
negative returns.
These results are consistent with Warther's evidence using aggregate flows at the monthly level
for all mutual funds. With the benefit of daily data, however, we can reject the hypothesis that
investors are simply chasing the market intra-day.
One approach to measuring the effects of demand shocks is based on the assumption that
positive feedback trading, if it exists, cannot be solely confined to one day -- feedback trading
must also happen on the day following a big market move, if it occurred contemporaneously. To
see if we can reject positive feedback trading at daily intervals, we next regress flows on lagged
returns.

III.2 Futures Returns on Flows

11

We consider both the S&P500 returns and the difference between S&P500 and S&P400, as well as the aggregate
flows for the three funds

15

When new money flows in, the fund manager can either buy stocks or take a long
position in the futures market. In the former case, this could drive up futures prices. Given the
low transaction costs and high liquidity of the futures market and the possibility of higher
leverage that such a market offers, it is likely that this can be a preferred direction of investment
for fund managers. Therefore, analogous to what we did for the spot market, we regress futures
returns on contemporaneous inflows and outflows, according to:

Rt = α + β * I t + ε t
in the case of the inflows, and

Rt = α + β * Ot + ε t
in the case of the outflows. We consider the returns on the futures on the S&P500, the difference
between such futures and the spot index S&P500 and the difference between the futures on the
S&P500 and the futures on the S&P40012. As with the spot price, all the regressions are
significant, showing a positive correlation between inflows and futures returns and a negative
one between outflows and futures returns. This tells us that the two markets are linked—either by
fund manager activity or by arbitrage across them.
We report the key results in Tables 6-7. In particular three results are worth mentioning.
First, the data tell us that fund managers may invest at least part of their new money in the futures
markets taking long positions. But the behavior in the futures markets changes according to the
nature of the flow. New inflows appear to affect first the futures market. Therefore the return
differential between futures and spot market is positively correlated to inflows. Outflows, on the
contrary, appear to induce the managers to first liquidate their spot positions. This induces a
positive correlation between outflows and the futures-spot return differentials. In terms of

16

differential with respect to the S&P400 futures, the results are more uncertain. They are
significant only if we consider the total inflows aggregated and not, as we have done up to now,
fund by fund. In this case they show a positive relationship between inflows and returns
differential between S&P500 and S&P400.

III.3 Flows on Returns
To investigate the effects of past returns on the decision to invest in funds, we consider
two specifications. The first is a regression of inflows (outflows) on contemporaneous returns
and past (one-period lagged) inflows (outflows). The second is a regression of inflows (outflows)
on multiple lagged returns and inflows (outflows).
The first specification is given by:

I t = α + β * Rt + γ * I t −1 + ε t
for the inflows and:

Ot = α + β * Rt + γ * Ot −1 + ε t
for the outflows. Lagged flows are used to control for trend. Two specifications are considered:
one with returns on the S&P 500 index and one with the difference between these returns and
those on the S&P 400 index. Given that the results agree we report and describe the former,
referring to the last section of the paper for a proper description of the latter.
In the second specification, we test the lagged influence of returns on flows, estimating the
following equations:
N

N

k =0

k =1

I t = α + ∑ β k * Rt − k + ∑ δ k * I t − k ε t

12

See note 6.

17

for the inflows and
N

N

k =0

k =1

Ot = α + ∑ β k * Rt − k + ∑ δ k * Ot − k ε t

for the outflows. Here N represents the number of days we included in the regression. To keep
the specification parsimonious and, at the same time, to include the salient lags, we consider six
lags (N=5). This covers the full trading week and picks up the returns of the last day of the
previous week.
The results of the regression of flows on S&P500 returns are reported in Tables 8 and 9
13

. They show a strong positive correlation of inflows on contemporaneous returns and a negative

one between outflows and contemporaneous returns. This specification confirms the results of
the previous sections. It also allows us to better control for trends in the flows by explicitly
modeling the temporal dependence by adding of the lagged dependent variable. Analogous
results are reported for the relationship between funds’ flows and futures market returns (not
reported in the tables).
Results for lagged returns are reported in Tables 10 and 11 for the spot market case and in
Tables 12 and 13 for the futures market case. Notice that lack of explanatory power of the
regression and the absence of significance for the explanatory variables rule out any causal
relationship from past returns to funds’ inflows. The behavior of the inflows for all the three
funds suggest that when investors decide to invest, they do not chase the trend. In the case of the
outflows, on the contrary, a relationship seems to exist for the first and third fund, while no
relationship is detectable for the second fund. This is justifiable in term of its peculiar fee

18

structure. The existence of a statistically significant relationship between outflows and past
returns and the lack of any relationship between these and inflows, seems to suggest an
asymmetric behavior by investors who react more quickly to bad than to good news.
It is interesting to note that lagged net inflows (not reported in the tables) are never
significant, either considering the three funds separately, or aggregating the data14. This should
sound as a warning towards that part of the literature that, lacking a separate availability of data
on inflows and outflows, has relied on net flows and point toward the need to separately analyze
inflows and outflows.
In general the results seem to suggest the lack of sophisticated trend-chasing strategies by
the investors, and the existence of a certain degree of over-reaction by risk-averse investors to
bad news. It is worth noticing that these results contrast with the results found in studies with
lower frequencies (quarterly) where it seems that investors react more to positive returns that to
negative ones. Also, using daily data, we thus confirm Warther’s hypothesis that feedback trading
is not driving the relationship between monthly flows and returns (at least for the case of
inflows). The higher frequency data allow us to clearly pin down the direction of causality, from
inflows to market returns and not vice-versa. The results on the funds’ flows-futures returns in a
following section strongly confirms this hypothesis, and suggests that the effect of fund share
purchases and sales is upon the spot as well as the futures market.

III.4 Explaining Fund Flows

13

We tested for the robustness of the estimations, using different standardizations of the flows. As the results agree
we do not report them, but are available upon requests from the authors.
14
This fits with the previous results that, for the tests of Granger causality find a more significant relationship for the
outflows than for the inflows.

19

Although we find no support for positive feedback trading, the general question of what
motivates the flows in and out of index funds is an important one. We would expect that most of
the inflows and outflows are the result of liquidity trading by uninformed investors.

We

examined the data for evidence of seasonality at the monthly and daily levels to see if inflows
occurred at regular intervals. We expected, for example, that end of year and beginning of month
inflows would be stronger due to deposit of paychecks and bonuses. We do not report the results
of this because we found virtually no seasonal variation in flows.

The only evidence of

seasonality we found was in the strength of the coefficients in the regressions themselves. Flows
responded more strongly in January, as well as on Mondays, for example. We do not know why.

III.5 Risk and Uncertainty
The analysis so far has mainly focused on the first moment of returns. We have shown,
that, unlike previous literature assumed, people react more to negative than to positive
performance, suggesting that investors’ behavior is strongly driven by risk aversion. We now go
more in depth into this aspect of investors’ behavior, looking directly at how investors' behavior
is affected by risk. In particular, we will focus on investors’ reaction to risk. We will also look at
how expert opinion (i.e. analysts’ reports) affect investors’ behavior: the results indicate that,
even in this case, the second moment (i.e.: volatility and dispersion of beliefs) affect investors
more than average returns.
Volatility is a natural variable to use to explain flows, since we expect risk to influence
investor portfolio choice.

Not only do we have current volatility to use as an explanatory

variable for flows, but we also have measures of future volatility. In addition to risk measures
per se we also have measures correlated to "disagreement" among participants in the financial

20

markets. In particular, the traditional financial microstructure literature usually identifies
dispersion of beliefs with open interest and risk with implied volatility. Our analysis offers us
the opportunity to reconsider such identification.
We therefore look at the relationship between flows and implied volatility and open
interest on the futures on the index. To control for spurious correlation, open interest is
considered both before and after standardization by the mean value of the market capitalization.
In particular, we test:

I t = α + β * Rt + γ * I t −1 + δOI t + ε t
and

Ot = α + β * Rt + γ * Ot −1 + δ * OI t + ε
where OI represents the open interest on futures on the S&P 500.
Beyond checking the robustness of earlier results the objective of this test to see how the decision
to invest in index funds is affected by the global level of uncertainty prevailing in the market. For
this second purpose we also use the implied volatility, estimating directly:

I t = α + β * I t −1 + γ * IVt + ε t
and

Ot = α + β * Ot −1 + γIVt + ε t
In this case the implied volatility (IV) directly proxies for the level of market uncertainty and
riskiness. Tables 14-17 report the results of the regressions of flows on contemporaneous open
interest (Tables 14 and 15) and implied volatility (Tables 16 and 17) of the S&P 500 index.
The coefficients on implied volatility are always highly significant and positive, for both inflows
and outflows. A Granger causality test between flows and volume and volatility, (not reported in

21

the table) indicate a two-way-causality between them. This would fit with the intuition that future
market risk, as well as dispersion in current beliefs, accentuate the index fund flows. On the
contrary, open interest affects only outflows. Also, although not reported, the added absolute
values of daily inflows and outflows are strongly correlated to volume, volatility and open
interest.
These results seem to suggest that open interest could be a good proxy of market
riskiness, while implied volatility would proxy for dispersion of beliefs. Indeed, higher riskiness
should affect outflows, with a negative or zero effect on inflows, while dispersion of beliefs
should increase both inflows and outflows, as it increases both the people who flock in the
market under the expectation of higher returns and the people who leave it, fearing lower returns.
And this is indeed what the results suggest.
We will see later how dispersion in the beliefs of the financial analysts, again play a
stronger role than their average recommendations. All this seems to portray a clear picture of
investors’ risk aversion, very different from the one traditionally observed at lower frequency.

III.6 Market timing newsletters
Next, we look at the relationship between market timing newsletters and investment
flows into the funds. Some fund flow is likely due to speculative trading as opposed to liquidity
trading.

What information do these speculators use?

We consider a number of potential

information sources for speculative trading: macro-economic data and expert recommendations.
Although Graham and Harvey (1996) found little evidence that these newsletters as a
whole had any timing ability, they never the less appear to generate self-sustaining profits

22

through subscriptions. In order to determine the influence of expert opinion on the inflows and
outflows, first we regress flows on the mean value of recommendations:

Ft = α + MRt + Infot + ε t
and on their cross-sectional dispersion:

Ft = α + SRt + Infot + ε t
Here MR and SR are, respectively, the mean value of the recommendations and their dispersion
(calculated as standard deviation)15. Both the specifications are tested alone and including
additional "information variables" (Info). These variables have been widely used in the literature.
In particular, a number of papers have pointed out that macroeconomic variables may help
explain variations in the equity premium in the short run. Ferson and Schadt (1995) point out
that performance evaluation of fund managers should take into account the value of conditioning
on macroeconomic conditioning. Graham and Harvey (1996) explicitly test the timing ability of
newsletters by conditioning upon macroeconomic variables. We use these variables to control
for other additional sources of information investors can base their behavior on. The natural
candidates we consider are the 3-month interest rate, the quality spread, the term spread between
long and short term bonds and the dividend yield. It is a very strong test of the impact of the
newsletters, as additional explanatory power would imply an information set not directly
contained in that of the other existing variables and, therefore, superior capacity as leading
indicator. The average of the contemporaneous and lagged mean value is used to capture effects
due to the lagged arrival of reports.16

15

As mentioned before, to properly account for the time it takes to reach the investors, both MR and SR are
calculated as the average between the values at time t and t-1.
16 Alternatively, we also estimated the same regressions the median value. Given that the results for the mean and
median recommendations coincide we will refer only to those using the mean.

23

The results are reported in Tables 18 and 19 for the average investors’ recommendations
and in Tables 20 and 21 for the dispersion of analysts’ beliefs. They show that recommendations
to invest into stocks increase inflows into index funds, reducing outflows. The results are
strongly more significant for the outflows (except for the second fund for which the specific type
of exit fee affects the results). The inflows are significant only for the first fund.
Interestingly, the flows seem to be more strongly affected by the dispersion of opinion
among analysts, than by their average recommendations. In particular a higher dispersion of
newsletter opinions lowers the inflows and increases the outflows. This confirms the earlier
results that risk averse investors tend to react more to uncertainty and risk and less according to a
return-chasing behavior.
In general, analysis of the investment timing newsletter recommendation seems to suggest
that the markets follow analysts' suggestions, increasing the investment into the funds and
reducing their divestments from them, whenever analysts' reports "agree" on suggesting to invest
into stocks.

III.7 Permanent or Temporary Price Effects?
An important issue is whether these uninformed investor demand shocks are temporary or
permanent and if temporary, can they be arbitraged by program traders. S&P index funds in
general promise investors end-of-day pricing.

That is, they promise investors that share

redemptions and purchases will be executed at same-day closing prices. We expect that the
funds thus minimize tracking error by entering market on close orders for the net dollar value of
their flows. By its very nature, however, a market-on-close price is not arbitrageable against the

24

futures market. The question is how this change of the market-on-close price will affect future
prices, that is, if it will revert the following day.
Prices are assumed to mean-revert if the information shock is a transitory idiosyncratic
shock, while no mean reversion takes place if the public flow of information is about permanent
news. Using flows and returns we can test if the idiosyncratic demand shocks due to funds’ flows
are permanent or temporary or permanent. If they are temporary, we expect them to revert over
night or in the following days, originating a negative correlation between flows and future
returns. If the shocks are, instead, permanent they should be incorporated into prices and no
correlation should be found in the following days. To test this hypothesis we looked at the
relations between funds’ flows and index returns. In particular, we run the following regressions:
N

N

k =0

k =0

Rt = α + ∑ β k * Rt − k + ∑ δ k * I t − k ε t
and
N

N

k =0

k =0

Rt = α + ∑ β k * Rt − k + ∑ δ k * Ot − k ε t
where R are the percentage daily returns on the S&P 500, both spot and futures.
For our experiments we consider three intervals: the interval market opening-to-market
closing, the interval closing of the previous day-closing of the following day, the interval
between market closing of the previous day and market opening of the following day. Then we
consider the relationship between flows and market returns for the successive N days, where N is
assumed to be equal to 5, to consider all the weekly effects. The rationale behind these tests is
the idea that if there is mean reversion in returns, we would expect to find correlation between
past flows and returns. If, on the contrary, the demand shocks are permanent, no correlation is

25

expected between past flows and returns. Therefore, testing the null hypothesis of no-mean
reversion is equivalent to testing the hypothesis that all the δs are equal to zero or not significant.
The results (not reported as all of them not statistically significant) hold for all the
different specifications, with both spot returns, futures returns and fail to reject the null
hypothesis of no-mean reversion. In particular, they show a strong contemporaneous relationship
between flows and returns, and no relationship at all between flows and future returns.
The lack of correlation between the overnight price change and the flows in the previous
day and between then flows and returns in the following and the other consecutive days (not
reported in the tables) seem to confirm the hypothesis that the shocks due to funds inflows are
not temporary, but are permanent. This test of market reaction to liquidity trading seems to
rejects the long-standing tenet that liquidity trading shocks mean revert and are temporary.
One possible implication of the permanent nature of demand shocks is that the growth of
the stock market during the last period of study may, in part, be a product of demand, not
economic fundamentals like dividend yields. To further analyze this issue, we look at the
relationship between the S&P500 and the S&P400 index. If index funds played any role, we
would expect that the difference in stock market growth between S&P500 and S&P400 be
affected by the behavior of the S&p500 index funds.
As a first preliminary test, we looked at the size and significance of the coefficients
representing the impact of flows in index funds on the S&P500 index, calculated with rolling
regressions, over 600 day moving windows. Figure 1 reports the point values of the coefficients,
as well as their estimated standard deviations. The increasing significance, as well as size of the
impact of fund flows is striking and can be due to the growing absolute size of the index fund
industry as well as to it increasing more important relative role.

26

In Figure 2 and 3 three indexes have been considered: S&P400 and S&P500 and a new
index that has been constructed deducting from the S&P500 index the part of it growth due to the
impact of the net (inflows net of outflows) index funds. The new index has been constructed
calculating the impact of the net flows in index funds in the index, through a regression over the
entire sample period (Figure 2) and through a series of rolling regressions of the index returns on
funds’ flows and using the estimated coefficients to calculate the part of the returns due to the
impact of funds’ flows (Figure 3). The resulting index has been constructed taking out the
cumulated component due to the funds. The figure is striking: a large portion of the spread
between the two indexes may be due to net demand shocks.
To test for the significance of the results, we run a series of bootstrapping experiments.
For the coefficient measuring the impact of fund flows on the S&P500 calculated on the entire
period (Figure 2) and for each coefficient calculated for each single rolling regressions (Figure
3), we calculated confidence bands bootstrapped 5,000 times and constructing 95% intervals
around the estimated coefficients. Using these as new coefficients, we then calculated the bands
for the new constructed index (the so called “ S&P500 net of fund effects”). The bands are
reported as “Upper Band” and “Lower Band”. The relatively narrow dimension of the bands with
respects to the difference between the new constructed index and the S&P ones, allows us to
reject the hypothesis that the net effect on demand on market price level is zero.
In short, the important role played by the index funds is shown not only by the huge
difference (-36%) between the two indexes that can be explained in terms of funds’ flows
(Figures 2 and 3), but also by the increasing significance of the explanatory power of the
coefficients of funds’ flows on the index over time (Figure 1). This striking growth of

27

explanatory power coincides with both the fast growth of the stock index and the development of
the index fund industry and the growth in size of the three funds we considered.
To test this hypothesis more rigorously, we estimated the following specifications:
N

SRt = α + ∑ β k * NFt − k + ε t
k =0

N

FRt = α + ∑ β k * NFt − k + ε t
k =0

We considered alternative specifications, where SR is the difference between the returns
on the S&P500 spot and the returns on the S&P400 spot index and FR is the difference between
the return on the S&P500 futures and the S&P400 futures index. Given that we are looking for a
direct effect of investment in index funds on market returns, we consider the net flows (NF ia
given by Inflows minus Outflows). In Tables 22 and 23 are reported the results of the effects of
flows on the S&P500-S&P400 spot and futures spread. The results confirm the intuition that the
spread between S&P500 and S&P400, both spot and futures is strongly influenced by flows in
index funds. The more money flows into index funds, the more these influence market returns
increasing the value of the stocks part of the S&P500 basket.

V Conclusions
Our analysis of high frequency flow of funds data for a set of large S&P 500 index funds
strongly suggests that investor demand influences stock returns but not vice-versa. Using higherfrequency data and being able to consider both inflows and outflows separately, we show that
investors are more affected by risk than by performance. We show that they tend not to chase
positive trends in returns, while they over-react to negative returns immediately liquidating their

28

positions in the funds. This asymmetric behavior is the inverse of the one traditionally found in
the mutual fund industry at lower frequencies and raises interesting questions. In particular, it is
worth investigating if the difference in results are due to a structural difference in behavior
between mutual fund and index fund investors, suggesting some sort of “clientele” hypothesis to
test, or if these results are driven by the higher precision provided by daily data. In the latter case,
the whole traditional analysis of investors’ behavior has to be at best reformulated.
We also find some other interesting determinants of investor demand, including risk
variables and expert recommendations. An analysis of the dynamics of the S&P 500 futures
basis suggests that the variations due to demand shocks are largely permanent. Also, the analysis
of the effects of funds’ flows on the difference in behavior between the S&P500 and the S&P400
indexes, both spot and futures sheds some light on the driving force behind the strong growth
experienced by the stock exchange during the last decade.

29

References

(1) Bakshi, G. S. and C. Zhiwu , 1994, “Baby Boom, Population Aging and Capital Markets”,
Journal of Business 67, 165-201.
(2) Beneish, M.D. and R. Whaley, 1996, "An Anatomy of the 'S&P Game': The Effects of
Changing the Rules", Journal of Finance December, 1909-1930.
(3) Busse, J. 1998, “ Volatility Timing in mutual funds: evidence from daily returns”,
N.Y.U. Stern Business School, Mimeo.
(4) Campbell, J., Grossman, S. and J. Wang., 1992 “Trading volume and serial correlations in
stock returns”, NBER Working Paper #4193
(5) Chan, L. and J. Lakonishok, 1995, “The Behavior of Stock Prices Around Institutional
Trades”, Journal of Finance, 1147-74.
(6) Chan, L. and J. Lakonishok, April 1993, “Institutional Trades and Intraday Stock Price
Behavior”, Journal of Financial Economics, 33(2), 173-99.
(7) Chevalier, J. and G. Ellison, August 1995, “Risk taking by mutual funds as a response to
incentives”, NBER Working Paper #5234.
(8) Chordia T., 1996, "The structure of mutual fund charges" The Journal of Financial
Economics, 41: (1) 3-39.
(9) Constantinides, G., J. Donaldson and R. Mahra, 1998, "Junior Can't Borrow: A New
Perspective on the Equity Premium Puzzle," NBER Working Paper #6617
(10) De-Long, J. B., A. Shleifer, L. H. Summers and R. J. Waldmann, June 1990, “Positive
Feedback Investment Strategies and Destabilizing Rational Speculation”, Journal of Finance,
45(2), 379-395.
(11) Dent, J., Geweke, R. and W. Meese (1983) “Comparing Alternative Tests of Causality in
Temporal Systems: Analytic Results and Experimental Evidence “ Journal of Econometrics,
21(2), pages 161-94..
(12) Ferson, W. and R. Schadt, 1995, “Measuring Fund Strategy and Performance
in Changing Economic Conditions”, Journal of Finance
(13) Ferson, W. and V. A. Warther, 1995, “Evaluating Fund Performance in a Dynamic
Market”, Financial Analysts Journal.

30

(14) Fridson, M. S. and Jonsson, J. (1995), “ Spread versus Treasuries and the riskiness of highyield bonds”, The Journal of Fixed Income, December, 79-88
(15) Garry M. and W. Goetzmann, 1986, “Does de-listing from the S&P500 affect stock price?”,
Financial Analysts Journal, 42(2) 64-69.
(16) Graham, J.R and C., R.Harvey (1996) “Market Timing Ability and Volatility Implied in
Investment Newsletters' Asset Allocation Recommendations “ Journal of Financial Economics,
42(3), 397-421.
(17) Harris, L. and Gurel, 1986, "Price and Volume Effects Associated with Changes in the
Standard and Poors 500 List -- New Evidence for the Existence of Price Pressures" Journal of
Finance 41: (4) 815-829.
(18) Lakonishok, J. and A. Shleifer, August 1992, “The Impact of Institutional
Trading on Stock Prices”, Journal of Financial Economics, 32(l), 23-43.
(19) Lakonishok, J., 1991, “Window Dressing by Pension Fund Managers”, American Economic
Review, 81(2), 227-31.
(20) Lakonishok, J., A. Shleifer, and R. W. Vishny, 1991, “Do Institutional Investors Destabilize
Stock Prices? Evidence on Herding and Feedback Trading” , NBER Working Paper: 3846.
(21) Lynch, A. W. and R.R, Mendenhall, 1997, "New evidence on stock price effects associated
with changes in the S&P 500 index", Journal of Business 70: (3) 351-383.
(22) Shiller, R, (1998) “ Comment on Vincent Warther, "Has the Rise of Mutual Funds
Increased Market Instability?" “ Brooking-Wharton Papers
(23) Shleifer, A., July 1986, Do Demand Curves for Stocks Slope Down?, Journal of Finance,
41(3), 579-590.
(24) Sias, R.W. and Starks, L.T. (1996) “Return Autocorrelation and Institutional Investors”,
Journal of Financial Economics, 46, 103-31.
(25) Sirri, E. R. and P. Tufano (1993), “Buying and selling mutula funds: flows, performance,
fees and service”, Working Paper, Harvard Business School.
(26) Warther, V. A., 1995, Aggregate Mutual Fund Flows and Security returns, Journal of
Financial Economics, 39, 209-235.
(27) Whaley, R. E. and Messod, 1996, D. “An Anatomy of the "S&P Game": The Effects of
Changing the Rules”, Journal of Finance; 51(5), 1909-30.

31

(28) Whaley, R., M.H. Miller and J. Muthuswamy 1994, "Mean Reversion of S&P 500 Index
Basis Changes: Arbitrage-Induced or Statistical Illusion?", Journal of Finance 49, 479-513.
(29) Zheng, L. 1997, "Stock Prices and Investment Cash Flows," Yale School of Management
Working Paper, 1997.

32

Table 1
Statistics of funds’ inflows and outflows
All the observations are daily. For Spartan Market Index and Spartan U.S. Equity Index they cover the period 1/4/93-12/31/97. For
V.I.P.Fund, the period is 5/23/94-12/31/97. All the values are expressed in millions.

Mean

Standard deviation

Median

Spartan Market Index Inflows

2.99

4.13

1.19

Spartan US Equity Index Inflows

9.05

13.52

5.21

V.I.P. Fund Inflows

2.13

2.38

1.42

Spartan Market Index Outflows

1.06

1.57

0.46

Spartan US Equity Index Outflows

6.19

11.12

2.96

V.I.P. Fund Outflows

0.46

1.19

0.07

Table 2
Correlation of funds’ inflows and outflows
All the observations are daily. For Spartan Market Index and Spartan U.S. Equity Index they cover the period 1/4/93-12/31/97. For
V.I.P.Fund, the period is 5/23/94-12/31/97.

Spartan Market Index Inflows

1.00

0.33

0.73

-0.54

-0.19

-0.23

Spartan US Equity Index Inflows

0.33

1.00

0.31

-0.20

-0.40

-0.05

V.I.P. Fund Inflows

0.73

0.31

1.00

-0.44

-0.16

-0.16

Spartan Market Index Outflows

-0.54

-0.20

-0.44

1.00

0.26

0.52

Spartan US Equity Index Outflows

-0.19

-0.40

-0.17

0.26

1.00

0.11

V.I.P. Fund Outflows

-0.23

-0.05

-0.16

0.52

0.11

1.00

33

TABLE 3
Spot market returns and funds’ inflows
The functional specification is Rt = α + γInflowst + εt, where Rt is the percentage return on the S&P 500 spot
index and Inflowst are the contemporaneous inflows in the index funds. The inflows are standardized dividing
them by the average market capitalization in the previous 160 days. The estimations are White-corrected to
control for heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation. All the observations are daily. For Spartan Market Index and
Spartan U.S. Equity Index they cover the period 1/4/93-12/31/97. For V.I.P.Fund, the period is 5/23/9412/31/97. A bootstrap of the t-statistics was performed by repeatedly constructing a pseudo-history for the S&P
by randomly drawing from the dependent variable with replacement and re-performing the regression. The
probability of observing a t-value greater than the magnitude of the observed t-value in each regression under
this null is less than 1%.
Dependent Variable: S&P 500 RETURN
Independent
Variables

Spartan Market Index

Spartan U.S. Equity Index

V.I.P Fund

Constant

Value
0.0001

T Stat.
0.36

Value
0.0003

T Stat
1.09

Value
-0.001

T. Stat.
-1.91

Fund’s Inflowst

0.001

2.50

0.0002

2.36

0.004

4.10

Corrected R2

0.008

0.005

0.05

Durbin Watson

1.97

1.97

1.96

Number of
Observations

1105

1105

755

TABLE 4
Spot market returns and funds’ outflows:
The functional specification is Rt = α + γOutflowst + εt, where Rt is the percentage return on the S&P 500 spot
index and Outflowst are the contemporaneous outflows in the index funds. The outflows are standardized
dividing them by the average market capitalization in the previous 160 days. The estimations are White-corrected
to control for heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation. All the observations are daily. For Spartan Market Index
and Spartan U.S. Equity Index they cover the period 1/4/93-12/31/97. For V.I.P.Fund, the period is 5/23/9412/31/97. A bootstrap of the t-statistics was performed by repeatedly constructing a pseudo-history for the S&P
by randomly drawing from the dependent variable with replacement and re-performing the regression. The
probability of observing a t-value greater than the magnitude of the observed t-value in the first and third
regression under this null is less than 1%.
Dependent Variable: S&P 500 RETURN
Independent
Variables
Constant
Fund’s Outflowst
Corrected R2
Durbin Watson
Number of Obs.

Spartan Market Index

Spartan U.S. Equity Index

Value
0.001
-0.003
0.01
1.97
1105

Value
0.0008
-0.00002
0
1.96
1105

T Stat.
5.38
-2.83

34

T Stat
3.62
-0.17

VIP Fund
Value
0.002
-0.012
0.10
1.99
755

T. Stat.
5.95
-3.73

Table 5
Tests of causality of the relationship between
funds’ flows and market returns
The causality tests are based on the Geweke-Meese-Dent specification, where the dependent
variable is regressed on the lagged dependent variable itself and on the leads, lags and the
contemporaneous values of the “exogenous” variable. The test is based on the exclusion of the
lead values. The spot market return is the percentage return on the S&P 500 spot index, while the
futures market return is the percentage return on the S&P 500 futures index. The inflows and the
outflows are standardized dividing them by the average market capitalization in the previous 160
days. The estimations are White-corrected to control for heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation.
All the observations are daily and the inflows and outflows are calculated adding up the inflows
and outflows for the three funds (Spartan Market Index , Spartan U.S. Equity Index and the
V.I.P.Fund) .
Number of lags = 6

Number of lags = 12

Chi-square

Significance

Chi-square

Significance

Inflows cause Spot Returns

7.47

0.06

18.57

0.005

Inflows cause Futures Returns

16.68

0.0008

27.83

0.0001

Outflows cause Spot Returns

0.89

0.82

4.10

0.66

Outflows cause Futures Returns

1.16

0.76

4.61

0.59

Spot Returns cause Inflows

3.60

0.31

9.58

0.14

Futures Returns cause Inflows

4.31

0.24

8.93

0.18

Spot Returns cause Outflows

5.62

0.13

8.59

0.20

Futures Returns cause Outflows

8.72

0.03

12.55

0.05

Direction of causality

35

TABLE 6
Futures market returns and funds’ inflows:
The functional specification is Rt = α + γInflowst + εt, where Rt is the percentage return on the S&P 500 futures
index and Inflowst are the contemporaneous inflows in the index funds. The inflows are standardized dividing
them by the average market capitalization in the previous 160 days. The estimations are White-corrected to
control for heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation. All the observations are daily. For Spartan Market Index and
Spartan U.S. Equity Index they cover the period 1/4/93-12/31/97. For V.I.P.Fund, the period is 5/23/9412/31/97.
Dependent Variable: S&P 500 RETURN
Independent
Variables
Constant
Fund’s Inflowst

Spartan Market Index

Spartan U.S. Equity Index

V.I.P Fund

Value
-0.00004

T Stat.
-0.11

Value
0.00016

T Stat
0.53

Value
-0.0016

T. Stat.
-2.12

0.0012

2.46

0.0002

2.47

0.0055

3.92

Corrected R2

0.12

0.007

0.054

Durbin Watson

2.10

2.10

2.10

Number of
Observations

1105

1105

1105

TABLE 7
Futures market returns and funds’ outflows
The functional specification is Rt = α + γOutflowst + εt, where Rt is the percentage return on the S&P 500
futures index and Outflowst are the contemporaneous inflows in the index funds. The outflows are standardized
dividing them by the average market capitalization in the previous 160 days. The estimations are White-corrected
to control for heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation. All the observations are daily. For Spartan Market Index
and Spartan U.S. Equity Index they cover the period 1/4/93-12/31/97. For V.I.P.Fund, the period is 5/23/9412/31/97.
Dependent Variable: S&P 500 RETURN
Independent
Variables

Spartan Market Index

Spartan U.S. Equity Index

VIP Fund

Constant

Value
0.0012

T Stat.
4.31

Value
0.0007

T Stat
2.94

Value
0.002

T. Stat.
5.43

Fund’s Outflowst

-0.0021

-1.99

-0.000003

-0.27

-0.012

-3.38

Corrected R2

0.003

0

0.07

Durbin Watson

2.11

2.10

2.14

Number of
Observations

1105

1105

755

36

TABLE 8
Funds’ inflows and spot market returns:
The functional specification is Inflowst = α + γ Rt + εt, where Inflowst are the inflows in the index funds at time t
and Rt is the percentage return on the S&P 500 spot index at t-k. The inflows are standardized dividing them by
the average market capitalization in the previous 160 days .To capture all the week effects we considered k=5.
The estimations are corrected to control for heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation. All the observations are daily.
For Spartan Market Index and Spartan U.S. Equity Index they cover the period 1/4/93-12/31/97. For V.I.P.Fund,
the period is 5/23/94-12/31/97. The constant and S&P500 Returnt coefficients are divided by 105
Dependent Variable: Fund’s Inflowst
Independent
Variables

Spartan Market Index

Constant
S&P500 Returnt
Fund’s Inflowst-1

Value
3.38
325.4
0.88
0.66

Corrected R2
Durbin Watson
Number of
Observations

2.10
1262

Spartan U.S. Equity Index

T Stat.
5.13
3.74
66.65

Value
39.74
1004.9
0.55
0.09

V.I.P Fund

T Stat
11.75
2.22
23.56

Value
3.30
609.15
0.82
0.53

2.05
1262

T. Stat.
5.88
9.60
44.76

2.07
913

TABLE 9
Funds’ outflows and spot market returns:
The functional specification is Outflowst = α + γRt + εt, where Outflowst are the outflows in the index funds at
time t and Rt is the percentage return on the S&P 500 spot index at t-k. The outflows are standardized dividing
them by the average market capitalization in the previous 160 days . To capture all the week effects we
considered k=5. The estimations are corrected to control for heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation. All the
observations are daily. For Spartan Market Index and Spartan U.S. Equity Index they cover the period 1/4/9312/31/97. For V.I.P.Fund, the period is 5/23/94-12/31/97. The constant and S&P500 Returnt coefficients are
divided by 105
Dependent Variable: Fund’s Outflowst
Independent
Variables
Constant
S&P500 Returnt
Fund’s Outflowst-1
Corrected R2
Durbin Watson
Number of
Observations

Spartan Market Index
Value
1.19
-312.46
0.84
0.54
2.12
1262

T Stat.
6.97
-8.3
55.74

Spartan U.S. Equity Index
Value
57.53
-180.64
0.073
0.004
2.00
1262

37

T Stat
11.40
-0.31
1.74

V.I.P Fund
Value
3.74
-419.03
0.27
0.15
2.10
913

T. Stat.
5.23
-6.13
3.54

TABLE 10
Funds’ inflows and lagged spot returns:
The functional specification is Inflowst = α + γ ∑Nk=1Rt-k + εt, where Inflowst are the inflows in the index funds at
time t and Rt-k is the percentage return on the S&P 500 spot index at t-k. The inflows are standardized dividing
them by the average market capitalization in the previous 160 days. To capture all the week effects we
considered k=5. The estimations are corrected to control for heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation. All the
observations are daily. For Spartan Market Index and Spartan U.S. Equity Index they cover the period 1/4/9312/31/97. For V.I.P.Fund, the period is 5/23/94-12/31/97. The constant and S&P500 Return coefficients are
divided by 105
Dependent Variable: Fund’s Inflowst
Spartan Market Index
Spartan U.S. Equity Index
V.I.P Fund
Independent
Variables
Value
T Stat.
Value
T Stat
Value
T. Stat.
Constant
0.06
2.69
0.79
8.83
0.04
3.29
6.90
4.34
28.45
2.58
11.67
9.01
S&P500 Returnt
-0.74
-0.45
-16.9
-1.3
-2.90
-1.19
S&P500 Returnt-1
0.21
0.13
3.45
0.25
0.77
0.46
S&P500 Returnt-2
0.53
0.33
8.77
0.63
-1.44
-0.86
S&P500 Returnt-3
4.51
2.79
-2.68
-0.2
1.75
1.09
S&P500 Returnt-4
1.69
1.06
15.55
1.4
-2.09
-2.15
S&P500 Returnt-5
0.21
7.07
0.69
23.22
0.88
23.98
Fund’s Inflowst-1
0.14
5.07
-0.31
-8.58
-0.43
-8.9
Fund’s Inflowst-2
0.069
2.37
0.23
6.43
0.39
7.85
Fund’s Inflowst-3
0.12
4.12
-0.13
-3.65
-0.14
-2.97
Fund’s Inflowst-4
0.34
12.10
0.10
3.57
0.21
5.92
Fund’s Inflowst-5
0.69
0.04
0.45
Corrected R2
Durbin Watson
1.99
2.00
1.98
Number of Obs.
1099
1099
749

38

TABLE 11
Funds’ outflows and lagged spot returns
The functional specification is Outflowst = α + γ ∑Nk=1Rt-k + εt, where Outflowst are the outflows in the index
funds at time t and Rt-k is the percentage return on the S&P 500 spot index at t-k. The outflows are standardized
dividing them by the average market capitalization in the previous 160 days. To capture all the week effects we
considered k=5. The estimations are corrected to control for heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation. All the
observations are daily. For Spartan Market Index and Spartan U.S. Equity Index they cover the period 1/4/9312/31/97. For V.I.P.Fund, the period is 5/23/94-12/31/97. The constant and S&P500 Return coefficients are
divided by 105
Dependent Variable: Fund’s Outflowst
Spartan Market Index
Spartan U.S. Equity Index
V.I.P Fund
Independent
Variables
Value
T Stat.
Value
T Stat
Value
T. Stat.
Constant
0.024
4.04
4.73
12.5
0.03
5.64
-4.65
-6.55
0.17
0.18
-7.96
-9.79
S&P500 Returnt
-3.36
-4.32
-3.97
-0.34
-2.04
-2.12
S&P500 Returnt-1
-1.22
-1.50
-2.56
-0.20
-0.37
-0.38
S&P500 Returnt-2
-1.97
-2.48
2.40
0.19
-1.12
-1.12
S&P500 Returnt-3
-2.04
-2.58
9.90
0.84
-1.28
-1.32
S&P500 Returnt-4
1.45
1.94
10.72
1.11
-2.29
-2.65
S&P500 Returnt-5
0.68
22.93
-0.77
-26.46
-0.63
17.46
Fund’s Outflowst-1
-0.15
-4.18
-0.56
-15.57
-0.22
-5.6
Fund’s Outflowst-2
0.17
4.86
-0.41
-10.78
0.21
5.02
Fund’s Outflowst-3
-0.01
-0.55
-0.31
-8.77
-0.05
-1.29
Fund’s Outflowst-4
0.22
7.82
-0.26
-9.10
0.11
3.22
Fund’s Outflowst-5
0.53
0.04
0.21
Corrected R2
Durbin Watson
1.99
1.99
2.02
Number of Obs.
1099
1099
749

39

TABLE 12
Funds’ inflows and lagged futures returns
The functional specification is Inflowst = α + β ∑Nk=0Rt-k + γ ∑Nk=1Inflowst-k +εt, where Inflowst represents the
inflows in the index funds at time t and Rt-k is the percentage return on the S&P 500 futures index at t-k. To
capture all the week effects we considered k=5. The estimations are White-corrected to control for
heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation. All the observations are daily. For Spartan Market Index and Spartan U.S.
Equity Index they cover the period 1/4/93-12/31/97. For V.I.P.Fund, the period is 5/23/94-12/31/97. The inflows
are standardized dividing them by the average market capitalization in the previous 160 days.
Dependent Variable: Fund’s Inflowst
Spartan Market Index
Spartan U.S. Equity Index
V.I.P Fund
Independent
Variables
Value
T Stat
Value
T Stat
Value
T Stat
Constant
0.06
2.75
0.80
8.87
0.04
3.23
6.82
4.78
29.61
3.01
11.30
9.89
S&P500 Returnt
-0.30
-0.20
-13.44
-1.19
-2.40
-1.75
S&P500 Returnt-1
-0.80
-0.54
-2.34
-0.20
0.57
0.39
S&P500 Returnt-2
0.30
0.20
12.66
1.079
-1.21
-0.84
S&P500 Returnt-3
3.43
2.33
-5.75
-0.51
1.45
1.05
S&P500 Returnt-4
1.80
1.25
18.21
1.84
-2.51
2.11
S&P500 Returnt-5
0.21
7.45
0.69
23.00
0.89
24.20
Fund’s Inflowst-1
0.15
5.41
-0.30
-8.33
-0.44
-8.99
Fund’s Inflowst-2
0.06
2.24
0.22
6.19
0.39
7.83
Fund’s Inflowst-3
0.11
4.02
-0.12
-3.44
-0.15
-3.14
Fund’s Inflowst-4
0.35
12.16
0.10
3.43
0.22
6.12
Fund’s Inflowst-5
0.69
0.04
0.46
Corrected R2
Durbin Watson
1.99
1.99
1.98
Number of
1099
1099
750
Observations

40

TABLE 13
Funds’ outflows and lagged futures returns
The functional specification is Outflowst = α + β ∑Nk=0Rt-k + γ ∑Nk=1Outflowst-k +εt, where Outflowst are the
outflows in the index funds at time t and Rt-k is the percentage return on the S&P 500 futures index at t-k. To
capture all the week effects we considered k=5. The estimations are White-corrected to control for
heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation. All the observations are daily. For Spartan Market Index and Spartan U.S.
Equity Index they cover the period 1/4/93-12/31/97. For V.I.P.Fund, the period is 5/23/94-12/31/97. The
outflows are standardized dividing them by the average market capitalization in the previous 160 days.
Dependent Variable: Fund’s Outflowst
Spartan Market Index
Spartan U.S. Equity Index
V.I.P Fund
Independent
Variables
Value
T Stat
Value
T Stat
Value
T Stat
Constant
0.023
3.98
4.73
12.56
0.04
5.60
-3.38
-5.31
4.44
0.51
-6.38
-8.77
S&P500 Returnt
-4.24
-6.30
-1.56
-0.14
-0.02
-0.025
S&P500 Returnt-1
1.09
1.58
-1.59
-0.13
0.44
0.53
S&P500 Returnt-2
-1.99
-2.88
-1.94
-0.16
-1.00
-1.19
S&P500 Returnt-3
-1.57
-2.28
8.07
0.74
-1.49
-1.79
S&P500 Returnt-4
1.68
2.57
10.30
1.19
2.27
2.97
S&P500 Returnt-5
0.66
22.47
-0.77
-26.44
0.62
17.01
Funds’Outflowst-1
-0.13
-3.78
-0.56
-15.54
-0.20
-4.66
Funds'Outflowst-2
0.16
4.68
-0.41
-10.77
0.20
4.85
Funds'Outflowst-3
-0.001
-0.22
-0.31
-8.76
-0.04
-1.01
Funds'Outflowst-4
0.22
7.71
-0.26
-9.11
0.11
3.13
Funds'Outflowst-5
0.04
0.04
0.20
Corrected R2
Durbin Watson
1.99
1.99
2.02
Number of
1099
1099
750
Observations

41

TABLE 14
Funds’ inflows and open interest:
The functional specification is Inflowst = α + βReturnt+γOpen Interestt+δ Inflowst-1 + εt, where Inflowst are the
inflows in the index funds at time t, Rt is the percentage return on the S&P 500 spot index at t. Open Interestt is
the number of outstanding contracts (shorts and longs) on the Futures on the S&P 500. It is standardized dividing
it by a rolling average of market capitalization in the previous 160 days. The estimations are corrected to control
for heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation. All the observations are daily. For Spartan Market Index and Spartan
U.S. Equity Index they cover the period 1/4/93-12/31/97. For V.I.P.Fund, the period is 5/23/94-12/31/97. The
inflows are standardized dividing them by the average market capitalization in the previous 160 days. The Open
Interest coefficients are divided by 106
Dependent Variable: Fund’s Inflowst
Independent
Variables

Spartan Market Index

Constant
Open Interestt
S&P500 Returnt
Fund’s Inflowst-1

Value
0.06
0.03
5.93
0.86
0.62

Corrected R2
Durbin Watson
Number of
Observations

2.10
1103

T Stat
1.41
0.47
3.58
58.00

Spartan U.S. Equity Index
Value
1.18
0.0001
25.24
0.41
0.03

T Stat
4.23
0.0062
2.42
14.94

2.0
1103

V.I.P Fund
Value
0.16
0.01
2.23
0.74
0.35

T Stat
0.05
0.12
0.87
30.31

2.09
751

TABLE 15
Funds’ outflows and open interest:
The functional specification is Outflowst = α + βReturnt+γOpen Interestt+δ Outflowst-1 + εt, where Outflowst are
the outflows in the index funds at time t, Rt is the percentage return on the S&P 500 spot index at t and Open
Interestt is the number of outstanding contracts (shorts and longs) on the Futures on the S&P 500. It is
standardized dividing it by a rolling average of market capitalization in the previous 160 days.. The estimations
are corrected to control for heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation. All the observations are daily. For Spartan
Market Index and Spartan U.S. Equity Index they cover the period 1/4/93-12/31/97. For V.I.P.Fund, the period is
5/23/94-12/31/97. The outflows are standardized dividing them by the average market capitalization in the
previous 160 days. The Open Interest coefficients are divided by 106
Dependent Variable: Fund’s Outflowst
Independent
Variables
Constant
Open Interestt
S&P500 Returnt
Fund’s Outflowst-1
Corrected R2
Durbin Watson
Number of
Observations

Spartan Market Index

Spartan U.S. Equity Index

V.I.P Fund

Value

T Stat

Value

T Stat

Value

T Stat

-0.004
0.09
-6.00
0.78
0.45

-0.02
3.00
-8.34
42.26

0.76
0.7
-3.59
0.17
0.00

2.77
1.51
-0.38
6.00

-0.068
0.24
-2.53
0.42
0.09

-1.90
4.10
-1.54
12.69

2.10
1103

2.00
1103

42

2.02
751

TABLE 16
Funds’ inflows and volatility:
The functional specification is Inflowst = α + βReturnt+γVolatilityt+δ Inflowst-1 + εt, where Inflowst are the
inflows in the index funds at time t, Rt is the percentage return on the S&P 500 spot index at t and Volatilityt is
the implied volatility on the S&P500 derived from the options written on it , at the money and with the shortest
maturity. The estimations are corrected to control for autocorrelation. All the observations are daily. For Spartan
Market Index and Spartan U.S. Equity Index they cover the period 1/4/93-12/31/97. For V.I.P.Fund, the period is
5/23/94-12/31/97. The inflows are standardized dividing them by the average market capitalization in the
previous 160 days.
Dependent Variable: Fund’s Inflowst
Independent
Variables

Spartan Market Index

Constant
Volatilityt
S&P500 Returnt
Fund’s Inflowst-1

Value
-0.08
1.58
5.87
0.80
0.63

Corrected R2
Durbin Watson
Number of
Observations

2.07
1103

T Stat
-2.30
5.24
3.56
45.08

Spartan U.S. Equity Index
Value
0.48
6.20
24.39
0.37
0.043

T Stat
2.33
3.87
2.35
13.40

2.00
1103

V.I.P Fund
Value
0.01
1.42
2.78
0.67
0.37

T Stat
0.43
4.62
1.09
24.9

2.06
751

TABLE 17
Funds’ outflows and volatility:
The functional specification is Outflowst = α + βReturnt+γVolatilityt+δ Outflowst-1 + εt, where Outflowst are the
outflows in the index funds at time t, Rt is the percentage return on the S&P 500 spot index at t and Volatilityt is
the implied volatility on the S&P500 derived from the options written on it , at the money and with the shortest
maturity. The estimations are corrected to control for autocorrelation. All the observations are daily. For Spartan
Market Index and Spartan U.S. Equity Index they cover the period 1/4/93-12/31/97. For V.I.P.Fund, the period is
5/23/94-12/31/97. The outflows are standardized dividing them by the average market capitalization in the
previous 160 days.
Dependent Variable: Fund’s Outflowst
Independent
Variables

Spartan Market Index

Constant
Volatilityt
S&P500 Returnt
Fund’s Outflowst-1

Value
-0.077
1.28
-5.96
0.64
0.49

Corrected R2
Durbin Watson
Number of
Observations

2.06
1103

T Stat
-5.7
9.26
-8.44
27.97

Spartan U.S. Equity Index
Value
-0.59
4.85
-3.97
0.15
0.006
1.99
1103

43

T Stat
-2.86
3.07
-0.40
5.26

V.I.P Fund
Value
-0.052
1.01
-2.37
0.37
0.10
2.01
751

T Stat
-1.92
5.09
-1.40
10.88

TABLE 18
Funds’ inflows and analysts’ recommendations:
The functional specification is Inflowst = α + βArecommendationt +γInformationt+δInflowst-1+ εt, where Inflowst
are the inflows in the index funds at time t and Arecommendationt is the percentage of the portfolio to be held in
stocks, calculated as average of daily analysts’ recommendations. It is the average of t and t-1 recommendations.
Informationt represents the amount of information publicly available on the market and is composed of the 3
Month Tbill rate, the Dividend Yield, the Term spread and the Quality Spread. The estimations are corrected to
control for autocorrelation. All the observations are daily. For Spartan Market Index and Spartan U.S. Equity
Index they cover the period 1/4/93-12/31/97. . The inflows are standardized dividing them by the average market
capitalization in the previous 160 days. For V.I.P.Fund, the period is 5/23/94-12/31/97.
Dependent Variable: Fund’s Inflowst
Spartan Market Index
Spartan U.S. Equity Index
V.I.P Fund
Independent
Variables
Value
T Stat.
Value
T Stat.
Value
T Stat.
Constant
0.82
3.10
3.00
1.85
0.31
0.57
0.42
2.45
1.19
1.13
0.16
1.00
Arecommendationt
0.04
2.31
0.04
0.33
0.10
1.15
3 Month T.Bill ratet
-0.45
-7.38
-1.06
-3.12
-0.45
-6.82
Dividend Yieldt
0.07
3.19
0.15
1.05
-0.42
-1.37
Term spreadt
0.18
0.94
0.40
0.32
-0.42
-1.37
Quality Spreadt
0.62
25.86
0.31
10.71
0.39
11.0
Fund’s Inflowst-1
0.66
0.07
0.40
Corrected R2
Durbin Watson
2.02
2.00
1.97
Number of Obs.
1103
1103
753
TABLE 19
Funds’ outflows and analysts’ recommendations:
The functional specification is Outflowst = α + βArecommendationt +γInformationt+δOutflowst-1+ εt, where
Outflowst are the outflows in the index funds at time t and Arecommendationt is the percentage of the portfolio to
be held in stocks, calculated as average of daily analysts’ recommendations. It is the average of t and t-1
recommendations. Informationt represents the amount of information publicly available on the market and is
composed of the 3 Month Tbill rate, the Dividend Yield, the Term spread and the Quality Spread. The
estimations are corrected to control for autocorrelation. All the observations are daily. For Spartan Market Index
and Spartan U.S. Equity Index they cover the period 1/4/93-12/31/97. For V.I.P.Fund, the period is 5/23/9412/31/97. Outflows are standardized dividing them by the average market capitalization in the previous 160 days.
Dependent Variable: Fund’s Outflowst
Spartan Market Index
Spartan U.S. Equity Index
V.I.P Fund
Independent
Variables
Value
T Stat.
Value
T Stat.
Value
T Stat.
Constant
1.28
9.29
4.91
2.30
1.56
3.30
-0.26
-3.25
-0.90
-0.65
-0.43
-3.00
Arecommendationt
-0.01
-1.96
-0.01
-0.06
-0.03
-0.40
3 Month T.Bill ratet
-0.35
-11.39
-1.39
-3.12
-0.31
-5.72
Dividend Yieldt
0.03
3.29
0.31
1.65
0.07
3.22
Term spreadt
0.25
2.75
-0.02
-0.01
0.68
2.60
Quality Spreadt
0.43
15.98
-0.15
-5.12
-0.12
-3.30
Fund’s Outflowst-1
Corrected R2
0.50
0.01
0.16
Durbin Watson
2.01
2.00
2.00
Number of Obs.
1103
1103
753

44

TABLE 20
Funds’ inflows and analysts’ recommendations:
The functional specification is Inflowst = α + βSrecommendationt +γInformationt+δInflowst-1+ εt, where Inflowst
are the inflows in the index funds at time t and and Srecommendationt represents analysts’ dispersion of beliefs.
It is the standard deviation of analysts’ recommendations about the percentage of the portfolio to be held in
stocks. It is the average of t and t-1 values. Informationt represents the amount of information publicly available
on the market and is composed of the 3 Month Tbill rate, the Dividend Yield, the Term spread and the Quality
Spread. The estimations are corrected to control for autocorrelation. All the observations are daily. For Spartan
Market Index and Spartan U.S. Equity Index they cover the period 1/4/93-12/31/97. For V.I.P.Fund, the period is
5/23/94-12/31/97. The inflows are standardized dividing them by the average market capitalization in the
previous 160 days.
Dependent Variable: Fund’s Inflowst
Spartan Market Index
Spartan U.S. Equity Index
V.I.P Fund
Independent
Variables
Value
T Stat.
Value
T Stat.
Value
T Stat.
Constant
1.70
7.37
4.86
3.74
0.80
1.60
-1.16
-4.02
-1.94
-1.16
-0.69
-2.87
Srecommendationt
0.03
1.52
0.0001
0.001
0.09
1.06
3 Month T.Bill ratet
-0.40
-6.76
-1.04
-3.02
-0.42
-6.04
Dividend Yieldt
0.05
2.41
0.09
0.69
0.05
1.85
Term spreadt
0.18
0.94
0.25
0.20
-0.39
-1.23
Quality Spreadt
0.59
24.13
0.31
10.71
0.33
9.27
Fund’s Inflowst-1
0.68
0.07
0.40
Corrected R2
Durbin Watson
2.02
2.00
1.96
Number of Obs.
1103
1103
753
TABLE 21
Funds’ outflows and analysts’ recommendations:
The functional specification is Outflowst = α + βArecommendationt +γInformationt+δOutflowst-1+ εt, where
Outflowst are the outflows in the index funds at time t and and Srecommendationt represents analysts’ dispersion
of beliefs. It is the standard deviation of analysts’ recommendations about the percentage of the portfolio to be
held in stocks. It is the average of t and t-1 values. Informationt represents the amount of information publicly
available on the market and is composed of the 3 Month Tbill rate, the Dividend Yield, the Term spread and the
Quality Spread. The estimations are corrected to control for autocorrelation. All the observations are daily. For
Spartan Market Index and Spartan U.S. Equity Index they cover the period 1/4/93-12/31/97. For V.I.P.Fund, the
period is 5/23/94-12/31/97. Outflows are standardized dividing them by the average market capitalization in the
previous 160 days.
Dependent Variable: Fund’s Outflowst
Spartan Market Index
Spartan U.S. Equity Index
V.I.P Fund
Independent
Variables
Value
T Stat.
Value
T Stat.
Value
T Stat.
Constant
0.86
8.50
3.24
2.10
0.72
1.74
0.46
3.59
2.31
1.40
0.64
3.11
Srecommendationt
-0.008
-0.99
0.026
0.17
0.02
0.28
3 Month T.Bill ratet
-0.37
-11.50
-1.53
-3.38
-0.34
-5.80
Dividend Yieldt
-0.04
-4.44
0.37
1.94
0.08
3.46
Term spreadt
-0.28
-3.17
-0.002
-0.001
0.65
2.46
Quality Spreadt
0.43
15.67
0.15
5.02
-0.12
-3.44
Fund’s Outflowst-1
0.50
0.01
0.16
Corrected R2
Durbin Watson
2.00
2.00
2.00
Number of Obs.
1103
1103
753

45

TABLE 22
Spread SP500-SP400 and funds’ flows
(Spot spread)
The functional specification is Rt = α + γFlowst + εt, where Rt is the difference between the percentage return on
the S&P 500 spot index and the percentage return on the S&P 400 spot index. Flowst are the contemporaneous
inflows in the index funds. The flows are the net flows (inflows-outflows) and are standardized dividing them by
the average market capitalization in the previous 160 days. The estimations are corrected to control for
autocorrelation. All the observations are daily. For Spartan Market Index and Spartan U.S. Equity Index they
cover the period 1/4/93-12/31/97. For V.I.P.Fund, the period is 5/23/94-12/31/97. Flows’ values are divided by
1,000,000.
Dependent Variable: S&P 500 Spot Return - S&P 400 Spot Return
Independent
Variables
Constant
Fund’s Flowst
Fund’s Flowst-1
Fund’s Flowst-2
Fund’s Flowst-3
Fund’s Flowst-4
Fund’s Flowst-5
Corrected R2
Durbin Watson
Number of Obs.

Spartan Market Index
Value
104
1258
340
-570
-221
123
-309
0.03
2.00
1099

T Stat.
0.62
3.36
-0.83
-1.39
-0.54
0.30
-0.82

Spartan U.S. Equity Index
Value
9543
117
32
67
75
100
124

T Stat
0.64
1.92
0.51
1.07
-1.19
1.59
-2.01
0.03
2.00
1099

V.I.P Fund
Value
-7.5
2550
-1116
-547
-633
415
-409
0.05
1.99
749

T. Stat.
-0.02
5.46
-2.20
-1.08
-1.25
0.82
-0.86

TABLE 23

Spread SP500-SP400 and funds’ flows (Futures spread)
The functional specification is Rt = α + γFlowst + εt, where Rt is the difference between the percentage return on
the S&P 500 futures index and the percentage return on the S&P 400 futures index. Flowst are the
contemporaneous outflows in the index funds. The flows are the net flows (inflows-outflows) and are
standardized dividing them by the average market capitalization in the previous 160 days. The estimations are
White-corrected to control for heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation. All the observations are daily. For Spartan
Market Index and Spartan U.S. Equity Index they cover the period 1/4/93-12/31/97. For V.I.P.Fund, the period is
5/23/94-12/31/97. Flows’ values are divided by 1,000,000.
Dependent Variable: S&P 500 Futures Return - S&P 400 Futures Return
Spartan Market Index
Spartan U.S. Equity Index
VIP Fund
Independent
Variables
Value
T Stat.
Value
T Stat
Value
T. Stat.
Constant
138
0.79
24
0.16
27
0.94
734
1.92
72
1.16
1806
3.63
Fund’s Flowst
215
-0.52
17
0.26
-120
-0.22
Fund’s Flowst-1
295
-0.72
109
1.72
-1267
-2.33
Fund’s Flowst-2
249
-0.60
112
-1.77
-387
-0.71
Fund’s Flowst-3
315
0.77
88
1.38
789
1.44
Fund’s Flowst-4
425
-1.10
79
-1.25
-638
-1.26
Fund’s Flowst-5
0.01
0.02
0.04
Corrected R2
Durbin Watson
2.00
2.00
2.00
Number of Obs.
1099
1099
749

46

-6

Fig.1: Regressions Statistics

x 10
7

6

Inflows im pac ts

5

4
Rolling Means
3

2

Rolling Stand.Deviations

1

0

-1
100

200

300

400

Days since 05/17/1995

47

500

600

Fig.2:Fund Flows and Stock Indexes: results from fixed coefficients regression
2.6
2.4
2.2
S&P500

Index es

2
1.8

S&P400

1.6
1.4
UPPER BAND
1.2
S&P500 net of funds effects
1

LOWER BAND

0.8
100

200

300

400

Days since 05/17/1995

48

500

600

Fig.3:Fund Flows and Stock Indexes: results from rolling coefficients regression
2.6
2.4
S&P500

2.2
2

S&P400

Index es

1.8
UPPER BAND
1.6
S&P500 net of funds effects

1.4
1.2

LOWER BAND
1
0.8

100

200

300

400

Days since 05/17/1995

49

500

600

