                                                                                                                               1


1 Introduction

    The relative wage of more-skilled to less-skilled Americans has been rising sharply since the

late 1970s.1 At the same time, within most industries relative labor demands have been shifting

toward the more skilled.2 Many economists have argued that these within-industry labor-demand

shifts are a primary cause of the rising skill premium, but there is still disagreement about what

caused the demand shifts. They are consistent with skill-biased technological change (SBTC), as

many researchers have pointed out. However, they are also consistent with explanations related to

international trade, and there remains uncertainty about which forces have contributed to skill

upgrading. For example, Feenstra and Hanson (1996a,b) find outsourcing to be correlated with

skill upgrading, whereas Autor, et al (1998) conclude outsourcing's effect is not robust to other

forces such as computerization.3

    Most research has focused on trade and technology as demand shifters. The focus on trade is

understandable because of the rapidly growing importance of trade in the U.S. economy.

However, foreign direct investment (FDI) by multinational enterprises (MNEs) both into and out

of the United States has on many measures grown even more rapidly. For example, from 1977 to

1994 U.S. manufacturing imports as a share of U.S. manufacturing shipments rose from 7.0

percent to 14.2 percent. During the same period, foreign-affiliate manufacturing sales in the

United States as a share of U.S. manufacturing shipments rose from 5.6 percent to 17.3 percent.

    This growth of foreign-owned manufacturing affiliate presence in the United States has

paralleled the rise in U.S. wage inequality. Figure 1 shows the U.S. skill premium (measured as

the ratio of average annual wages of non-production workers to average annual wages of

production workers) and the share of foreign-owned affiliate employment in total U.S.

1 Several economists have documented this fall in terms of education, experience, and job classification. Bound and
Johnson (1992) find that between 1979 and 1988, the ratio of the average wage of a college graduate to the average wage of
a high school graduate rose by 15 percent. Davis (1992) finds that between 1979 and 1987, the ratio of weekly earnings of
males in their forties to weekly earnings of males in their twenties rose by 25 percent. For all U.S. manufacturing, we find
that between 1979 and 1994 the ratio of average annual wages of non-production workers to average annual wages of
production workers rose by 10 percent, from about 1.52 to 1.67.
2 Many studies have found that even though the relative wage of more-skilled workers has been rising, within most
industries relative employment of these workers has risen. This evidence strongly suggests within-industry demand shifts.
3 The link between SBTC and overall wage inequality depends crucially on whether there is one aggregate output sector or
many. In one-sector models SBTC always raises the skill premium, but in multi-sector models what usually matters is the
sector bias of technological change, not its factor bias. See Haskel and Slaughter (1998).
                                                                                                                              2


manufacturing employment from 1977 through 1994. The skill premium rose from a low of about

1.52 in 1979 to nearly 1.67 in 1994. At the same time, foreign affiliate employment rose from

about 3.7% of total U.S. manufacturing employment in 1977 to 13.5% in 1994 (absolute

employment nearly quadrupled over this period, from about 655,000 to over 2.3 million). These

parallel trends suggest that rising affiliate presence may have contributed to economy-wide skill

upgrading and inequality.

    In addition to Figure 1, several studies have found substantial differences between operating

characteristics of foreign-owned manufacturing plants in the United States compared both to plants

owned by U.S.-headquartered MNEs and to plants owned by purely domestic firms. With plant-

level data for 1989 and 1990, Howenstine and Zeile (1994) find that foreign affiliates in the United

States are larger, more capital intensive, and pay higher wages than domestic plants. Globerman,

Ries and Vertinsky (1994) find qualitatively identical results for foreign affiliates and domestically-

owned plants in Canada. For U.S. manufacturing, Doms and Jensen (1996) report that foreign-

affiliate plants are more productive and pay higher wages than domestic plants even after

controlling for four-digit industry, state, plant age and plant size.4 All these studies suggest that

foreign affiliates may have quite different factor demands, even within the same industry.

    Despite the evidence from plant–level studies and the time-series evidence of Figure 1, to our

knowledge there has been no systematic investigation into FDI and foreign affiliate presence as a

source of growing U.S. wage inequality. In fact, Baldwin (1995, p.55) notes that “there do not

seem to be any studies of how the shifts in the pattern of U.S. direct investment and direct foreign

investment in the United States have affected relative wages.” 5 In response, this paper examines

the impact of inward FDI flows and rising foreign-affiliate presence on U.S. skill upgrading in

manufacturing from 1977-1994.
4 Doms and Jensen (1996) proceed to group U.S. plants into three categories: plants of U.S. multinational firms, plants of
large domestically-oriented firms, and plants of smaller firms. They find that plants of U.S. multinational firms are the
most productive, largest, most capital-intensive, and pay the highest wages, closely followed by U.S. plants of foreign-
owned multinationals. Thus, multinational orientation, rather than domestic orientation, is what seems to matter most for
these plant characteristics.
5 Slaughter (1999) looks at the effect of outward FDI on U.S. wage inequality. Beyond this, a number of studies have
examined the impact of FDI on the general level of wages in the United States and other countries, including Aitken, et al,
(1996) and Feliciano and Lipsey (1998).
                                                                                                                        3


    To go beyond the aggregate evidence in Figure 1 and address the fact that skill upgrading has

been predominantly within industries, our econometric analysis uses variation across and within

industries. There has been substantial variation across sectors in the within-industry changes in

foreign-affiliate presence. For example, our data will show that across all sectors the average

1977-1994 change in the foreign-affiliate employment share was a rise of about 10 percentage

points -- but the standard deviation in this change was 14 percentage points. To exploit this cross-

industry variation we create an industry-year panel data set for all U.S. manufacturing from 1977

to 1994 by merging data from the National Bureau of Economic Research's (NBER)

Manufacturing Productivity Database with data on inward foreign-owned affiliates. Affiliate data

come from the Bureau of Economic Analysis, U.S. Department of Commerce (BEA); the

International Trade Administration, U.S. Department of Commerce (ITA), and the Japan Economic

Institute (JEI). Importantly, the MNE data all start around 1977 when the U.S. skill premium

began climbing. With our data we employ an empirical framework used frequently in this literature

to examine whether foreign-owned affiliate activity affected within-industry skill upgrading.

    In addition to examining overall affiliate activity, we have sufficient data to examine the

separate impact of different forms of FDI -- in particular, new plant (or “greenfield”) investment

versus acquired establishments. This distinction may be important for a number of reasons. For

example, acquired plants may be more likely than new plants to maintain factor demands similar to

those of domestic plants. Alternatively, acquisitions may discipline inefficient firms to alter

inefficient factor demands (e.g., by reducing union power). Our data also allow us to focus on

Japanese affiliates, which were particularly controversial over our sample period.

    In addition to the literature on U.S. skill upgrading, our analysis also aims to contribute some

empirical evidence on the new class of MNE models in trade theory. Until the mid-1980s standard

trade theory provided few explanations for capital flows into a capital-abundant country such as the

United States, besides tariff-jumping motives.6               During this time period, however, a less-

formalized MNE literature existed, centered around the “eclectic paradigm” of Dunning (1981),

6 While avoiding protection is certainly one possible explanation for some FDI into the United States during our time
period of analysis, few would argue that this was more than one of many causes.
                                                                                                                              4


which emphasized firm-specific assets (such as technological assets) are important causes of

MNEs. This literature also argued that MNEs are important channels for international technology

transfer. This suggests that MNEs may bring into host new skill-intensive technologies that induce

or accelerate SBTC, even in advanced host countries like the United States.7

    Beginning in the mid-1980s, researchers generated a number of new MNE models which

incorporated features from new trade theory and industrial organization (see the survey in

Markusen, 1995). These models generate a rich set of MNE and trade patterns across countries

that depend on countries’ relative endowments and sizes, economies-of-scale effects, and trade and

investment policies. These newer models have the potential to formalize the theoretical impact of

foreign-affiliate presence on skill upgrading and wage inequality even for an equilibrium like that

of the United States in which most of the inward FDI stock is owned by other industrialized

countries. However, these models do not generate unambiguous predictions about the link from

inward FDI to skill upgrading. They commonly show that inward FDI changes the activity mix of

a multinational firm between its home and host country. This changes industry-level factor

demands--but both skill upgrading and its reverse are possible, depending on many variables that

are often difficult to quantify. This ambiguity means the question of how FDI and foreign-affiliate

presence affect host-country within-industry factor demands is largely an empirical one.

    To preview our results, we find little evidence that inward FDI has contributed to U.S. skill

upgrading within manufacturing industries. The insignificant relationship between inward FDI and

skill upgrading is robust to several sensitivity checks including different measures of foreign-

affiliate presence, alternative specifications of our control regressors, various sub-samples of our

data, and focusing on different types of FDI such as greenfield plants versus acquired ones. We

also present limited evidence that trade effects of foreign affiliates working through imported inputs

is unlikely to have had any impact on skill upgrading. Thus, despite the plausible a priori



7 A recent paper by Adams (1998) finds that industries where foreign patents are more important pay a higher relative
skilled wage in the United States. However, it is not clear whether this connection occurs directly because of transferred
skill-biased technology to foreign-owned affiliates in the United States or other more indirect channels, such as industry-
wide spillovers of skill-biased technology.
                                                                                                          5


relationship, we do not find significant U.S. expansion in foreign-affiliate activity to be a source of

U.S. skill upgrading.

   However, we find one important exception: Japanese greenfield FDI. We examine FDI by

Japanese firms specifically, since they were much more likely both to enter with greenfield

investments than other source countries and exhibit many differences in operating characteristics

relative to other foreign affiliates in the United States. We find that greater Japanese greenfield

affiliate presence is significantly correlated with lower, not higher, relative demand for skilled

workers; greater Japanese presence through acquisitions has no significant effect. The negative

correlation is consistent with recent MNE models in which foreign affiliates focus on activities less

skilled-labor-intensive than the activities of parents. These findings also suggest that if inward FDI

brought new technologies into the United States, the induced technological change was not biased

towards skilled labor.

   The paper has three additional sections. Section 2 discusses the theoretical connections

between foreign affiliate presence and relative demands for skilled and unskilled labor. Section 3

presents a brief set of facts about inward FDI, while section 4 presents econometric evidence on

inward FDI and U.S. labor-demand shifts.

2 Theoretical Motivation

   Most previous work on the effect of FDI on wages has examined the issue from a general-

equilibrium trade model based on endowment-driven comparative advantage.                 Feenstra and

Hanson (1996a;1996b;1997) develop a North-South model to examine the potential effects of FDI

inflows on wages in both the host and parent countries. Here, a final good is produced from a

continuum of intermediate inputs which vary in the relative amounts of skilled and unskilled labor

required. The South has a comparative advantage in unskilled labor. This attracts FDI from the

North, which in turn transfers some number of "marginal" inputs from North production to South

production. Interestingly, the skill premium rises in both the North and the South both regions

now produce a more skilled-labor-intensive mix of activities. Empirically, Feenstra and Hanson

(1997) find substantial evidence that U.S. FDI into Mexico contributed to rising Mexican
                                                                                                         6


inequality. Slaughter’s (1999) examination of U.S. MNE outsourcing follows Helpman’s (1984)

model of MNEs. Helpman’s model is based on a two-good, two-factor Heckscher-Ohlin trade

model. Here, vertically-integrated MNEs may arise when relative-endowment differentials are so

large that trade alone cannot arbitrage international wage differentials.

    Unfortunately, endowment-driven models cannot easily explain the recent wave of inward FDI

into the United States. It seems unlikely that inward FDI into the United States has occurred

because comparative advantage has changed so that other countries are now outsourcing unskilled-

labor-intensive activities to the United States. But if FDI into the United States is not motivated by

standard comparative advantage motivations, it is quite difficult to assess theoretically whether and

how this inward FDI should affect wages.

    An alternative theoretical literature on the formation of MNEs is summarized by Markusen

(1995).   These general-equilibrium models start with the observation that a distinguishing

characteristic of MNEs is their firm-specific assets such as proprietary technology, marketing

skills, and management skills. These assets have a within-firm public-goods aspect to them, so

they can be used across all firm plants after incurring a one-time development cost. Thus, these

firms can realize economies of scale from multiple plants, which becomes important in a world

where there are trade costs. In fact, introducing these types of features into a general-equilibrium

trade model leads to a very rich set of possible configurations of MNEs.

    Markusen and Venables (1998) use this type of model to analyze the influence of MNEs on

relative wages in the parent and host countries. They use a two-country, two-factor model in

which production in the monopolistically competitive sector is comprised of three distinctactivities:

1) a firm-specific fixed cost using skilled labor, 2) a plant-level fixed cost using a mix of skilled

and unskilled labor, and 3) final production which uses only unskilled labor. Intuitively, one can

think of the first activity as headquarter services for a multi-plant firm. This means that branch-

plant activity is less skilled-labor intensive than both headquarter services and the MNE’s overall

operations. In support of these assumptions, Carr, et al (1998) give empirical evidence that

foreign affiliates tend to be less skill-intensive and less-R&D-intensive than parents. If a firm
                                                                                                        7


chooses not to service the foreign market through branch plant production, it remains a “national”

firm and exports to the foreign market. Markusen and Venables assume that transportation of

exports requires only unskilled labor; this ensures that MNE plants with foreign branch production

are more-skilled intensive than exporting national plants.

   Given this set-up Markusen and Venables show how relative wages are affected by various

parameter changes such as trade-cost declines or endowment growth. In general, the wage effects

depend on the initial equilibrium and on the underlying parameter change. For example, rising

trade costs generally raise the wage inequality in the skilled-labor abundant country as MNE firms

replace national firms, and lower wage inequality in the unskilled-labor abundant country. But if

the countries are different enough in size to begin with, then wage inequality may rise in both

countries. Another example is the wage effects of world endowment growth. Growth leads to a

greater role for MNEs as they displace national firms, but the wage effects depend on the initial

equilibrium. If initially there are many national firms and few MNEs, growth triggers a "regime

shift" away from national firms into mainly MNEs. Since MNEs are more skilled-labor intensive

than national firms, relative wages go up in one or both countries. However, if the initial

equilibrium has mainly MNEs, growth lowers the skill premium in both countries. The intuition is

that growth leads to greater firm-scale effects. Since skilled labor makes the firm-specific assets

with a public-good aspect to them, firm-scale effects with growth occur mainly with MNE

assembly operations which use only unskilled labor.

   In summary, greater MNE activity can either raise or lower the skill-mix of activities performed

within industries, and thus help raise or lower wage inequality. With respect to the recent U.S.

experience, then, there’s no clear theoretical prediction about the wage effects of rising inward FDI

unless one knows the initial equilibrium and the underlying parameter changes that are increasing

multinational activity. This is not a criticism of recent MNE models. They fill an important void in

our understanding of the real-world distribution of production and trade. Instead, the ambiguities

highlight the need for empirical work to help inform which equilibrium states of the model seem

relevant. In our concluding section, we address how our empirical results may serve this purpose.
                                                                                                                            8


3 Data Description and Stylized Facts About Foreign-Affiliate Presence in the United States

    To analyze inward FDI we combine the U.S. data from the NBER with FDI data from several

sources. The Data Appendix describes all our data in detail. The NBER data are a panel of 4-digit

SIC (revision 2) industry-year observations reporting the value, quantity, and price of output

produced and inputs hired within U.S. manufacturing. We combined the NBER data with each of

our affiliate data sources, aggregating the NBER industries when necessary.

The BEA Data

    Through responses to legally mandated surveys, the BEA tracks affiliates of foreign-

headquartered MNEs, each of which is defined as one foreign "parent" plus one or more U.S.

"affiliates." A parent is an individual or a group such as a trust, corporation, or partnership which

controls a business enterprise incorporated abroad. A U.S. affiliate is a business enterprise located

in the United States in which there exists "inward foreign direct investment." In turn, inward FDI

is defined as direct or indirect ownership or control by a single parent of at least 10% of either the

voting power of an incorporated or unincorporated U.S. business enterprise. For the years with

publicly available data, 1977 through 1994, we constructed a consistent data series for 56

industries, most of which are collections of three-digit SIC industries (see Appendix Table).

    The BEA data show that foreign-affiliate activity has increased substantially during the period

of rising U.S. wage inequality. Figure 1 showed this affiliate rise for employment as a share of

total U.S. manufacturing employment; Figure 2 presents the analogous trends for affiliate shares of

payroll, capital stock, and sales in U.S. manufacturing from 1977 to 1994. All four shares show

an ongoing rise since 1977, with an acceleration in this rise from about 1987 through 1991. We

note that the large rise in capital-stock share is at least partly a data artifact: the total U.S. data

measure property, plant, and equipment (PPE) but the BEA data measure PPE plus all other assets

such as accounts receivable. Unfortunately, the annual BEA data are not sufficiently detailed to

separate PPE from all affiliate assets in all years.8


8 In absolute numbers, total U.S. manufacturing affiliate activity increased from 1977 to 1994 as follows: employment
rose from about 655,000 to over 2.3 million; payroll rose from about $11 billion to nearly $109 billion; assets rose from
$56 billion to nearly $548 billion; and sales rose from $60 billion to $580 billion.
                                                                                                                                9


    Because our analysis explores the impact of foreign-affiliate presence on within-industry skill

upgrading, it is important to note there is substantial cross-industry variation in foreign-affiliate

presence and growth. As mentioned earlier, the average change in employment shares from 1977

through 1994 was 10 percentage points, but with a standard deviation over 14 percentage points.

The ITA Data

    One limitation of the BEA data is they do not have disaggregated information on whether

foreign affiliates are born and/or expand via a merger or acquisition (M&A), a new "greenfield"

investment, or other types of transactions.9 As we discussed earlier, different types of FDI may

have very different effects on skill upgrading. To allow us to explore this idea we use data from

the ITA. Every year since 1974 the ITA has compiled a census of inward FDI transactions with

the following information for each transaction: type of investment, foreign investor, U.S. state

location, 4-digit SIC industry, and (when available) the dollar value.

    The ITA distinguishes seven transaction types: M&A, new plants, joint ventures, plant

expansions, reinvested earnings, equity increases, and other. In our analysis we do not use ITA

information on the last three categories both because they account for only a very small share of

total ITA observations and because they are fairly uninformative about the type of initial

investment. Over our sample period of 1977 through 1994, of all remaining transactions 52%

were M&As, 26% were new plants, 13% were plant expansions, and 9% were joint ventures.10

Figure 3 plots annual counts for these two largest categories and their sum; the overall picture is

broadly consistent with the BEA trends in Figures 1 and 2. Transaction counts peaked during the

second half of the 1980s, with M&A activity accounting for most of this surge.

    Ideally we would use the ITA data to analyze whether different types of inward FDI have

different effects on skill upgrading. However, these data have a number of disadvantages. First,

the ITA generates data from publicly available media sources. This is problematic both because not


9 BEA measures of foreign-affiliate activity by activity type are available annually for all manufacturing beginning in
1980. Greater industry detail by activity type is generally not available due to BEA restrictions not to disclose proprietary
firm information.
10 What transactions data are available from the BEA also show M&As to be the largest transaction category. Klein and
Rosengren (1994) note that from 1979 to 1991, this category accounted for from 60% to 89% of annual U.S. FDI inflows.
                                                                                                                10


all FDI transactions are publicly announced and because actual changes may end up differing from

announced changes. Second, approximately one-third of the ITA observations do not list dollar

values. Third, the ITA counts capture only gross flows into the U.S. affiliate stock: they have no

information on exits. Because of these concerns, in our econometric analysis we use these data

only in conjunction with the BEA data. Specifically, we use the ITA counts to decompose changes

in the industry-level BEA measures of total affiliate activity among various affiliate types. Below,

we discuss this data merge in greater detail.

The JEI Data

    Our final inward FDI data source is the JEI census of Japanese affiliate plants. Japanese plants

in particular are of interest because of the substantial Japanese FDI inflow during our sample

period which started from very low levels. Additionally, Howenstine and Shannon (1996) find

substantial differences between Japanese and non-Japanese affiliates. Japanese affiliates are much

more likely to be greenfield investments, to have a higher share of intermediate inputs in final

sales, and to pay slightly lower wages. These findings suggest that Japanese plants may affect

U.S. skill upgrading differently than do non-Japanese plants.

    Semi-annually from 1980 through 1990 the JEI collected the following information on every

Japanese manufacturing plant in the United States:                       4-digit SIC industry, location, age,

employment, and M&A or greenfield status. We measure total Japanese affiliate activity using the

JEI employment data; we also separate total employment between M&A and greenfield

employment. Because of the difficulty in obtaining these data, we use data only from 1980 and

1990. 11 Japanese employment grew by more than 400% during this decade, from around 57,000

to over 262,000, with these totals about evenly split between M&A and greenfield plants. As with

the BEA data, the JEI data show substantial cross-industry variation in foreign-affiliate presence

and growth. The average change in greenfield employment was plus 1700 with a standard

deviation over 5000; for M&A employment the average change was plus 1800 with a standard

deviation of 3000. Among greenfield plants the largest growth occurred in Motor Vehicles &

11 We thank Keith Head and John Ries for providing the 1990 data in electronic form.
                                                                                                                                11


Equipment (37,000), while among M&A plants it was Electronic Components (12,000).

Industries such as Agricultural Chemicals and Other Transportation Equipment actually lost

employees over the decade.

4 Estimation Strategy, Measurement, and Empirical Results

Estimation Strategy and Measurement

    To identify the link between inward FDI and within-industry shifts in U.S. labor demand, we

exploit the variation in inward FDI across industries. To proceed, we assume that in each industry

k capital is a quasi-fixed factor and that the industry minimizes the cost of skilled and unskilled

labor according to a translog cost function.12 In each industry cost minimization leads to an

equation explaining the level change over some time period in that industry's skilled-labor share of

the total wage bill:

                                  ws              K
           (1)                         ( )                     ()
                  ∆SHkt = β 1∆log wu kt + β 2∆log Y kt + β 3∆log(Y)kt + δ(TD)t + ekt ,


where k indexes industries; t indexes time; ∆SHkt is the level change in the skilled-labor share of

the total wage bill -- i.e., skill upgrading; wskt is the skilled wage; wukt is the unskilled wage; K kt

is capital; Ykt is real value-added output; TDt is a full set of time dummy variables; and ekt is an

additive error term. The wage regressor accounts for variation in SHkt due to industries

substituting away from more-expensive factors.                    The coefficient β 1 is positive or negative

depending on whether the cross-industry average elasticity of substitution between skilled and

unskilled labor is below or above one. The capital-to-output regressor accounts for variation in
SH kt due to capital investment. A positive β 2 indicates capital-skill complementarity whereby

investment stimulates skilled-labor demand. The output regressor controls for industry scale. The

time dummies control for any skill upgrading that is common to all industries. Industry fixed

effects, accounted for through time-differencing the data, capture any industry-specific technology

differences that are common over time.


12 The advantage of the translog functional form is it imposes fewer restrictions on factor substitutability than either CES,
Cobb-Douglas, or Leontief production technologies.
                                                                                                           12


   If one pools all industries and estimates equation (1), then the variation in SHkt not explained

by changes in wages, capital, and output is commonly attributed to SBTC. Variations of equation

(1) have been used recently by a number of researchers. Berman, Bound, and Griliches (1994)

use equation (1) to document the large amount of within-industry SBTC in the United States in

recent decades. Feenstra and Hanson (1996a,b), Autor, Katz, and Krueger (1998), and Slaughter

(1999) expand this methodology by adding new regressors to equation (1), such as outsourcing,

computerization, and outward FDI. These studies explain skill upgrading more thoroughly than
the assumption of equation (1) that any residual variation in SHkt is attributed by default to SBTC.

   Our empirical specification adds to equation (1) measures of inward FDI activity. Following

earlier findings that computerization is robustly correlated with skill upgrading, we also add

computer use to (1). Thus, our baseline estimating equation is given by equation (2):

                        w               K
     (2) ∆SHkt = β1∆log( s )kt + β2∆log( )kt + β3∆log(Y)kt + γ ∆ (FDI)kt + η(COMP)kt + δ(TD)t + u kt,
                        wu              Y


where FDIkt is some measure of inward FDI activity, COMPkt measures computer use, and ukt is

an additive error term. The key question in equation (2) is the sign of γ. The null hypothesis is γ =

0: no relationship between affiliate activity and skill upgrading. The alternative hypothesis is γ >

0: increases in affiliate activity are associated with greater skill upgrading. A significantly positive
(negative) estimate of γ will be interpreted as evidence that affiliates contributed to within-industry

shifts in demand towards more-skilled (less-skilled) workers.

   Estimating equation (2) requires industry-level data on affiliate activity, computer use, capital

stocks, output, and employment and wages for both skilled and unskilled workers. FDI sources

were discussed in Section 3; computer use comes from the U.S. Census of Manufactures, and all
other data come from the NBER Manufacturing Productivity Data Base. We measure COMPkt as

the share of computer investment in total investment. Note that this variable enters (2) in levels,
not in changes, under the assumption that it is the flow of investment that creates changes in SHkt.

We construct SHkt as the nonproduction wage bill divided by total wage bill of production and

nonproduction workers. We construct wskt (wukt) as total nonproduction (production) wage bill
                                                                                                                              13


divided by total nonproduction (production) employment. Kkt is measured as real equipment and

plant. Value-added price deflators are not available, so we measure Ykt as real value of shipments.

    Before presenting our results, we mention three general estimation issues. First, all results are

robust to the exact treatment of the non-FDI regressors in equation (2). Below we report results

for specifications which omit the wage regressor, disaggregate capital between plant and

equipment, and include real output and computer use.13 These results are qualitatively similar to

unreported results which include the wage regressor; aggregate plant and equipment; and omit

output or computer use. Second, we use weighted least squares weighting industries by their

share of total manufacturing wage bill. Third, all estimates use White-adjusted standard errors.
    Table 1 reports summary statistics for our key variables discussed so far; the various ∆(FDI)kt

regressors in Table 1 we define in turn below. For consistency, all data are aggregated to the 56
BEA industries. Skill upgrading is visible in the positive mean changes in SHkt. Again, there is

substantial cross-industry variation in ∆SHkt that we aim to link with our ∆(FDI)kt regressors.14

The Effect of Total Affiliate Activity on Skill Upgrading
    We first measure affiliate activity (FDIkt) using the BEA data, our most complete data source

on all foreign-affiliate activity in the United States. We construct the ratio of total affiliate activity

to total U.S. industry activity four ways: in terms of employment, payroll, assets, or sales.

Rather than measuring the absolute level of affiliate activity, this construction scales how important

affiliates are relative to U.S. industry overall. In principle, industry-years in which affiliate activity

constitutes a greater share of U.S. industry activity have greater scope for affiliates to affect U.S.
industry labor demand. Accordingly, these industry-years have larger measures of FDIkt.

    We use these BEA data across 56 industries from 1977 through 1994 to estimate equation (2).

Table 2 reports estimation results for one-year differences. Each column reports estimates for one
of our FDIkt measures plus a common set of controls. The control regressors in Table 2 all have


13 The wage regressor is omitted because cross-sectional relative-wage variation might reflect skill-mix differences rather
than exogenous wage differences. Standard trade theory with perfect interindustry factor mobility predicts no such cross-
sectional wage variation, in which case time fixed effects capture the truly exogenous wage changes.
14 We have data on COMP for only 1977, 1982, and 1987. We imputed the 1977 level to years 1978-1981, the 1982
                           kt
level to years 1983-1986, and the 1987 level to years 1988 and beyond.
                                                                                                            14


coefficient estimates in line with earlier studies: skill upgrading is positively correlated with capital

intensity, output, and computer use. While the fit of the equation and control regressors suggests a

reasonably specified equation, all four measures of affiliate activity have no significant correlation

with industry-wide skill upgrading. Statistical significance aside, three of the four FDI measures

are actually negatively correlated with skill upgrading, suggesting that greater affiliate activity is

associated with reduced, not increased, skill upgrading.

    We next conducted a number of sensitivity checks on the results in Table 2. First, our

specification with one-year differences assumes that a given year's changes in affiliate activity

immediately influence industry-level skill upgrading in that same year. This assumption might be

too restrictive. For example, with M&A activity it may take considerable time for a new foreign

owner to change operations of a formerly domestic-owned operation. If this is true, one-year

changes in affiliate shares may not capture the long-run impact of foreign affiliate presence on skill

upgrading very well. Since most U.S. affiliates were originally "born" via acquisitions (versus

greenfield plants), this may be an important consideration.

    To examine the potential long-run impact of foreign affiliates, Table 3 reports estimation results

for equation (2) where each industry is long-differenced over the period from 1977 to 1994.

Despite the change in specification we get qualitatively identical results to our sample with one-year

differences. The control variables retain the correct signs and are generally statistically significant,

and overall the fit of the regressions is quite high for a cross section with so few observations. Yet

we still find no significant correlation between any of the affiliate-activity measures and skill

upgrading. Three of the four measures now show positive correlations, but none are even close to

statistical significance at standard confidence levels.

    As a second check of our results in Table 2, Table 4 reports results for two different sub-

periods: 1977 through 1985 and 1986 through 1991. The 1986-1991 sub-period is of particular

interest because during that time aggregate inward FDI into the United States surged to record

levels. For brevity we only report estimates measuring affiliate activity in terms of employment;

the other three measures yielded no qualitative differences. As Table 4 reports, using both short
                                                                                                                                   15


and long differences on both sub-periods we again find no clear link between affiliate activity and

skill upgrading. In summary, our finding that overall affiliate activity has no significant impact on

skill upgrading in the U.S. manufacturing is surprisingly robust to a variety of specifications and

data sub-periods.

The Effect of Different Forms of Affiliate Activity on Skill Upgrading

    To this point we have assumed that foreign affiliates in an industry are homogeneous.

However, the different forms of establishing a foreign-affiliate presence may have different

implications for skill upgrading. For example, the acquisition of an existing domestic firm will

have no impact on industry skill upgrading unless and until the foreign parent changes the

affiliate's production technology in a way that affects the affiliate's relative labor demands. This

contrasts with a new greenfield or joint-venture affiliate, which may immediately employ a much

different technology from that of domestically owned establishments in the industry. Empirically,

Kogut and Chang (1991) and Blonigen (1997) find evidence consistent with a story where foreign

firms are accessing firm-specific assets, such as new technologies, through acquisition of U.S.

establishments. To the extent that foreign acquisitions are motivated by these considerations, it’s

not clear that acquisition FDI necessarily changes the acquired establishments' operations.15

    To examine how the effect of foreign-affiliate activity on skill upgrading may vary by type of
initial FDI, we construct a second set of FDIkt measures by combining our BEA data with the ITA

data that details FDI transactions by type. To link these data we first aggregate the 4-digit SIC ITA

counts up to the 56 BEA industries. Then we decompose the change in total foreign-affiliate

presence into four FDI types: M&A, greenfield, joint venture, and plant expansion. That is, we

apportion the change in the BEA affiliate measures into the four FDI types using the shares of each

FDI type in the total ITA transaction counts for each industry in each year. For one-year BEA

changes between years (t-1) and t we used ITA counts during year t. For longer full-sample BEA

changes we accumulated ITA counts over the full sample period.


15 There is also an established literature on acquisitions as a disciplining device, whereby efficient firms acquire inefficient
ones. This may have implications for skill upgrading. However, if foreign firms are no more likely to be the acquiring firm
in these cases than U.S. firms, there is no expected effect from greater foreign presence in an industry on skill upgrading.
                                                                                                                                  16


    Alternatively, we could simply use the counts of ITA transactions as our measures of yearly

changes in affiliate presence by type of FDI. However, this approach would impose strict

assumptions on the data that are likely not satisfied. This would assume that transactions across

type and industry are equal in size, i.e., that each transaction represent the same change in foreign-

affiliate presence. A simple look at the ITA transactions for which dollar values are recorded

shows this is not the case: there are systematic differences in transaction sizes across industries

and type. M&A transactions, for example, tend to be much larger than all other types, so counts

alone would understate the importance of M&A transactions and overstate that of all other types.

By taking the BEA measure of affiliate-presence change for an industry and year and then

apportioning that change by type of FDI using the ITA data, we no longer assume that transactions

are equal in size across industries. But we must still assume that transactions are identical in size

across types within an industry. One important reason we turn to the JEI data on Japanese FDI in

the next section is because those data allow us to relax this assumption as well.
    Table 5 reports results for the BEA-ITA measures of FDIkt by type for one-year differences.

For brevity, in Table 5 we report results using changes in foreign affiliate activity measured by

employment share only; the other measures (in terms of payroll, assets, or sales) yield qualitatively

identical results to those reported here. As Table 5 shows, isolating the role of different transaction

types does not change the picture much.                    There is no significant correlation between skill

upgrading and any particular type of inward FDI measures. The same is true in Table 6, which

continues with the BEA-ITA data, but reports long-difference estimates.16

The Effect of Different Forms of Japanese Affiliate Activity on Skill Upgrading

    As we noted, the ITA data don’t have information on transaction sizes, a limitation we can only

partially alleviate by linking the ITA data with the BEA data. In contrast, the JEI data described in

Section 3 reports both size (in terms of employment) and type (M&A or greenfield) of all Japanese

affiliate activity in the United States. So with these data we no longer need to make restrictive

16 Note that the non-FDI regressors in Tables 5 and 6 have nearly identical coefficient estimates and standard errors across
the different FDI regressors. This suggests that the ITA allocations across transaction types are quite stable over time (e.g.,
M&A transactions account for about 50% of all transactions every year) such that the sample variation is quite similar
across the various BEA-ITA regressors.
                                                                                                                           17


assumptions about the relative size of transactions, which reduces potentially serious bias from

measurement error.

    In addition, a focus on Japan as a source country has the potential to yield more insight on the

potentially different effects on skill upgrading from M&A versus greenfield activity because Japan

had a much greater share of greenfield activity in the United States than most foreign countries.

Our JEI data show that Japanese investors had almost identical numbers of total employees in

greenfield affiliates and acquired affiliates in both 1980 and 1990. This contrasts with Howenstine

and Shannon’s (1996) finding that other major source countries spent less than 10% of their total

U.S. FDI outlays on greenfield operations.
    To use the JEI data as our third set of FDIkt measures we construct the share of Japanese

affiliate employment in total U.S. employment by industry-year. We construct three different

shares: of total Japanese affiliate activity, of acquired Japanese affiliate activity, and of greenfield

Japanese affiliate activity.17 These measures are similar to the BEA-only measure, as the ratios

allow us to scale how important affiliates are relative to overall U.S. industry. We construct these

measures using JEI data for 1980 and 1990, and then estimate equation (2) separately on these

three measures for the ten-year difference over the 1980s.
    Table 7 reports results using the JEI measures of FDIkt. As with all previous specifications,

the control variables are estimated precisely and with correct sign, and the general fit of the

specification is quite high. However, our results for our FDI measures differ markedly. We now

estimate a significant negative correlation with U.S. industry-wide skill upgrading for changes in

new-plant Japanese affiliate employment; this also shows up to a lesser degree for changes in all

Japanese activity.       This suggests that greater Japanese inward FDI decreased, rather than

increased, skill upgrading within U.S. manufacturing industries over this time period. These

results are estimated from JEI data aggregated up to our 56 BEA industries.                               We obtain

qualitatively identical results when we alternatively estimate equation (2) using the JEI measures of



17 Greenfield activity includes establishments that may be joint ventures with more than one Japanese firm, or between a
Japanese firm and another foreign or U.S.-based partner.
                                                                                                          18


FDI at their original 4-digit SIC industry level. Results are also robust to alternative specifications

of the controls and specifications which include both M&A and greenfield regressors separately.

   A closer look at the data underlying these regressions finds a few outlier industries. Motor

vehicles and equipment had the single largest level rise in greenfield share of industry employment
(∆FDIkt = +.053), yet this industry was one of the few with a decline in the skilled-labor share of

the wage bill (∆SHkt = -.013). This observation squares with anecdotal evidence that Japanese

FDI in this industry, largely thought to be "VER jumping," focused on relatively unskill-intensive

assembly activities. Similar to cars, rubber products had one of the largest rises in greenfield share
(∆FDIkt = +.017) combined with the single largest decline in wagebill share (∆SHkt = -.026).

Conversely, the communications-products industry had a relatively small rise in greenfield
employment share (∆FDIkt = +.007) but the single largest rise in wagebill share (∆SHkt = +.141).

These three industries in particular help drive the major finding of Table 7. However, our

sensitivity checks showed this finding to be robust to excluding outliers such as these.

Discussion of Empirical Results and Conclusions

   Our results suggest zero or even a negative correlation between increases in foreign-affiliate

activity and skill upgrading in the United States from 1977 through 1994. That is, skill upgrading

within U.S. manufacturing industries is not positively correlated with greater foreign-affiliate

activity. This suggests that foreign affiliates have not been an important source of SBTC, contrary

to any anecdotal evidence. This eliminates one possible force behind SBTC that until now has not

been systematically explored.

   One concern we had about our results was that three of our four measures of affiliate activity

capture part of value added (either labor or capital), while our fourth (sales) encompasses both

value added and intermediate inputs. These measures might miss important affiliate effects on skill

upgrading working through just intermediate inputs. There is reason to suspect that a role for input

activity in particular. First, Feenstra and Hanson (1996a,b) find a strong correlation between skill

upgrading and a rising share of imports in total U.S. intermediate-input purchases. Second, Zeile

(1998) shows that on average, affiliates rely on imported intermediate inputs to a much greater
                                                                                                            19


degree than do domestically owned companies. Together, these two facts suggest that the rising

share of imported intermediate inputs found by Feenstra and Hanson might be caused by the

increased presence of foreign affiliates.

    Unfortunately, the publicly available BEA data do not contain sufficiently detailed information

on affiliate intermediate-input purchases to test this idea as formally as our earlier regressions.

However, what little data are available on this question suggest that affiliate input purchases did not

play an important role. For example, 1977 to 1989 saw extensive skill upgrading in the majority

of U.S. industries. Yet over this period the share of imports in total manufacturing-wide affiliate

input purchases held constant at 16%. The share rose only slightly in only two of the five broad

industries for which the BEA breaks out the manufacturing totals: chemicals (from 9% to 12%)

and other manufacturing (from 15% to 17%). From 1989 to 1994 the all-manufacturing share rose

up to nearly 19%, but during this time U.S. skill upgrading slowed considerably. We do not have

the data to explore cross-industry patterns, but these aggregate data do not indicate a strong link

between U.S. skill upgrading and rising affiliate imports of inputs.

    Our results using the Japanese data are intriguing. Unfortunately, we cannot disentangle

whether the significant negative correlation between greenfield affiliate activity and skill upgrading

is because the JEI data have more accurate measures of greenfield activity or because the JEI data

are picking up an effect specific to differences in Japanese investors from those in other source

countries. In some respects, our overall conclusions are not affected by which explanation

matters. Suppose greenfield activity across all source countries has a different impact on skill

upgrading relative to other affiliate types, but we are just not able to measure this precisely using

the ITA counts. The overall impact of total foreign affiliate activity is still likely negligible because

the vast amount of activity for source countries other than Japan is M&A activity which shows no

impact even in the Japanese data. If the negative correlation between Japanese greenfield activity

and skill upgrading is specific to Japan only, then the overall impact must be even smaller.

    The negative correlation between greenfield activity and skill upgrading has relevance beyond

the skill-upgrading literature. The result lends empirical support to recent models of MNEs in
                                                                                                       20


which foreign affiliates focus on activities less skilled-labor intensive than the activities of MNE

parents. In these models parents are skill-intensive relative to affiliates because only parents

perform firm-wide skill-intensive activities such as R&D and advertising. In U.S. manufacturing,

parents of U.S. MNEs account for at least 50% of activity in terms of employment and sales (see

Slaughter, 1999). So "on average" U.S. industries look like parents, in which case foreign-

affiliate expansion into the United States should tend to reduce the skill mix of U.S. industries--a

prediction that squares with our empirical findings. Thus, we think our findings provide some of

the first empirical support for some aspects of this newer class of MNE models.

   Finally, our findings also highlight a possible issue for future theory work: differences

between types of FDI. We find significant effects of inward FDI on U.S. labor demands only for

greenfield activity, not M&A activity. To date, the type of FDI has received relatively little

attention in MNE models. Our results indicate that FDI type might be an important factor in

determining host-country labor-market effects.
                                                                                                                                     21


                                                     Data Appendix
BEA Data

     Under the International Investment and Trade in Services Survey Act, MNEs are obligated to
participate in BEA censuses and surveys. In 1987 and 1992 the BEA conducted censuses of every
U.S. business enterprise that was a U.S. affiliate of a foreign person. In the intervening years from
1977 through 1994 the BEA surveyed a subset of all U.S. affiliates and then estimated universe totals.
The censuses (also called "benchmark surveys") sample every American affiliate identified both by
checking whether each affiliate from the previous census has "died" and by monitoring news services
for the "birth" of new affiliates since that census. Substantive data must be reported by only those
affiliates whose total assets, sales, or net income/loss exceeds $1 million.18 The surveys sample larger
U.S. affiliates in existence for the most recent benchmark survey. To generate universe estimates
from these surveys, the BEA calculates activity growth rates for sampled affiliates and then assumes
the same growth rates for all affiliates. Data are required to be reported on a fiscal-year basis
following generally accepted U.S. accounting principles. In particular, monetary amounts must be
reported in U.S. dollars. The BEA defines parents and affiliates as described in the text. When there
is more than one ownership link between the parent and affiliate, the percentages of ownership for
each link are determined and then multiplied to determine the parent's overall stake in the affiliate.

    To classify the activity of affiliates in its publicly available data, the BEA assigns each to a single
industry that accounts for the largest share of its total activity.19 From 1977 through 1986 the BEA
classified industries using the Direct Investment (DI) classification, adapted directly from SIC revision
2 (1972) industry codes. Starting in 1987 the BEA switched to the International Surveys Industry
(ISI) classification, based on the SIC revision 3 (1987) industry codes. We concorded the ISI data
back to the DI classifications by following both an internal BEA concordance plus an SIC revision 2 -
revision 3 concordance accompanying the NBER data base. This concordance left us with 56 BEA
manufacturing industries. Some are individual three-digit SIC industries; others are the sum of
several three-digit SIC industries; and a few are single two-digit SIC industries. For our analysis we
aggregated the NBER data up to these 56 industries.

    Sales are defined as gross sales minus returns, allowances, and discounts. Employment is defined
as the number of full and part-time employees on the payroll either at fiscal-year end or at some
representative time during the year. Compensation is defined as wages, salaries, payments-in-kind,
and employee benefit plans. Total Assets are defined as current assets (e.g., accounts receivable) plus
non-current assets (e.g., gross plant, property, and equipment).


ITA Data

    As reported in the text, each year since 1974, the International Trade Administration, U.S.
Department of Commerce (ITA) reports a list of the year’s FDI transactions, including the type of
investment, the foreign investor and country, the four-digit SIC of the U.S. investment, the U.S. state
location, and the dollar value of the transaction when available. These transactions are classified by
type of investment 1) acquisitions and mergers, 2) new plants, 3) joint ventures, 4) plant expansions,
5) reinvested earnings, 6) equity increases, and 7) other. These data represent a compilation of
material from generally publicly available sources, including newspapers, business and trade journals,
as well as from Federal regulatory agencies, such as the Securities and Exchange Commission, Federal
Trade Commission, and the Federal Reserve Board. While this means that the universe of FDI


18 Affiliates not meeting this criterion account for negligible amounts of activity: in 1992 they accounted for only about
1% of total affiliate assets, sales, and net employment. The data reported in censuses as covering "all U.S. affiliates"
actually refers to only those affiliates meeting this size criterion.
19 This classification follows a three-step procedure. First, the parent or affiliate is classified in the one-digit industry that
accounts for the largest percentage of its sales. Second, within that one-digit industry it is classified in the two-digit
industry that accounts for the largest percentage of its sales. Third, within that two-digit industry it is classified in the
three-digit industry that accounts for the largest percentage of its sales.
                                                                                                          22


transactions in the United States are not accounted for in the data, the ITA and others have found
they track the BEA data reasonably well.

     This paper uses counts of FDI occurrences (by transaction type and 4-digit SIC) listed in the ITA
data for the years 1977 through 1994. To concord counts of transactions listed in the ITA database
to our 56 BEA sectors, a number of data issues were addressed. First, for reasons cited in the text, we
eliminated observations classified as reinvested earnings, equity increases, or “other.” Second,
counts recorded from 1988 through 1994 are recorded using revision 3 of the SIC and were
concorded into revision 2 of the SIC. Next, a small fraction of the counts (approximately one
hundred observations out of more than five thousand) had no record of the type of transaction. For
these observations, we simply distributed a transaction across the 4 types according to their average
distribution for the sample: 1) 52% to AM, 2) 9% to JV, 3) 26% to NP, and 4) 13% to PE. There
were an additional twelve observations with no type recorded and which were only listed at a 2-digit
SIC. For these observations, we distributed across type (by distribution above) and equally across the
first 4-digit codes within the corresponding 3-digit sectors. For example, if the observation listed a
transaction in SIC 28, we distributed equally into SIC 2812, 2821, 2831, 2841, 2851, 2861, 2873,
2891. There were approximately 50 observations that had type of transaction specified, but were
only listed at a 2-digit or 3-digit SIC code. For the 2-digit SIC observations, we used the same
procedure to distribute the specified transaction equally across the first 4-digit codes within the
corresponding 3-digit sectors. For the 3-digit observations, we distributed the transaction equally
across all 4-digit SIC in the corresponding 3-digit industry. Finally, there were a handful of
transactions (less than ten) that were deleted because of recorded SICs in the ITA data that do not
exist - i.e., coding problems. Once these data steps were taken, we concorded the 4-digit SIC
industries (revision 2) into the 56 BEA sectors we use for the paper’s empirical analysis.


JEI Data

    Our data on Japanese manufacturing affiliate presence in the United States comes from survey
data of Japanese plants in the United States conducted by the Japan Economic Institute (JEI) and
published semi-annually from 1980 through 1990 by JEI in Japan’s Expanding U.S. Manufacturing
Presence. The appendix of this report lists all Japanese plants in the United States and includes
information on 4-digit SIC (revision 3), location of U.S. plant, plant-level employees, year of
establishment, and whether the plant was acquired or greenfield investment.

    Keith Head and John Ries provided us with an electronic form of the 1990 update, the final year
published by JEI. After eliminating observations for which Japanese ownership was less than a fifty
percent share, we concorded the 1990 employee levels (listed separately by greenfield or acquisition)
into revision 2 of the SIC and then into the 56 BEA sectors. Construction of the 1980 employee
levels was more problematic. We created an electronic form of the 1980 survey and eliminated plants
with Japanese ownership less than fifty percent share. We noticed that there were 1990 plants with
establishment dates of 1980 or earlier, for which there was no record in the 1980 survey. These were
plants that were presumably missed in the initial 1980 survey. A number of these plants appear in the
1981, 1983, or 1984 updates, and so we assumed the employee numbers in these updates were the
same as 1980 levels. A smaller number of observations on 1980 plants did not have records until
surveys or updates after 1986. For these we first calculated the average growth from 1980 to 1990
for all plants for which we had employee numbers in our sample. The average growth rate was 9.4%
over the 10 years. A simple interpolation implies growth of 5.6% from 1980 to 1986. We used
these growth rates to get 1980 employee levels from 1986 and 1990 employee levels. Finally, there
were a small number of observations which had no employees listed in 1980 and also did not show
up in later surveys. We imputed 1980 employee numbers for these plants by taking the average 1980
employees for other plants in the same 4-digit SIC or, if necessary, the same 3-digit SIC. In the end,
about one-eighth of our observations in 1980 had employee levels estimated in some manner
described above, because we didn’t have information on 1980 employee levels directly from the
1980 survey or 1981 update. The final step was concording the 1980 employee levels, listed
separately by greenfield or acquisition and by revision 2 of the SIC, into the 56 BEA sectors.
                                                                                                  23


                                         References
Adams, James D., “Technology, Trade, and Wages: Sectoral Evidence,” mimeograph, 1998.

Aitken, Brian, Ann Harrison, and Robert E. Lipsey, "Wages and Foreign Ownership: A
Comparative Study of Mexico, Venezuela, and the United States," Journal of International
Economics, May 1996, 345-372.

Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz, and Alan B. Krueger, "Computing Inequality: Have
Computers Changed the Labor Market?", Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 1998.

Baldwin, Robert E., "The Effect of Trade and Foreign Direct Investment on Employment and
Relative Wages," NBER Working Paper #5037, February 1995.

Berman, Eli, John Bound, and Zvi Griliches, "Changes in the Demand for Skilled Labor Within
U.S. Manufacturing Industries: Evidence from the Annual Survey of Manufactures," Quarterly
Journal of Economics, May 1994, 367-398.

Blonigen, Bruce A., “Firm-specific Assets and the Link Between Exchange Rates and Foreign
Direct Investment,” American Economic Review, June 1997, pp. 447-65.

Bound, John and George Johnson, "Changes in the Structure of Wages in the 1980s: An
Evaluation of Alternative Explanations," American Economic Review, June 1992, 371-92.

Carr, David L., James R. Markusen, and Keith E. Maskus, "Estimating the Knowledge-Capital
Model of the Multinational Enterprise," NBER Working Paper #6773, October 1998.

Davis, Steven J., "Cross-Country Patterns of Change in Relative Wages," in Olivier J. Blanchard
and Stanley Fischer (eds), 1992 Macroeconomics Annual, NBER, 1992.

Doms, Mark E., and J. Bradford Jensen, "Comparing Wages, Skills, and Productivity Between
Domestic and Foreign Owned Manufacturing Establishments in the United States, mimeograph,
October 1996.

Dunning, John H., International Production and the Multinational Enterprise, London: George
Allen and Unwin, 1981.

Feenstra, Robert C. and Gordon H. Hanson, "Foreign Investment, Outsourcing, and Relative
Wages," in Robert C. Feenstra, Gene M. Grossman, and Douglas A. Irwin (eds.), Political
Economy of Trade Policy: Essays in Honor of Jagdish Bhagwati, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
1996a, pp. 89-127.

Feenstra, Robert C., and Gordon H. Hanson, "Globalization, Outsourcing, and Wage Inequality,"
American Economic Review, May 1996b, pp. 240-245.

Feenstra, Robert C., and Gordon H. Hanson, "Foreign Direct Investment and Relative Wages:
Evidence from Mexico's Maquiladoras," Journal of International Economics, 1997, pp. 371-393.

Feliciano, Zadia, and Robert E. Lipsey, "Foreign Ownership and Wages in the United States,
1987 -1992," mimeograph, 1998.

Globerman, Steven, John C. Ries, and Ilan Vertinsky, “The Economic Performance of Foreign
Affiliates in Canada,” Canadian Journal of Economics, 1994, pp. 143-156.
                                                                                                   24



Haskel, Jonathan E., and Matthew J. Slaughter, "Does the Sector Bias of Skill-Biased Technical
Change Explain Changing Skill Differentials?", August 1998, revision, NBER Working Paper
#6565.

Helpman, Elhanan, "A Simple Theory of International Trade with Multinational Corporations,"
Journal of Political Economy, 92, 1984, No. 3, 451-471.

Howenstine, Ned G. and Dale P. Shannon, “Differences in Foreign-Owned U.S. Manufacturing
Establishments by Country of Owner,” Survey of Current Business, March 1996, pp. 43-60.

Howenstine, Ned G. and William J. Zeile, “Characteristics of Foreign-owned U.S. Manufacturing
Establishments,” Survey of Current Business, January 1994, pp. 34-59.

Japan Economic Institute, Japan's Expanding U.S. Manufacturing Presence, 1980 and 1990.

Klein, Michael W. and Eric S. Rosengren, “The Real Exchange Rate and Foreign Direct
Investment in the United States,” Journal of International Economics, May 1994, pp. 373-89.

Kogut, Bruce and Sea Jin Chang, "Technological Capabilities and Japanese Foreign Direct
Investment," Review of Economics and Statistics, August 1991, 73(3), pp. 401-13.

Markusen, James R., "The Boundaries of Multinational Enterprises and the Theory of International
Trade," Journal of Economic Perspectives, Spring 1995, 169-189.

Markusen, James R., and Anthony J. Venables, "Multinational Firms and the New Trade Theory,"
Journal of International Economics, December 1998, 183-204.

Slaughter, Matthew J., "Production Transfer Within Multinational Enterprises and American
Wages, 1999, forthcoming Journal of International Economics.

United States Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis, Foreign Direct Investment
in the United States: Operations of U.S. Affiliates of Foreign Companies, 1977 through 1994.

United States Department of Commerce, International Trade Administration, Foreign Direct
Investment in the United States: Completed Transactions, 1977 through 1994.

Zeile, William J., "The Domestic Orientation of Production and Sales by U.S. Manufacturing
Affiliates of Foreign Companies," Survey of Current Business, April 1998, pp. 29-50.
                                                                                                                    25




                                         Figure 1
                     Skill Premium and Foreign-Affiliate Employment
                             in U.S. Manufacturing, 1977-1994
                         U.S. Skill Premium           Aff. Share of U.S. Employment

                                                                                    .15
               1.7



              1.65                                                                  .1


               1.6
                                                                                    .05

              1.55


                                                                                    0
               1.5
                     1975          1980        1985        1990            1995
                                           Year (4-Digits)
Notes: Skill premium is measured as the ratio of average annual wages of non-production workers to average annual
wages of production workers in U.S. manufacturing. Employment share is the share of total U.S. manufacturing
employment accounted for by foreign-owned affiliates operating in the United States.
Sources: Bureau of Economic Analysis and National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                                                                                          26




                                             Figure 2
                           Foreign-Affiliate Payroll, Capital, and Sales
                               in U.S. Manufacturing, 1977-1994
               Aff. Share of U.S. Payroll                      Aff. Share of U.S. Sales
               Aff. Share of U.S. Capital


       .4


       .3


       .2


       .1


        0
            1975                   1980                1985                     1990                  1995
                                                   Year (4-Digits)
Notes: All activity shares are the share of total U.S. manufacturing activity accounted for by foreign-owned affiliates
operating in the United States.
Sources: Bureau of Economic Analysis and National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                                                                 27




                                            Figure 3
                                  Inward FDI Transaction Counts
                                in U.S. Manufacturing, 1977-1994
               NP Transactions                              M&A Transactions
               M&A Plus NP Transactions


     400


     300


     200


     100


        0
            1975                 1980                1985                   1990          1995
                                                 Year (4-Digits)
Notes: "NP" transactions are new plants, "M&A" transactions are mergers & acquisitions.
Sources: International Trade Administration.
                                                                                                                 28


                                   Table 1: Summary Statistics
              Variable                 Measure        Observations          Mean           Std. Dev.
            Regressand
        U.S. NP Wage Bill /            Levels             1008             0.394             0.116
          U.S. Wage Bill             First Diffs           952             0.003             0.011
                                     Long Diffs             56             0.047             0.042
             Regressors
          ln (U.S. Plant /             Levels             1008             -1.637            0.331
          U.S. Shipments)            First Diffs           952             -0.013            0.072
                                     Long Diffs             56             -0.221            0.433

       ln (U.S. Equipment /            Levels             1008             -1.388            0.483
         U.S. Shipments)             First Diffs           952             0.011             0.077
                                     Long Diffs             56             0.179             0.456

        ln (U.S. Shipments)            Levels             1008             10.393            0.854
                                     First Diffs           952              0.019            0.075
                                     Long Diffs             56              0.315            0.611

       Computer Investment /           Levels             1008             0.044             0.043
         Total Investment            First Diffs           952             0.003             0.011
                                     Long Diffs             56             0.046             0.033

       Affiliate Employment /          Levels              864             0.127             0.178
        U.S. Employment              First Diffs           767             0.007             0.045
                                     Long Diffs             42             0.109             0.139

        Affiliate Wage Bill /          Levels              859             0.163             0.217
         U.S. Wage Bill              First Diffs           763             0.010             0.055
                                     Long Diffs             42             0.161             0.190

          Affiliate Assets /           Levels              860             0.223             0.263
         U.S. Capital Stock          First Diffs           763             0.022             0.080
                                     Long Diffs             37             0.379             0.368

     Affiliate U.S. Shipments /        Levels              871             0.108             0.108
          U.S. Shipments             First Diffs           773             0.007             0.039
                                     Long Diffs             42             0.115             0.114

    Jap Affiliate Employment /         Levels             112              0.009             0.013
        U.S. Employment              First Diffs          N.A.             N.A.              N.A.
                                     Long Diffs            56              0.013             0.015
Notes: All variables defined in the text. "First Diffs" are one-year differences, "Long Diffs" are full-sample
differences (18 years for all variables except the Japanese variable, which is 10 years).
Sources: BEA, JEI, NBER, and U.S. Bureau of the Census.
                                                                                                                     29




                             Table 2: Skill-Upgrading Regressions:
                            BEA Data, Short Differences, 1977-1994

              Regressor               Specification     Specification     Specification      Specification
                                          (1)               (2)               (3)                (4)
      Measure of FDI Activity         employment          wage bill           capital         shipments
          ∆ (FDI Activity)               -0.001            -0.002             0.004             -0.009
                                        (-0.100)          (-0.378)           (0.948)           (-0.915)
          Computerization                 0.024             0.025             0.028             0.026
                                         (2.299)           (2.345)           (2.522)           (2.424)
     ∆ ln (U.S. Plant / U.S. Ship)        0.098             0.096             0.097             0.094
                                         (4.727)           (4.601)           (4.588)           (4.572)
     ∆ ln (U.S. Equip / U.S. Ship)        0.009             0.008             0.009             0.010
                                         (1.189)           (1.087)           (1.145)           (1.250)
       ∆ ln (U.S. Shipments)              0.053             0.052             0.052             0.051
                                         (3.091)           (2.988)           (2.939)           (2.981)
        Adjusted R-Squared                0.371             0.375             0.400             0.386
           # Observations                  767               763               763                773
Notes: Each specification is a variation of equation (2) in the text. In all cases the regressand is the change in
skilled-labor's share of the wage bill, the wage regressor omitted, and capital disaggregated between plant and
equipment. Reported t-statistics (in parentheses) are based on White robust standard errors.
Sources: BEA, U.S. Bureau of the Census, and NBER.
                                                                                                                     30




                             Table 3: Skill-Upgrading Regressions:
                            BEA Data, Long Differences, 1977-1994

              Regressor               Specification     Specification     Specification      Specification
                                          (1)               (2)               (3)                (4)
      Measure of FDI Activity         employment          wage bill           capital         shipments
          ∆ (FDI Activity)                0.007             0.011             -0.001            0.076
                                         (0.134)           (0.303)           (-0.110)          (1.040)
          Computerization                 0.473             0.480             0.445             0.501
                                         (2.404)           (2.463)           (3.455)           (2.668)
     ∆ ln (U.S. Plant / U.S. Ship)        0.054             0.055             0.034             0.061
                                         (2.204)           (2.194)           (1.693)           (2.372)
     ∆ ln (U.S. Equip / U.S. Ship)        0.018             0.018             0.020             0.013
                                         (2.164)           (2.056)           (3.184)           (1.468)
       ∆ ln (U.S. Shipments)              0.045             0.045             0.016             0.046
                                         (2.231)           (2.210)           (3.455)           (2.668)
        Adjusted R-Squared                0.537             0.538             0.584             0.561
           # Observations                   42                42                37                42
Notes: Each specification is a variation of equation (2) in the text. In all cases the regressand is the change in
skilled-labor's share of the wage bill, the wage regressor omitted, and capital disaggregated between plant and
equipment. Reported t-statistics (in parentheses) are based on White robust standard errors.
Sources: BEA, U.S. Bureau of the Census, and NBER.
                                                                                                                       31




                           Table 4: Skill-Upgrading Regressions:
                        BEA Data, Various Differences and Subperiods

              Regressor               Specification      Specification      Specification     Specification
                                          (1)                (2)                (3)               (4)
           ∆ (FDI Activity)               -0.004            -0.150              0.015             0.004
                                         (-0.323)          (-0.392)            (1.216)           (0.085)
           Computerization                0.017              0.080              0.055             0.288
                                         (0.773)            (0.662)            (2.648)           (2.215)
     ∆ ln (U.S. Plant / U.S. Ship)        0.048              0.054              0.131             0.095
                                         (1.496)            (1.355)            (2.926)           (3.560)
     ∆ ln (U.S. Equip / U.S. Ship)        0.006              0.005              0.027             -0.001
                                         (0.865)            (1.190)            (0.885)           (-0.042)
       ∆ ln (U.S. Shipments)              -0.021            -0.006              0.092             0.072
                                         (-0.615)          (-0.229)            (3.336)           (3.535)
             Time Period               1986-1991          1986-1991          1977-1985         1977-1985
          Time Differences                 Short             Long               Short              Long
        Adjusted R-Squared                0.149              0.185              0.492             0.563
            # Observations                  219                47                346                40
Notes: Each specification is a variation of equation (2) in the text. In all cases the regressand is the change in
skilled-labor's share of the wage bill, the FDI regressor is in terms of employment, the wage regressor omitted, and
capital disaggregated between plant and equipment. Reported t-statistics (in parentheses) are based on White robust
standard errors.
Sources: BEA, U.S. Bureau of the Census, and NBER.
                                                                                                                                     32




                                Table 5: Skill-Upgrading Regressions:
                              BEA-ITA Data, Short Differences, 1977-1994

          Regressor                Specification       Specification      Specification      Specification       Specification
                                       (1)                 (2)                (3)                (4)                 (5)
    Type of Inward FDI                   MA                  JV                 NP                 PE           MA+NP+PE
      ∆ (FDI Activity)                 0.001              -0.019              -0.009             -0.009             -0.001
                                      (0.068)            (-0.490)            (-0.462)           (-0.315)           (-0.124)
      Computerization                  0.023               0.023              0.023              0.023               0.023
                                      (2.074)             (2.089)            (2.047)            (2.071)             (2.071)
 ∆ ln (U.S. Plant / U.S. Ship)         0.102               0.101              0.102              0.102               0.102
                                      (4.671)             (4.675)            (4.669)            (4.676)             (4.676)
 ∆ ln (U.S. Equip / U.S. Ship)         0.009               0.009              0.009              0.009               0.009
                                      (1.123)             (1.140)            (1.131)            (1.128)             (1.128)
   ∆ ln (U.S. Shipments)               0.057               0.057              0.058              0.058               0.058
                                      (3.143)             (3.144)            (3.143)            (3.148)             (3.146)
    Adjusted R-Squared                 0.368               0.368              0.368               0.368              0.368
       # Observations                    678                678                678                 678                678
Notes: Each specification is a variation of equation (2) in the text. In all cases the regressand is the change in skilled-labor's
share of the wage bill, the BEA part of the FDI regressor is in terms of employment, the wage regressor omitted, and capital
disaggregated between plant and equipment. Reported t-statistics (in parentheses) are based on White robust standard errors.
"MA" refers to mergers and acquisitions, "JV" joint ventures, "NP" new plants, and "PE plant expansions."
Sources: BEA, ITA, U.S. Bureau of the Census, and NBER.
                                                                                                                                     33




                                Table 6: Skill-Upgrading Regressions:
                              BEA-ITA Data, Long Differences, 1977-1994

          Regressor                Specification       Specification      Specification      Specification       Specification
                                       (1)                 (2)                (3)                (4)                 (5)
    Type of Inward FDI                   MA                  JV                 NP                 PE           MA+NP+PE
      ∆ (FDI Activity)                -0.170               0.117              0.045              0.123               0.007
                                      (0.098)             (0.218)            (0.230)            (0.499)             (0.121)
      Computerization                  0.461               0.476              0.479              0.492               0.472
                                      (2.375)             (2.475)            (2.359)            (2.512)             (2.397)
 ∆ ln (U.S. Plant / U.S. Ship)         0.054               0.056              0.054              0.055               0.054
                                      (2.204)             (2.149)            (2.198)            (2.203)             (2.207)
 ∆ ln (U.S. Equip / U.S. Ship)         0.020               0.018              0.019              0.018               0.018
                                      (2.152)             (2.131)            (2.033)            (1.997)             (2.168)
   ∆ ln (U.S. Shipments)               0.045               0.046              0.045              0.045               0.045
                                      (2.263)             (2.160)            (2.203)            (2.176)             (2.230)
    Adjusted R-Squared                 0.537               0.537              0.537               0.541              0.537
       # Observations                     42                 42                 42                  42                 42
Notes: Each specification is a variation of equation (2) in the text. In all cases the regressand is the change in skilled-labor's
share of the wage bill, the BEA part of the FDI regressor is in terms of employment, the wage regressor omitted, and capital
disaggregated between plant and equipment. Reported t-statistics (in parentheses) are based on White robust standard errors.
"MA" refers to mergers and acquisitions, "JV" joint ventures, "NP" new plants, and "PE plant expansions."
Sources: BEA, ITA, U.S. Bureau of the Census, and NBER.
                                                                                                                      34




                             Table 7: Skill-Upgrading Regressions:
                             JEI Data, Long Differences, 1980-1990

                       Regressor               Specification      Specification     Specification
                                                   (1)                (2)               (3)
                 Type of Inward FDI                 MA                 NP             MA + NP
                    ∆ (FDI Activity)               -0.003            -0.008            -0.007
                                                  (-0.632)          (-3.285)          (-1.619)
                    Computerization                0.404              0.358             0.411
                                                  (3.327)            (3.179)           (3.816)
              ∆ ln (U.S. Plant / U.S. Ship)        0.105              0.098             0.094
                                                  (4.039)            (3.367)           (3.270)
              ∆ ln (U.S. Equip / U.S. Ship)        0.012              0.008             0.009
                                                  (1.668)            (1.440)           (1.684)
                ∆ ln (U.S. Shipments)              0.061              0.056             0.052
                                                  (3.248)            (2.793)           (2.691)
                 Adjusted R-Squared                0.660              0.686             0.672
                     # Observations                  56                56                 56
Notes: Each specification is a variation of equation (2) in the text. In all cases the regressand is the change in
skilled-labor's share of the wage bill, the wage regressor omitted, and capital disaggregated between plant and
equipment. Reported t-statistics (in parentheses) are based on White robust standard errors. "MA" refers to mergers
and acquisitions, "NP" to new plants.
Sources: JEI, U.S. Bureau of the Census, and NBER.
                                                                                                                     35


                             Appendix Table: The 56 BEA Industries

       BEA Industry Name                 SIC Industries               BEA Industry Name             SIC Industries

         Meat Products                        201              Primary Metal Industries, Ferrous    331, 332, 339

         Dairy Products                       202            Primary Metal Industries, Nonferrous     333 - 336

      Fruits & Vegetables                     203            Containers, Forgings, & Stampings        341, 346

       Grain Mill Products                    204               Cutlery, Hand Tools, & Screws         342, 345

         Bakery Products                      205              Plumbing, Heating, & Structures        343, 344

            Beverages                         208                    Misc. Metal Products             347 - 349

      Misc. Food Products                206, 207, 209               Engines & Turbines                  351

        Tobacco Products                       21                 Farm & Garden Machinery                352

      Textile Mill Products                    22             Construction & Mining Machinery            353

        Apparel Products                       23                  Metalworking Machinery                354

    Lumber & Wood Products                     24                 Special Industry Machinery             355

      Furniture & Fixtures                     25                General Industrial Machinery            356

   Pulp, Paper, & Board Mills         261, 262, 263, 266       Office & Computing Machinery              357

Paperboard & Misc. Paper Products          264, 265           Refrigeration & Service Machinery          358

     Printing & Publishing                     27                      Misc. Machinery                   359

      Industrial Chemicals               281, 282, 286              Household Appliances                 363

              Drugs                           283                 Light & Wiring Equipment               364

        Soap & Cleaners                       284            Radio, TV, & Communication Prods            366

     Agricultural Chemicals                   287                   Electronic Components                367

Paint & Misc. Chemical Products            285, 289                Misc. Electrical Products             369

  Integrated Petroleum Products             291 part             Motor Vehicles & Equipment              371

       Petroleum Refining                   291 part              Other Transport Equipment           372-379

   Petroleum and Coal Products             295, 299           Scientific & Measuring Instruments      381, 382

        Rubber Products                    301 - 306             Optical & Ophthalmic Goods           383, 385

      Misc. Plastic Products                  307              Medical Instruments & Supplies            384

        Leather Products                       31            Photographic Equipment & Supplies           386

         Glass Products                    321 - 323           Watches, Clocks, & Watchcases             387
     Stone & Clay Products                 324 - 329            Misc. Manufacturing Industries           39


                Note: SIC Codes are for the Standard Industrial Classification, Revision 2 (1972)
