1990s, many pointed to Mexico as a splendid example of successful economic policy reform.

Mexico had even negotiated the North American Free Trade Agreement with Canada and the

United States, thus contemplating a highly open economy in future years.

       In December 1994, however, a new Government came to power. Recognizing that the

exchange rate was somewhat unrealistic, it attempted a 15 percent devaluation. Instead of

improving the situation, however, that devaluation triggered a major foreign exchange crisis, as

Mexican citizens and foreigners alike attempted to get out of pesos and peso-denominated assets

and into dollars.

        With foreign support and further policy measures, the markets ceased to panic and the

virtual free-fall in the exchange rate and government debt stopped. To help reduce non-

performing loans in the banks' balance sheets, the government provided for the banks to transfer

part of their loan portfolio to the government, and gave the banks nontransferable ten-year

government bonds in exchange.

        While Mexican real GDP fell at rates of 9.2, 8.0 and 7.0 percent in the last three quarters

of 1995, real GDP then began increasing in the second quarter of 1996, and grew at average

annual rates above 5 percent through the first quarter of 1998.1 This remarkably quick recovery

in aggregate activity has not been uniform across the economy. The tradable sector has grown

strongly, while after a steep fall in 1995 the non-tradable sector has subsequently recuperated

only sluggishly. Mexican exports, which had grown at an average annual rate of 5 percent from




1
  The only exception was the first quarter of 1997 when the growth rate was “only” 4.9 percent. But that was
followed by expansion of 8.6 percent in the second quarter of 1997.



                                                                                                               2
1985 to 1994 and were U.S. $74 billion in 1994, grew at an average rate of 21 percent from

1994 to 1997, and stood at $126 billion in 1997.2

        The asymmetric response of the tradable and non-tradable sectors is intimately linked

with the severe credit crunch that Mexico has experienced since 1995. Although fresh domestic

bank lending dried up in Mexico, it was still possible for export firms to obtain financing in the

international capital market, or to receive credit from upstream firms. Hence, the credit crunch

did not deter the tradable sector from growing at spectacular rates. On the other hand, firms in

the non-tradable sector were adversely affected by the lack of credit, as these firms had no

access to international financial markets. Instead, such firms have had to finance themselves with

their own resources.

        A phenomenon that has gone hand in hand with the credit crunch is the steady increase in

the share of non-performing loans. Even after deducting the bad loans transferred to Fobaproa,

the ratio of nonperforming to total loans in the balance sheet of commercial banks increased

from around 10% at the end of 1994 to 16% in 1995 and subsequently to 21% in 1996. In

1997, this ratio rose to 30%, a sizable increase, indicative of a change in banking regulation that

directed banks to classify the principal in addition to the unpaid interest as non-performing.

        From an ex-ante perspective the partial bailout policy pursued by Mexico seemed

appropriate. In principle one would expect that high GDP growth would increase firms’ profits

and households incomes. As a result debtors would be able to service their debts, and banks

would be able to expand credit. However, with hindsight we can see why this policy stance did

not solve the banking problem. First, export firms financed themselves in international capital

2
 This stands in sharp contrast to the Southeast Asian performance, where exports of goods and services grew at
an average annual rate of 14 percent over the 1985-94 period, and 11 percent from 1994 to 1997. The countries




                                                                                                                 3
markets. This meant that domestic banks did not tap the growing tradable sector of the

economy. It also resulted in a decrease in the quality of the pool of borrowers. Second, the

banks had few resources with which to confer fresh loans because they have accumulated a large

share of evergreen accounts. Third, moral hazard plagued the banking system.

        An important lesson from the Mexican experience is that nonperforming loans are

unlikely to disappear on their own over a span of a few years, even under a high GDP growth

scenario. Furthermore, the existence of nonperforming loans is an obstacle for the banking

system to adequately perform its functions. This raises the question of whether an alternative

strategy under which all nonperforming loans were recognized at once and the fiscal costs were

all paid up-front would be preferable.

       The remarkable turnaround of the Mexican economy and the evolution of the banking

problem is of interest in its own right. In addition, it is of interest to policy makers in other

countries where debt-servicing difficulties and foreign exchange crisis have forced adjustment

measures. In this paper, therefore, we examine the causes of the crisis, the crisis itself (insofar

as it is relevant to understanding the response), and the evolution of the Mexican economy since

the crisis.

        While Mexico's economy has evidently performed well beyond the expectations of early

1995 in the past three years, there remain problems. We shall focus both on the positive side of

the reforms and on the difficulties that remain. In a final section, we assess the lessons that

emerge for other countries in light of the Mexican experience.




covered are Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore, and Thailand. Data are from International
Monetary Fund, International Financial Statistics.


                                                                                                            4
II.    WHAT LED TO THE CRISIS?

      That Mexico experienced a major debt crisis in 1982 is well known. After three difficult

years of stagnation following a stabilization program during which there was no fundamental

change in the underlying policy stance, a second crisis loomed in 1985. By this time, policy

makers in the government became convinced that fundamental reforms were necessary. Instead

of tightening quantitative restrictions on imports (which were already in place and covered 85

percent of imports) as had happened in earlier crises, the currency was devalued (see Table 2 for

estimates of the nominal and real exchange rates for Mexico). Tariffs were reduced, and there

was a general opening of the previously highly-protected manufacturing sector. Privatization

was started by President de la Madrid. However, the rate of inflation rose sharply, and by 1987

had reached an annual rate of 100 percent.

      Further reforms were undertaken, this time with a view to bringing down the rate of

inflation, but without any intent to reverse the previous opening of the economy. There was a

sharp nominal devaluation, from l 378 pesos per dollar at the end of 1986 to a 2 273 pesos per

dollar at the end of 1987 while at the same time, the fiscal deficit was significantly reduced from

13 percent of GDP in 1986 to 5 percent of GDP in 1989 (see Table 4). Politically, it was

deemed important that the inflation rate be brought down sharply. To achieve that objective, in

addition to fiscal adjustments, the authorities adopted the exchange rate as the “nominal

anchor.” Under this policy the range within which the exchange rate would be allowed to move

was predetermined, and at a rate below the expected differential in the inflation rate between

Mexico and the United States, the country with which Mexico conducted more than 70 percent

of her merchandise trade.




                                                                                                 5
      The theory underlying the use of a nominal anchor exchange rate policy is that, in an open

economy, the domestic price of tradable goods is determined via the (nominal anchor) exchange

rate, and so, when the exchange rate is adjusted more slowly than the rate of inflation, it serves

as a “nominal anchor”, bringing down the overall rate of inflation.

      From 1987 until 1994, the authorities followed a nominal anchor exchange rate policy.

The way in which this worked was as follows. Government officials met with leaders of the

labor unions and the private sector, sometimes annually and sometimes semiannually, and

negotiated a “pacto” which specified the rate of increase in the minimum wage, the rate of

depreciation of the currency, and key public sector prices for goods such as electricity and

gasoline. On the basis of these, a forecast for the inflation rate was set forth, which was

essentially above the rate of currency depreciation. Since rates of depreciation were

government-determined while forecasts of inflation were usually accurate or on the low side, this

resulted in real appreciation of the exchange rate, as can be seen in Table 2. Starting in 1987,

right after a large devaluation, the real exchange rate appreciated sharply, falling from 139 in

1987 (with an index of 1990 equaling 100) to a low of just under 79 by 1993. Simultaneously

real wages in the manufacturing sector increased significantly during this period as shown in

Table 5.

      As can also be seen in Table 2, the rate of price increase did indeed slow down. From a

rate of inflation of over 100 percent in 1987, it fell to 23 percent by 1991, and to around 9

percent by 1993. Hence, from the viewpoint of inflation, the Mexican policy combination - a

relatively balanced fiscal account combined with the nominal anchor - seemed successful.

      Mexico's debt problems were greatly reduced, despite the sharp decline in the price of oil

in 1986. The debt service ratio of 423 percent of exports in 1986 fell to 205 percent in 1993,


                                                                                                6
and interest payments on outstanding foreign debt fell from 40.4 percent of export (of goods and

services) earnings in 1982 to 10.9 percent in 1993. These changes were all the more remarkable

in light of the devaluations of the 1980s, which raised debt servicing obligations in domestic

terms.4

          In addition to the fiscal-trade regime reforms, the authorities began to undertake serious

reforms in the rest of the economy. There was a conscious effort to reduce the role of the public

sector and to rely on private enterprise for the bulk of economic activity. The scope of reforms

was enormous, encompassing privatization, removal of regulations, tax reforms, changes in

landholding arrangements in rural areas, and generally greatly reducing the role of the state in

economic activity. Table 7 gives a chronology of major economic events in Mexico since 1980.

In many regards, Mexico's decision to enter into the North American Free Trade Agreement was

a signal of the intent to open up markets and shift to reliance on the private sector for future

development prospects, as well as an effort to signal and insure that reforms were irreversible.

          However, there were difficulties. First of all, the Mexican rate of economic growth was

relatively low, especially when the stagnation of the early 1980s and the relatively rapid rate of

growth of the labor force was taken into account. As can be seen in Table 1, even by 1988 real

GDP had barely surpassed its 1981 level (which implied a drop in per capita income in excess of

15 percent), while from 1987 to 1993 Mexican real GDP only grew at an average annual rate of

around 3 percent. Meanwhile, during the 1980s the Mexican population and labor force grew at

an average annual rates of 2.3 and 3.5 percent, respectively. Both growth rates slowed




4
    Data are from World Bank, World Debt Tables 1994-95, Mexico pages.


                                                                                                   7
substantially after 1990, with average rates of growth from 1990 to 1995 of 1.9 percent for

population and 2.8 percent for the labor force. 5

      This slow growth was accompanied by, and in part caused by, a relatively slow growth of

exports combined with a rapid growth of imports and a deteriorating current account balance.

As can be seen in Table 3, exports rose gradually from 1987 to 1994, but imports rose sharply,

with the current account deficit increasing from virtual balance in 1986-88 to a deficit of around

US$30 billion in 1994. As a percentage of GDP, that was the equivalent of an increase from

near zero to almost 8 percent of GDP (see Table 3). This deterioration in the current account

was associated with a fall in domestic savings. As a percentage of GDP, savings fell from 22.0

percent in 1987 to around 16 percent in 1994. Investment, however, held fairly constant as a

percentage of GDP.

      Slow growth was partly attributable to restructuring, especially in Mexican industry, that

was taking place in response to privatization, deregulation, and the removal of trade barriers,

and later in response to the prospect of entry into NAFTA. However, the period during which

the Mexican real rate of growth was low -- in the 3-4 percent range -- was far longer than can be

explained simply by restructuring: the increasingly appreciated real exchange rate stood as a

disincentive to exports and, as such, resulted in a significantly slower rate of growth of exports

than would normally be expected after a switch in incentives.6

      To be sure, these developments were interrelated.                Real exchange rate appreciation

reduced the profitability of exporting and increased the relative profitability of producing


5
  Data are from World Bank, World Development Report, 1997, Appendix Table 4.
6
  Chile also experienced very slow growth from the beginning of reforms (in 1975) until the mid 1980s. But the
real growth rate in the late 1970s was over 5 percent. Interestingly, in the early 1980s the Chilean peso was
allowed to appreciate by more than 30 percent in real terms (as Chile followed a nominal anchor exchange rate
policy), and at the same time, the world price of copper fell sharply.


                                                                                                            8
nontradable goods, such as office buildings and residences. But since the real exchange rate

appreciation also helped hold down the rate of inflation, it induced larger capital inflows (to take

advantage of higher nominal rates of interest in Mexico) than would otherwise have occurred.

The capital inflows supported the relatively appreciated real exchange rate, and therefore

obscured the fact that the nontradable sector was expanding rapidly while the tradable sector

was increasingly tipped toward increased imports and a large current account deficit.

      There are indications that, by 1992 or 1993, the authorities were aware of the

overvaluation of the peso. However, Mexican authorities stated that they had little choice but to

maintain nominal anchor exchange rate policies, arguing that any larger change in the exchange

rate would simply trigger offsetting nominal wage increases.7

      Capital inflows were increasing and there clearly did not appear to be imminent danger.

Analysts pointed out that the Mexican government's fiscal accounts were in overall primary

surplus, and that the net capital inflow was destined to the private sector.                   Furthermore,

Mexico's experience with policy reform was held up as a stellar example of how a developing

country could perform.8 Even the exchange rate was defended by some as being realistic as late

as the end of 1992.9 For example, Claudio Loser (an official at the IMF) and Eliot Kalter

authored an International Monetary Fund Occasional Paper in September 1992, which discussed

Mexican exchange rate policy, and stated that "...The authorities have been successful ... In the

process the peso appreciated in real terms at a time when the balance of payments strengthened,

7
  See Pedro Aspe, 1993, for a description of Mexican policies and an explanation of the need for "el pacto" and
similar policies. Aspe, Economic Transformation the Mexican Way, MIT Press, Cambridge. Aspe was Finance
Minister for Mexico during the Salinas Presidency from 1988 to 1994.
8
  See, for example, Arnold C. Harberger, “A Handful of Heroes,” American Economics Review Papers and
Proceedings, May 1993.
9
  To be sure, there were some dissenting voices. See Rudicher Dombusch and Alejandro Wemer, 1994. “Mexico:
Stabilization, Reform, and No Growth,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity I; and Anne Krueger and Pablo



                                                                                                             9
helped by a process of external liberalization and reform that the authorities pursued..."10 At the

same time the OECD advocated pegging the peso to the dollar without any change in the

nominal exchange rate in that same year.11 Nonetheless, the sheer size of the current account

deficit and the increasing overvaluation of the peso created a significant vulnerability for

Mexico.

II.1 The Crisis

      During the course of 1994, a number of "accidents" occurred.12 There was, first of all, the

beginning of the Chiapas uprising, in response to the formal commencement of NAFTA. That

may have served to alert foreign investors to potential political dangers in Mexico. But equally

dramatic and probably more important, there were two important political assassinations during

the year, in late March when the designated candidate for President, Donaldo Colosio was

gunned down, and in September the Secretary General of the PRI was assassinated. After each

assassination, there was a sizable capital outflow. As a result, foreign exchange reserves dropped

from 30 billion dollars in February 1994 to 17 billion in April, and to around 12 billion in early

December.

      It is often argued that the fall in reserves was the inevitable result of the negative shocks

that Mexico experienced in 1994. This is not correct. The fall in reserves resulted from the

confluence of the political shocks and the policy response. After the exchange rate hit the ceiling

of the band in the aftermath of Mr. Colosio’s assassination, monetary authorities decided to keep



Barahona, 1991, “The Mexican Program of Trade and Exchange Rate Reform” (in Spanish), Quantum Monterey,
Mexico.
10
   Claudio Loser and Eliot Kalter, 1992. Mexico: The Strategy to Achieve Sustained Economic Growth,
International Monetary Fund Occasional Paper 99, Washington, D.C. December P.1
11
   OECD, 1992. Economic Surveys. Mexico. OECD Paris.
12
   In addition to the factors enumerated here, U.S. interest rates were rising during 1994, which would in any
event have increased the cost of debt servicing and floating new issues.


                                                                                                           10
the exchange rate virtually fixed and to expand domestic credit in order to fully sterilize the fall

in reserves (see Figure 1 and Table 6). This policy was adopted in order to avoid a sharp

increase in interest rates. Given the vulnerability of the banking system, it was feared that a sharp

increase in interest rates would generate a deep recession.

      In addition to expanding domestic credit, authorities decided to respond to the capital

outflow by issuing short-term dollar denominated bonds, the so called “Tesobonos.” The stock

of Tesobonos increased from around 1.2 billion dollars at the end of 1993 to 29 billion dollars in

December 1994.         Since in early December reserves were only 12.5 billion dollars, the

government had de facto become illiquid.

      The administration of President Zedillo took over in December. It was apparently agreed

by all that a change in the nominal exchange rate was seriously called for. However, when a 15

percent devaluation was announced on December 20 1994, it had the opposite effect from that

intended. Foreigners and domestic residents alike rushed to attempt to convert pesos into

dollars. Within a few days, the authorities gave up their efforts to support the currency, and

permitted, or had no choice but to let it float.14

      Nonetheless the currency continued to depreciate rapidly, and reserves were dropping

rapidly. That, in turn, had several effects. Most important was the fact that the peso cost of

debt rose both because of the appreciation of the dollar and because of a much higher interest

rate.15 In addition, the value of nonperforming loans in the banking system increased rapidly,


14
   For an analysis of the policy response to the shocks that took place in 1994 see Jeffrey Sachs, Aaron Tornell
and Andres Velasco, “The Collapse of the Mexican Peso: What Have we Learned?” Economic Policy, April
1996. For an account of the chronology of the Mexican crisis and the immediate response, see International
Monetary, Fund, International Capital Markets. Developments, Prospects, and Policy Issues. Washington DC
August 1995, Pp.53-79.
15
   The interest rate on 28-day Cetes repurchase agreements rose from 14.7 percent on December 19 to 17 percent
on December 2 1 and then to 3 1 percent on December 28, and to 41 percent by January 18, 1995.. It fluctuated


                                                                                                             11
both because of dollar-denominated debt and because of the financial difficulties encountered by

Mexican borrowers confronted with a higher price of foreign exchange. As explained by the

International Monetary Fund, the peso devaluation and subsequent tightening of financial market

conditions created asset quality problems in the peso-denominated and foreign currency loan

books of Mexican banks. Foreign currency loans represented about a third of total loans made

by Mexican banks as of December 1994, but many of these loans were extended to firms

without sources of foreign currency income.               As the credit expansion of 1991-94 had

accelerated, some of the new loans were in any event extended to shaky ventures. With the

recession and the peso depreciation, borrowers increasingly encountered debt-servicing

problems.

      The sharp rise in interest rates also affected the peso-loan portfolio. Most, if not all bank

credits in Mexico have variable interest rates tied to the one-month Cetes rate or to interbank

interest rates. When interest rates reached levels as high as 80 percent in the first quarter of

1995, payments ceased on a large proportion of loans of all types. Banks generally chose to

restructure these loans, or simply to suspend interest payments, rather than be forced to

recognize them as high-risk assets and write off a certain amount of their already declining

capital by making provisions. Nevertheless, the deterioration in asset quality forced the risk-

weighted capital ratios of several Mexican banks below the 8 percent minimum, and in some

cases, capital was even negative.




below that level, in a range of 31 to 38 percent until the week of February 22 when it reached 53 percent, and
rose thereafter to 83 percent by March 15.


                                                                                                           12
III. POLICY MEASURES IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE CRISIS

      In January 1995, the Mexican government responded to the financial crisis, often called

the "tequila" crisis, instituting a stabilization program and introducing still further measures on

March 9. These programs were aimed at reducing the current account deficit, preventing

inflation from getting out of control, and avoiding a meltdown of the banking system. In order

to help stabilize financial and foreign exchange markets, international financial institutions and

the governments of the United States and Canada assembled a loan guarantee package for

Mexico at the end of January, amounting to U.S.$52 billion.

      As described in more detail below, the 1995 policy response was in stark contrast to the

actions undertaken by the government during the 1982 debt crisis. At that time, the immediate

response following the collapse of the foreign exchange market was to suspend payments on

foreign debt, impose exchange controls, nationalize banks, and impose import licensing

requirements. In the Tequila crisis, however, the government announced that structural reforms

would not be postponed, that the liberalization of trade and capital flows was to be maintained,

and that a futures market was to be created to cover exchange risk.

      In this section, we describe the main elements of the 1995 policy package, which includes

macroeconomic stabilization, the international rescue, the debt management strategy of the

government, the main structural reforms, and the program to avoid a meltdown of the banking

and financial system.

       III.1. The Stabilization Program

      In order to contain inflation, the government signed an agreement with the labor unions

and the private sector in January 1995. Under the 1995 "Pacto", administered prices were to be

increased by 10 percent (in the face of a far greater proportionate depreciation of the exchange


                                                                                                13
rate) while minimum wages were to be raised by only 7 percent.              At the same time,

entrepreneurs agreed to limit price rises to adjustments induced by higher costs of imported

inputs. Since inflation was projected to reach 19 percent, this agreement entailed a substantial

fall in real wages. To ameliorate the effect that this would have had, a 3 percent income tax

rebate was given to workers earning less than twice the (legally mandated) minimum wage.

      The Pacto was further complemented with fiscal and monetary tightening. The initial

budget for 1995, approved in early December 1994 immediately preceding the crisis, had

projected a primary budget surplus of 2.2 percent of GDP. The revised budget increased the

projected surplus to 3.4 percent of GDP. On the monetary policy front, it was announced that

the exchange rate would be allowed to float. Under the new framework, the Central Bank was

required by law to make price stability its single objective. Thus, there was no longer a

commitment to peg the nominal exchange rate or maintain it within a band. Instead, the Central

Bank committed itself to keep domestic credit creation below a ceiling of NP 12 billion. Given

the macroeconomic projections, this ceiling was expected to finance an increase in the monetary

base of no more than 21 percent in 1995.

      However, these measures proved insufficient to stem capital outflows. As a result, 3-

month Cetes interest rates rose dramatically, peaking at over 80 percent in March 1995. In

response, the government that month introduced a second stabilization package along with

significant revisions to the official macroeconomic projection. Under this package, real GDP for

the rest of 1995 was projected to decline by 2 percent instead of the small increase projected in

January. The exchange rate was projected to average 6 NP/$ while projected inflation was

raised to 42 percent. Fiscal policy was further tightened by projecting a rise in the primary

surplus (the government budget net of interest payments on the debt) from 3.4 percent to 4.4


                                                                                              14
percent of GDP. Public spending was cut by nearly 10 percent, the value added tax rate was

increased from 10 to 15 percent, and public-sector energy prices were again raised (gasoline by

35 percent and electricity by 20 percent). Monetary policy was also tightened by reducing the

upper bound on Central Bank domestic credit creation from NP 12 billion to NP 10 billion for

1995, despite the upward revision in the anticipated inflation rate from 19 to 42 percent. Finally,

to increase liquidity in the foreign exchange market, the government encouraged the

establishment of a peso futures contract on the Chicago Mercantile exchange, which began

trading in April of 1995.

       Fluctuations in the prices of foreign exchange and other key variables were reduced

significantly in the aftermath, and implementation, of the new stabilization program and the

international rescue package. The exchange rate settled at around 6 NP per U.S. dollar and

short term interest rates fell to 40 percent by the end of June.

       In order to ameliorate the effects that the stabilization program was expected to have on

the poor, several measures were taken. The most important were: an additional 12 percent rise

in legal minimum wages for 1995, an expansion of direct support for agricultural and livestock

activities through PROCAMPO, and an allocation of additional public funds to create 600,000

temporary jobs in particularly depressed areas.

       III.2. The Emergency Rescue Package

       As noted at the outset, a key ingredient of the short term measures was a financial rescue

package that was assembled by multilateral organizations and the governments of the U.S. and

Canada in the first two months of 1995. The package included resources of almost U.S.$52

billion, although during 1995, only half was in fact used. The large amount was intended to be




                                                                                                15
sufficient to convince the markets that the government had sufficient resources to honor its

obligations.

      The main components of the package were: 1) U.S.$20 billion from the U.S. government

in the form of short or medium-term swap facilities and long-term guarantees from the

Treasury's Exchange Stabilization Fund; 2) U.S. $17.8 billion through an IMF 18-month Stand-

By Arrangement of which U.S.$7.74 billion was immediately paid and further disbursements

were conditioned upon implementation of the economic adjustment program. The rest of the

resources were provided by the government of Canada, the World Bank, and the Interamerican

Development Bank.

      Mexican authorities used these funds for three purposes. They were enabled to redeem

maturing dollar-indexed Tesobonos. They were also able to refinance commercial banks' foreign

currency liabilities. Finally, foreign exchange reserves were increased.

       III.3. Debt Management

      One of the main factors behind the crisis was the large amount of short-term dollar

denominated government bonds, the "Tesobonos". Consequently, one of the primary objectives

of the new administration was to reduce the stock of Tesobonos, which stood at U.S.$29 billion

at the end of December 1994. It was reduced to U.S.$8.9 billion by July 1995, and was entirely

eliminated by February 1996. Most of the reduction reflected the use of the financial resources

of the international support package to buy back the Tesobonos as they matured.

       Once the crisis was over, the government was able to focus on lowering the funding

costs of borrowing and lengthening the average maturity of the public debt. To this end, the

government accelerated its repayment of the U.S. government loan: in August 1996, U.S.$7




                                                                                            16
billion was repaid. A final installment of U.S.$3.6 billion repaid the entire loan in early 1997.

Similarly, by April 1997 the Mexican government had repaid U.S.$ 3.7 billion to the IMF.

        During 1996 and 1997, the government lengthened the maturity of its debt by issuing

Bondes (1-2 year Treasury bills) and Udibonos (5 year indexed bonds). As a result, the average

maturity of the public debt increased from 283 days at the end of 1995 to 342 days in September

1997.

        III.4. Structural Reforms

        An important concern of the new administration was to make clear its signal that

commitment to trade liberalization and deregulation programs started earlier would continue.

The NAFTA agreement was ratified, and pronouncements were made supporting pro-market

policies. Since that time, further reforms have been undertaken.

        On the regulatory front, telecommunications services have been opened to competition,

and several limitations on foreign ownership of financial institutions have been eased. Market-

share limits on NAFTA banks have been raised from 1.5 percent to 6 percent for individual

banks, and from 6. to 25 percent in the aggregate. In addition, the limit on foreign ownership of

share in banks controlled by Mexican groups was increased from 30 to 49 percent.

        The privatization program has also been continued. The most important ones have been

those of ports, airports, and railways. In the electricity and oil sectors, the privatization program

has not advanced significantly since 1995.

        Another important reform was the introduction of greater transparency in the conduct of

monetary policy. Starting in March 1995, the Central Bank began publishing weekly balance

sheet summaries including key variables such as the monetary base, foreign exchange reserves




                                                                                                  17
and net domestic credit. The Central Bank also laid out in advance its domestic credit and

inflation targets for the coming, year.

      Also important was a radical pension reform that transformed the previous pay-as-you-go

system into a fully-funded system. The new system, introduced in July 1997, operates using

individual pension accounts managed by private fund administrators. In addition to mandatory

contributions, workers may make voluntary deposits in their accounts.

       III.5. Measures to Save the Banking System

      As discussed above, the crisis left commercial banks in critical condition. Because of the

exchange rate depreciation, the huge earlier credit expansion which weakened the quality of

bank lending, and the hike in the interest rate, a majority of debtors were unable to service their

debts. Consequently, banks were unable to honor their foreign currency liabilities and found

themselves with a much greater share of nonperforming loans than they had earlier had. To

avoid a systemic crisis in the banking system, the government implemented a bailout program,

and did so rapidly. The four components were: 1) a mechanism to provide immediate dollar

liquidity to the banks; 2) absorption by the government of a portion of non-performing loans; 3)

recapitalization of the banks; and 4) relief schemes for debtors. We describe each in turn.

      Around 75 percent of Mexican banks foreign debt was short term, and the banks faced

serious difficulties in rolling over these debts in the early months of the crisis. To assist them in

refinancing maturing short-term foreign credit lines, the Bank of Mexico provided a special

dollar credit window to Mexican banks at penalty interest rates.

      To help reduce non-performing loans in the banks' balance sheets, the government

permitted the banks to transfer part of their loan portfolio to the government, and gave the

banks nontransferable ten-year government bonds in exchange.            This program was and is


                                                                                                  18
administered by FOBAPROA, the equivalent of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation in

the United States. The banks remain responsible for collecting interest on, and the recovery of,

the loans transferred to FOBAPROA, and have an incentive to do so because of the illiquidity

and lower rates of interest paid on the government bonds.

      To increase the capitalization of the banks to the 8 percent minimum required level, a

special trust fund (PROCAPTE) was created that lent funds to the banks in order to increase

their capital. The amounts not repaid within five years would be converted to ordinary capital

and then sold by the government.

      The fourth component, relief schemes to reduce the burdens to borrowers, established a

CPI-indexed accounting unit known as the UDI, and allowed loans to be re-denominated in

UDIS. This was accomplished by permitting banks to transfer loans, up to their allocated

quotas, to special trust funds which converted each loan to a long-term fixed-rate indexed loan,

denominated in UDIS, bearing a real interest rate of 4 percent plus a margin to reflect the credit

risk of the borrower.    The government absorbed the costs and risks associated with the

transformation of loan payments into UDIS.

      An important issue that arose in 1995 was whether or not to replace the management

teams in the banks that were going to receive government support. Since all the banks were de

facto bankrupt, the government decided not to alter the governance structure of the banks.

With the exception of very small banks, the government neither nationalized banks nor

transferred control of the banks from the original management teams to new teams.




                                                                                               19
IV. EVOLUTION OF THE MEXICAN ECONOMY: 1995-1997

        The liquidity crisis that Mexico suffered in early 1995 was reflected in an eighty five

percent depreciation of the peso and an interest rate hike. This resulted in a sharp fall in

economic activity. As Table 1 shows, during 1995, GDP fell 6% in real terms. Surprisingly, the

recession was short lived and the economy started to grow in the fourth quarter of 1995,

achieving a GDP growth rate 5% in 1996 and 7% in 1997.

        This remarkably quick recovery in aggregate activity has not been uniform across the

economy. The tradable sector has grown strongly, while after a steep fall in 1995 the non-

tradable sector has subsequently recuperated only sluggishly. Figure 2, which depicts the

evolution of sectoral GDP and exports clearly illustrates this point. During 1995, the

construction and commerce sectors, with big non-tradable components, experienced sharp

declines of 28% and 22%, respectively. Even by the first quarter of 1998, these sectors had not

attained the level of production they had before the crisis erupted. In contrast, sectors with

significant tradable components, such as manufacturing and mining, did not suffer such a deep

decline in 1995, and have subsequently experienced robust growth.

        The last panel in Figure 2 makes clear how the spectacular increase in exports led the

recovery. Exports of goods and services increased from 74 billion dollars in 1994 to 126 billion

dollars in 1997. This dramatic increase in Mexican exports was achieved thanks to the real

depreciation experienced by the Mexican peso during the 1995-1997 period, compared to the

level it had during the period 1990-1994. We would like to note that the Mexican terms of trade

did not improve during this period, and indeed the price of oil fell. From this experience we can

derive the very important lesson that trade liberalization is not sufficient to insure a high rate of

export growth. Avoiding an appreciation of the real exchange rate is also key.


                                                                                                    20
       IV.1 The Credit Crunch

       The asymmetric response of the tradable and non-tradable sectors is intimately linked

with the severe credit crunch that Mexico has experienced since 1995. As we shall see, though

fresh bank lending dried up in Mexico, it was still possible for export firms to obtain financing in

the international capital market, or to receive credit from upstream firms. Hence, the credit

crunch did not deter the tradable sector from growing at spectacular rates. On the other hand,

firms in the non-tradable sector were adversely affected by the lack of credit, as these firms had

no access to international financial markets. Instead, such firms have had to finance themselves

with their own resources.

       In short, Mexico’s substantial real depreciation and the access to foreign credit enjoyed

by firms in the tradable sector have been largely responsible for the tradable sector’s spectacular

growth. The non-tradable sector, on the other hand, suffered a credit crunch that resulted in a

slow recovery. In what follows, we will document these facts.

       A first indicator of the extent of the credit crunch is the steep decline in the total stock of

lending from commercial banks to the private sector. Table 8 shows that total lending to the

private sector fell 16% in real terms from 1995 to 1996 and 12% in 1997. Note, however, that

these numbers do not reflect fully the decline in the availability of fresh loans. This is because the

stock of loans to the private sector has two components: those still in the balance sheets of

commercial banks, and those that have been transferred to the Central Bank under the bailout

programs described earlier. It is clear that fresh loans can only be part of the stock of loans in

the commercial banks’ balance sheets. Unfortunately, these loans have fallen more drastically

than the total stock loans: 38% in 1996 and 19% in 1997, as Table 8 shows.


                                                                                                     21
           The question arises as to whether this decline in lending to the private sector has affected

mostly households and consumption, rather than firms and investment. Table 9 shows that this

has not been the case. The reduction in the stock of loans has been distributed evenly across

firms and households. During 1996 the real stock of loans to firms and households fell 16% and

15%, respectively. During 1997 these figures were 12% and 15%, respectively.

           The next point is that the credit crunch has affected mainly small and medium firms in the

non-tradable sector, while leaving export firms and their affiliates virtually unaffected. Since the

early 1990s export firms and their affiliates have been able to obtain financing in international

capital markets. This is because firms that export a substantial portion of their sales are more

likely to be able to provide collateral in the form of receivables denominated in dollars. To get

some idea of the degree to which these firms finance themselves in international capital markets

consider the 142 non-financial firms that are listed in the Mexican stock exchange. This set of

firms is composed mainly of tradable sector firms: during 1997 this set of firms had an average

exports-to-sales ratio of 40%. The remarkable fact is that these firms had on average 53% of

their liabilities denominated in foreign currency by the end of 1997. Furthermore, the subset of

20 firms with the highest shares of liabilities denominated in foreign currency (73% on average)

were more export oriented than the rest of the firms. Their export-to-sales ratio was 64%.16

           In what follows we will describe some reasons why the remarkable recovery in aggregate

activity has not led to a credit expansion.



           IV.2 Non-performing Loans




16
     Data are from Banco de Mexico, Informe Anual, 1997.


                                                                                                     22
       A phenomenon that has gone hand in hand with the credit crunch that we described

above is the steady increase in the share of non-performing loans. Table 10 shows that the ratio

of nonperforming to total loans in the balance sheet of commercial banks increased from around

10% at the end of 1994 to 16% in 1995 and subsequently to 21% in 1996. In 1997, this ratio

rose to 30%, a sizable increase, indicative of a change in banking regulation that directed banks

to classify the principal in addition to the unpaid interest as non-performing. It is important to

note that the these numbers do not include the banks’ loans that have been already transferred to

the Central Bank in exchange for government bonds under FOBAPROA and the UDIs

programs.

       Table 10 characterizes the distribution of bad loans across a range of different users. In

December of 1997, the most affected sector was “durable consumption goods” with a non-

performing ratio of 55%. The corresponding ratios for housing loans and for enterprise loans

were 42% and 27%, respectively. Again, these numbers only refer to the non-intervened banks

and exclude loans transferred to the government under FOBAPROA and the UDIs programs.

       We should warn the reader that the share of nonperforming loans mentioned above does

not imply that the remaining loans in the balance sheets of the non-intervened banks are by

default performing loans. The reason for this is that a portion of these loans are nonperforming

loans that have not been officially recognized by the banks as such. These are the so called

“evergreen accounts,” where the bank in question lends the debtor the principal and interest that

the debtor was supposed to have repaid. Although these transfers are accounted as “loans”,

they are de-facto capitalized nonperforming loans.

       A natural question to ask is why did the high GDP growth during 1996 and 1997 not

lead to an increase in bank lending and to a reduction in the share of non-performing loans? In


                                                                                                     23
principle one would expect that high GDP growth would increase firms’ profits and households

incomes. As a result debtors would be able to service their debts, and banks would be able to

expand credit. Here we mention some reasons why this has not been the case in Mexico.

       First, there are no transparent and effective bankruptcy procedures in Mexico, making it

almost impossible to take possession of a debtor’s assets in case it fails to service its debt. This

problem was only aggravated by the 1995 crisis. As a result, real domestic lending rates have

been much higher than interest rates at which big tradable firms can obtain financing in world

markets. In consequence, Mexican banks have lost “good customers” and have been left with

firms that have no access to international capital markets either because they are small or

because their earnings are not in dollars. The deterioration in the pool of borrowers and the

associated reduction in the expected rate of return have resulted in an unwillingness of banks to

offer higher interest rates in order to attract more deposits. As a result bank deposits decreased

4.1% from 1995 to 1997, while the broad monetary aggregate (M4) increased 5.6% during the

same period as shown in Table 11. This unwillingness of the banks to attract more deposits had

as a counterpart the reduction in the stock of loans to the private sector that we documented in

the previous section.

       A second reason why high GDP growth has not led to a reduction in the share of bad

loans is that while the banks reduced their net lending they were simultaneously saddled with the

previously mentioned evergreen accounts. Recall that these accounts are de facto non-

performing loans. Thus, the accrued interest must be capitalized every period. As a result,

evergreen accounts grow exponentially, thereby reducing the capacity of banks to make new

loans to fresh projects. Since each period a portion of the evergreen debtors goes bankrupt, and




                                                                                                       24
since net total lending has been declining, the natural result has been an increase in the share of

reported non-performing loans.

       A third reason why the share of bad loans has increased is the existence of severe moral

hazard problems in the banking system. On the one hand, the lack of transparent and effective

bankruptcy procedures combined with the fact that the crisis left many borrowers insolvent

created the incentives for some debtors with the capacity to service their debts not to do so,

since nonpayment would be hardly punished. On the other hand, the existence of evergreen

accounts has left several banks with negative effective capital. That is, their capital became

smaller than the sum of the recognized and unrecognized nonperforming loans. When banks

have negative effective capital managers have incentives to undertake risky or white elephant

projects which have a negative net expected value.



       V. EVOLUTION OF THE BANKING RESCUE PROGRAM

       As we have seen, the policy measures undertaken in the aftermath of the Tequila crisis

brought about robust economic growth. Responsible fiscal and monetary policies combined with

a real exchange rate depreciation paved the way for a remarkable expansion of the tradable

sector and of Mexican exports. Some bank restructuring was undertaken and was a necessary

condition for recovery. As a result the recession was short-lived and economic recovery

resumed in 1996. Still, fast economic growth and the restructuring that was undertaken did not

solve the banking problem in the sense that the share of non-performing loans has increased,

while the credit extended from the banking system has decreased.

       When the banking rescue package was designed, back in 1995, it was believed that as the

economy came out of the recession, higher GDP growth rates would induce a reduction in the


                                                                                                      25
share of nonperforming loans without further policy intervention. Unfortunately, these

projections did not materialize, and the exchange of bad loans for government bonds

administered by FOBAPROA turned out not to be a once-and-for-all event. Indeed, several of

these swaps took place again in 1996 and 1997 because the share of nonperforming loans kept

on going up and the banks failed to increase their capital in order make the appropriate

provisions.

       Consequently, the rescue program that was meant to be temporary became an open-

ended bailout mechanism. Ironically, according to the Mexican press, this rescue mechanism has

induced the banking system to undertake unfavorable activities that have resulted in a greater

amount of bad loans than had previously existed in 1995.

       As time went by authorities had to increase their assessment of the fiscal costs associated

with the banking rescue program. Table 12 shows how in 1995 the present value of the bailout

costs were estimated at 5.5% of GDP. This estimate had increased to 8.6% of GDP in 1996.

However, worse news was to come in early 1998 when the Executive asked Congress to

recognize that the loan portfolio in FOBAPROA was de facto irrecoverable, and that it should

be converted to public debt. The amount added up to approximately 16% of GDP.

       As the Mexican experience has shown, nonperforming loans are unlikely to disappear on

their own over a span of a few years, even under a high GDP growth scenario. Furthermore, the

existence of nonperforming loans is an obstacle for the banking system to adequately perform its

functions. This raises the question of whether an alternative strategy under which all

nonperforming loans were recognized at once and the fiscal costs were all paid up-front would

be preferable.




                                                                                                 26
    In what follows we will analyze what such an alternative strategy would entail, and the

possible reasons as to why such alternative was not adopted by the Mexican government. An

immediate recognition of all non-performing loans is very likely to make the effective capital of

most banks negative. As a result, regulators would have to require banks’ shareholders to inject

new capital and create provisions for bad loans. Since it is politically very costly to let a bank go

bankrupt (specially if it is big), the government would have to inject the necessary capital and

take over the banks that fail to inject fresh capital. During a financial crisis, like the one

experienced by Mexico in 1995, it is very likely that the government would have to take over the

majority of the banks, in which case the fiscal costs would be enormous. Therefore, the

government will have to issue of long term bonds in order to finance this potentially enormous

sum, and the interest rate on these bonds might be quite high.

        While recognizing all nonperforming at once would increase the national debt

substantially, the increase would occur only once if adequate policies are put in place to prevent

recurrence. However, fresh lending would resume immediately because the problem of

recovering bad loans would be decoupled from the business of making fresh loans to profitable

projects. This separation could be implemented by transferring all nonperforming loans to a

specialized agency that would either try to recover or securitize them.

        The benefits of this strategy stem from the fact that freeing the banking system to

provide fresh loans will induce greater economic growth and greater banks’ profits, provided an

adequate regulatory framework is in place. On the contrary, if the share of nonperforming loans

does not decrease, banks will not be able to channel savings into new projects, specially those

projects involving firms in the non-tradable sector and small firms that cannot access




                                                                                                   27
international markets. To the extent that banks are necessary in channeling savings to those

firms, long-run economic growth will deteriorate.

         We should stress that this strategy is not sufficient for banks to adequately perform their

intermediation function. Another lesson from the Mexican experience is that simply cleaning the

balance sheets of banks and privatizing them is not sufficient to insure good banking practices. It

is also necessary to establish an effective regulatory framework and to put in place adequate

bankruptcy procedures to ensure that creditors can take possession of the collateral in case of

nonperformance. If these conditions are not satisfied, it is not advisable to incur the enormous

fiscal costs associated with the cleansing of the balance sheets of the banking system. This is

simply because a lending boom cycle will recur, banks will lend irresponsible to very risky or

white elephant projects, and after a few years the share of nonperforming loans will increase

again.

         Next, we address the issue of why piecemeal bailout policies were undertaken in Mexico.

As we explained earlier, in 1995 Mexico found itself in the midst of a liquidity crisis. Important

sums of dollar denominated short term bonds (the Tesobonos) were due in 1995, and the

government was unable to rollover these bonds. The situation was so critical that the US

Treasury and the IMF had to structure a rescue package for Mexico. Understandably, meltdown

of the payment system and of the economy was highly feared. Thus, the primary objective was

to minimize “systemic risk.”

         Hence, a comprehensive one-time recognition and cleansing of bad loans was considered

very dangerous in 1995. First, it was feared that forcing a recognition of all bad loans would

reveal that the situation was worse than what foreign investors perceived it to be. Such a

revelation would prevent Mexico from rolling over its short run liabilities. Second,


                                                                                                   28
policymakers anticipated that the government would have to take over a large segment of the

banking system, as the shareholders were not expected to sufficiently increase the banks’ capital.

The policymakers’ analysis of the government’s role exposed three potentially devastating costs:

(1) the government would have to increase national debt significantly at a time when it had

trouble rolling over its short term liabilities; (2) nationalizing the banks could be interpreted by

the market as a signal that the government was opposed to “free markets” and privatization; (3)

from a political economy perspective, such a move would involve changing the coalition of

powerholders that supported the regime. That is, a nationalization of the banking system would

have forced the Executive to find support in the so called PRI Dinosaurs and other agents that

were opposed to market oriented policies.

        Furthermore, as mentioned earlier, a solution to the banking problem required a radical

reform of bankruptcy procedures, so that a creditor would be able seize the assets of non-

performing debtors. In 1995, however, such a seizure of debtors assets by creditors became a

very sensitive political issue. In fact, debtors had organized themselves into a powerful group,

“Barzon,” and the threat of a debtors revolt was very high. Politicians viewed this matter very

seriously and were not inclined to reform bankruptcy procedures in the manner indicated above.

        However, though the above reasons may have been valid in early 1995, they ceased to be

so in 1996. First, by early 1996 all Tesobonos were repaid, the economy started to recuperate,

and the credentials of President Zedillo as a free market reformer were firmly established. As

these three factors successfully eased the previous worries of the Mexican government, it must

be asked why a definitive solution to the “non-performing loans” problem was not implemented

either in 1996 or in 1997? The seemingly paradoxical answer is that Mexico had the misfortune

of being lucky! As explained above, Mexican exports grew spectacularly, and the growth of the


                                                                                                       29
export sector was more than enough to compensate for the fall in services, construction and

other non-tradables. This “lucky” event eliminated the immediacy of the crisis and the necessity

to fix the banking problem. The authorities adopted a panglosian diagnostic: the growth of the

export sector would be sufficiently strong for an adequately lengthy period such that the share of

bad loans would eventually decline. Hence, policymakers concluded that the optimal policy

involved the continuance of piecemeal bailout programs.

       With hindsight we can see why this policy stance did not solve the banking problem.

First, export firms financed themselves in international capital markets. This meant that domestic

banks did not tap the growing tradable sector of the economy. It also resulted in a decrease in

the quality of the pool of borrowers. Second, the banks had few resources with which to confer

fresh loans because they have accumulated a large share of evergreen accounts. Third, moral

hazard plagued the banking system.




                                                                                                  30
VI.   LESSONS FROM THE MEXICAN EXPERIENCE

      As the review of the evolution of the Mexican economy has demonstrated, Mexico's

performance to date has been impressive, although problems remain. The rapid initial policy

response enabled the resumption of growth in the economy, fueled by the export response to the

real exchange rate depreciation. The initial burst of inflation was rapidly damped, and prospects

are for a rate of inflation in 1998 of less than 15 percent (contrasted with more than 50 percent

in 1995).     The longer-term problems stem from the persistence of the high ratio of

nonperforming loans in the banking system that has choked off growth for firms that have no

access to international capital markets.

      In this section we draw lessons from the Mexican experience about how to avoid a crisis,

and on the policy alternatives once the crisis has erupted. First, the real appreciation of the peso

between 1988 and 1994 resulted in slower growth of exports, and more rapid growth of imports

than was consistent with efficient resource allocation. And that slower growth, in turn, was a

significant factor in the relatively lackluster overall rate of economic growth. When negative

shocks hit in 1994, the underlying imbalance between incentives for tradables and nontradables

production quickly resulted in a crisis. Letting the real exchange rate appreciate over a

significant period of time is to invite a crisis.

      The second lesson from the pre-crisis situation, is that, in an open economy the creation of

domestic credit is virtually identical to the creation of additional liabilities denominated in

foreign exchange. It is nearly impossible to provide an environment for open trade without

having sufficiently relaxed regulations governing the capital account so that those wishing to

move their assets from one country to another can do so readily. In this scenario, moves which

were essential to establish a base for accelerated growth, such as financial deregulation and the


                                                                                                 31
opening of the economy, intensified the vulnerability of the Mexican economy to international

capital flows. In this respect, the costs of having attempted to contain the capital outflow at the

end of 1994 would have been steep: certainly, the open Mexican trade regime would have had to

be abandoned, and tight exchange controls put in place. Even then, it is doubtful that capital

outflows could have been contained, as the very act of attempting to control capital flight would

have intensified peoples' desire to get out of pesos and into other currencies.

      The third lesson is that in the absence of a strong regulatory framework financial

deregulation might lead to a lending boom, which in turn creates vulnerabilities in the banking

system. When domestic credit expands too rapidly, the quality of the banks' portfolios

deteriorate. As a result even a small negative shock can drive many loans into nonperforming

status, and generate banking and balance of payments crises.

      Those lessons, of course, pertain to avoiding a crisis in the first place. What can the

Mexican experience teach about policy alternatives once a crisis has set in? Obviously, each

crisis is different, and no lessons - however appropriate for one country - can be mechanically

applied to any other country without consideration of circumstances. Nonetheless, some broad

general conclusions do emerge. We turn here to those lessons, noting first the policy lessons that

we believe originate from the appropriateness of Mexican government responses. We then turn

attention to the remaining weaknesses and conjecture as to how they might have been avoided.

      We note first that one thing proven conclusively by the Mexican experience is that it is

possible to recover rapidly from such a crisis. The Mexican authorities' willingness to continue

economic reforms, and clear commitment to maintaining a market-based system, was of obvious

importance in enabling the turnaround in economic activity. Had there been significant doubts

about the sustainability of the trade or exchange rate regime, it is doubtful whether foreign


                                                                                                32
bankers would have been willing to extend credit to Mexican exporters; that, in turn, would

have meant slower growth of exports and a significantly slower recovery. Had there been

significant doubts about the government's commitment to a market-based system, it is doubtful

whether large Mexican firms would have been willing to undertake the liabilities associated with

expanding their export capacity.

       The second lesson is that there is little choice but to let the exchange rate float. Once it is

floating, fluctuations in the rate diminish sharply once peoples' confidence in the authorities and

in the situation is restored. In a world of capital mobility, it makes no sense to attempt to peg

the exchange rate again; that simply enables the development of vulnerability for a future crisis.17

       The third lesson is that recovery is not possible unless the banking system has been

"fixed". If there are sizable portions of banks' portfolios that are nonperforming, the banks

themselves cannot extend new loans at reasonable interest rates. Despite Mexico's impressive

recovery, the data speak for themselves: the small and nontradable firms have recovered only

sluggishly and are starved for credit. It is only the creditworthiness of the large and tradable

firms that has enabled them to obtain financing internationally at reasonable rates.

          There are some who might argue that a policy alternative could be to wait, on the

     grounds that, as the economy recovers the share of nonperforming loans will diminish. But

     Mexico’s experience does not lend support to this position because nonperforming loans have

     increased as a proportion of the banks' portfolios despite the Mexican government's efforts.

     Thus, it would appear that waiting makes the problem worse as new loans are extended to


17
   A few countries have chosen a currency board, which is probably the only viable and desirable long-term
alternative to a floating exchange rate in a country with an open trading regime. There are potential costs to a
currency board, and in most circumstances, those costs probably exceed the benefits. At any event, there is
nothing in the Mexican experience to shed light on the behavior of key macroeconomic variables under currency
boards.


                                                                                                             33
     cover bad old loans. Indeed, there are several reasons why the “bad loans” problem is not

     likely to disappear without further policy. First, when the share of bad loans is large, the

     interest rate at which domestic banks lend is high. Due to the higher domestic interest rate,

     big export firms will find it profitable to finance themselves abroad. As a result, domestic

     banks lose the fast growing and high quality end of the market and, instead, are left with

     small and non-tradable firms.          Second, maintaining a large share of unrecognized non-

     performing loans (“evergreen accounts”), would force banks to allocate more resources to

     finance existing non-performing loans.18            As a result, the share of non-performing loans

     would increase further despite a high GDP growth.

           Hence, we conclude that a major lesson from Mexico is that the problem of cleaning up

     the banks' portfolios requires decisive and immediate action. Delay is likely both to prevent

     recovery and response to the altered exchange rate, and to lead to an even larger problem

     that will ultimately have to be addressed in order for satisfactory growth to resume.

         A fourth, and somewhat more conjectural lesson, has to do with the existence of

     systemic risk.    It can be cogently (but not conclusively) argued that, had the Mexican

     authorities failed to take action in early 1995, they might have been unable to control a

     cumulative spiraling contraction of credit. Had that happened, recovery would have been

     impossible until it was halted, and that, in turn might have required much stronger action

     once the spiral was underway.

         A fifth lesson that derives from the Mexican experience in the early 1990s is that the

problem of the banks requires not only the initial and rapid removal of the bad paper from their


18
  There is also the consideration, mentioned above, that when the banks are significantly undercapitalized, there
are strong incentives for lenders to take extreme risks: if they win, they gain; if they lose, they would have lost
anyway.


                                                                                                                 34
portfolios and their establishment on a sound capitalized basis, but also a rapid imposition of

mechanisms (both in the form of incentives and in supervisory institutions) and standards to

insure that the problem does not recur. Failure to achieve adequate incentives and provisions for

maintaining the quality of bank loans can, if left unchecked, result in yet another buildup of

nonperforming loans.

       Lastly, we would like to note that the fiscal deficit was not a significant factor in

contributing to the crisis; the Mexican authorities held steady with fiscal behavior in the wake of

the crisis, which was undoubtedly essential to the successful outcome Mexico had.19 But for

countries that enter into a crisis with severe fiscal imbalances, it would obviously be imperative

to address the sources of imbalance as a crucial initial step in addressing the crisis; Mexico offers

no lessons for that because it had no problems in that dimension.

       As we have seen, the lessons from Mexico are mostly positive. Recovery can come about

quickly, and stability can be restored. To achieve these desirable ends requires rapid action with

regard to monetary and fiscal policy, the exchange rate, and the banking system. Delays can

only slow down recovery. But, in addition to the immediate challenge lies the need to insure

that the problem does not happen again. That, in turn, requires rapid action with regard to

prudential supervision and incentive mechanisms to assure the quality of future lending of the

banking system.




19
  It should be noted that the Mexican authorities have reduced fiscal expenditures to maintain fiscal balance as
the government's prospective revenues from oil have diminished with the decline in the oil price. This behavior
has undoubtedly been important for sustaining success in reducing the inflation rate and maintaining credibility
of the government's monetary, fiscal, and exchange rate policies.


                                                                                                               35
