NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HOUSEHOLD PRODUCTION AND THE
EXCESS SENSITIVITY OF CONSUMPTION
TO CURRENT INCOME

Marianne Baxter
Urban J. Jermann

Working Paper 7046
http :/Iwww.nber.org/papers/w7046

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 1999

This project has benefited from the comments of Robert G. King, Matthew D. Shapiro, and an anonymous
referee, as well as seminar participants at Dartmouth College, Harvard University, University of Michigan,
University of Texas-Austin, University of Virginia, the Wharton School, and the NBER Meeting on "Micro
and Macro Foundations of the Aggregate Labor Market." Any remaining errors are our own. Baxter gratefully
acknowledges the support of the National Science Foundation. Any views expressed in this paper are those
of the author only and not those of Columbia University or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©

1999 by Marianne Baxter and Urban J. Jermann. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed

two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Household Production and the Excess
Sensitivity of Consumption to Current Income
Marianne Baxter and Urban J. Jermann
NBER Working Paper No. 7046
March 1999

JEL No. D13, ElO, E21
ABSTRACT
Empirical research on the permanent income hypothesis (PIH) has found that consumption

growth is excessively sensitive to predictable changes in income. This finding is interpreted as
strong evidence against the PIH. We propose an explanation for apparent excess sensitivity that is
based on a quantitative equilibrium version of Becker's (1965) model of household production in
which permanent income consumers respond to shifts in sectoral wages and prices by substituting

work effort and consumption across home and market sectors. Although the PIH is true, this

mechanism generates apparent excess sensitivity because market consumption responds to
predictable income growth.

Marianne Baxter
Department of Economics
Rouss Hall 116
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA 22901
and NBER

mb6svirginia.edu

Urban J. Jermann
Finance Department
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
jermann@wharton.upenn.edu

The permanent-income/life-cycle hypothesis (PIH) has come to occupy a central position in mainstream macroeconomics since its inception nearly forty years

ago in the writings of Milton Friedman (1957). Although the PIH is taken as
axiomatic in many macroeconomic investigations, the question of its empirical
accuracy continues to form the basis for an active empirical literature which we

survey in section I below. Many of these studies find that consumption growth
rates are robustly correlated with predictable changes in real income. This finding

is sometimes described as the "excess sensitivity" of consumption to income and

is interpreted as strong evidence against the PIH.

This paper proposes an explanation for apparent excess sensitivity that is
consistent with the PIH. Our starting point is Gary S. Becker's (1965) model of
a household in which individuals substitute between home and market produced
consumption goods according to their relative price. We will show that a model

incorporating production and consumption of home-produced goods provides a
compelling rationale for the observed empirical relationship between consumption

and output.
The link between household production and the business cycle has been the
subject of several recent papers.1 These papers find that interactions between the
2

household and market sectors in a quantitative general equilibrium model improve

the model's predictions concerning the central business cycle facts relative to a
prototypical one-sector real business cycle model. These household production
models do not test the PIH: they embed permanent income theory as part of the
structure of the model. However, the model turns out to have striking predictions
for the empirical findings that a researcher would obtain if he investigated excess

sensitivity using data on market consumption and market output alone.
The basic idea behind household production in a theory of the business cycle

is that individuals substitute between home and market goods depending on the
wage rate. That is: the market wage rate measures the opportunity cost of engaging in household production, so an increase iu the market wage during an economic

expansion should be accompanied by an increase in market work and purchases of

market goods and a corresponding decrease in household production. Examples
of goods for which there are especially good possibilities for substitution between

market purchase versus home production include the following: child care; home

maintenance (housecleaning, lawn mowing, painting, repairs, and the like); food

preparation; financial services such as preparation of income tax returns; and
clothing (sewing and repair).
Since the household production model predicts that income growth and growth
3

in the opportunity cost of home-produced goods are highly correlated, there is
a natural reason for a positive correlation between market consumption growth

and predictable changes in income. Using a quantitative equilibrium business
cycle model with household production, we show that the empirical finding of
excess sensitivity of market consumption to market income emerges even though

individuals have rational expectations and act as permanent income consumers
when consumption is appropriately defined to include goods produced at home.
Essentially, the standard "excess sensitivity" regression is misspecified because it

focuses on market consumption and market income, when it should properly be
specified as a relationship between aggregate consumption and aggregate income.2

The paper is structured as follows. Section I reviews the empirical literature
on the excess sensitivity of consumption. Section II develops a partial equilibrium

model of consumer choice that illustrates how apparent excess sensitivity arises

naturally in the presence of a nonmarket consumption good. The partial equilibrium nature of the model allows us to develop intuitive, closed-form solutions
for the relationship between consumption growth and predictable income growth.

Section III closes the model of section II by specifying the production side of the
economy and determining prices and interest rates endogenously. The section ends

with a brief description of the business cycle implications of the model. Section
4

IV studies the implications of the general equilibrium model for the coefficients

in a regression of market consumption growth on the predictable component of
income growth and on the interest rate. We consider several plausible specifica-

tions for the productivity process which drives the model. Further, we explore
the sensitivity of the parameter estimates to alterations in the specification of the

consumption regression and explore the extent to which small sample bias may

be important. Overall, we find a robust prediction of "excess sensitivity" in the
sense that expected income growth in the market sector predicts growth in market
consumption. Section V concludes.

I. Related literature
In his seminal paper, Robert E. Hall (1978) showed that consumption should
follow a random walk in a simple intertemporal equilibrium model with a constant interest rate. He finds that lagged income is not significant for consumption
growth, and he thus concludes in favor of the permanent income hypothesis. Subsequently, however, Marjorie Flavin (1981) found that consumption is excessively

sensitive to income in the sense that current income still has explanatory power
after accounting for the innovation in permanent income. Most recently, John Y.
Campbell and N. Gregory Mankiw (1989, 1990, 1991) used instrumental variable
5

techniques to estimate the coefficient on predictable changes in income in consumption growth regressions and argued that this coefficient measures the fraction of consumption attributable to individuals who, as a rule of thumb, consume

their current income.

In addition to the rule-of-thumb consumption function, several possible ex-

planations for the empirical failure of Hall's basic model have been suggested.
Most of these consider the relaxation of the simplifying assumptions of the initial
model. The following representation of the consumer's first order condition, which
is somewhat more general than Hall's, suggests various avenues for reconciling the

empirical evidence with modern versions of the permanent income hypothesis:

u'(C, X) = i3E[u'(C+1, X+1)(1 + rtt+i)]

(0.1)

In the expression above, u'(C,X) is momentary marginal utility which depends
on consumption of nondurables and services, C, and on other factors X which

affect the marginal utility of consumption, and rt,t+i denotes the interest rate
between periods t and t+1. Thus one possible explanation for the failure of Hall's

basic model is a variable interest rate. Campbell and Mankiw consider whether

the interest rate explains excess sensitivity. They find, however, that empiri-

6

cally the interest rate does not explain much of consumption growth. Another
proposed explanation for excess sensitivity is time-varying precautionary saving
behavior, related to a time-varying conditional variance of consumption. This line

of argument has been pursued by Ricardo J. Caballero (1990). Finally, Lawrence

Christiano et al. (1991) explore the role of temporal aggregation in generating
spurious excess sensitivity.

Another proposed reconciliation of the PIH with apparent excess sensitivity is

based on other factors which enter nonseparably in the marginal utility function,

as represented above by the variable X. The most obvious are nonseparabilities
related to different classes of consumption goods (e.g., consumer durables vs. con-

sumer non-durables, or consumption vs. leisure), or nonseparabilities over time

due to habit formation. If movements in Xt1

are

predictable and if they are re-

lated to predictable changes in income, the nonseparability can generate the excess

sensitivity result. John Cochrane (1991) suggests this as one potential interpre-

tation of the Campbell-Mankiw results. Empirical evidence on the hypothesis
that excess sensitivity is due to nonseparability of consumer durables from nondurables is inconclusive: Campbell and Mankiw (1990) and Mankiw (1985) do not

reject separability, while Martin Eichenbaum and Lars Hansen (1990) find some
evidence against separability between durables and nondurables.
7

Our proposed explanation for apparent excess sensitivity hinges on a particular nonseparability: that between market goods and home goods in momentary
utility. While substitutions between consumption and leisure are also part of our

story, it is more plausible that the most important channel involves substitution

across alternative methods for producing final consumption goods. Further, in
addition to substitution across consumption goods, individuals in our model also
substitute between productive activities depending on the relative rewards to work

in each sector. The combination of these two effects provides an explanation for
the empirical finding of excess sensitivity.

II. A simple model
This section develops a partial equilibrium model of consumer choice that illustrates how apparent excess sensitivity arises in the presence of a nonmarket
consumption good. Specifically, we show that the growth of market consumption

is positively related to the predictable component of labor income growth.

The representative individual derives utility from market consumption, C,
from home-produced consumption, H, and from leisure, L, and maximizes ex-

8

pected lifetime utility given by:

E0t (

1

)

(0.2)

where y(.) is a linearly homogeneous aggregator of the two consumption goods;
v(L) measures the utility derived from leisure; a is the coefficient of relative risk
aversion; and 3 is the subjective discount factor. The individual's time constraint
takes the form:

T—NHt+NAIt+Lt

(0.3)

where T is the amount of nonsleeping time available for working or consuming
leisure; NHt is the amount of time that individuals allocate to the production of

the home-produced good; NAIt is time devoted to market work; and L denotes
time spent in leisure activities. We follow the literature in assuming that an hour

devoted to market work generates the same disutility as an hour of nonmarket
work.

The representative individual's assets evolve according to the following:

= (1 + rt,t+i)(Zt + W(T — NHt — L) — C)
9

(0.4)

where Z,1 denotes individual asset holdings at the beginning of period t + 1 and

W, is the wage rate in the market sector. We have assumed, for simplicity, that
the representative agent holds a single asset (which may be a portfolio) that earns

the exogenous real return rt,t+i between periods t and t + 1.
Household production is assumed to require labor alone, according to a linear

technology (this assumption will be relaxed in the general equilibrium model of

the next section). Letting AHt denote the (possibly stochastic) level of labor
productivity in the home sector, consumption of the home good, H, is constrained
by:

AHtNHt =

H.

In equilibrium, the following three conditions must hold, where

(0.5)

Hi),

u3(L) denote the partial derivatives of and v at date t with respect to variable
3:

H) v(L) yc(Ct, H) /3E [(C+1, Ht+i)v(L+i)c(C+i, H+1)(1 + Tt,t+i)]
(0.6)

10

YH(Ctj't) W
Ht
Pc t, t
y(Ct, Ht)'vL(Lt)
(1 —

a)(C, Ht)v(L)

II)

= W•

(0.8)

Equation (0.6) is the intertemporal efficiency condition relating the marginal

utility in period t to discounted marginal utility in period t + 1, while equations
(0.7) and (0.8) are intratemporal efficiency conditions relating relative prices and
marginal utilities.
We can obtain a closed form solution for this model by taking a log-linear ap-

proximation to the Euler equations. To simplify, we let productivity be constant

in the household sector: AHt = AH. Log-linear approximation of (0.6) yields
the following relationship between expected growth of consumption and expected
wage growth, where lowercase letters denote percentage deviations from the point

of linearization (except for rt,t+1, defined earlier as the risk-free interest rate):

Et(Ac+i) = aiEt(twt+i) + Q2Etrt,t+1.

with

11

(0.9)

— (1 —

ae11 + (1 —

— ____________
a2 —

a11 + (1 —

In the expressions above, s denotes the share of market consumption in the
consumption aggregate y; (denotes the elasticity of substitution between market

consumption and consumption of goods produced at home;

is the elasticity

of the marginal utility of the consumption aggregate with respect to leisure
denotes the own-elasticity of the marginal utility of leisure.

To gain insight into the relationship between consumption growth and wage

growth, it is instructive to study two special cases of equation (0.9).

First,

suppose there is no household good, so that s = 1. Then the expression for a1
simplifies to

a1 =

.

(0.10)

ae11 + (1 —

The denominator of (0.10) is negative by concavity of momentary utility. The

numerator

0 if a

1, so the condition for a1 >

household production is a >

1:

0

in the case with no

the marginal utility of consumption falls with

12

increases in leisure.
A second special case involves zero elasticity of substitution between the home

and market good:

0. In this case,

a

becomes

—

(1 — )e11
+ (1 —

Compared with the no-household-production case, this expression for c has a new

term in the numerator, —(1—s)j, which reflects a "price effect" of an increase in

the market wage on consumption. When the market wage rises, the consumption
aggregate becomes more expensive because time is needed to produce the home
good. This price effect, taken by itself, would tend to reduce consumption of the

composite good. Thus introducing household production in a way that permits

no substitutability between home and market goods would tend to reduce the
responsiveness of market consumption to changes in the wage rate.

When individuals are willing to substitute between home and market goods,
C

> 0, then the final term appears in the expression for c: (1 — s)(.

This

term reflects the effect on market consumption of substitutions between home
and market goods when their relative price changes. As noted above, an increase

in the market wage increases the price of home goods relative to market goods.

13

Individuals will then shift consumption toward market goods—the extent to which

they are willing to do this depends on the elasticity of substitution (.
Thus, we find that ci is likely to be positive, even if there is no home produc-

tion, simply because of substitution between consumption and leisure. The price

effect of home production tends to reduce the value of c, while increases in the

substitutability between home and market goods will increase o. A sufficient

condition for c > 0 is a > 1, (

1. As we discuss more fully in the next section,

these parameter restrictions appear to be satisfied in the data.
How does effort devoted to market work vary with the market wage and the
interest rate? Working again with the log-linear approximation to the model, we
obtain the following expression for the growth rate of market labor input:

Et(AnAI,t+l) = y1Et(Awt+i) + 'y2Er,+1

(0.11)

where

-(1-s(1-a))

—
a11 + (1 — a)ç1

—
—

__H.1'
N1
NM

a

+ (1 —

14

i

Whether labor input is expected to rise or fall with increases in the wage rate

depends on the sign of 'y. Since 'Yi

the related to the compensated labor

is

supply elasticity, it is likely to be positive. Further, we find that 'y is positive
when parameters are set in accordance with estimates obtained by others in the
context of household production models, as we shall show below.

Putting these pieces together, expected income growth is given by

E(Ay+1)

Et(Ariji,t+i) + E(Aw+1).

(0.12)

Using equations (0.9) and (0.11) above, we find that expected consumption growth

is related to expected income growth by the following:

E(Ac+1) =

1

2Etrtt+i

1E(Ay+1) +

.

(0.13)

Thus we have that expected growth of market output is positively correlated with

>

the growth of market consumption if

0

and (1 + 'y) >

0,

as seems like'y

in light of our prior discussion.3 The economic mechanism behind this result is
made transparent by the simplicity of the model. When future market wages are

expected to be high, individuals plan to substitute labor input away from the
home good and toward production of the market good. At the same time, they
15

plan to substitute consumption of the market good for consumption of the home
good (which they must since, holding AHt constant, there will be relatively less of

the home good available if labor supply to the household sector declines). Thus
there is a natural mechanism linking predictable income growth to the growth of
market consumption.4

Finally, note that the coefficient on the interest rate is not equal to 1/a = 1
unless ci =

1.

Thus this equation cannot, in general, be used to estimate a as

the inverse of the coefficient on the interest rate. To estimate a in the context of

this model, it is necessary to have data on household sector activity that would

permit estimation of the shares and elasticities embedded in the coefficients in
equation (0.13).

III. A general equilibrium model
This section closes the partial equilibrium model of section II by specifying the
production side of the market economy, allowing both capital and labor to be used

in the household sector, and determining prices and interest rates endogenously.
While a growing literature has shown that household production considerations

may be important for understanding macroeconomic phenomena at business cycle

frequencies, our concern is how household production alters the interpretation of
16

standard tests of the permanent income hypothesis. Specifically, does the presence

of the nonmarket sector rationalize the fact that consumption growth is related

to predictable income growth? We find that the answer is "yes." Central to
our story is the idea that individuals substitute labor supply across the market
and nonmarket sectors depending on the relative opportunities available. At the
same time, consumers value consumption of both the market-produced good and

the non-market good (the home good), and substitute between these goods with

variations in their relative price. The basic intuition developed in the partial
equilibrium model of last section will carry over to this general equilibrium model.

That is: when productivity is expected to be high in the market sector individuals

will choose to increase labor supply to that sector. At the same time, the relative

price of market goods will decline, so that expected consumption of the market
good will rise. Thus expected growth of market output will be able to predict the
growth of market consumption even though individuals act as rational, permanent
income consumers.

A. The model
As in the partial equilibrium model of section II, the representative individual
values consumption of the market-produced good, C,, the home-produced good,
17

as well as leisure, L. Individuals maximize expected lifetime utility, given by

equation (0.2) above, subject to their time constraint, equation (0.3).
Production of the market good is governed by the following constant-returnsto-scale technology:

Y1 = AjtK1 (XN1)1

(0.14)

while production of the nonmarket good follows

= AHtKt(XtNHt)''9.

(0.15)

X is the deterministic trend in labor-augmenting technical change, common
across sectors, which grows at the rate 'y = X+1 /X. The variables A1 and
AHt are the stochastic components of technical change, which may contain unit
roots.

In each sector, capital is subject to convex costs of adjustment, so that investment in each sector, Ijt and 'Ht is translated into installed capital according
to:

K1,+1 = (1 — &1)K1 + (IIt/KMt)Kit

18

(0.16)

KH,t+1

with

(1 — 6H)KHt +

(IHt/KHt)KHc

(0.17)

0, " <0.

The government of this economy purchases the market good in the amount
G, taxes the returns to market work and market capital at the constant rates TN

and TK, and rebates any potential surplus proceeds to consumers as lump-sum
transfers, TR. Government purchases neither yield utility to private individuals
nor enhance the productivity of private factors of production. The government's
budget constraint, expressed in units of the market good, is given by:

TNWtNMt + TK(rKt — öM)KMt

G + TR

(0.18)

where W is the market wage rate, and TKt is the rental rate of market capital.
Output of the nonmarket good is used solely for consumption, thus the associated resource constraint is simply

YHt > H .

(0.19)

Output of the market good is used for private consumption, for government con-

19

sumption, and for investment in each of the two sectors:

YMt

C + G + 'Mt + 'Ht•

(0.20)

The competitive equilibrium for this economy is found using the log-linear
method of King, Plosser, and Rebelo (1987).

B. Calibration
We have calibrated our model to conform as closely as possible with the recent
literature on household production as summarized in the survey by Jeremy Green-

wood et al. (1995). Our procedure is similar to theirs, in that we solve for the

deterministic steady state of the model and calibrate the model's steady state
by setting the following quantities to match corresponding averages in U.S. time

series: the capital-output ratio in the market sector; the ratio of household cap-

ital to market capital; the shares of investment in the two sectors as a fraction

of market output; time allocated to each of the two sectors and to leisure; tax
rates; the trend rate of growth of total factor productivity; and the real interest

rate. These parameters jointly determine the steady state, and thus implicitly
define the following parameters: the growth-adjusted subjective discount factor;

20

the depreciation rates in the two sectors; labor's share in each sector; capital's
share in each sector; and the share of market goods in aggregate consumption.
The following parameters have no effect on the steady state; rather, they affect

the model's dynamics: the elasticity of substitution between market and home
goods; risk aversion; the own-elasticity of leisure; the elasticity of the adjustment

cost function; and the parameters of the productivity shock process. Our baseline
parameterization of the economy is as follows.

1. Preferences
The time period is a quarter of a year. The growth-adjusted subjective time
discount factor is set so that the steady state real interest rate is 6.5% per year.
The share of market goods in the consumption aggregate

is s = 0.63.

The

amount of available nonsleeping time is normalized to 1, of which NM = 0.33
is spent in market work including commuting, NH = 0.25 is spent in household

production, and L = 0.42 is consumed directly as leisure. These shares are from
the 1971-1981 Michigan time surveys, and are averages over both men and women.

The own-elasticity of leisure is set at =

—1

in the baseline case. The coefficient

of relative risk aversion is a = 2.

The elasticity of substitution between market and home goods, , plays an
21

important role in our analysis. Until recently there has been little research which

attempts to determine the appropriate value of this parameter. In the two early
quantitative models with household production, researchers established a 'preferred value" that was chosen to insure that the model performed well in terms of
some key business-cycle facts. Specifically, Greenwood et al. (1995) chose ( = 3,

while Jess Benhabib et al. (1991) report a preferred value of ( = 5. Subsequently,

Ellen McGrattan et al. (1997) constructed a household production model similar

to ours and used maximum likelihood to obtain an estimate of ( using macroeconomic time series data. Their point estimate was 1.75 with a 95% confidence
interval of (1.25, 2.95).

In another study, Peter Rupert et al. (1995) used micro data from the PSID to

estimate ( for three groups of consumers: single males; single females; and couples.

The point estimate for single males was = 0.94 (the 95% confidence interval is
(0.05, 1.82). For single females, they report =

1.80 with

95% confidence interval

(1.37, 2.24). For couples, the estimate ranges from ( = 1.09 (95% confidence
interval is (0.45, 1.73)) to

4.00 (95% confidence interval is (3.02,4.98)). The

estimate depended on whether specific cross-equation restrictions were imposed

during estimation. Based on this group of studies, a plausible range for seems

to be ( E (0.00,5.00). Our benchmark value is ( = 3, but we also report results
22

for other plausible values of .

2. Technology

The parameters of the two production technologies were set to match the following

steady state values. First, the capital-to-output ratio in the market sector is equal

to 4, based on a concept of market capital that comprises producer durables and

nonresidential structures. The ratio of household capital to market capital is

set at 0.625; this is half the value chosen by Greenwood et al. (1995). We
depart here from their assumption that the household capital is equal to the
entire stock of durables plus residential structures to capture the idea that part
of this stock is not used for household production, but rather is used solely for

leisure (this assumption does not affect significantly our results). The share of
market investment is constrained to equal 11.8% of market output, and the share
of household investment is set equal to 6.75% of market output. Labor's share in

the market sector is 0.69, and is 0.80 in the household sector. The elasticity of
substitution between capital and labor in each sector is 1. The adjustment cost
function is parameterized so that no adjustment costs are incurred in maintaining

the steady state capital stock (i.e., in the steady state Tobin's q is one). The
elasticity of the investment-to-capital ratio with respect to movements in Tobin's
23

q is set at i'

13.3 as

in Marianne Baxter and Mario J. Crucini (1993,1995). The

depreciation rates on the two capital stocks are 5M

the market sector, and oH

2.30

2.55

percent per quarter in

percent per quarter in the household sector.

3. Productivity
The quarterly trend rate of growth of labor-augmenting technical change is set at

=

1.004.

The stochastic components of productivity, A11 and AHt, are governed

by the following vector AR(1) process:

=

Pi v1

log AAIt

V1

logAH

p1

+

i-'2

log AM,t_1

V2 P2

logAH,_1

P2

+
(0.21)

with the correlation of innovations set at 0.67 in accordance with the parameterization of Greenwood et al. (1995).

We study three stochastic processes for the productivity shock. In the first
case, we assume that technology follows a trend-stationary process with Pi

P2 =

0.

0.90,

In the second case, we assume that technology is an AR(1) in first

differences: we set Pi =

1.25,

P2 =

—0.25.

In both cases we assume that there

is no transmission of shocks from one sector to the other: u1 =

= 0. In the

third and final case we assume that productivity is trend stationary, but that
24

innovations in productivity spill over to the other sector with a one-quarter lag.

This specification captures the idea that innovations that initially apply to one
sector (such as microcomputers used in the market sector) eventually find uses in

the home sector (microcomputers can be used at home to prepare one's own tax
return). Specifically, we set Pi =

0.81,

v1 = 0.10,

P2

= i-'2 = 0. In each case, we

assume that the standard deviation of innovations to productivity shocks in both
sectors is 0.0075, following Greenwood et al. (1995).

4. Government
The government has an essentially passive role—the reason for including a gov-

ernment sector is that taxation of capital is important for the level of the capital

stock, investment shares, and the capital share in the market sector. The tax
rate on market capital, TK, is set at 0.70, which is in the range estimated by
several authors: see, for example, Martin Feldstein et al. (1983). The tax rate on
market labor is set at TN = 0.25, which is in line with current effective tax rates,

as reported by McGrattan et al. (1997). The model's results regarding excess
sensitivity are largely insensitive to variations in these tax rates, even over fairly
wide ranges. Government purchases are set at C = 0, so that all tax proceeds are
returned to individuals as lump-sum transfers.

25

C. Business-cycle implications
Although this paper is not concerned with the business-cycle implications of the
model per se, we present these for two reasons. First, for readers unfamiliar with

the household production literature, we provide some evidence on the extent to
which the household production model performs well in terms of replicating the
salient features of business cycles. Second, these results show the extent to which

our model of household production generates cycles that are similar to those
generated by the earlier models.
Table 1 presents summary business-cycle statistics for postwar U.S. data and

for our household production model. We present results for all three parametrization of the productivity shock process. Table 1 shows that our household
production model fits the basic business-cycle statistics about well as the other
household production models in the literature. In particular, the stationary models generally do a good job of replicating the pattern of relative volatility of market

consumption (relative to market output), and produce relative volatility statistics for investment that are close to those in the data. The model underpredicts

somewhat the volatility of labor input to the market sector, while the relative
volatility of the wage rate is closer to that found in the data.
Although corresponding figures are not available from the data, it is interesting
26

to see that the model predicts that household and market output are positively
correlated although not strongly so, while household and market consumption
are roughly uncorrelated. The model predicts that market consumption is highly

correlated with market output, in fact, somewhat more so than found in the
data. Overall, however, the model fits the stylized facts of household and market
business cycles fairly well.

IV. The excess-sensitivity regression
Following an idea of Hall (1978), Campbell and Mankiw (1989) propose a model

in which there are two types of consumers: permanent income consumers, and
"rule-of-thumb" consumers who simply consume their current income. Combining

these two types of consumers leads to the following specification for consumption

growth, /Ct, as a function of income growth, E_1y, and the ex-ante real interest
rate rt_i,t (which is known at time t — 1), and an error term Ut that captures the

part of consumption growth that is unpredictable given past values of income

growth and the interest rate, and other sources of error such as measurement
error:

= + AE_i/y + Ort_i,t + Ut.

27

(0.22)

Campbell and Mankiw argue that A in equation (0.22) measures the fraction of

the population that follows a rule of thumb; their instrumental-variables estimates

of A range from 0.29 to 0.66, depending on the instrument list and whether the
interest rate is included in the regression. Their estimates of 0 are typically very
small, ranging from 0.02 to 0.15, which they also view as inconsistent with the PIll

since, in their specification, 0 = 1/a is the elasticity of intertemporal substitution

and should thus be somewhat larger.

Campbell and Mankiw's regression is, of course, mis-specified in our model

economy. That is: the error term t includes other variables (notably, household
sector variables) that affect the growth rate of market consumption. Most impor-

tantly, these omitted variables are correlated with expected income growth and
the real interest rate. But it is still of interest to know what coefficient estimates
an empirical researcher would find in our economy using the Campbell-Mankiw
approach.

This section shows that the empirical finding of excess sensitivity

could result from individuals' substitutions between home and market work and
between home and market consumption goods as relative prices and wages rates
change. To show how excess sensitivity arises in our model, we begin by assuming

that the model is true and that the researcher has an infinitely-long time series
on all the variables in the model. Next, we show how the model implications for
28

excess sensitivity change when the researcher continues to have an infinitely-long

sample but has observations on only the conventional variables typically used as

instruments. Finally, we suppose that the researcher is constrained by a finite
sample (of approximately post-war length) and has access to data on the conven-

tional instruments. In all cases, we find that data generated by the household
production model would generate apparent "excess sensitivity" of the magnitude
commonly found in the empirical literature.

A. Large sample, full information results
In this first example, we take as given that the household production model is
correct, and explore the implications of this model for the coefficients ) and 0 when

we suppose that the researcher has an infinitely long sample period and a dataset

that includes all the variables in our model (the details of the computations are

given in the Appendix). In the context of our quantitative equilibrium model,

we can use the model solution to compute the exact conditional expectations
of income growth and the ex-ante interest rate—we do not need to simulate the
model. Given the conditional expectations and covariances, we can then compute

the regression coefficients in eq. (0.22). Our interpretation of these estimates is

that these are the large sample full-information coefficients of \ and 0 implied
29

by our model. Table 2 presents results for benchmark model together with an
extensive sensitivity analysis.

We begin with the benchmark parameterization. For the trend-stationary
model without transmission of shocks across sectors, this approach yields A =
0.32, 0 = —0.03.
0.08.

0

For the difference-stationary case, we obtain A = 0.36, 0 =

The model with transmission of shocks across sectors produces A = 0.69,

—0.43.

Thus the benchmark model of household production model predicts

that a researcher running the typical consumption growth regression should find
apparent excess sensitivity in the form of a positive coefficient on expected output
growth.

The positive coefficient on expected output growth derives from the intersec-

toral movement of labor in response to expected productivity differentials. Fur-

ther, the model predicts a coefficient on the interest rate that is close to zero,
especially in the absence of transmission of shocks across sectors, which is in line

with the Campbell-Mankiw results. However, as shown in the simpler model of
section II (see equation (0.13)) the coefficient on the interest rate is not, in general, equal to 1/a, which would be 0.50 under our parameterization. Thus a small

value of 0 cannot be interpreted as evidence that consumers are insensitive to
variations in the interest rate.
30

The sensitivity analysis in Table 2 shows how these results vary with changes

in the parameterization of the model. We begin by exploring the implications
of altering the elasticity of substitution between home and market consumption

goods. Our explanation for apparent excess sensitivity hinges on substitutions

between different goods, so it is important to explore the effects of changing
these elasticities. Experiments 1 and 2 show the effects of a reduced elasticity of
substitution between home and market goods; experiment 3 increases the elasticity

of substitution to the high end of its plausible range. Even with zero elasticity
(experiment 1) there is still apparent excess sensitivity, with A ranging from 0.11

to 0.17. The reason that apparent excess sensitivity arises in this case is that
the consumer still undertakes substitutions between leisure and the consumption

aggregate. Put differently, the aggregate supply of labor (to home and market

sectors together) responds to variations in the real wage. A high elasticity of
substitution leads to increases in A,

as

expected.

Experiment 4 presents results for a case in which the aggregate labor supply

is fixed (leisure is constant or, equivalently, individuals do not value leisure).
Apparent excess sensitivity arises in this case as well, with values of A ranging
from 0.40 to 0.75. In this case, apparent excess sensitivity stems from the fact that

the consumer substitutes between consumption of the home and market good,
31

even though aggregate labor supply is fixed. Evidently, then, apparent excess
sensitivity will only disappear if market consumption enters the utility function

separably from home production and leisure. Based on the existing empirical
evidence, we view this specification as implausible.

Experiments 5 and 6 show that variations in risk aversion have little effect on
the excess sensitivity result. Experiment 7 reduces the correlation of the shocks to

the home and market sectors, which tends to increase apparent excess sensitivity

by increasing the scope for substitutions across sectors (there is less tendency
for marginal products in the two sectors to move together). Experiments 8 and
9 illustrate the effect of changing the assumed elasticity of adjustment costs for
capital. Abolishing adjustment costs has little effect on apparent excess sensitivity,
while increasing adjustment costs leads to much higher apparent excess sensitivity.

Finally, experiment 10 shows that apparent excess sensitivity will arise even if
there are no productivity shocks to the household sector—shocks to the market
sector alone are sufficient. Overall, we find that the predictions for the coefficient

on income growth )

are remarkably robust, whereas 0 is

sensitive to departures from the baseline model.

32

found to be more

B. Large sample, limited information estimates
The preceding sub-section showed that the household production model can ex-

plain apparent excess sensitivity, based on the population, or large sample, moments implied by the baseline parameterizations of the model. However, empirical

research is constrained by the fact that some variables that are important for constructing conditional covariances (i.e., some useful instruments) are not available

to the researcher. This sub-section follows standard empirical practice in using

lagged values of consumption, output, and the interest rate as instruments (see
the Appendix for details). That is: we use our model to construct 'instrumented'
versions of z.yt and rt_i,t as linear projections on lagged endogenous variables.6
Following Campbell and Mankiw (1989), we choose the following as our basic in-

strument set: Act_i,

Ac_3, Tt_2,t_1, rt_3,t_2, Tt_4,t_3. In the context of the

model, it is not necessary to instrument rt_i,t because this is a risk-free rate (it

is unrelated to the period t error since it is known at time t-1). However, we
instrument this variable since this procedure is typically followed in the empirical
literature.7

Table 3 gives the results for the procedures that use lagged observable en-

dogenous variables as instruments. With this procedure, there is no sampling
uncertainty and no small-sample bias. Table 3 shows that, in the stationary case
33

without transmission of cross sectors, the estimates are A = 0.05, 8 = 0.42. In the

nonstationary case without transmission, the estimates are A = 0.30, 8 =

0.43.

(The corresponding coefficients from Table 2 are presented for comparison.) These

coefficient estimates differ from those computed using exact conditional expecta-

tions because the linear projections yield an imperfect measure of the exact con-

ditional expectations which were used in Table 2. With transmission of shocks
across sectors (panel C), the full information procedure yields A = 0.69, 8 = —0.43;

while the limited information procedure yields A = 0.44 and 8 = 0.06.

C. Finite sample, limited information results
To explore the small-sample properties of the procedure which uses a restricted
set of variables as instruments, we followed a Monte-Carlo approach.

Specifi-

cally, we simulated our model to generate time series of length 130 quarters (32.5

years—approximately the length of time studied by prior researchers). Using the
simulated data, we computed the instrumental variables estimates of A and 0 us-

ing the instrument list specified earlier. We performed 1000 such simulations;
the mean estimates of the coefficients are reported in Table 3, together with the
standard deviation of the coefficient estimates across the 1000 simulations. This

table also reports sample means of the partial R2 statistics from the first-stage
34

regressions, which Shea (1996) recommends as the correct measure of instrument
relevance in multivariate settings.
For the stationary case without transmission of shocks across sectors (Panel A)

the mean values of the coefficients are A = 0.53, 9 —

—0.75,

values for the model-based variables approach were A =

while the population

0.05,

0=

0.42.

Over

1000 trials, the standard deviation of the coefficient on output (A) was 0.15, The
considerable difference between the computed and the simulated coefficient values

is linked to the weak predictability of the regressors and of consumption growth

itself. This can be seen in the low values of the R2 and partial R2 statistics for
the regressions of consumption, output and the interest rate on the instruments.8

In the nonstationary model without transmission (Panel B) we find similar
results. The average value of the coefficients from the simulated, shorter sample

differ markedly from both the population values for the model-based variables
approach and the coefficients yielded by the exact conditional expectations. There

continue to be low partial R2 statistics for the instrumented variables.
Looking at the model with transmission of shocks across sectors, we find that

the three groups of coefficients differ less than in the prior two cases due to improved predictability of consumption with this shock process.
Campbell and Mankiw also report regressions of consumption growth on out35

put growth without the interest rate:

Ct = L + )Ly + Et

.

(0.23)

We explored estimation of eq. (0.23) as a check on the robustness of our estimates

of A; these results are not reported in the paper. In each case, we found that the
values for A obtained from this equation to those obtained when the interest rate
is included.9

D. Implications for testing the PIH
Our results have implications for empirical testing of the PIH.'° In particular, we

have shown that it is inappropriate to test the PIB by looking at the correlation
between market consumption and income growth due to an increase in market
wages. However, tests that involve income growth due to windfalls or changes in

the timing of predictable income receipts should still be valid tests of the PIH.

Tests of this latter sort have been carried out using micro data by lvlatthew D.
Shapiro and Joel Slemrod (1995) who surveyed consumers to determine effects of
the 1992 change in income tax withholding procedures. Nicholas Souleles (1996)

studies the relationship between consumption and the receipt of income tax re-

36

funds. These studies find some evidence of excess sensitivity and thus present an
ongoing challenge to the PIH,

In the context of our model, a decrease in government purchases acts as a
windfall increase in consumer disposable income that is unrelated to wages. We
used our model to study an unexpected, purely temporary decrease in government

purchases." The excess sensitivity coefficient is A =

—0.0175

for this type of

shock (using the model's exact conditional expectation). The intuition behind
the finding of a slight negative dependence of consumption growth on windfall
growth in disposable market income is as follows. The decrease in government
purchases increases households' wealth. Leisure rises, as does consumption of the

home good. Consumption of the market good increases, while labor input to the

market sector falls. Thus, we have a natural mechanism leading to a negative
correlation between labor income and market consumption. This suggests that

an alternative approach to testing the PIH would be to determine the effect on
consumption of changes in government spending on goods and services that do
not affect individual utility (or affect it only additively) and which do not affect
labor productivity.

37

V. Summary and conclusions
This paper has shown that a macro model with household production can rationalize the observed "excess sensitivity" of consumption growth to predictable

output growth. Our story is based on the idea that consumers substitute between

home goods and market goods according to their relative price, and substitute
between work at home and work in the market depending on the relative wage.

That consumers and workers do undertake these substitutions has been documented by Benhabib et al. (1990) Victor Rios-Rull (1990), and F. Thomas Juster
and Frank P. Stafford (1991). Our paper shows that plausible substitutions along

these lines can produce exactly the empirical finding that predictable growth in
market output is correlated with consumption growth. We began by demonstrating this result within a simple, partial equilibrium model of consumer choice, and

then showed that the result continues to hold within a general equilibrium model
with neoclassical investment dynamics. We explored the implications of the quan-

titative equilibrium model for the empirical estimates that would be obtained by
researchers running the "excess sensitivity regressions" on data generated by our
model. We found that these researchers would find a positive coefficient on output

growth in this regression, which should not be interpreted as excess sensitivity or

38

as a violation of the PIH. Further, we found that the coefficient on the interest
rate is predicted to differ substantially from the inverse of the coefficient of rel-

ative risk aversion, and that this coefficient estimate is particularly sensitive to
choice of instruments and to small sample bias.

Our story has stressed substitutions of labor effort across sectors depending

on the relative wage rate. It is natural to wonder how things would work if
hours of market work were unrelated to wages or productivity, as in Richard
Rogerson's (1988) "lottery model," or if there were "involuntary unemployment."

Apparent excess sensitivity would still arise in these settings, for the following
reason. Following dismissal from the work force, an individual would have less
market income and more time to allocate to leisure and to household production.

Less market income leads to lower consumption of the market good, while the
increase in the time available for non-market activities would lead to increases in

the consumption of the home good and leisure. Qualitatively, these are the same

effects stressed in our equilibrium model. The only difference is that we would
not expect the value marginal product of labor to be equalized across home and
market sectors in these alternative settings.
Finally, empirical results obtained in a recent paper by Attanasio and Brown-

ing (1995) can be interpreted as lending support to the household production
39

story. Attanasio and Browning study micro data on consumption and find that
excess sensitivity of consumption to current income disappears once one controls
for variables such as the individual's age, number of children, whether one or both

spouses work, and the amount of labor supplied to the market. These variables
all seem likely to be good proxies for the relative costs and benefits to working in
the market sector and consuming market goods versus working in the home sector
and consuming home-produced goods.

Overall, our results suggest that it would be premature to abandon the PIH
as a central component of modern macroeconomic models. However, these results

also strengthen the case that understanding substitutions between the household
and market sectors are likely to be central to understanding the behavior of consumption over the business cycle.

40

References
Attanasio, Orazio P. and Martin Browning. "Consumption over the Life
Cycle and over the Business Cycle." American Economic Review, December

1995, (5), pp. 1118-37.
Baxter, Marianne. "Are Consumer Durables Important for Business Cycles?."
Review of Economics and Statistics, February 1996, 78(1), pp. 147-55.

Baxter, Marianne and Crucini, Mario J. "Explaining Saving-Investment
Correlations." American Economic Review, June 1993, 83(3), pp. 4 16-436.
"Business Cycles and the Asset Struc-

ture of Foreign Ttade." International Economic Review, November 1995,
36(4), pp. 821-54.

Becker, Gary S. "A Theory of the Allocation of Time," Economic Journal,
September 1965, 75, pp. 493-517.

Benhabib, Jess; Rogerson, Richard and Wright, Randall. "Homework
in Macroeconomics: Household Production and Aggregate Fluctuations."
Journal of Political Economy, December, 1991, 99(6), pp. 1166-1187.

41

Caballero Ricardo J. "Consumption Puzzles and Precautionary Savings."
Journal of Monetary Economics, January 1990, 25(1), pp. 113-136,

Campbell, John Y. and Ludvigson, Sydney. "Elasticities of Substitution
in Real Business Cycle Models with Home Production." Working paper,
Harvard University, 1997.

Campbell John Y. and Mankiw, N. Gregory. "Consumption, Income,
and Interest Rates: Reinterpreting the Time Series Evidence." NBER
Macroeconomics Annual, 1989, pp. 185-216.

Campbell John Y. and Mankiw, N. Gregory. "Permanent Income, Current
Income, and Consumption." Journal of Business and Economic Statistics,
July 1990, 8(3), pp. 265-279.

Campbell John Y. and Mankiw, N. Gregory. "The Response of Consumption to Income: A Cross-Country Investigation." European Economic
Review, May 1991, 35(4), pp. 723-767,

Canova, Fabio and Ubide, Angel.

"International Business Cycles, Fi-

nancial Markets and Household Production." Universitat Pompeu Fabra
(Barcelona, Spain) Discussion Paper Series 27, Working paper #204, Jan-

42

uary 1997, and forthcoming, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control.

Christiano, Lawrence; Eichenbaum, Martin, and Marshall, David.
"The Permanent Income Hypothesis Revisited." Econometrica, March 1991,
59(2), pp. 397-424.

Cochrane, John H. "Comment: 'The Response of Consumption to Income:
A Cross-Country Investigation' by J.Y. Campbell and N.G. Mankiw, 'Why

Test the Permanent Income Hypothesis?' " European Economic Review,
May 1990, 35(4), pp. 757-764.

Eichenbaum, Martin and Hansen, Lars Peter. "Estimating Models with
Intertemporal Substitution Using Aggregate Time Series Data". Journal of
Business and Economic Statistics, January 1990, 8(1), pp. 53-69.

Feldstein, Martin S., Dicks-Mireaux, Louis and Poterba, James. "The
Effective Tax Rate and the Pretax Rate of Return." Journal of Public Economics,
July 1983, 21(2), pp. 129-158.

Flavin, Marjorie A. "The Adjustment of Consumption to Changing Expectations About Future Income," Journal of Political Economy, October 1981,
89(5), pp.974-1009.

43

Friedman, Milton. A Theory of the Consumption Function. Princeton, New
Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1957.

Garber, Peter and King, Robert. "Deep Structural Excavation? A Critique
of Euler Equation Methods." University of Rochester Discussion Paper No.
83-14, 1983.

Greenwood, Jeremy, and Hercowitz, Zvi. "The Allocation of Capital and
Time over the Business Cycle." Journal of Political Economy, December
1991, 99(6), pp. 1188-1214.

Greenwood, Jeremy; Rogerson, Richard and Wright Randall. "Household Production in Real Business cycle theory," in: T. Cooley, ed., Frontiers

of Business Cycle Research. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1995,
pp. 157-174.

Hall Robert E. "Stochastic Implications of the Life Cycle-Permanent Income
Hypothesis: Theory and Evidence." Journal of Political Economy, December 1978, 86(6), pp. 971-987.

Juster, F. Thomas and Stafford, Frank P. "The Allocation of Time: Empirical Findings, Behavioral Models, and Problems of Measurement." Journal

44

of Economic Literature, June 1991, 29(2), pp. 471-522.

King, Robert G., Plosser, Charles and Rebelo, Sergio. "Production,
Growth and Business Cycles: Technical Appendix." Working paper, Rochester
Center for Economic Research, 1987.

Mankiw Gregory N. "Consumer Durables and the Real Interest Rate." Review
of Economics and Statistics, August 1985, 67(3), pp. 353-362.

McGrattan, Ellen; Rogerson, Richard and Wright, Randall. "An Equilibrium Model of the Business Cycle with Household Production and Fiscal
Policy." International Economic Review, May 1997, 38(2), pp. 267-290.

Rios-Rull, Victor. "Working in the Market, Home Production, and the Acquisition of Skills: A General-Equilibrium Approach." American Economic
Review, September 1993, 83(4), pp. 893-907.

Rogerson, Richard. "Indivisible Labor, Lotteries and Equilibrium." Journal
of Monetary Economics, January 1988, 21(1), pp. 3-16.

Rupert, Peter; Rogerson, Richard, and Wright Randall. "Estimating
Substitution Elasticities in Household Production Models." Economic Theory,
June 1995, 6(1), pp. 179-193.
45

Shapiro, Matthew D. and Joel Slemrod. "Consumer Response to the
Timing of Income: Evidence from a Change in Tax Withholding." American
Economic Review, March 1995, 85(1), pp. 274-283.

Shea, John. "Instrument Relevance in Multivariate Linear Models: A simple
Measure." Review of Economics and Statistics, May 1997, 79(2), pp. 34852.

Souleles, Nicholas. "The Response of Household Consumption to Income
Tax Refunds." Working paper, Wharton School of Business, 1996, and
forthcoming, American Economic Review.

46

Endnotes
1. See, for example, the contributions of Benhabib, Rogerson, and Wright (1991),
Jeremy Greenwood and Zvi Hercowitz (1991), Greenwood et al. (1995), McGrat-

tan et al. (1996), Fabio Canova and Angel Ubide (1997), and John Y. Campbell
and Sydney Ludvigson (1997).

2. This is an example of the type of problem discussed by Peter Garber and
Robert G. King (1983).

It is also possible to generate apparent excess sensi-

tivity through substitutions on the consumption/leisure margin, as in Orazio P.
Attanasio and Martin Browning (1995). We focus on alternative ways of generating consumption goods through substitution between home and market-generated

consumption, while incorporating standard labor/leisure choice.

3. In fact, the coefficient on expected output growth will be positive even if

is negative, so long as 1 + is positive.
4. Anyone who has found himself eating pizza for the fifth night in a row when
trying to meet a deadline will understand the basic idea here.
5. Adjustment costs are incorporated into our model, in contrast to the model of
Greenwood et al., because they substantially improve the investment behavior of

the model. The importance of adjustment costs for the dynamics of investment

47

in multi-sector environments is discussed in Baxter and Crucini (1993,1995) and
Baxter (1996).

6. One of the puzzles uncovered by Campbell and Mankiw is that the correlation between consumption and predictable income is higher than the correlation
between consumption and raw income. As a result, the OLS estimate of A, which

should in theory be upward biased due to a positive correlation between income
innovations and optimal consumption, turns out to be lower than the IV estimate
of A empirically. This is not the case for our model, as reconciling these results

seems to require measurement error in aggregate income. Our model abstracts
from measurement error.

7. An alternative strategy would be to take an ex-ante uncertain return, such as
the return on capital, so that the IV procedure would actually be necessary. We ex-

perimented with this alternative approach, but it did not lead to significantly different results. We also experimented with alternative instrument sets. For exampie, we used the following instrument set:

/yt—2, Ay_3, rt2,t_1, Tt_3,t_2, rt4,t3.

The results did not change appreciably. Also, many researchers use twice-lagged

instruments to avoid potential problems due to time-averaged consumption data;

for the results reported here we lag the instruments only once. Exploration with
time-averaged model-generated data and twice lagged instruments did not yield
48

different results.

8. As a check on our Monte Carlo procedure, we performed 30 simulations of
length 3000 (750 years) for the stationary model without transmission. The mean

coefficient values that we obtain are A = 0.15, 0 = 0.29. These are much closer
to the large sample, full information coefficients of A

0.05, 0 = 0.42. Thus with

sufficiently long samples, the procedure converges to the large sample, limited

information estimates. A discussion of this econometric issue can be found in
Nelson (1990).

9. An alternative choice for the instruments, Ay_1, Ay2,

leads to similar

conclusions.

10. We are grateful to a referee for pointing out these implications to us and for
suggesting the experiment involving changes in government spending.
11. We specified that shocks to government purchases were i.i.d., and then studied

the response to a decrease in purchases. The steady state share of government
purchases was set at 20% of total output. Results were similar for persistent but
ultimately temporary shocks to government purchases.

49

App end ix
This appendix explains the methods used to compute the results in Section IV.
The solution to our model can be written as follows. First, the state variables of
the problem evolve according to:

St

where St

1S an

Ms_1 + G€

(Al)

s x 1 vector of state variables, Et is a k x 1 vector of shocks,

and Al and C are coefficient matrices. The solution to the model is given by
(0.24) together with eq. (0.24) which describe how other variables of interest—

consumption, output, the interest rate, labor input, etc.—depend on the state
vector:

W = Hst

(A2)

where W is a w x 1 vector and H is a w x s coefficient matrix.

We use this system to generate the results that a researcher would find if
he were studying data produced by our model economy. Some of the results
are obtained under the assumption that the researcher has an infinite amount
of data on all variables in the model. These results are termed "large-sample,

50

full-information" results. Other results assume an infinite amount of data but
on a limited set of variables. These results are termed "large-sample, limitedinformation" results. Finally, we explore Monte-Carlo results based on a sam-

ple length of 130 quarters (approximately the sample length used by prior researchers) using a hmited set of variables. These are called "finite-sample, limited-

information" results.
The Campbell-Mankiw equation is given below:

= t + AE_1y + 9E_1r1_1, + LLj.

(A3)

Since the expectations in (0.24) are not observable, Campbell and Mankiw
specify their estimating equation as follows:

ct = ,u + AL\y + OTt_it + e

(A4)

and then use instrumental-variables procedures to try to correct for the simultane-

ity bias that arises because the expectation errors in YL and Vt_it are correlated

with e,.

As discussed in the text, this equation is mis-specified in the model, since

51

the growth rate of market consumption depends on more variables than income

growth and the interest rate.

Specifically, there are omitted variables in this

regression that are included in the "error term" Et. These omitted variables will

influence the results that would be obtained by a researcher estimating (0.24)
using data generated by the household production model.

A-i. Large sample, full information results
To produce our "large sample, full information" results, we proceed as follows.
First, we work directly with the specification (0.24) since we can use our model

to compute the necessary expectations. Specifically, from (0.24) and (0.24), we
have

= HE1s

=

HMs_1

=

Fst_i.

(A5)

Estimates of the coefficients A and 0 are found by solving the least-squares

52

'normal equations':

(E_1Ac —

— 9Et_irt_i,t)

(E_1c —

E_1y 0

— 9E1r_1,) Et_iArt_i,t = 0.

(A6)

(A7)

In the context of our model economy, we use equation (0.24) to construct the

expectations in (0.24) and (0.24), where the notation F3 denotes the row of the
matrix F associated with variable, yielding:

(Fast_i —

Fs_1 — 6FrSt_i) Fs_1 0

(A8)

(Fast_i —

Fs_i

(A9)

—

OFrSt_i) FrSt_i

0.

For the "full-information" results, we take the probability limits of (0.24) and
(0.24) as T —p oc to obtain:

—

— OUyr

=0

(AlO)

acr —

— Oarr

=0

(All)

53

where Ujj denotes the population, or large-sample covariance of variable i with

variable j. Given these covariances, these 2 equations can be solved for the two
unknowns, ,\ and 0.

It is easiest to see how the moments in (0.24) and (0.24) can be calculated if

we assume that the system is stationary. Let

denote the probability limit of

the variance-covariance matrix of st_i. This variance-covariance matrix can be

computed in a variety of ways for example, by solving the matrix equation =

MM' + E(EE'). We then obtain the following versions of the normal equations:
—

.\FF1 — 0FrF'y 0

(A12)

FCF. —

— 0FTF, 0.

(A13)

These two equations are then solved for the two unknown coefficients, \ and 0,
as reported in Table 2. When the shocks to the state variables are nonstationary
does not exist. Note, however, that even in the nonstationary case the covariances in (0.24) and (0.24) are still well-defined, as they involve growth rates of
consumption and income as well as the level of the real interest rate, all of which

are stationary.

54

A-2. Large sample, limited information results
In applied econometric contexts, the researcher typically does not have enough

information compute the necessary expectations: in our context, these would

be E_1iy and E_1r_1,. Thus researchers like Campbell and Mankiw use an
instrumental variables procedure which we find convenient to discuss as two-stage-

least-squares. Under this procedure, the variables /yt and rt_i,t are regressed
on instruments, where valid instruments are any variables correlated with

and rt_i,t but are uncorrelated with t in (0.24) and with the expectation errors

(Yt — E_1Ly) and (rt_i,t — Et_irt_i,t).
We let X denote the n ><

1

vector of date t observations on the instruments.

For compactness, we rewrite (0.24) as

Ac =

where Z = [1

,

, rt_i,t]'

and = ) 0]'.

(A14)

The 'first-stage' regression involves

running an OLS regression of Z on Xt:

=

'X + et.
55

(A15)

The 'second-stage' regression involves replacing Z in eq. (0.24) with the fitted

values, Z =

from eq. (0.24). Then the two-stage-least-squares estimator

of /3 is given by:

-1 T

T

/2SLS =

[ z1'zt] [ 2ct]

(A16)

As T — 00 the estimator I32SL8 converges in probability to E(t)_1E(2zct).

We used our model to compute a large sample version of /325L5 as follows. In

the 'first stage' we computed Zt by projecting Z on the instruments X. The X
depend on the state vector as follows:

X = Fxst_i

(A17)

through a version of equation (0.24), where (0.24) reflects the fact that, in our ap-

plication the instruments X contain no date-t variables at all. Further, the state
vector St_i must be augmented to include additional lags of the state variables as

necessary, depending on the instrument list employed. The 'first stage' projects
on X, yielding an estimate of 6; the second stage computes /32SLS according

to (0.24). These estimates are reported in Table 3.

56

A-3. Finite sample, limited information results
To investigate the properties of estimates obtained by researchers constrained to
using a finite amount of data, we employed a Monte Carlo procedure. Specifically,

we generated 1000 simulations of our model, where each simulation was of length

130 quarters. For each simulation, we used the simulated data to construct an
estimate of /2SLS in exactly the same way as Campbell-Mankiw would have, had

their data been generated by our model. The mean estimate of /32SLS over the
1000 simulations is reported in Table 3, together with the standard error of the
estimate across the simulations.

57

0.58
0.21

2.61

0.78
N/A
0.73
N/A
N/A
0.76

aggregate investment
market labor input
household labor input
wage rate

Correlation between home and market output

Correlation between home and market consumption

Correlation between market output and market consumption

0.40
0.60

0.62
0.89

0.98

-0.01

0.94

0.09

0.36

0.45

0.34

0.11

3.22

0.55

1.48

Model with
transmission

1.21

1.07

1.59

model

Non-stationary

Note: All series are filtered with the Hodrick-Prescott filter (smoothing parameter X=1600). The U.S. post-war quarterly data are from
Benhabib, Rogerson and Wright (1991) and Greenwood, Rogerson and Wright (1995). N/A indicates statistic not available due to lack
of data on household sector.

0.92

-0.16

0.47

0.46

3.15

0.60

0.54

market consumption

Volatility relative to market output

1.54

1.96

market output

Standard deviation (% per quarter)

model

Variable

Statistic

Data

Stationary

Table 1: Business cycle properties of the benchmark model

0.63

0.61

0.99

0.43

0.15
-0.24

0.74

0.72

0.67

0.75

0.84

0.26

0.11

0.69

X

-0.03

-0.03

0.44

0.06

-0.31

0.46

0.37

0.08

0

-0.73

-0.74

0.53

-0.49

-0.20

-0.45

-0.56

-0.70

0.25

0.31

-0.43

0

Model w/transmission

See the Appendix for the details of the estimation procedure.

0.31

0.66

0.47

0.47

0.25

0.35

0.40

0.63

0.09

0.17

0.36

X

Nonstationary model

to be larger in absolute value to insure concavity of momentary utility. We set E = -10 for this case.

The equation estimated is zc=M+?

2. The case with =10 requires

1.

Notes:

0.53

0.35

No shocks to household sector

10.

-0.67

0.90

9.

-0.22

High adjustment costs: K=6.7

No adjustment costs

8.

0.48
0.61

Low correlation of shocks: 0.50

7.

-0.11

0.19

-0.27

-0.35

0.40

0.38

0.40

High risk aversion:

6.

0.33

Low risk aversion:

5.

=10

Fixed labor supply:

4.
0.31

0.49

=5

=1

High elasticity of substitution:

3.

0.11

1

0.17

0.45

Low elasticity of substitution:

2.

0

-0.03

0.32

= -oo

Low elasticity of substitution:

1.

Sensitivityanalysis

Benchmark model

0

2.

Stationary model

Large-sample, full-information results

Table 2: Estimated response of consumption growth to income growth and the interest rate

Table 3: Estimated response of consumption growth to income growth and the interest rate
Comparison of three estimation methods

Coefficient
estimates

Partial R2 from
regression on
instruments

r

?.

0

Large sample, full information

0.32

-0.03

Large sample, partial information

0.05

0.42

Finite sample, partial information

0.53

-0.75

0.04

0.46

(0.15)

(0.91)

(0.02)

(0.20)

Large sample, full information

0.36

0.08

Large sample, partial information

0.30

0.43

Finite sample, partial information

0.81

-1.07

0.09

0.44

(0.24)

(0.66)

(0.04)

(0.14)

Large sample, full information

0.69

-0.43

Large sample, partial information

0.44

0.06

Finite sample, partial information

0.52

-0.14

0.04

0.39

(Standard error)

(0.14)

(0.73)

(0.02)

(0.18)

y

A. Stationary model without
transmission of shocks across sectors

(Standard error)

B. Nonstationary model without
transmission of shocks across sectors

(Standard error)

C. Model with transmission of shocks
across sectors

1. The equation estimated is zc=M+)
For the large sample, full information results and the
large sample, partial information results, we used the model solution to directly compute measures of the
expectations in this equation. For the finite sample, partial information results, we simulated the model and
employed standard two-stage-least-squares procedures on the following equation, which replaces expectations
with realizations: /.c=ii+?.
See the Appendix for the details of the estimation procedure.
2. In the finite sample, limited information case, the simulation results are obtained from 1000 runs with 130
usable data points; numbers in parentheses are standard errors of the coefficient estimates over the 1000 runs.
Time required for 1000 runs on a Pentium Pro 200 Mhz processor was approximately 5 minutes. Instruments for
both limited information cases are Ac1,
cE3, rE21, r32, r43.
3. Partial R2 statistics are described by Shea (1996).

