the government may be purchasing services from private providers, another way
to see this distinction is that government-organized accounts are organized on
a group basis while privately-organized accounts are organized on an individual
basis.   As with financial and insurance products generally, the group and
individual markets function very differently and yield different pricing
structures. 3

      A central element in thinking about costs is the quality of services
offered with the accounts.    With government-organized accounts, the central
question for this element is what Congress might legislate, and, underlying
that, what services are likely to be requested by constituents.            With
privately-organized accounts, Congress will legislate a minimum standard of
quality of services, but the market is likely to offer an array of services,
extending above the minimum.     In turn, this equilibrium is likely to be
influenced by the details of the regulations that are placed on these accounts,
for these accounts are likely to be subject to a new set of regulations,
possibly administered by a new regulatory body or possibly handled by one or
more existing bodies such as the SEC. These regulations will affect the costs
of providing services and may include regulation directly of charges, either in
level or in form.

      There are many steps in organizing and running individual accounts. The
costs of different steps might be paid by different sources: workers,
employers, charges against the accounts, the rest of Social Security, the non-
Social Security portion of the federal budget.     In comparing different cost
estimates, it is important to be clear about which tasks, and their costs, are
included in a given estimate and which are assumed to be borne elsewhere. To
help with such comparisons, the NASI Panel on Privatization of Social Security
prepared a list of many of the tasks associated with having accounts in its
Report. That list is reproduced here as Appendix A.

      The paper proceeds by first describing how a low cost/low services
government organized plan might look, how it differs from the Thrift Savings
Plan for federal employees (TSP), and what it might cost. For this purpose I
rely heavily on NASI, 1998.    My estimate of the cost of such a system is
roughly the range $40-50 per worker per year.      I suspect there would be
pressure for more services, which would raise costs.   After this discussion,

    3
       The paper does not consider the use of employers to organize groups for
some workers as would follow with a mandate on employers rather than on
workers. The Australian system is a mandate on employers. See, e. g., Edey
and Simon, 1998.


December 16, 1998

                                       2
the paper turns to privately-organized accounts and the nature of equilibrium.
My conclusion is that for the small accounts that are the current focus of
political discussion (financed from 2 to 3 percent of payroll), the costs of
private organization would be very high compared to the cost of government
organization, given the perceived advantages of such a system.

I.   Government-Organized Accounts 4

      The creation of mandatory government-organized individual accounts would
involve setting up nearly 150 million individual accounts, with a system to
produce a flow of deposits into the accounts and a mechanism for investing,
reporting (and changing) portfolio choices. 5 To put the scope of a possible new
system in perspective, the TSP maintains fewer than 3 million individual
accounts; the largest number of existing individual accounts handled by a
single firm has under 6 million accounts; and there are fewer than 10 million
IRA's with multiple investment options.     No existing system could handle the
administrative complexities of a program with this scope of individual
accounts; creating one would take time and resources.

      In addition to needing a structure for accumulation in individual
accounts, a structure is needed for the provision of retirement income flows.
This issue is considered below after considering the structure and cost of the
accumulation phase.

      Since the present structure of Social Security would be preserved for the
remaining defined benefit retirement system as well as disability insurance and
survivors’ insurance for young families, any introduction of individual
accounts would add to the costs of Social Security. Currently, Social Security
costs about $16 per person (workers and beneficiaries) per year. Excluding the
costs of the disability program, OASI costs about $10 per person per year. A
cost of $10 per participant is a cost of $14.50 per worker. 6

    4
       As mentioned above, much of the presentation of this section is verbatim
from NASI, 1998.
     5
        One can have a defined contribution system without any individual
portfolio choice.    While such a construct is useful for analytical purposes
(see, e. g., Diamond, 1998), this is not on the agenda of proposals being taken
seriously currently.
    6
        The estimate for is based on 1997 administrative cost of $3.4 billion
for the total program divided by 198.7 million participants (145 million
workers and 43.7 million beneficiaries). The cost for only the retirement and
survivors part of Social Security is based on administrative cost of $2.1

December 16, 1998

                                       3
I-A.   Measuring costs.

      Setting up and administering a system of individual accounts involves a
variety of types of costs. Some would be one-time costs to set up the system,
independent of the size of the system. Other setup costs would depend on the
number of participants. In terms of ongoing costs, most are fixed costs per
account, while some depend on the size of the account.        Since the bulk of
ongoing costs would likely be fixed costs per account, estimating costs is
approached in those terms (for example, x dollars per account per year). That
is, the cost of managing the aggregate portfolio is small relative to the costs
of record-keeping, including communication with account owners. With the TSP,
investment management fees are roughly 1/10th of total costs borne by TSP (with
the costs borne by federal agencies also fixed costs per account). Dividing an
annual dollar cost by annual deposits converts this to a percentage front-load.

      It is also useful to express these costs in other ways.      One familiar
method of stating costs is as an annual management fee in percentage terms (for
example, y percent of the accumulated balance in the account per year). Once
the size of the accounts has been estimated, a dollar cost per year and a
percentage of balances per year can be related by calculations that equate the
present discounted value of costs over the career of a worker. If charges are
imposed to cover the costs under these two methods, the charges will be equal
on a lifetime basis, but will likely differ in any given year or stage of life.
With balances that grow relative to wages, a constant percentage of balances is
a smaller charge in early years and a larger charge in later years. A third
way to report on the costs is in terms of the percentage decrease in the
accumulation in an account at retirement age as a consequence of the
administrative charges, called the charge ratio.       The relationships among
percentage front-load, annual management fee and charge ratio, based on
continuous time calculations, are presented in Appendix B, which is reproduced
from Diamond, 1998. Some examples are shown in Table 1.




billion and 182.6 million participants (145 million workers and 37.6 million
beneficiaries) (Board of Trustees, 1998, p.97 and 105; and Statistical
Supplement to the Social Security Bulletin, 1997, p. 167 and 183).


December 16, 1998

                                       4
               Table 1. -- Decline in Value of Accounts Due to Fees
                           After a 40-Year Work Career a


                    Type and level of fees       Percentage decline in
                                                  account value due to
                                                          fees

                Front-load fees (percent of new contributions) of:

                1 percent                                            1 %

                10 percent                                          10 %

                20 percent                                          20 %

                Annual management fees (percent of account
                balance) of:

                0.1 percent                                        2.2 %

                0.5 percent                                       10.5 %

                1.0 percent                                       19.6 %


              a. Assuming real wage growth of 2.1 percent and a
              real annual return on investments of 4 percent. With
              a larger difference between the rate of return and
              the wage growth rate, the charge ratio with annual
              management fees is slightly larger, and conversely.

      The costs of organizing the accounts depend on the level of services
provided with the accounts.    Examples of variation in the level of services
include variations in the frequency of deposits of withheld funds into the
accounts, the number of alternative investment options available, the frequency
of interfund transfers that are allowed, the frequency of reporting on
balances, the availability of information (e. g., an 800 number), the ease of
communication (e. g., the presence of people who can speak different
languages), the amount of education made available to workers.

      We begin by considering government-organized accounts that ha ve
relatively low costs and provide a relatively low level of services.   The
following description is taken from the NASI Panel Report, with a few
modifications.   In particular, using round numbers and reflecting diverse



December 16, 1998

                                             5
opinions, the Panel described a range of costs as being $25-50. I use a range
of $40-50, because I consider this range more plausibly centered.

I-B.    An Illustrative Low-Cost/Low-Services Plan

Transmission of funds. At present, employers pay Social Security taxes to the
Treasury shortly after each pay period, with a frequency depending on the size
of the employer.   However, these payments are not individually identified to
the Treasury; that is, the Treasury knows the employer but not the individual
employee associated with any tax payment.    Once a year, employers file W-2
forms that show the annual taxable earnings of individual workers, which are
needed for the eventual determination of benefits. Until 1978, firms reported
on individual earnings quarterly, but that frequency was reduced to hold down
costs, particularly for employers with few workers. 7   At present, of the 6.5
million employers that report to the Social Security Administration each year,
5.4 million file their W-2 reports on paper; these include more than 4 million
employers with 10 or fewer employees.

      While shifting to more frequent reporting might not be costly for
employers with electronic record keeping, doing so would represent a
significant cost for small businesses.      Therefore, in the low-cost /low-
services version of individual accounts, it is assumed that these taxpaying and
reporting practices of private firms would not change.     With this structure,
the Treasury could place the portion of aggregate payroll tax revenues that was
allocated for individual accounts in a separate trust fund, which would earn
interest. Such a fund could hold Treasury debt, but it might be better to hold
the estimated average portfolio, based on existing allocations and previous
earnings.    This would permit an allocation to individual accounts that
reflected individual portfolio choices (which would have been made before the
year began).   Moreover, the allocation to individual accounts might go more
smoothly in the capital market if assets were allocated to the accounts rather
than funds to buy assets.    Without a direct adjustment, there would be some
difference between the total investment returns of the separate trust fund and
the amounts to be credited to individual accounts.    This difference could be
averaged over time, or allocations could be adjusted each year, but something
would need to be done. However, the allocation could not recognize the actual
timing of payments by different workers; all workers would be treated as if the


    7
       Olsen and Salisbury, 1998, cite a 1972 estimate of the cost savings to
small employers from dropping quarterly reporting which, "adjusted to 1997
dollars, ... would amount to about $900 million a year."


December 16, 1998

                                         6
timing of their withheld tax payments were the same as the timing of aggregate
withholdings.

      Once a year, the Treasury would allocate the accumulated separate trust
fund to individual accounts.    To process almost all of the accounts without
greater cost than at present would probably require 7 to 9 months after the end
of the year in which the taxes had been collected. 8 More time would be required
for those cases in which there was a mismatch between the reported W-2
information and Social Security records, as well as for the self-employed, who
can file as late as April 15 (and later if they file for an extension). In a
system this large, even a small percentage of errors adds up to large number of
errors.   Currently, roughly 3 percent of W-2 forms (6 million cases) require
direct contact with employer or employee to match the W-2 and Social Security
records.    With the additional element of portfolio allocation, more errors
would have to be resolved.

Portfolio choice.     Under this structure, individuals would inform Social
Security about the division of their deposits among the available portfolios.
Workers might do this directly or through their employers, but in either case
it would have to be done before the start of the calendar year, with the
allocation unchanged from the previous year unless the worker requested
otherwise.   Presumably a chosen allocation would be unchanged until a worker
selected a different one. Thus a worker changing employers would not need to
report a portfolio choice to Social Security; only newly covered workers and
workers wanting to change their allocations would need to report.    Since many
new and changed allocations would be reported on paper if done by a firm or on
paper or by phone if done by workers, there are likely to be errors and a need
for both an error correction mechanism and a record-keeping function to provide
evidence for sorting out errors afterwards. 9    Some individuals, particularly
newly covered workers, would not have selected an allocation, and there would
have to be a default portfolio for these workers. This could be legislated to
be similar to the current portfolio of the Social Security Trust Fund, or the
average portfolio in individual accounts, or a prudently selected portfolio.
In addition to directing the flow of new deposits among different index funds,
workers would be allowed to shift existing account balances on a limited basis,

    8
       Mitchell (1998) reports that "only 70 percent of earnings were posted
within six months of the tax-year end in 1991."
    9
       As an example of the difficulties present in error correction, Olsen and
Salisbury (1998) cite unpublished SSA data (1998) that "approximately 10
percent of employers reporting wages to SSA go out of business each year."


December 16, 1998

                                       7
such as once a year.     Again the mechanism for allowing this would need a
record-keeping mechanism to deal with possible mistakes or claims of mistakes.
Similarly, information on the level of their accounts would be provided
directly to workers only once a year. Workers could infer the value of their
accounts by knowing the number of units held in each account and checking the
values of those units, which would likely be presented regularly in the media.

      To keep costs low, worker education about portfolio choices would be
limited to providing pamphlets on investment strategy.     It should be noted,
however, that experience with worker education in 401(k) plans shows that
considerably more substantial (and expensive) worker education is needed to
have a noticeable effect on workers' investment choices (Bayer, Bernheim, and
Scholz, 1996). Moreover, the covered population includes many people who have
not considered investment choices, making this low level of education an
important issue. As reported by Arthur Levitt (1998), SEC research indicates
that half the public do not know the difference between a stock and a bond. In
addition to this minimal outreach providing education, Social Security would
need to respond to questions asked by covered workers. Presumably this would
be a major source of cost, particularly reflecting the education and language
difficulties of part of the population.

      Handling and managing the aggregate funds would probably require only a
small management fee. Currently, the TSP is charged roughly 1 basis point by
the fund managers handling the bond and stock funds.

Benefits. The cost of paying retirement benefits from individual accounts must
also be considered.     Assuming annuitization were mandated, the least-cost
approach would be automatic annuitization of these funds according to rules set
by legislation, with the payments added to the payment of whatever defined
benefits were maintained.    Information would be provided to beneficiaries on
the source of each payment.

I-C.   Cost

      A starting place for estimating the additional costs to Social Security
for adding such a low cost/low services individual account plan is the portion
of the costs of the TSP that fall on the TSP (that is, excluding the costs that
fall on federal agencies that educate workers, answer questions and report
earnings records to the TSP and excluding the administrative costs coming from
the payment of annuities (which are paid by retirees and reflected in the price
of privately supplied annuities).   The TSP cost is currently roughly $20 per


December 16, 1998

                                       8
worker per year, although the costs were lower when fewer services were
provided.10   With 140 million accounts, a cost of $20 per worker would be an
aggregate cost of $2.8 billion per year. The startup costs of TSP in 1987 were
$5.25 million; if the startup costs were the same per participant, the 1998
cost would be $1.08 billion (Olsen and Salisbury, 1998).

      There are a number of issues involved in comparing TSP costs with the
incremental costs of the low-cost/low-services system just described. On the
one hand, the TSP provides better services (in frequency of reporting,
frequency of portfolio change, and frequency of deposit), must deal with loans
against workers’ accounts, and has fewer economies of scale.       In addition,
Social Security would have some economies of scope.      For example, a single
annual statement can contain information on both parts of the system.     These
factors tend to lower the costs of Social Security individual accounts relative
to TSP costs. On the other hand, there are factors that tend to raise the cost
of Social Security individual accounts relative to TSP costs.       First, many
costs of the TSP system are borne by federal agencies as employers.        They
handle the education of participants (providing more education than described
in the low cost plan), respond to their questions, enroll them in the plan,
transmit their portfolio choices electronically, and make employees whole when
reporting errors cause them to lose investment returns on their contributions.
If employers do not fill the roles they fill with the TSP, these costs will
likely fall on Social Security.     Many of the 140 million workers have more
limited education and less proficiency in English than is typical of federal
employees, and direct contact would be needed to handle the tasks above. For
example, providing account information over the internet costs 1 percent of the
cost of providing the information by an operator responding to an 800 number
and 4 percent of the cost of providing it by an automated 800 number ( Dickson,
1998). The Social Security population would make less use of the internet, on
average, than the 401(k) population. Second, Social Security covers many small
employers that report Social Security records on paper, rather than
electronically, which would add to the cost and risk of errors in record
keeping.    While error correction for earnings needs to be done for the
continuing defined benefit system, adjusting individual accounts for the same
errors would be an additional cost.     Also correction of errors in reported
portfolio choice would have additional costs.    Third, Social Security covers
part-time, intermittent, and highly mobile workers, many of whom have multiple

  The estimate for TSP is based on its 1997 balance sheet and includes :
administrative costs of $44.1 million; investment management fees of $2.3
million; and fiduciary insurance of $0.2 million, divided by 2.3 million
participants (Arthur Anderson LLP, 1998).


December 16, 1998

                                       9
employers, whereas federal employees have low labor mobility.    Fourth, there
are likely to be mandatory adjustments upon divorce, and/or account sharing
between spouses. Finally, there will be costs of providing benefits, whether
annuitized or paid out regularly, which are not part of TSP costs. A range of
$40-$50 per worker per year seems to me a reasonable rough order of magnitude
for a low cost/low services plan. A bit lower or somewhat higher can not be
ruled out. I note that this is a considerably higher cost than the 10.5 basis
points for accounts financed by 1.6 percent of payroll assumed by the Advisory
Council (1997).

      While the bulk of the costs would be fixed per account, their effect on
the accumulation in individual accounts would depend on how charges for these
costs were allocated across accounts of different sizes. The charges could be
proportional to deposits or to account sizes, implying that all workers with
the same portfolio choice would receive the same rate of return.
Alternatively, the charges could include a fixed component reflecting the
underlying structure of the costs, implying that workers with higher
accumulations would have better rates of return net of charges. The importance
of this choice depends on the dispersion in earnings for the covered
population. In 1996, 22 percent of workers covered by Social Security earned
less than $5,000, while 58 percent earned below $20,000 (Table 2). Presumably,
government-organized accounts would follow the approach of uniform percentage
charges.

      How would these added costs affect the retirement income of covered
workers? The relative significance of a cost range of $40-$50 per worker per
year would depend on the proportion of workers’ earnings being deposited in the
accounts and the size of their earnings. In 1997, mean Social Security taxable
earnings were approximately $23,000. If 2 percent of workers’ earnings went to
individual accounts, the mean deposit would be $460. A $40-$50 cost charged to
the account would be equal to 9-11 percent of the new contribution (equivalent
to a ?front load? charge) for the mean earner. Presumably the cost would rise
roughly in step with average wages, keeping the front load roughly constant in
percentage terms.    These calculations would be the same for workers at any
earnings level if charges were the same percentage for all workers. If charges
reflected some of the fixed costs of accounts, the load would be larger for low
earners and smaller for high earners.     The calculation for accounts financed
from larger or smaller percentages of payroll would be proportional.

       Another way to describe these charges is to ask what charge as a fraction
of   assets under management would cover these costs on a lifetime basis,


December 16, 1998

                                       10
assuming that the cost grew with average wages. Using Table 1, with 2 percent
accounts an annual $40-$50 change would be roughly equivalent to a 40-50 basis
point charge on assets under management over a 40-year career.

      We note that the distribution of earning of workers covered by Social
Security is very different from that of earnings of current 401(k)
participants. In contrast to Table 2, of workers participating in 401(k) plans
in 1993, only about 20 percent earned less than $20,000 (EBRI, 1994).



Table 2.     Percent of Workers with Social Security Earnings Below Specified
Levels
                            Wage and Salary Workers, 1996


                                Workers            With annual
                                                taxable earnings
                                                 of less than:


                       Number        Percent

                           29,554         22             $ 5,000

                           46,438         35                10,000

                           61,816         46                15,000

                           76,178         58                20,000

                           88,900         67                25,000

                           99,458         73                30,000

                           114,629        85                40,000

                           123,641        91                50,000

                           128,591        95                60,000

                           129,578        96                63,000

                           136,689      100                 63,001


                           Source:   Office of the Actuary, SSA.

I-D.   Level of Services


December 16, 1998

                                           11
      Costs would be raised by the provision of additional services, such as
more frequent reporting on accounts, more frequent deposits into accounts,
more frequently allowed reallocations of existing portfolios, more readily
available information on account balance, more resources devoted to answering
questions, or more worker education.   Thus a critical question is what level
of services would be a political equilibrium. A low cost/low services plan
would provide far fewer services than a typical 401(k) account with which
much of the public is familiar.    That might be one source of pressure for
more services.   In addition, unless voters make a good connection between
services and costs, there might be pressure for more services which Congress
might be prone to satisfy since Congress does not have to legislate a tax
increase to finance the higher services, the higher cost just coming out of
the individual accounts without explicit pricing by Congress. Thus a steady
rise in services and costs might well be the political equilibrium, as it has
been with the TSP.

I-E.   Payment of benefits

      The cost of paying retirement benefits from individual accounts also
depends on legislative decisions. Assuming annuitization were mandated, the
least-cost approach would be automatic annuitization of these funds according
to rules set by legislation, with the payments added to the payment of
whatever defined benefits were maintained. Information would be provided to
beneficiaries on the source of each payment. Such a system would add little
to the cost total costs of Social Security.         However, this method for
providing services might not be the political equilibrium.        An important
issue with mandated annuitization of accounts that are individually owned and
managed is the political stability of such a proposal as the public’s view of
Social Security shifts.   For example, would an individual with limited life
expectancy or extraordinary immediate needs be forced to annuitize? Indeed,
proposals for individual accounts sometimes propose alternatives, including
some degree of choice as to how benefits are received.      Another reason why
this might not be the political equilibrium is that it would involve
social Security's directly holding the assets that back the annuity promise.
Some of the reasons some people favor individual accounts have them favoring
private market provision of annuities, unless the backing is fully in indexed
Treasury debt.    First, we consider private market provided annuities for
government-organized accounts with mandated annuitization. Then we consider
possible alternatives for benefit provision.




December 16, 1998

                                      12
Annuity   provision.      Annuitization  of   individual   accounts  might  be
accomplished in three different ways.     First, the federal government could
decide what benefits to pay for given accumulations, with Social Security
bearing the risk inherent in projecting mortality and selecting a portfolio.
Second, the federal government could contract with private providers to
receive accounts from the government in return for paying the annuities.
These annuities would be priced on a group basis.      These payments could go
directly to beneficiaries or to the government for transmittal to
beneficiaries; in the latter case, the government would provide the payments
directly to beneficiaries along with defined benefits. The private providers
would bear the mortality and return risks, although there would be residual
risk that a private insurance company would be unable to meet its obligations
for annuity payments.      It would be undesirable and probably politically
untenable to put that residual risk on individuals, particularly those late
in life.     Therefore, the government should absorb that residual risk.
Currently, insurance companies receive oversight from state governments, not
the federal government; with such a residual risk for the federal government,
there would be a call for federal oversight instead of or in addition to
state oversight.     Third, individuals could be left free to contract with
insurance companies on their own, purchasing annuities from their accounts.
This approach would employ individual rather than group purchase of
annuities.   In insurance markets generally, group products are considerably
less expensive than individual products.     This outcome reflects both lower
costs for insurance companies in dealing with groups and greater competition
for large group accounts than for smaller individual accounts.      Costs with
the third approach would be considerably higher than with either of the other
two.   The costs of private market annuitization are discussed elsewhere at
this conference (Poterba and Warshawsky, 1998); see also Mitchell, Poterba,
Warshawsky and Brown, (forthcoming).

      Like many insurance products, annuities are offered far more cheaply on
a group basis than on an individual basis.        In order to have private
provision on a group basis with a large national program some mechanism would
be needed. One issue is the sheer size of the program, calling for the use
of multiple groups and multiple providers, rather than a single provider of
annuities for all retirees. If multiple groups are used, then, to preserve
as much of the advantage of groups purchase as possible, the government needs
to allocate people to different groups, rather than allowing the market to
form the groups (Diamond, 1992).       Since there is little reason for a
geographic concentration of benefit recipients, people could be allocated to
different groups randomly, giving everyone roughly the same opportunities,


December 16, 1998

                                      13
which could be adjusted by cross-subsidization between groups receiving
slightly different bids. While such group provision is likely to be somewhat
more expensive than government provision provided the same portfolio were
held for backing for the annuity promises, there is probably not a great deal
of difference in cost.     What is likely to be more of an issue is the
determination of benefits. With private provision, the political outcome is
more likely to be to accept the prices offered by the market.            With
government provision, there may be pressures for intervention when the
pricing implied by mortality projection and current interest rates involves a
drop in benefits.

Benefit alternatives.   Proposals take three different forms with regard to
allowing choice about retirement income.       Some proposals allow lump-sum
withdrawals, leaving the worker free to choose the extent of annuitization of
that portion, whatever rules apply to the remaining balances.           While
providing a lump sum is not expensive to Social Security, retirees who do
want to annuitize are then left with the private annuities market in which to
annuitize.     Private-market   annuitization on an individual basis is
considerably more expensive than is provision of retirement benefits by
Social Security, making this option costly for those who might annuitize.
Those who did not annuitize would be bearing the risk of outliving their
retirement wealth.    An intermediate position is to give workers a choice
between annuitization and periodic withdrawal (monthly, for example), with a
limit on the size of the allowed withdrawal to limit the risk of outliving
the retirement wealth.   Other proposals mandate annuitization of the entire
accumulation.   An important issue with mandated annuitization of accounts
that are individually owned and managed is the political stability of such a
proposal as the public’s view of Social Security shifts. For example, would
an individual with limited life expectancy or extraordinary immediate needs
be forced to annuitize?     Moreover, with mandated annuitization, the issue
remains of the extent to which any mandate is for inflation-adjusted
annuities and/or for joint and survivor annuities for married couples.

I-F. Conclusion. While individual accounts and annuitized benefits could be
provided at a cost of around $40-50 per year, a critical question is what the
political equilibria would be for the level of services during accumulation
and for the structure of benefit provision after retirement. Cost estimates
need to recognize the uncertainty in what will be legislated for the
accounts.

II.   Privately organized accounts


December 16, 1998

                                     14
      To consider the charges for government-organi zed accounts, we followed
three steps. First we described a level of services that is a candidate to
be provided if there are government-organized accounts. Second, we estimated
costs for that plan, noting that additional services increase costs.      And
third, we suggested that the costs would be allocated to different workers in
proportion to either deposits or account balances, or some combination.    To
consider privately-organized accounts we discuss the level of services that
might be provided and how the costs differ from those with government-
organized accounts.   In addition, we need to consider the issues raised by
competition among private firms.    In doing this, we shall keep in mind a
realistic picture of competitive markets, not an idealized one.       Charges
differ from the costs identified because of marketing costs and markups
(which interact in equilibrium).

II-A. Deposit of funds.

      There are three methods of deposit of funds to consider. In parallel
to the low cost/low services government-organized plan described above, we
consider a system where the government continues to collect all of taxes and
transmits them once a year to private financial firms, with workers directly
informing the government as to which private firm to use.         Second, we
consider having employers directly transmit the funds to financial firms.
Third, we consider direct deposit by workers, keying off a tax credit.    We
need to keep in mind costs that fall on all three players in this scenario -
workers, employers, and government.

      If the government transmits the funds once a year to firms, then there
are some additional costs for government beyond having the government
transmit the funds to itself. The actual transmission is not likely to have
significant costs, but there are additional steps.   Workers must inform the
government as to the destination of the funds. There is a major design issue
at this stage.   Is a worker restricted to keeping his or her account at a
single financial institution or are workers allowed to have accounts at
several institutions? If it is the former (as in Chile) then the government
needs to enforce this consistency. When a worker, particularly a worker with
a new employer, selects a financial institution, the government needs to
check for consistency with the location of the existing account.      With a
centralized deposit plan this is readily doable.      Without a centralized
system, restricting workers to a single account is probably not feasible and
we would have, as in Australia, a problem of many very small accounts,


December 16, 1998

                                     15
particularly as some low earners might start many accounts. This will be a
problem for the workers who start multiple accounts in the absence of
regulatory restrictions and/or subsidies since the earnings on small accounts
would not cover the costs of maintaining them.      If firms are required to
charge all accounts the same percentage amounts (and to accept all workers),
this cross-subsidization of multiple accounts is part of the cost for
everyone. In Australia, this is a significant problem and is one reason for
preferring centralized transmission of funds.     We assume that workers are
restricted to a single account each. Otherwise costs per account need to be
multiplied by accounts per worker to estimate costs per worker.

      With government transmission of funds, the costs include verifying and
correcting mistakes in the choice of firm, verifying and correcting mistakes
on the deposits in financial firms (e. g., do the Social Security number and
name in the firm's records match those of the incoming deposit information),
and overseeing transfers between firms. It seems plausible that many workers
would shift financial firms from time to time. In Chile, turnover is roughly
20 percent per year.        Transmission would not cost much since all
communication between government and firms would be electronic and would be
likely to be accurate.    The problems would come from the errors at either
end.

      Direct deposits from employers would be significantly more expensive
for both employers and financial firms.       Financial firms would have to
process many paper transactions (duplicating the same paper transactions
being handled by SSA) and would have to deal with many employers separately.
Similarly, employers would have higher costs, whatever the frequency of
transactions, from dealing with many financial firms as well as with
government. In Chile there are a small number of AFPs so the process is not
so bad.   In the US there would be a vast array.      While there would arise
private clearing house arrangements (which have not arisen in Chile) to help
particularly small firms, this is another layer of costs and markups.
Moreover there would be the usual tensions in a naturally increasing-returns
activity between costs and competitive pressures depending on how many firms
survived as clearing houses. Financial firms would still have the problem of
communicating with both workers and fund transmitter (employers rather than
government) which adds to costs.    Since this seems to add significantly to
costs and has little in the way of benefits that are apparent to me in the US
context, I will not consider such transmissions further.    While there would
be some economies of scope from combining these accounts with 401(k )s, it is
important to recognize that only a fraction of workers have 401(k)s, that


December 16, 1998

                                     16
regulations covering 401(k)s are likely to be different from those covering
mandated accounts (requiring separate record-keeping), and that it is
unlikely that workers would be required to use only the options provided by
the employer that provides their 401(k)s.   So while there is an advantage
here, it is unlikely to offset the sizable cost disadvantage of this
approach.

      Direct deposit by individual workers has the advantage for financial
firms that the firms are only dealing with a single entity, although they
would still need to keep the government informed, as with mutual funds
currently.   The agent with whom they must communicate anyway is the one
making the deposit and with the job of checking that the deposit is properly
handled. With many workers without financial sophistication, the government
is likely to play a larger role in policing accuracy than is true for dealing
with voluntary accounts with financial firms currently.    This would follow
from both the difference in populations from those currently dealing with
financial firms handling retirement savings and from the presence of a
mandate. In addition, deposits would be overwhelmingly on paper, making for
considerably higher costs and error rates than with a single electronic
transmission from the government. This seems to me likely to be noticeably
more expensive than government deposit. Moreover, it involves issues of some
workers filing for refundable tax credits who would not otherwise file taxes.
So I will do the analysis based on government collection of taxes and
transmission to private firms.

II-B.   Alternative investments.

      One of the major arguments in favor of privately-organized accounts is
the presence of a wider choice of investment options.      In particular, one
would expect that all three of the banking, insurance, and mutual fund
industries would be active participants in this market.     Banks would offer
CDs and a vast array of locations. Insurance companies would offer accounts
with insurance features attached to them.    Mutual funds would offer managed
as well as indexed funds, and possibly individually designed portfolios.

      Several issues arise from this array.     One is the currently diverse
regulation of these different institutions. In particular, mutual funds and
banks have different federal regulatory agencies while insurance companies
are regulated at the state level.        Presumably this would change in a
significant way if we had privately-organized accounts.




December 16, 1998

                                     17
      A second major issue is how to think about the value of this diversity,
as well as the increased diversity just within mutual funds. As economists,
we normally consider increased options to be advantageous, provided that the
increased options do not come with adverse price changes as part of
adjustment to a new equilibrium.    This need not be the case here for two
reasons, both related to the purpose of and motivation for Social Security.
First, the purpose is to have retirement income.          Insofar as workers
(implicitly) trade off current services (including possibly kickbacks) for a
lower rate of return (and so lower retirement incomes), the increase in
options in privately-organized accounts are cutting against the primary
purpose of the mandate.   Second, insofar as the mandate comes from a concern
that individuals do not do a good job of looking out for themselves when it
comes to retirement planning, it seems right to recognize that many people
will not do a good job of choosing a financial intermediary for retirement
savings as well. The current financial market is marked, as are almost all
retail markets, by a diversity of prices for similar, sometimes seemingly
identical products.    Some people end up with high cost options.       Since
individual accounts would be an ongoing relationship, with little at stake in
any particular month, workers, particularly low earners, would not have much
incentive to stay on top of the changing array of alternative investments and
alternative charges. In the absence of detailed regulations limiting pricing
alternatives, we might see a dizzying array of prices and arrangements in
this market.

      In this setting, it is important to move beyond an "average" worker and
to recognize the allocation of workers across different options and the
relationship between different worker characteristics, particularly earnings
level and options selected.     Thus it would not be an adequate analytical
approach to consider the availability of some low-cost option as the basis
for evaluation, with an assumption that everyone choosing some higher cost
option is gaining from making that choice.    Both positive political economy
and normative considerations suggest that this would be a tightly regulated
market, with both the benefits and costs of tight regulation.

Comparing costs.   In some settings, private firms have lower cost functions
than the government because they have access to better technologies, are able
to generate better incentives for workers or can pay lower wages, perhaps by
avoiding unionization. The potential for these opportunities depends on the
nature of the task being fulfilled.      As Wilson (1989) has argued, some
bureaucratic tasks have outputs that are easy to measure and so it is easier
for a government bureaucracy do a good job.    Current Social Security is in


December 16, 1998

                                     18
this category.    The tasks are well defined (collect money, keep records,
distribute money, provide information). Indeed the costs of Social Security
are very low compared to private firms doing similar activities.     Moreover
this is not a special US outcome, but a common feature of many national
pension systems in advanced countries.         (On costs in other advanced
countries, see Mitchell, 1998.)    It seems to me that organizing a TSP type
system has similar characteristics from the perspective of ease of
bureaucratic management. I would not expect private firms to have lower cost
functions than the federal government.    In addition to considering the cost
functions, there are issues of returns to scale, since the government system
would be vastly larger than the average private system. While some firms may
have economies of scope from combining their share of Social Security
individual accounts with other fund management activities, Social Security
has economies of scope as well. I conclude by suggesting that record-keeping
and investment management costs are likely to be higher with privately-
organized than with government-organized accounts.

Charges. If the world were like an idealized competitive market, then all we
would need to know is costs, since charges would equal costs, in the absence
of regulation.     But observation of other countries that have national
(mandated or voluntary) privately-organized individual accounts (Chile,
Argentina, UK) makes it clear that this model does not apply.     Similarly,
consideration of voluntary individual capital market in the US shows
considerable advertising expenses and charges that do not have the structure
of costs.

      There are two aspects to thinking about equilibrium in such a market.
What will be the structure of charges and what will be the levels of pricing
parameters in the structure . Currently, the most common bases for charges in
mutual funds is proportional to the amount in an account or a combination of
the amount in an account and the amounts being deposited - in 1997, load
funds accounted for more than half of all new sales of equity funds ( Rea and
Reid, 1997). The market has higher charges for people with lower accounts,
minimum account balances, and some flat charges.      It is plausible that,
without regulations on the structure of charges, mandatory accounts would see
a similar structure. I am not aware of analyses as to why this structure has
evolved.   I suspect that a charge in basis points is less psychologically
aversive than one in dollars - it is harder to think about how much it
actually is costing.   Since the advantage of having "better" management of
funds increases with the size of the funds, charges that vary in this way may
take advantage of the way charges will be viewed and the extent to which


December 16, 1998

                                     19
investors will shop and switch.         Presumably this is a market with
considerable inertia as to switching, even though switching costs are very
low (except from firms that have back loads or to firms that have front loads
on transfers).

      Looking across different portfolios, it does seem to be the case that
those funds with higher costs have higher charges, but there is considerable
spread in charges within portfolio categories, indeed even within index fund
categories that are tracking the same index. Spreads in prices for the same
services are widespread phenomena in retail markets, and suggestive of
imperfections in perceiving and acting on alternatives that exist in the
market.   This suggests that, without regulation to the contrary, charges on
average will be higher (in percentage terms) for accounts which are financed
with a smaller fraction of taxable payroll. It also suggests that charges on
average will be higher (in percentage terms) for lower earners than higher
earners.

      This view of markets as having markups and variation primarily because
of consumer lethargy is clearly different from a perspective that consumers
are choosing the best option in an array of competitive firms that offer
different qualities of services at different prices.    It is the case that
firms offer different services in terms of the nonreturn aspects of services.
But I find it hard to accept the competitive market model.     This would be
particularly an issue with mandatory accounts where people may not know how
services vary across firms nor how to value such services. In particular, it
is very difficult to assess whether some portfolio managers are better than
other portfolio managers , even if one understands the concept of a risk-
return tradeoff.    Given the difficulty in doing this with sophisticated
analysis, most workers would have considerably greater difficulty, even
though Consumer Reports would be giving ratings to the small fraction of the
public that would follow such information.    I conclude that equilibrium is
likely to have substantial markups, together with the selling costs that are
encouraged by such markups.

      This possibility has led some analysts to call for a cap on allowable
charges for handling privately-organized accounts.     Our experience with
regulation of prices leaves it unclear how well such regulation would work.
In addition, caps would be somewhat difficult to enforce.     Some types of
accounts (e. g., CD's) do not have separate charges. Currently charges from
brokerage fees are treated separately from other charges.    And costs are




December 16, 1998

                                     20
different for different types of       accounts   (bond   vs.   stock,   domestic   vs.
international, index vs. managed).

Current examples.   One approach is to consider existing market alternatives
and their costs. While this might give some idea on average charges, it is
more difficult to consider the degree of matching of different workers with
different institutions. It also needs to be recognized that the average size
of accounts may well be different from any particular example and that the
population whose demand reactions affect pricing would be different.

      A key point is that individuals will be seeking out firms on an
individual basis. Thus quotations of charges made by financial firms on an
institutional basis, while relevant when considering costs with government-
organized accounts, seem to me irrelevant when considering privately-
organized accounts. We therefore need to consider the market for individual
choice or the market that deals with small firms. It is natural to look at 4
pieces of evidence.     What has happened in other national systems with
individual accounts organized individually .    What are charges for mutual
funds and other investment vehicles? What are charges with IRAs and 401(k )s?
It is also important to look at the entire market and not just the offerings
of one or a few firms. Since other papers in this volume also consider the
available information, I will be brief.

      Costs in Chile (which are front-load costs of roughly 15-20 percent )
are roughly equivalent to 75-100 basis points on accounts that are 10 percent
of taxable wages (which seems to me relevant since the labor costs of the
financial firms will resemble the average labor costs in an economy).
Argentina, with smaller accounts, has larger charges.      Mexico, which has
amounts put in the accounts by the government as well as amounts withheld
from workers have higher charges relative to the deposits of workers'
withholding, but lower charges relative to total deposits.            UK has
                                        11
considerably higher charges than Chile.

      Some people have argued that costs are high in Chile because of the
nature of regulation.   Regulations require uniform pricing for all workers,
preventing the formation of groups that might bargain for lower prices, with
an unclear implication for charges to the remaining population.   Regulation
on the structure of charges (only frontloads and only a combination of flat
and proportional charges) would not prevent competitive pressures, if they

    11
         For more details, see Diamond, 1998.


December 16, 1998

                                         21
are as in the idealized market, from keeping charges, on average, close to
costs, and so holding down the incentive for sales efforts. The high markups
over production costs and high fraction of costs devoted to sales suggest
that it is inherent in individually organized markets for this type of
product to have high markups. The similarity of costs in Chile to those in
markets without such price-structure regulations also suggests that the
details of the regulation are not the prime reason for the level of costs. 12

      A recent ICI study of equity mutual funds ( Rea and Reid, 1998)
argues that the average dollar invested in individual funds in 1997 was
charged around 149 basis points, not including any brokerage charges that go
with many of these products.     The calculation includes balanced and other
hybrid funds. This calculation includes both annual maintenance charges and
an annualization of front-load charges. 13  The study also reports that this
average charge has fallen from 225 basis points in 1980. The study does not
report the average size account, which would help for comparison with
individual Social Security accounts. 14

      I do not know what the implicit charges would be         with   bank   CDs.
Similarly, I have not looked into insurance company charges.

      I do not examine IRA and 40 1(k) charges - for discussions of the
literature, see Mitchell (1998) and Olsen and Salisbury (1998).    As they
note, some data sources (e. g., Form 5500) only report part of the charges

    12
        Australia has a mandate on firms, not workers. Thus evidence from the
large firm section of that economy do not seem relevant for the typical
proposal in the US.



    13
        The study argues for the importance of including front-loads since
roughly two-thirds of retail investors buy mutual funds through sources
offering load funds, load funds accounted for more than half of all new sales
of equity funds in 1997 and represented 60 percent of equity fund assets at the
end of 1997.     The study does not seem to deal with the complication in
annualizing front loads from the fact that the interest rate relevant for the
individual depends on the charging structure. I suspect this would not be a
significant change in the calculation, but it should be examined.
    14
       Mitchell (1998) reports on expense ratios without front-loads separately
for different types of mutual funds and does report on average account sizes.
For fiscal years ending in 1994-95, calculations show expense ratios varying
from .324 for equity index funds to 1.043 for growth funds and 1.250 for global
funds. From average account sizes, these translate into $67.9 for index funds
and $137.5-302.5 for the other funds.


December 16, 1998

                                      22
made by financial firms.   We need to recognize that both IRA and voluntary
accounts may well have lower costs than mandatory accounts because financial
firms deal only with the depositor in these cases, but would deal with both
the government and the individual with mandatory accounts.      On the other
hand, 401(k)s have considerable regulation for tax qualification and have
financial firms deal with both employers and employees. Thus the costs for
providing services to small firms may well be higher than with mandatory
accounts organized with direct government deposits.       Larger firms have
economies of scale and bargaining power in negotiating individual deals
rather than accepting a take-it-or-leave-it offer in the market - so their
charges and costs are probably not relevant for thinking about privately-
organized accounts.

      I see no reason to think the nature of equilibrium with privately-
organized individual accounts would be dramatically different from these
examples. The accounts would be smaller and the population dealing with the
financial community more diverse and less sophisticated on average.         I
suspect the costs for the typical worker choosing a mutual fund would be at
least 100 basis points with accounts from a large percentage of payroll, and
larger, possibly considerably larger, if we are considering accounts financed
with only 2 percent of payroll. I note that this is roughly consistent with
the 1 percent cost for accounts financed by 5 percent of payroll assumed by
the Advisory Council (1997).

Implications of charges. For example, with 100 basis points of accumulations
per year charged over a full career, and assuming the wage growth exceeds the
interest rate by 2%, the final accumulation in privately-organized accounts
would be reduced by 19.6%.    Other examples were reported in the Table 1.
Thus, privately-organized accounts are likely to deliver accumulations at
retirement that are at least 10-15 percent lower than could be delivered by
government-organized accounts, and quite possibly even lower.    In addition,
the provision of annuitization would be more difficult and would likely be
more expensive.

II-C.   Conclusion.   My conclusion is that privately-organized      individual
accounts are very expensive for satisfying the basic purpose         of Social
Security. Since I think that government-organized accounts can be   reasonably
insulated from political interference, that the increased choice    that would
be present with privately-organized accounts may be as likely to    be harmful
to the worker as helpful, and that greatly increased regulation     is likely,
with the uncertainties created by the introduction of a new         regulatory


December 16, 1998

                                     23
structure, I consider privately-organized   accounts   to   be   dominated   by
government-organized accounts.




December 16, 1998

                                   24
Appendix A

                    Tasks in Implementing Individual Accounts

This list first considers tasks in implementing government-organized
accounts, and then notes tasks that would be different with privately-
organized accounts.


Government-Organized Accounts

This list assumes that contributions are received throughout the year, and
are linked to individual taxpayers after the end of the year, when W-2s are
filed. It also assumes that the government receives the money, arranges for
investment, recordkeeping and benefit payments. An asterisk (*) indicates
tasks now done by the Social Security Administration or Treasury, or similar
tasks. In some cases, the tasks become more complex because of differences
in timing or other concerns.


1.   Collect Contributions from Employers
     a.      Receive and record money from employers shortly after each
             payday.*
     b.      Reconcile amounts received with quarterly 941 and annual W-2
             reports to detect missing or discrepant payments .*
     c.      Segregate account contributions from other taxes paid by
             employers.

2.   Invest Funds
     a.      Select a private fund manager(s).
     b.      Invest new contributions during the year according to government
             policy.
     c.      Designate a default investment portfolio for individuals not
             selecting one.
     d.      Report investment returns to the recordkeeper - annual average
             for new contributions, monthly/quarterly for account balance
             valuations.

3. Credit Workers' Accounts with New Contributions
    a.      Find missing or inconsistent reports from employers by
            reconciling annual and quarterly reports and correspond with
            employers to fix it.*
    b.      Record new contributions to individual accounts. Identify
            discrepancies between W-2s and SSN files and correspond with
            employers or employees to fix mistakes.
    c.      Set up new information system of records needed to administer
            accounts: workers' ID, portfolio choice, effective date of
            choice, interfund transfers and date of interfund transfer, death
            beneficiary designation, marital status, spouse ID, and spousal
            consent code (depending on policy), current address.




December 16, 1998

                                       25
4.   Enroll Workers and Get Portfolio Choice (and Other New Information )

Depends on employer involvement (either mandatory or voluntary).   Options
include: (i) ongoing requirement that employers enroll new employees and
report portfolio choices annually (on W-2s or W-4s); (ii) one-time employer
responsibility to enroll workers in the plan and send data to the record
keeper; (iii) do not involve employers -- deal directly with workers through
1040s, correspondence, phone, website or in person.

5.    Educate and Communicate with Workers
     a.             "Wholesale" tasks (such as in the TSP) include developing
              educational brochures, videos, training courses for employers to
              use to enroll workers.
      b.      "Retail" tasks (performed by employers in the TSP) include one-
              on-one communication with workers -- via Social Security (or
              IRS?) field offices, an 800 number, website.

6.    Pay Death Benefits
     a.       Determine policy for death benefits including registry of state
              laws on inheritance rights and rules for determining
              jurisdictions, if relevant.
     b.       Set rules of evidence for determining correct death beneficiary
              and maintain record system to support it .*
     c.       Resolve competing claims when they occur .*

7.   Implement Policy on Treatment of Accounts at Divorce

Possible policies include: ( i) let courts decide; (ii) automatically divide
50/50 changes in account balances that occurred during the marriage; and
(iii) automatically divide contributions each year between spouses.
Depending on policy, tasks include:

     a.       Set policy for treatment of QDRO (qua lified domestic relations
              order from court).
     b.       Maintain historical records that can be used to retroactively
              combine and split two individuals' change in account balances for
              a period of years or each year, link accounts of husbands and
              wives and transact a split.
     c.       Set up systems for verifying marital status and spouse ID, and
              policies for resolving disputes, discrepancies, and informing
              each party of transactions made on their accounts.

8.   Pay Retirement Benefits
     a.      Determine policies abo ut nature of withdrawal options.
     b.      With annuities, determine whether government or insurance
             companies will: (i) assume mortality and investment risk; and/or
             (ii) administer the annuities.
     c.      If insurance companies, determine policy for their involvement --
             e.g., standards for participation, competitive bidding for group
             contract, some sort of reinsurance.
     d.      Policy on joint-and-survivor annuities and beneficiary
             designation for non-annuitized funds (or period certain
             annuities).


December 16, 1998

                                        26
9. Retirement Benefit Counseling (assuming a number of withdrawal options
are available)
    a.      Explain to retirees what the choices are and what terms mean and
            run scenarios of how different choices would affect the
            particular retiree and spouse.
    b.      Set policies (if any) on who will provide the information and who
            will pay for it.

10. Early Access (if loans or withdrawals end up being allowed for
"hardship.")
    a.       Determine hardship rules and how they will be applied.
    b.       If loans, set up systems for how they will be repaid.


Privately-Organized Accounts: Additional Tasks

This list assumes that funds are withheld and paid by employers to the
government (as they are now) and that employers report annually on W-2s the
amounts belonging to each worker. The government's tasks in collecting
contributions would be the same as in government organized accounts.

When W-2s are in, the government would send each worker's funds to a
financial institution chosen by the worker. The financial institution would
be responsible for all further dealing with the account holder.   It would be
responsible for: investing funds, crediting workers accounts with new
contributions, getting information about the worker's portfolio choice and
other data needed to pay benefit to the worker or his/her beneficiaries,
educate and communicate with workers about investment choices, pay death
benefits, implement policy on treatment of divorce, pay retirement benefits
under applicable rules, and provide retirement benefit counseling. It would
also be responsible for enforcing whatever policy applies with regard to
early access.

New issues and tasks that arise under this model:

a. Government would maintain a default plan or default institution for
workers who fail to designate a financial institution.

b. Government would set rules on financial institutions eligible to hold
Social Security accounts .*

c. If workers would be required to hold their funds in only one institution
at a time, government and financial institutions would put systems in place
to ensure that happened.

d. Once money is sent to the financial institution, it would be responsible
for receiving portfolio choices from workers, sorting out mistakes and making
employees whole under whatever rules apply.

e. Government policies might regulate fee arrangements of financial
institutions, terms on which accounts are accepted by institutions, and
possibly, marketing practices.

f.   Government policies might regulate allowable portfolios.

December 16, 1998

                                       27
g. Government would monitor institutions' compliance with whatever rules
apply to the accumulation and distribution of account funds .*

h. Auditing, trustee, legal and related functions, to the extent not
included above.




December 16, 1998

                                     28
Appendix B

We do the calculation in continuous time. Consider a worker who earns ws at
time s, assumed to grow exponentially at rate g:

(1)   ws = w0egs.

The tax rate on these earnings is t. There is a proportional front-load
charge of f, so that t(1-f)w 0egs is deposited at time s. This accumulates
until retirement age T. The accumulation occurs at rate r-c, where r is the
rate of return and c is the management charge per dollar under management.
Thus deposits made at time s have accumulated to t(1-f)w 0egse(r-c)(T-s) at time T.
The total accumulation at time T is the integral of this expression from time
0 until time T. Integrating, the accumulation depends on f and c and (for
g+c unequal to r) is equal to:

(2)   A[f, c] = t(1-f)w 0e(r-c)T{e(g+c-r)T - 1}/(g+c-r).

For g+c=r, the accumulation satisfies

(3)   A[f, c] = t(1-f)w 0e(r-c)TT.

For r unequal to both g+c and g, the ratio of the accumulation to what it
would be without any charges satisfies:

(4)   AR[f, c] = A[f, c]/A[0, 0]
               = (1-f)e-cT{(e(g+c-r)T - 1)/(e (g-r)T - 1)}{(g-r)/(g+c-r)}.

The charge ratio is one minus the accumulation ratio:

(5)   CR[f, c] = 1 - AR[f, c].

Sample calculations are shown in the table.




December 16, 1998

                                           29
REFERENCES

Advisory Council on Social Security, 1997. 1994-1996 Advisory Council on
Social Security. Findings and Recommendations: Volume I and II.

Arthur Anderson LLP.   1998.   “Financial Statements of the Thrift Savings Fund
- 1997 and 1998.”

Bayer, P., Bernheim, B.D., Scholz, J. 1996. "The Effects of Financial
Education in the Workplace: Evidence from a Survey of Employers," National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper, 5655.

Board of Trustees, Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance and Disability
Insurance Trust Funds. 1998. 1998 Annual Report. Washington, DC: U.S.
Government Printing Office.

Diamond, P. 1992.   “Organizing the Health Insurance Market.”     Econometrica,
60: 1233-1254.

Diamond, P., 1998, “Economics of Social Security Reform.” In Arnold, R.D.,
M.J. Graetz, and A.H. Munnell (eds.), Framing the Social Security Debate :
Values, Politics, and Economics , Washington DC: Brookings Institution for the
National Academy of Social Insurance.

Dickson, Joel, 1998, personal communication.

Edey Malcolm, and John Simon, 1998 Australia's Retirement Income System, in
Fedlstein, 1998.

Employee Benefit Research Institute. 1994. “Employment-Based Retirement
Income Benefits: Analysis of the April 1993 Current Population Survey.” EBRI
Special Report SR-25/Issue Brief no. 153.

Levitt, Arthur, 1998, Speech at Harvard University, October 19.

Mitchell, Olivia, 1998, Administrative Costs in Public and Private Retirement
Systems, in Feldstein, Martin (ed.), Privatizing Social Security , National
Bureau of Economic Research, University of Chicago Press.

Mitchell, O., Poterba, J., Warshawsky, M, and Brown, J.    forthcoming. “New
Evidence on the Money?s Worth of Individual Annuities.”    American Economic
Review.

National Academy of Social Insurance, 1998, Evaluating Issues in Privatizing
Social Security, Report of the Panel on Privatization of Social Insurance,
Washington: National Academy of Social Insurance (available at www.nasi.org).

Olsen, Kelly A., and Dallas L. Salisbury, 1998, Individual Social Security
Accounts: Issues in Assessing Administrative Feasibility and Costs, EBRI
Special Report SR-34 and Issue Brief 203, Washington: EBRI.

Poterba, J., and M. Warshawsky. 1998. The Costs of Annuitizing Retirement
Payouts from Individual Accounts. This volume.


December 16, 1998

                                        30
Rea, John D., and Brian K. Reid, 1998, Trends in the Ownership Cost of Equity
Mutual Funds, Washington: Investment Company Institute Perspective.

Social Security Administration, 1997, Annual Statistical Supplement to the
Social Security Bulletin.

Wilson, James Q., 1989, Bureaucracy, Basic Books, Inc.




December 16, 1998

                                       31
