I.     Introduction

       In 1994, The Nobel Prize in Economics was awarded to the game theorist John Nash,

who, in the early 1950s, formulated elegant mathematical models for the strategic interaction

among small numbers of decision-makers in situations involving elements of both conflict and

cooperation. The “Nash equilibrium” remains the most widely used equilibrium concept in game

theory. Soon after his pioneering work was published, it was discovered that Nash suffered from

schizophrenia. In the last thirty-five years, Nash has done little productive work, living in the care

of hospitals, family, and friends. Many doubted that Sweden’s Royal Society would award the

Nobel Prize to a person with severe mental illness. When they did, Ariel Rubenstein, himself a

prominent game theorist, expressed in a New York Times interview his admiration for Nash’s

work and his pleasure that the Royal Society acknowledged by their decision that there was

nothing disqualifying about mental illness. Schizophrenia was, in Rubenstein’s words, “just like

cancer.”

       Public attitudes about mental illness have changed since the 1950s when Nash became ill,

and the mentally ill have in many ways been integrated into the mainstream of the health care

system. The fact remains, however, that in terms of public and private policy in the U.S., mental

illness and substance abuse are not treated the same as other illnesses. In comparison to physical

illness, governments pay for more of mental health and substance abuse (MH/SA) care, and

private insurance pays for less. Treatment for mental and addictive disorders is often involuntary.

This is rare for physical illness. The public mental health care system has had quality problems

that are regarded as scandalous. The public system in mental health has a role as protector of

public safety. When efforts have been made to reform the health care sector in the U.S., mental

health and substance abuse care are usually handled separately. President Clinton’s proposed


                                                  1
health care reform in 1993, to take the most recent example, did not include long-term treatment

for mental illness in the required services to be offered in health plans.

           This chapter is concerned with the economics of mental illness and mental health care.

Following convention, we will use the term “mental illness” to include substance abuse disorders

such as drug or alcohol abuse and dependence. Mental health has been an active and distinct

subfield of health economics for some time. Though mental health economics can claim no

special methodology, it has its own conferences, training programs, and journals.1 Mental health

economics is like health economics only more so: uncertainty and variation in treatments are

greater; the assumption of patient self-interested behavior is more dubious; response to financial

incentives such as insurance is exacerbated; the social consequences and external costs of illness

are more formidable. We will elaborate on these statements and consider their implications

throughout this chapter. “Special characteristics” of mental illness, and the persons with mental

illness, will be identified and related to the observance of institutions paying for and providing

mental health care. When Pauly (1988) asked, “Is Health Care Different?”, he was contrasting

health care with the rest of the economy. Here we explore the question: “Is mental health care

different from health care?”

           The first reaction for many people is to answer “yes” to this question, and give the reason

as stigma. Literally, a “mark” or a “stain,” stigma sets persons with mental illness apart as

undesirable. Nunnally (1961) found that regardless of the respondent's education, the mentally ill

were regarded as dangerous, unpredictable, and socially of little value. In one of the few studies

comparing attitudes over time, Matas et al. (1986) analyzed treatment of mental illness in the


1
    Much of this is due to support from the National Institute of Mental Health in various forms. The late Carl Taube
    was the official of the NIMH who was most responsible for promoting the field of economics of mental health.



                                                           2
press, concluding that in spite of some “minor, cosmetic changes,” overall, “content and attitudes

had changed little.”2       One hopes that national educational campaigns such as the NIMH’s

Depression Awareness initiative have had some effect, but the degree is hard to judge. It seems

safe to say that some part of the public's fear of the mentally ill remains irrational and misplaced.3

The historical importance of stigma calls attention to the salient point, important to the rational as

well as the irrational side of the story, that differential treatment of mental health care for

purposes of policy will be driven not just by differences in the disease and its treatment (e.g.,

demand is more responsive), but differences in the people who have the disease (e.g., they are

more costly in other ways). This chapter, using methods of economics, will be concerned with the

more “rational” reasons why mental illness is treated differently than other illnesses, without

claiming that this is the full picture.

        The core issues in mental health and health economics include:

    •   Adverse Selection and Moral Hazard: These are traditional concerns in health economics.
        We will argue that these features of insurance markets apply with particular force for
        mental health care.

    •   Non-contractable provider actions. The term “noncontractable” was not in use when
        Arrow wrote his overview of health economics, but he clearly had this in mind when he
        discussed the ways health markets adapt to ensure that physicians put sufficient effort into
        caring for patients. Maintaining effort in a managed care environment is a problem for all
        areas of care. We will argue that it may be especially problematic in mental health due to
        the severity of selection-related incentives. At the same time it appears that special
        institutions are arising (a la Arrow) that may be capable of contending with some of these
        unwanted consequences.


    •   Externalities: Mental disorders are often chronic conditions that create substantial
        disability and strike people early in life (ages 15 to 30). These illnesses are correlated with

2
  Prejudice against the mentally ill on the part of the nominating committee for fellowship in the prestigious
   Econometric Society thwarted Nash’s induction in 1988, according to Nasar (1998). Two years later the
   nominating committee was bypassed and Nash was elected directly by the members in an overwhelming vote.
3
  Link and Cullen (1986) demonstrate that the more people have direct contact with persons with mental illness,
   the less dangerous they are regarded, supporting this conclusion.


                                                        3
       other costly social problems: unemployment, crime, violence, and homelessness. Many of
       these problems have consequences for others as well as the person with the illness. For
       this reason government has historically taken a large role in provision and regulation of
       some forms of mental health care.


       The mental health sector contains institutions, professions, and illnesses that are unfamiliar

to policy analysts and even to specialists in health economics. As such, policy has often been

applied to the institutions of the mental health sector as an afterthought to a broad health policy

decision. We hope to introduce some of the special institutional features in MH/SA to a health

economics audience and to review some of the empirical research that has been focused on mental

health issues. In addition, we will review some of the policy trade-offs facing those interested in

remedying market failures in the mental health sub-sector.

       This chapter is organized into six main sections.         Following this introduction is a

description of the institutional context within which mental health and substance abuse care is

provided. This includes a discussion of mental and addictive illnesses, their consequences, and the

organizations involved in financing and delivery of care. The third section focuses on issues of

moral hazard and rationing of care. Evidence on the impact of benefit design and payment

policies is assessed. A general framework for analyzing rationing of treatment within managed

care is presented, which allows us to evaluate the case for “parity” for mental health in health care

payment systems within a managed care environment. Adverse selection is addressed in the

fourth section. The rationing model developed in the previous section is applied to selection-

related behavior by managed health care plans. The reasons why mental health might be more

vulnerable to selection-driven market features are set out. Risk adjustment and behavioral health

carve-outs are examined as institutions aimed at countering selection-related incentives. The fifth




                                                 4
section focuses on externalities and the role of state government in the delivery of mental health

and substance abuse care. We offer some concluding observations in the sixth and final section.



II.    The Institutional Context

       The nature of mental illness, the persons with mental illness, use of treatment services, and

the supply side of the market differ from the general health sector.

       A. Mental Illness and Persons with Mental Illness

       World-wide, mental illness is among the most prevalent and disabling illnesses. In the

U.S., approximately 29.5% of the population is estimated to experience some diagnosable mental

or addictive disorder in a 12-month period (Kessler et al., 1993). Some diseases have been found

to be roughly similar in high and middle income countries when the same epidemiologic

assessments are applied (Weissman et al., 1995). However, comparative epidemiological studies

show considerable variation in illness patterns across nations. For example, rates of depression

are estimated to be considerably lower in Puerto Rico than in the U.S. or Switzerland. Substance

abuse is much higher (roughly 4 times higher) in the U.S. and Puerto Rico than in Switzerland

(Swendsen et al., 1997).

       The most severe mental disorders, schizophrenia, manic depression, and some forms of

major depression affect about 4% of the population each year and are very disabling. Within this

group are the psychoses, illnesses associated with severe disturbances in cognitive functions.

These disorders are persistent illnesses that tend to have initial onsets relatively early in life (ages

15 to 30). Individuals with these serious illnesses most often suffer for relatively long periods

(APA, 1995). Severe forms of mental illness reduce an individual’s ability to function in the

consumer role, and interfere with the maintenance and creation of social networks (family and


                                                   5
friends) weakening the connection with others who might serve as caregivers or proxy decision-

makers (Segal, Silverman, and Baumohl, 1989).

        Effective treatments, primarily drug therapy, reduce symptoms and improve functioning

for all of these illnesses. Existing treatments contend with but do not “cure” mental illness, and

persons with these illnesses require long-term monitoring and treatment as well as periods of

intensive services such as hospitalization. Many require extended periods of assistance with

housing and social support, contributing to the need for a public risk in caring for this most

severely ill group.

        Mental and addictive disorders are costly to society both in terms of direct spending on

treatment as well as in terms of the losses sustained as a consequence of the disorders. Spending

on mental health and substance abuse care (MH/SA) in 1995 was estimated to be about $75

billion (Triplett, 1998), amounting to about 8.3% of personal health expenditures.         Overall

spending on MH/SA in the U.S. (including specialty and general care) grew at 13% per annum

during the 1963-1972 period, at 14% per year during 1972-1980, and 9.3% in the 1980-1995

time span. Total health care spending grew at yearly rates of 11.5%, 13.7%, and 9.9% for the

three time intervals respectively.   This suggests that mental health spending tracked overall

spending quite closely over the 1963-1995 period (Triplett, 1998).

        While the United States spends more on MH/SA in absolute terms than do other western

nations, it spends a lower proportion of personal health outlays than Great Britain (16.6%),

Canada (11.4%), and Australia (8.4%) (Triplett, 1998). Mental disorders impose costs on the

individual, his or her family, and on society as a whole. In aggregate, Rice et al. (1990) found

indirect costs to be twice the direct costs of care. Studies of individual behavior have documented

the impact of mental health on employment, productivity and earnings (Berndt et al., 1997; Ettner


                                                6
et al., 1997; Bartel and Taubman, 1986; Mullahy and Sindelar, 1993), criminal activity (Steadman

et al., 1998; Link, 1992), motor vehicle accidents (Rice et al., 1990), child abuse and neglect

(Kelleher et al., 1994), homelessness (Jencks, 1994), and divorce (Bartel and Taubman, 1986).

       The indirect cost of mental illness has also been studied in terms of employment and

earnings. A common finding in psychiatric epidemiology is an inverse correlation between income

and rates of illness in a population (Bruce, Takeuchi, and Leaf, 1991). However, the causal

connection between mental illness and income and other labor market outcomes is complex.

Economic stress, such as involuntary unemployment, may aggravate illness. Some difficult-to-

measure personal characteristics which make a positive contribution to earnings are correlated

with some illnesses. Creativity, energy, and attention to detail may each be more common among

persons who have mania or obsessive-compulsive disorders. Furthermore, persons who have

diseases and are successful enough to remain in the labor force may have atypical values of some

other unmeasured labor market characteristics. Estimates of the impact of mental disorders on

labor market outcomes have used longitudinal data, or instrumental variables and cross-sectional

data to find substantial reductions in earnings and other measures of productivity associated with

illness. Bartel and Taubman (1986), and Frank and Gertler (1991) use longitudinal data with

information on prior illness to estimate reductions in earnings of men of between 20% and 25%

for conditions that are thought to produce the most impairment such as psychotic disorders and

major depression. Neuroses and other mental disorders had smaller but significant negative

impacts on earnings (5% to 15%). Ettner, Frank and Kessler (1997) used cross sectional data

from a national epidemiological survey of the U.S. population to examine the effect of mental and

addictive illnesses on employment and earnings. Information on the family history of mental

illness and the timing of the onset of symptoms of mental illness enabled the authors to use


                                                7
instrumental variable techniques to estimate the impact of mental illness on income taking account

of possible endogeneity of mental illness. They found that the presence of a diagnosable mental

illness reduced employment by about 11% for both males and females and for those who worked,

the estimated loss of income attributable to mental illnesses was about 20% for women and 10%

for men.

       The connection between mental disorders and violence and crime has been controversial,

since it is tied so closely to the sensitive issue of social stigma. Recent research has found clear

evidence that mental illness and substance abuse are associated with higher rates of criminal

activity. A study by Link and colleagues (1992) illustrates the tenor of a larger set of research

findings. When psychiatric patients are compared to a control population, matched according to

the neighborhood in which they live and socioeconomic characteristics, psychiatric patients exhibit

significantly higher rates of weapon use and violent behavior. Torrey (1994), an advocate for the

seriously mentally ill, arrived at a similar conclusion based on a review of the literature, stating:

“Although the vast majority of individuals with serious mental illness are not more dangerous than

members of the general population, recent findings suggest the existence of a sub-group that is

more dangerous” (p.653). According to Steadman et al. (1998), the subgroup includes those

individuals with a co-occurring substance abuse disorder. Individuals who suffer from both

mental illness and substance abuse problems are more likely to be involved in violence than

otherwise similar people with mental illness only or without mental illness. (It is notable that

individuals with a mental disorder are significantly more likely to abuse substances than are people

without such illnesses.)

       Addictive disorders have also been tied to auto accidents (see Rice et al., 1990 for a

review), unsafe sexual practices and child abuse and neglect (Kelleher et al., 1994). Alcohol and


                                                 8
drug abuse in mothers has also been linked to poor birth outcomes (Secretary of DHHS, 1993;

ASPE, 1994). Even at levels of use that do not qualify as “abuse”, alcohol and drug use can be

problematic, especially among the young. Lowry et al. (1994) report that high school students

were more likely to engage in risky sexual behavior if they used alcohol (relative odds of 2.7),

marijuana (odds of 9.2) or cocaine (odds of 26.8) relative to non-users.

       Finally, homelessness has often been linked to mental illness and substance abuse in both

recent literature (Jencks, 1994) and the popular press. Many mental hospital patients were shifted

to nursing homes, jails, and streets as a result of the reduction in public mental hospital capacity

during the 1960s and 1970s (O’Flaherty, 1996). Jencks contends that the “deinstitutionalization”

movement was a prime cause of the growth of homelessness during the 1980’s, while other

observers (e.g. O’Flaherty, 1996) have questioned the strength of the causal connection.

       This brief profile of mental and addictive disorders and their social consequences leads to

two conclusions useful for an economic analysis of mental health and mental health care. First,

mental and addictive disorders are prevalent and associated with a variety of social costs not

incurred by the affected individuals. The existence of externalities means that decentralized

market decision-making will tend to undervalue effective treatments for mental and addictive

illnesses. Second, the social costs of mental and addictive disorders are concentrated in the 4% of

the population that experience the more severe forms of the disorders. This sub-group of people

displays a series of characteristics that make them “undesirable” to insurers as clients, employers

as workers and to significant segments of the general population as neighbors. Thus, in the

absence of some compensatory factor, there are selection-related private benefits linked to

avoiding employing and insuring those at risk for mental illness.

       B. Who is Treated for Mental Illness


                                                 9
         One of the dilemmas in formulating policy towards mental health care is that

“undertreatment” and “overtreatment” can coexist within the same payment system. Of the 30%

of the population that has a mental illness at some point during a year, only 17.3% get some

treatment in the health care sector with an additional 7.4% getting their only treatment from a

human service agency or a self-help group (e.g. Alcoholics Anonymous).4 Thus, only about 25%

of those with a diagnosable condition get some form of treatment over a twelve-month period.

Low rates of treatment conditional on having a disorder also characterize the more severely ill.

Only 36% of those with manic depression or major depression in a year are treated in any sector,

and only 25% of those with substance abuse are treated. (Approximately 57% of individuals with

schizophrenia do get some health care treatment.)

         At the same time, 4.5% of individuals with no disorder (assessed with a diagnostic

instrument) receive mental health care from a health care provider and 8.2% get treatment from

some human service organization or self-help group.                   Those individuals with no diagnosed

condition that obtain treatment make almost the same number of visits as those with at least one

diagnosed condition: 7.9 visits per year compared to 9.3 visits (Kessler et al., 1997). Putting this

together with the figures in the earlier paragraph, we can say that nearly 38% of all users and 28%

of all visits for mental health care are not associated with a diagnosable disorder.5 Moreover, a

large segment of that group report that they are in either good or excellent emotional health (see




4
  All the data cited in this paragraph are based on information from the National Comorbidity Survey. Detailed
   discussion of these findings is in from Kessler et al. (1997).
5
  The share of the total population that are both users of care and have a diagnosable condition is 0.05 (0.17 x
   0.30). The share of the total population that use services but do not have a diagnosable condition is 0.03 (0.045
   x 0.70). Thus 38% of the users do not have a diagnosable condition.


                                                         10
Kessler et al., 1997). 6 It is interesting to note that in Canada the portion of users of MH/SA care

who have no disorders is considerably smaller than in the U.S. (Kessler et al., 1997).

           Spending on treatment is concentrated on those people with the most disabling conditions.

It was estimated that in 1990 nearly 30% of spending on mental health and substance abuse care

was accounted for by 5% of the users of care (Frank et al., 1994). For example, the mean level of

spending on treatment of mental health and substance abuse care in a large insured population for

1993 was $8 per enrollee per month, while the mean cost of treating someone with a diagnosis of

manic depression was about $6,700.

           People with a history of mental health care use also tend to incur higher levels of general

health expenditures than do others. For example, data from Michigan Medicaid indicate that the

average person had expenditures of $1,873 per year in health care over a three-year period (1991-

1993) compared to $3,722 (including mental health care) for individuals with any treatment for

mental illness during that time period. Roughly 66% of the difference is accounted for by mental

health costs. Cuffel and Goldman (1998) report that mental health care users spend nearly 90%

more on general medical care than did non-users.

           A large segment of individuals who receive the highest intensity of care do so, in part,

because they are compelled to by the legal system. For example, in 1994, approximately 43% of

days of care provided in specialty psychiatric hospitals and specialty psychiatric units of general

hospitals were accounted for by individuals involuntarily admitted. In addition, 27% of days of




6
    Results from an epidemiological survey in Ontario suggest that people with the most disabling illnesses are
    somewhat more likely to get treatment in Ontario (Kessler et al., 1997b). The U.S. may perform relatively badly
    on this score.


                                                         11
care in residential facilities and 8% of patients in ambulatory settings were involuntarily placed in

care.7

           C. Who Pays for Mental Health Care

           Spending on mental health and substance abuse care displays a different pattern than that

found in the health sector overall. Table 1 reports the composition of spending on health and

MH/SA care in the U.S. Among the most important differences reported in the Table is the role

of government as a direct funder of care. The other federal (block grants) and other state and

local categories comprise 23.3% of all MH/SA spending compared to 11.5% of overall healthcare

spending. In addition, Medicaid plays a somewhat larger role in MH/SA spending, 18.8% vs.

14.8%. Finally Medicare plays a considerably smaller part in funding MH/SA than it does for all

health services. Thus state and local government generally allocated more resources for MH/SA,

42.1% (summing block grant, state/local and Medicaid) than for health services generally, 26.3%.

This highlights the differing division of labor between federal and state government. Whereas the

federal government funds over 25% of health spending, it accounts for less than 20% of MH/SA

expenditures.

           Table 1 shows that private health insurance accounts for a smaller share of spending in

MH/SA than in all health care (25.8% vs. 31%). The table also suggests that private out-of-

pocket spending makes up a smaller share of non-public funding in MH/SA than in overall health

care. As we shall see below, this finding is inconsistent with data on insurance coverage and may

be an artifact of using insurance claims to estimate private spending.

           D. The Supply of Mental Health Services



7
    These data are based on unpublished information from the Inventory of Mental Health Organizations collected by
     the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration of the USDHHS, 1996.


                                                         12
       There are a great variety of organizations and professionals that supply mental health

services, not limited to traditional medical care providers.         For example, in the state of

Massachusetts one could receive office-based psychotherapy from any of the following licensed

providers: primary care physicians, psychiatrists, psychologists, social workers, counselors, and

nurses. The services provided by each of these professions are paid for by public and private

insurance plans. Similarly, inpatient psychiatric care might be provided in the medical-surgical

section of a general hospital, a general hospital psychiatric unit, a private psychiatric hospital or a

state mental hospital. In some cases the functions of these various suppliers are differentiated and

in others they offer services that appear to be close substitutes (Goldman and Skinner, 1989).

       Table 2 describes the types of organizations that offer specialty mental health services in

the U.S. and their nominal levels of spending in 1969 and 1994. Note the dramatic shifts in

patterns of spending within the hospital sector and between hospital and non-hospital

organizations over time. For example, state mental hospitals accounted for about 55% of all

specialty mental health spending in 1969 compared to roughly 25% in 1994. General hospitals

accounted for 9% of spending in 1969 compared to 16% in 1994. Community based treatment

programs (which include mental health centers) accounted for 7% of spending in 1969 and 11% in

1994. These changes in the roles of suppliers of mental health care also reflect the emergence of

markets that has taken place over the past 40 years. Even public funds are increasingly allocated

via markets. Insurance mechanisms like Medicaid have grown in importance over time. Public

managed care programs turn over operations of systems of care to private organizations.

Whereas publicly owned and operated mental hospitals dominated the supply of care in the 1950s

and 1960s, privately owned non-profit hospitals, mental health centers and clinics now play a

central role, as do private for-profit organizations.       These new treatment sites emphasize


                                                  13
outpatient therapy, management of drug treatments, partial hospital services, rehabilitation and

case management services.

       Psychiatrists and psychologists account for less than half of mental health professionals.

While there were about 33,500 psychiatrists and nearly 70,000 psychologists in 1995, social

workers, counselors, and family therapists accounted for 94,000, 61,000 and 46,000 practitioners

respectively. Individuals with higher income and private insurance receive mental health care

from physicians, psychologists, or social workers specializing in mental health services. Shifting

patterns of supply correspond to altered approaches to treating mental illnesses.

       The treatment of mental illnesses has changed dramatically over the past 40 years, in part

due to scientific changes in treatment technology such as pharmaceutical innovation (Berndt,

Cockburn and Griliches, 1997; Grob, 1991), new methods of organizing elements of treatment

(Stein and Test, 1980), and improved approaches to brief psychotherapy.             Changes in the

organization and financing of mental health services have also contributed to changing treatment

patterns (Mechanic, 1989). In particular, limits on insurance coverage for inpatient days or

outpatient visits, financial incentives to reduce hospital stays and payment arrangements which

reward health plans for reducing overall health care spending have contributed to shifts in

treatment of mental and addictive disorders (Harrow and Ellis, 1992; Frank and McGuire, 1996).

Various types of mental health services have been posited to be substitutes. Research based in

HMOs and publicly funded treatment programs provides evidence indicating that community

based outpatient treatments are substitutes in production for inpatient hospital care (see

Weisbrod, 1983; Stein and Test, 1980; Hoult et al., 1981; Finch et al., 1992; Callahan et al.,

1995). Similarly for psychotherapy services, outcomes evaluations suggest that there are a range

of professions trained in psychotherapy that produce comparable clinical gains to patients,


                                                14
implying that these professions are substitutes in production of psychotherapy treatment (Knesper,

1989).

           There is also mounting evidence that for certain specific illnesses pharmaceutical

treatments can substitute for psychotherapy (Elkin et al., 1986; Kupfer et al., 1993). Berndt,

Frank and McGuire (1997) offer evidence that drugs and psychotherapy are also substitutes in

demand.         Empirical analyses of cross-price responses of demand for social workers’ and

psychologists’ services relative to psychiatrists’ indicates that a substantial segment of the services

delivered by each profession are also close substitutes in demand (Fairbank, 1989; Frank, 1985).

           Data on medical practice patterns indicate that there is considerable disagreement about

how medical treatments of all types, health and mental health care, should be used. Holding other

factors constant, the likelihood of receiving a particular treatment can vary dramatically based on

a patient’s residence (Phelps, 1998). Phelps and Mooney (1993) contend that much of the

variation in practice is due to beliefs, information, and learning at the individual physician level. If

variation is unrelated to differences in patient need or benefit, it will cause significant welfare loss.

In the mental health area, variation in treatment tends to be greater than in medical care overall

(Phelps, Handbook). This may, in part, be explained by the wide range of professions (with their

theoretical orientations) and modalities (with their patterns of costs and incentives) that supply

treatment to individuals with a particular illness. It may also reflect greater clinical uncertainty.

With more disagreement among clinicians about proper treatment, welfare losses from treatment

not related to benefits may as a result be larger in the mental health area.8

           E. Managed Behavioral Health Care

8
    The variation and welfare loss must take into account other factors. Even granting that variation is around an
     “optimal point,” the welfare loss depends on the shape of the total benefit schedule. A flat marginal benefit
     function, associated with an elastic demand will imply a relatively low welfare loss.



                                                           15
        Managed care is transforming the health care sector generally, and may be having more of

an impact on mental health than in health care. Employers, government and other purchasers are

bargaining for lower prices and monitoring treatment patterns. The response to the new spirit of

prudent purchasing of health care services has been an acceleration in the growth of managed care

organizations. Preferred Provider Organizations (PPOs), Point of Service (POS) plans and Health

Maintenance Organizations (HMOs) accounted for 73% of the insured population in 1995

(PPRC, 1997). State governments have moved to strengthen the bargaining power of buyers of

health care by encouraging the creation of purchasing alliances that enable smaller purchasers of

group health insurance to command more choice at more advantageous prices. State Medicaid

plans and the federal Medicare program are all experiencing rapid growth in enrollment of

beneficiaries in managed care organizations that bear significant financial risk.

        A striking development in mental health and substance abuse has been the development of

so-called managed behavioral health care carve-outs. Traditionally, the purchaser, usually an

employer, contracted with a single insurance plan to cover a full range of health risks.

Increasingly, however, purchasers of health insurance are offering beneficiaries a range of plans.

Purchasers may also “carve out” certain benefits, which means that they separate the health

insurance function by disease or service category and contract separately for the management of

those risks. This carve-out in insurance need not be associated with “managed care,” but it

virtually always is.

        There are three forms of carve-outs found in the MHSA health sub-sector, with potentially

distinct economic impacts. They are: a) payer specialty carve-outs from all health plans; b) payer




                                                  16
specialty carve-outs from only indemnity and PPO type arrangements; and c) individual health

plan carve-outs to specialty vendors.

       The two forms of payer carve-outs are illustrated in Figures 1 and 2. In Figure 1,

enrollees have a choice among a traditional indemnity insurance plan and managed care plans (e.g.

an HMO and a PPO). The payer in this case writes a separate contract with a specialty vendor,

for the carved out service (e.g. behavioral health), to manage a segment of the risk in the

traditional plan.   Some well-known carve-out programs are of this type, the Massachusetts

Medicaid (Callahan, et al., 1995; Frank and McGuire, 1997; and Beinecke, et al., 1996) and the

Massachusetts Group Insurance Commission (Huskamp, 1997; Ma and McGuire, 1998; Merrick,

1997). In this case, a carve-out eliminates a traditional indemnity plan for behavioral health care,

ensuring that all behavioral health care will be managed.       The payer also intervenes in the

competitive process by preventing the traditional plan from competing on the basis of the

behavioral health benefit (or other service carve-outs).

       The payer may entirely remove the carved-out service from the market for competing

(otherwise) integrated health plans. Figure 2 shows the case where enrollees choose among

competing health plans for all of their healthcare except for the carved-out service. Behavioral

healthcare for the State of Ohio employees and for employees and dependents of Pacific Bell are

organized in such a fashion (Goldman, McColloch, and Sturm, 1998). Enrollees are not given a

choice of plan for the carved out service, although a payer would typically use a competitive

process to choose the carve-out vendor.

       The third major form of carve-out arrangement is illustrated by Figure 3. In this case,

enrollees have a choice of health plan for all services. Health plans choose to manage certain

services such as mental health or cancer care by sub-contracting with a specialized managed care


                                                 17
organization. In this case, the carve-out is an element of the competitive strategy adopted by a

health plan. The payer may set general requirements for plans to meet, but does not specify

organizational form. For example, an employer might contract with the Prudential HMO in St.

Louis, which in turn carves out MH/SA to Merit Behavioral Health, Inc.

       At present, mental health carve-out contracts are a rapidly growing feature of health

insurance. According to Oss (1997), approximately 53 million people are enrolled in carve-out

programs of all types. Between 20 and 25 million people are enrolled in so-called risk-based

carve-out contracts (whereby the carve-out vendor assumes some or all of the financial risk for

claims), which account for about 60% of the total revenue of firms that manage MHSA benefits.

Carve-outs are more common among larger firms than smaller firms. Umland (1995) reports that

35% of employers with 5,000 or more employees were contracting with a specialty MHSA carve-

out vendor compared with a rate of about 3% for firms with fewer than 500 employees.

       Carve-outs are an important new institutional feature in mental health and substance

abuse. Although carve-outs exist for other conditions, they are most common in the care of

MH/SA. To understand why carve-outs are part of the MH/SA landscape and what their effects

are, we need to turn to issues of moral hazard and adverse selection covered in the next two

sections.



III.   Private Insurance Markets, Moral Hazard, and Mental Health Care

       Private insurance markets have long offered insurance for mental health coverage on much

more limited terms than for general health care coverage. Most Americans who obtain health

insurance coverage through their employers have some coverage for mental health and substance

abuse treatment, but it is rarely on the same terms as for other medical care. Over 90% of all


                                              18
employees covered by employer sponsored health insurance have mental health coverage. This is

true of employees of both large and small firms (BLS, 1996).9 In 1993, large employers offered

insurance plans with more restrictive coverage for mental health care than other services 86% of

the time for inpatient benefits and 97% of the time for outpatient benefits. The corresponding

figures for small employers were 85% and 99% respectively. The 1993 data offer evidence

suggesting an erosion in coverage from the 1980s (Buck and Umland, 1997). It is important to

note that the mere fact that more health plans establish limits for MH/SA coverage that they did in

previous years does not mean that financial protection is less overall. Establishing that would

require a more complete consideration of the terms of coverage. Typically, private insurance

limits the number of reimbursable days of inpatient mental health care to 30, and the number of

outpatient visits to between 20 and 30. Outpatient care generally carries 50% cost sharing (in

about 54% of all policies). Lifetime spending limits are common for both inpatient and outpatient

mental health care (in 40% of health plans).10 The upper limit on plan cost sharing is usually

defined as a limit on reimbursable visits or plan spending.11

         In sum, mental health and substance abuse insurance coverage provides some coverage for

low ranges of spending but leaves households unprotected against more expensive and potentially

financially ruinous treatment. It is these observations along with the history of stigmatization that

have led mental health advocacy groups to focus so much effort on obtaining “parity” in the terms

of benefit design in private insurance for MH/SA and general medical care. The first principle of

optimal insurance is that insurance ought to cover high-end expenses (where the marginal utility

9
   In 1993-94, 82% of employees of large firms and 66% of employees of small firms participated in employer
   sponsored health plans (Unpublished data from the Employee Benefit Survey of the BLS).
10
    All data except the level of day and visit limits reported in this paragraph are from the Employee Benefit Survey
   of the BLS.




                                                         19
of money is greater) (Arrow, 1963). A higher demand response for mental health might imply

different cost sharing arrangements for mental health services in a “second best” world, but this

does not explain the presence of coverage limits. Optimal insurance in principle would still imply

better high-end coverage, a different pattern of coverage than what is observed. The traditional

explanations for differences in coverage and apparent failures in the insurance market are moral

hazard and adverse selection.

          A. Evidence of Moral Hazard

          Since the 1950s, coverage of treatment for mental illness under private insurance has been

controversial because of perceptions that psychotherapy was discretionary and its use would be

greatly affected by insurance (McGuire, 1981). Insurers argued that equal coverage for health

and mental health services would create a “cost control” problem. The moral hazard argument

for special treatment of mental health care is based on the proposition that demand response to

insurance coverage for mental health services is greater than that of other medical services and

therefore the welfare loss from coverage is larger while the risk spending benefits are similar

(Pauly, 1968; Zeckhauser, 1970). During the 1960s and 1970s, the demand response of mental

health services to the terms of insurance was studied by examining the experiences of large

insured populations.         The federal employees health benefit program was frequently studied

because claims data were available for this population and because coverage under the Blue

Cross/Blue Shield high option plan was quite generous (Reed, 1974; Von Korff and Kramer,

1978; Sharfstein and Hustead, 1978). Other large insured populations studies are summarized in

Frank and McGuire (1986). These included the United Mine Workers, Blue Cross of Michigan

and Massachusetts, Group Health of Puget Sound, the United Auto Workers Health Plan,

11
     In 1996, Congress passed a so-called mental health parity law requiring dollar limits on mental health coverage


                                                          20
CHAMPUS and the State of Washington employees among others. The empirical problem of

separating adverse selection effects (persons more likely to use coverage choose better coverage)

from the moral hazard problem (better coverage leads to demand response) was not addressed in

this early work.

           In the 1980s a number of econometric analyses made use of cross sectional surveys to

investigate the magnitude of demand response for ambulatory mental health services, the services

thought to be most responsive to cost sharing (McGuire, 1981; Horgan, 1986; Taube, Kessler and

Burns, 1986; Watts, Scheffler and Jewell, 1986).12 This first generation of econometric models

focused on estimating the demand response of ambulatory mental health care use to differences in

the cost-sharing provisions across private insurance plans. The empirical models of demand were

built on simple assumptions about the price schedule and consumer expectations (Manning and

Frank, 1992). Annual number of visits (or dollars) were assumed to be the relevant decision unit,

consumers were assumed to face a constant price. Consumers formulated their demand at the

beginning of the annual decision-period. Insurance coverage for mental health is rarely described

by a single price block, such as constant 50% coinsurance. Much more frequently there are two

or even three blocks. Figure 4 shows a three-block schedule that would result from a deductible,

a covered region and a limit on coverage. Empirical studies during the 1980s used an “average”

price, and related this to quantity used. The block structure of pricing builds in a relation between

use and average price unrelated to demand response (e.g., with a declining block price, average

price and use are negatively correlated). In principle, instrumental variables might deal with this,

but this is a highly imperfect way to address this measurement issue.


     to be the same as for other conditions. Visit and day limits remain permissible.
12
     There is a more limited literature on the demand for inpatient psychiatric care. See, for example, Scheffler and
     Watts (1986).


                                                           21
          The models estimated during the 1980’s under a variety of approaches to measuring out-

of- pocket costs were so-called two part models of demand (Manning et al., 1981). In the first

part, the impact of cost sharing on the probability that an individual would use any mental health

services was estimated using a logit or a probit model. The second part estimated the effect of

cost sharing on the level of utilization (often subject to a logarithmic transformation) of mental

health care conditional on some use of services. The second stage was usually estimated using

ordinary least squares. The first generation of econometric research resulted in similar findings

across studies: that ambulatory mental health services were highly responsive to cost sharing.

Studies generally could not make a direct comparison to responsiveness in health care, but they

typically arrived at a conclusion that demand for ambulatory mental health care was more

responsive to cost sharing than ambulatory medical services. Those results were based on non-

experimental assignment of individuals to insurance plans, and were subject to selection

problems.13 Contending with the bias introduced by selection of insurance condition in general

health as well as mental health was a primary rationale for mounting the RAND Health Insurance

Experiment (HIE).

          The RAND HIE improved upon earlier studies of demand response by randomly assigning

families to insurance conditions, minimizing the problems of the correlation of insurance and use

introduced by unobserved variables. Over and above this central virtue of an experimental design,

the HIE made dramatic improvements in the measurement of key variables that plagued earlier

studies.      Rather than relying on patient or provider reports about use, the HIE (RAND

functioning as a third-party payer) directly observed what was used and when. Prices charged and

paid were also directly observed, obviating the need to use the self-reported ranges and averages

13
     McGuire (1981) used an instrumental variable approach to correct for endogenous insurance coverage. Other


                                                        22
from earlier work.       Finally, measures of health and mental health status, along with other

covariates likely to influence demand, were measured much better in the HIE.

        Random assignment and better measurement were great helps, but the problems

introduced by the non-constant price schedules described by Figure 4 remained. Every HIE plan

included a stop loss that limited a family's out-of-pocket spending to $1,000 or less. A family in a

50% plan with a $750 stop loss would, for example, have all care completely paid for, once they

spent $1,500 during a year. A family with any high cost treatment early in a year, or any

foreseeable treatment (such as long-term psychotherapy) would rationally treat the marginal price

of care as free, just like a family in the free care plan. Interpreting differences in use between the

50% plan and the free care plan, as well as other plans, requires confronting the issue of family's

expectations about spending.

        Data collection for the HIE took place in the mid-1970s. Early empirical work on the HIE

(Newhouse et al., 1981; Manning et al., 1986, Wells et al., 1982) compared plans on the basis of

“plan response” coinsurance only, for example users in the 50% plan to the free care plan. This

does not yield a simple price elasticity estimate because the price change is averaged over stop

losses. Later research also dealt explicitly with expectations, which the omnibus response to plan

treated only implicitly. With the addition of some structural assumptions about how expectations

were formed, estimates of the demand response could be derived.

        Keeler, Manning, and Wells (1988) examined the demand of a subset of users in the

RAND HIE who began mental health (or general health) treatment while far away (in dollar

terms) from the limit on out-of-pocket expenses. They assumed that individuals would foresee, at

the initiation of care, all the care that would eventually be used in a given episode of care, but that


  studies had no method for dealing with selection.


                                                      23
individuals did not foresee that they might exceed the out-of-pocket limit from other episodes.

They show individuals in families with full insurance (free care) coverage used about four times

more ambulatory mental health care than do those with virtually no coverage (95% cost sharing).

This is roughly double the response reported using a similar methodology for ambulatory medical

care. Research on other data dealt with the issue of block pricing and demand. Ellis (1986)

proposed an empirical approach which builds on the model developed by Keeler, Newhouse and

Phelps (1977). He studied a mental health benefit where there was an increasing block price (no

deductible, cost sharing up to a limit on outpatient spending). Ellis assumed that consumers

would base consumption decisions on their “expected” end of year price. Ellis and McGuire

(1986) applied this model to estimate price elasticities of demand. This research also showed

mental health services to be relatively price elastic. In sum, nearly all the available evidence,

experimental or observational, points in the direction of greater price response for ambulatory

mental health than other health care services.

       Table 3 summarizes the cumulative evidence on the demand response of ambulatory

mental health services to cost sharing provisions in insurance. Note that the magnitudes of the

price responses vary considerably. The relative response compared to ambulatory medical care is,

however, quite consistent when comparison was possible. For example, Taube and colleagues

(1986), using the NMCUES survey, report price elasticity estimates for mental health care that

are four times those estimated for general ambulatory health care. Similarly, Horgan (1986)

obtained elasticity estimates from the NMCES data set for mental health care that were 2.75 times

those for ambulatory medical care. The relative elasticity estimate for mental health and medical

care found in the RAND HIE was 2.66. The main policy implication of the empirical literature on

the demand response of ambulatory mental health care to cost sharing is that there is an efficiency


                                                 24
rationale for psychotherapy (the predominant form of ambulatory treatment) to be covered at a

higher level of cost sharing than other types of ambulatory health care. Thus, in the absence of

other forms of rationing or cost control, the strong evidence showing relatively high demand

response implies higher cost sharing for psychotherapy.14 Based on the empirical results from the

HIE (and some assumptions about risk aversion), Manning and Marquis (1992) estimate that 50%

cost sharing for psychotherapy is optimal (second best).

           The moral hazard issue continues to be debated in the context of managed care (Scheffler

et al, 1993).        While there exists a growing body of research showing that managed care

arrangements result in substantial savings in mental health and substance abuse (together referred

to as behavioral health) spending paid through insurance, this evidence pertains primarily to the

effect of “managed care” on levels of spending, not the response of spending to the terms of

coverage (Christianson et al., 1995; Goldman, McCulloch and Sturm, 1997; Ma and McGuire,

1997; Calahan et al., 1995; Brisson et al., 1997). Demand response in managed care is an

important area for study. The reason the subject of demand response must be looked at afresh is

that the control of moral hazard in managed in managed care is done with other mechanisms in

addition to demand-side cost sharing.

           B. Rationing in Managed Care

           Assessing the cost control or moral hazard problem in the context of managed care

requires one to change the conceptions of rationing that have been employed in studying fee-for-

service and indemnity insurance arrangements. Managed care in general and managed behavioral

health care (MBHC) in particular address the moral hazard problem with tactics that ration care

without relying on money prices paid by the consumer (Mechanic, Schlesinger, and McAlpine,

14
     This conclusion follows if a consumer demand curve is given a normative interpretation as a marginal benefit


                                                          25
1995). Managed behavioral health care organizations (MBHO) must often allocate treatment

resources subject to a prospectively set budget for serving a defined number of people. Features

of rationing within managed behavioral health care organizations include:

       •   Establishment of a network of selected providers to furnish specialized services to a
           defined population of enrollees.

       •   Directing individuals to levels of care (e.g. inpatient hospital, residential, outpatient) based
           on clinical criteria about appropriate matches of clinical circumstances and provider
           capabilities.

       •   Writing contracts to providers that include financial incentives to limit care.

       •   Application of concepts of medical necessity to determine the need and benefits from
           continuing treatment at differing levels of care.

       •   Feedback of information to clinicians on treatment patterns relative to peers and clinical
           norms.

           The MBHO makes these rationing choices in the context of either: a) markets where

potential enrollees may choose among health plans based on quality indicators, price and other

aspects of reputation and/or b) regulatory standards set by payers that require health plans to

achieve certain specified levels of performance.15 From the very beginning of research on the

economics of health insurance (e.g. Pauly, 1968), when the moral hazard problem was addressed

exclusively by demand-side cost sharing, it was assumed that rationing took place in an

economically rational fashion.            As a price was introduced, the units of quantity that were

“rationed out” were those that were the least valuable to the consumers. Consumers/patients

were assumed to be utility-maximizing price takers in the face of the prices presented to them by

their insurance coverage, implying that the consumer could buy as little or as much health care as

he or she wished at the going price, and did so to maximize utility. The validity of these


     schedule.
15
     For example, it is common to find employers requiring MBHOs to achieve certain access standards, to facilitate
     entry into treatment and to leave patients largely satisfied with the treatment process (see IOM, 1997).


                                                          26
assumptions have, of course, generated thousands of academic journal pages. For example, Rice

(1998) has argued that the rationing mechanism economists employ is not correct in a positive or

descriptive sense, in that low value units are not necessarily those rationed out after prices rise.

           With managed care, the assumption of the price-taking consumer can no longer be

maintained. The essence of managed care – its very rationale – is the ability to ration care without

imposing financial risk on consumers. Whatever one’s view on the workability of the assumption

of price-taking consumers in times gone by,16 rationing by price-taking consumers certainly is

indefensible in a health plan with managed care. Recent research on the economics of managed

care has begun to characterize rationing within managed care, working along two tracks in

modeling the effect of managed care. One approach views managed care organizations as setting

quantities for individuals who may be heterogeneous with respect to severity of illness and

demand (Baumgardner, 1991; Glazer and McGuire, 1998; Pauly and Ramsey, 1997).                           This

approach views managed care as specifying what a person, given a demand curve, would get in

terms of services under managed care. Note that if heteregeneous patients get the same quantity

of services, managed care rations in an inefficient manner. In this case, shifting resources from

consumers with low valuation to those with high valuation could improve welfare. A second line

of research proposes that managed care organizations, ration by “shadow prices” (Keeler, Carter

and Newhouse, 1998; Frank, Glazer, and McGuire, 1998).                        In this approach, it is “as if”

consumers were charged a price, and the managed care plan gave them all services that were

valued above the shadow price and denied care for all uses for which the value was below the

shadow price. In this characterization of managed care the shadow price determines a “need” or

benefit threshold that a patient must attain in order to qualify for treatment. Rationing by shadow

16
     See McGuire (1998) for discussion of the price-taking assumption in health care markets.


                                                          27
prices is efficient in the sense that this form of rationing analyzes the marginal benefit of services

to all users.

        The fact that managed care rations without demand prices has important implications for

the discussion of “parity” for mental health coverage and generally for the efficiency of benefit

designs for mental health versus general medical care. In our discussion of moral hazard above

we noted that the empirical evidence showing greater demand response to cost sharing for mental

health care relative to general medical care in the context of fee-for-service-indemnity insurance

arrangements implies that it would be efficient to cover ambulatory mental health care differently

from general health care. This is an argument against parity for MH/SA. Normative conclusions

about coverage change are altered under managed care. For example, Ramsey and Pauly (1998)

consider the roles for quantity-type managed care rationing and demand-side cost sharing in a

model in which quantity received by the consumer is the minimum of what would be demanded,

or what the managed care firm would supply. They are concerned with the optimal combination

of the two rationing instruments. Some quantity rationing is always part of the optimal policy,

and it is unclear how different demand responses fit into the story.

        In the case in which rationing is only by shadow prices, we can show clearly the

potentially major impact of superimposing a new rationing mechanism for quantity determination.

In this case, the higher demand elasticity of mental health services does not imply a higher shadow

price, where this form of rationing is used, is in contrast to the usual optimal insurance result. We

first consider the problem diagrammatically. Figures 5a and 5b characterize the demand curves

for general medical care and mental health care in accord with empirical findings from the

literature. The demand for mental health services is more price elastic than is the demand for




                                                 28
medical care. We begin by imposing a shadow price of q to ration both types of services. At this

initial shadow price the managed care plan would provide g dollars in general medical care

spending and m dollars of mental health care for an individual with these two demand curves. If

we increase the shadow price to q’ for both areas of care, which represents stricter rationing, the

result is g’ and m’ levels of spending on general medical and mental health care, respectively. The

higher elasticity for mental health services means that the cut back in services for mental health

will be greater than that in other service areas.

           The efficiency implications of a change in shadow price under managed care are quite

different from comparable changes in benefit design under indemnity insurance. Because the

shadow price is an “as if” price consumers do not actually bear more financial risk when it rises.

There is no risk/inefficiency trade-off taking place to determine the optimal shadow price. The

only efficiency issue is the allocation of resources between health care and mental health care,

which is done efficiently when the shadow prices are equal, irrespective of the relative demand

responses.

           This can be shown more formally within a model that will first be used to define efficient

rationing, and later be used to compare efficient rationing with that which may occur in the

presence of selection incentives.17 Consider a planner seeking to maximize net benefits subject to

a budget, for a given set of enrollees in a plan. The planner chooses the level of rationing qs, for

each of s services. Each service quantity is expressed in dollars, assuming price is normalized to

$1. Use of each service for each enrollee is a function of its own shadow price only.




17
     The discussion in this section has benefited greatly from extensive discussions with Jacob Gazer and is closely
     related to the discussion in Frank, Glazer and McGuire (1998).


                                                           29
             Specifically, suppose a plan has a membership consisting of Nt members of type t,

∑N   t
         t   = N , where a type of person corresponds to a valuation that person places on health care


services. Person of type t has a benefit function Bt(m1t(q1), m2t(q2)…mst(qs)), where qs is the

shadow price for service s and mst(qs) is the spending type t can expect if the shadow price is qs.18

Note that qs is set in common for all users of service s. What each person gets is dependent on

their “need” or marginal benefit. Then Bt(•) is the person’s valuation of all the elements of

expected spending. With this notation, total benefits to all enrollees are

(1)          ∑ N B (m
               t
                    t    t          1t   (q 1 ), m2t (q 2 )...m st (q s ))


with a total cost of

(2)          ∑ N (∑ m
               t
                    t
                         s
                                     st   (q s ))


Maximizing benefits less costs with respect to each qs implies,

(3)          ∑ N (B
               t
                    t         ts   m 'st − m'st ) = 0              ∀s


                                                                                     dm st (q s )
Bts is the derivative of Bt(•) with respect to the sth argument, and m 'st =
                                                                                       dq s

Rewriting (3) yields,

                                                              ∑N B
(4)          ∑N B
               t
                    t    ts   m 'st = ∑ N t m 'st , or
                                            t                      N
                                                                      t   ts
                                                                               =1


Since rationing by shadow price implies Bts is the same for all types, (4) implies that

(4’)          B ts = 1             ∀s



18
     Consumers value spending on the various services. Spending is determined by the shadow-price rationing and
     expressed as mst (qs). Diagramatically, the relation between q and spending can be seen in Figure 5.



                                                                                30
All shadow prices should be set equal to one. All services would be subject to the same level of

rationing and that every dollar of spending would generate at least a dollar in health care benefits.

The implication of the first best is that the managed care organization should have a budget

sufficient to cover the costs of all services implied by the efficient level of rationing.

        It should be recognized that the condition given in equation (4) is based on the assumption

that the demand response for a service (e.g. cardiac care) is the same for each person in the

patient type category t. The demand response may, of course, vary across services within a

patient type category. This will be important for the selection analyses presented in Section IV.C.

        This normative problem could be transformed into a second-best analysis by maximizing

the value of spending to the members of the plan subject to a given budget, rather than

maximizing benefits less cost. The second-best analysis is more general and covers the case in

which the goal is to maximize welfare subject to given levels of public funds or perhaps a set of

capitation payments. It is straightforward to show that the result in (4’) is altered so that the

marginal benefit of spending in all services will be equalized to a new shadow price, the value of

the marginal dollar given the budget. This shadow price is one, of course, at the first-best level of

spending. It is above (below) one when the health budget is set below (above) the first-best level.

        Two points flow from this analysis that are important for the economics of mental health.

First, if managed care rations by shadow price, and does so efficiently, providing full coverage

(parity) for mental health services can improve efficiency by increasing financial protection with

no additional loss due to moral hazard, a point that has been anticipated in some policy

discussions (Frank, Koyanagi and McGuire, 1997; National Advisory Mental Health Council,

1997; Sturm, 1997). Second, efficient rationing implies rationing equally across service areas, in

the sense of setting the same shadow price across services. Efficiency conditions imply equality in


                                                   31
shadow prices irrespective of demand elasticities. (Note that the demand-response term, m 'st ,

drops out of (4).)

           The normative implications of this model of rationing are parallel to those that underlie

models used in cost-effectiveness analysis (Weinstein, 1995).                         The manner in which cost-

effectiveness information has been proposed for use in resource allocation is consistent with the

simple model proposed above.                 Weinstein and Zeckhauser (1972) propose an approach to

efficient rationing within a budget using estimates of Quality Adjusted Life Years (QALYs)

derived from specific health programs. QALYs were initially designed as a means of developing a

common metric for evaluating heterogeneous health outcomes in a fashion which takes account of

individual preferences for different health states (see Kaplan, 1995 for a review). While that work

focuses on rank ordering health treatment programs in terms of the QALYs they yield in order to

find the incremental intervention, the point here is that budget allocation process across classes of

“incremental” interventions should allocate funds so that the health benefit per dollar (perhaps as

measured by QALYs) is equal.19

           In the analysis just conducted, we have assumed that shadow prices were the only

rationing device, whereas, in fact, demand-side price rationing is likely to be going on at the same

time. A short-side model in which utilization is the minimum of demand and supply is the

approach noted above by Pauly and Ramsey. Another is a bargaining model in which utilization is

a compromise between what the patient wants at the price he or she pays and what the seller

wants to supply given the incentives and constraints it faces (Ellis and McGuire, 1990). Any


19
     The analysis would be altered if we assumed, Baumgardner-like, that managed care plans ration by quantity
     setting, instead of assuming, Keeler, Carter, and Newhouse-like, that plans ration by a shadow price.
     Maximization of benefits less costs with respect to ms with the implied constraint that mst = ms for all t yields a
     public-goods like condition in (4). The weighted marginal benefits must be equalized across services. In this
     altered analysis, the “expected” marginal benefits are equalized across services.


                                                             32
supply-side instrument will have the virtue that rationing is being accomplished without imposing

financial risk on consumers, and, therefore, is likely to be used “first” in putting together an

optimal payment system (Ellis and McGuire, 1993). Supply-side policies, especially “one size fits

all” types, may run the risk of not respecting consumer preferences. Pauly and Ramsey’s (1998)

approach suggests one way to capture this. Supply side policies also do not address initial visits

very well. The literature in health economics on optimal combinations of demand and supply-side

policies is thin, and reasonable incorporation of managed care tactics in normative models is only

beginning (Ma and McGuire, 1997).

          Considerations of optimal payment systems in mental health encounter the same issues

about patient and provider motivation as do such discussions in the general field of health

economics. The assumption of rational, utility-maximizing, price-taking consumers with fixed

preferences seems, if anything, less convincing in demand for mental health care than for general

health.

          Interpretation of Demand: The normative interpretation of mental health care demand in

the fee-for-service indemnity insurance world has long been problematic. Long standing issues of

asymmetric information and imperfect agency relationships that were noted early in the study of

health care markets (Arrow, 1963) temper the normative interpretation of all health care demand

functions as marginal benefit schedules. The demand for mental health care has a special set of

constraints on consumer information. Demand for mental health services may be influenced by

fear of stigma, Veblen’s “bandwagon” effects (McGuire, 1981) and unclear information about

efficacy of specific treatments.    In addition, many mental disorders affect the capacity of

individuals to make decisions in their own best interests (Rubin, 1978). For these illnesses,

placing a strong normative interpretation on observed demand behavior is unlikely to be justified.


                                                33
       The relation between behavior and normative marginal benefit schedules under managed

care arrangements may differ from that in fee-for-service indemnity insurance for many reasons

related to new forms of rationing, including creation of managed care provider networks, using

payment systems that depart from simple fee-for-service arrangements, and the use of utilization

management techniques and information feedback. Managed care also may alter the traditional

agency relationships between patient and clinician (Blomquist, 1991; Mechanic, 1998). Providers

seeking to be part of a managed care network must balance patient, managed care organization,

and their own economic interest differently than under FFS. If provider actions influence demand,

the relationship between demand-side price and quantity consumed must be constructed with a

whole new set of factors in the ceterus paribus under managed care. In general, since managed

care mechanisms are intended to affect rationing, we can expect that the positive demand curve

will change. Conducting research on these changes is an important element of the current

research agenda in mental health, as well as in health services.

       We can speculate about what changes we might expect in demand behavior. If forces to

ration care in addition to demand-side prices are in play, the change in quantity utilized with

respect to a change in price is probably smaller. This emerges from a short-side model (Pauly and

Ramsey, 1998), because some price changes for some consumers do not affect quantity since the

supply constraint is binding. It would also emerge from a bargaining model because the quantity

used is a compromise, and even if “desired demand” changes by the same amount, actual use is a

weighted average of desired demand and desired supply (which does not change). Thus, here too,

alternative rationing dampens demand response.

       The normative view of such changes must be approached cautiously for reasons stated

above. Nevertheless, at the very least the “cost control problem” that has been of such a central


                                                 34
concern in mental health policy is potentially attenuated with managed care. The welfare loss

from equal coverage, or parity, would also likely be reduced.

       C. Managed Care, Supply Side Incentives and Moral Hazard: Evidence

       Alternative methods of organizing and paying for mental health and substance abuse

services within private insurance, Medicaid and Medicare have received increasing attention from

researchers and policy makers in the U.S. since the mid-1980s. Similarly, Britain has recently

begun to use supply side incentives to affect resource allocation in the primary care and specialty

mental health sectors (Knapp, 1997). To date most of the evidence on the impact of payment and

organizational arrangements on utilization is based on the U.S. experience.

       Research and policy debates about supply side payment incentives have primarily been

focused on hospital and health plan payment schemes. Prior to the mid-1980s payments by

insurers in the U.S. were commonly made on the basis of retrospectively incurred costs or charges

for hospital care and charges or customary fees for professional services (IOM, 1995). Since the

mid-1980s payments have increasingly been made prospectively and are based on days or

discharges for hospitals and on a per capita basis for health plans and groups of health care

professionals.

       Prospective payment systems were introduced in order to give providers incentives to

control costs. The basic idea is to separate the level of payment, determined prospectively, from

the costs the provider incurs.      In practice, payment systems are not always completely

prospective, and may include some features, which, at least partially, reimburse costs.         In

Medicare’s Prospective Payment System for hospital discharges, there are outlier features for

some costs. Medicare’s TEFRA system for paying psychiatric hospitals and psychiatric units of

general hospitals has explicit features that increase payments if a facility’s cost rises above a


                                                35
certain level (Cromwell et al., 1992). State payment systems for Medicaid may include rebasing

features which, in effect, reimburse part of costs.                   To capture elements of prospective and

retrospective payment that characterize actual payment systems, we can characterize a general

payment system in the following way:

(5)        P = α + βC

where α is the prospective portion of payment that is unrelated to incurred costs and can be paid

in connection to any of the above mentioned units of payment (days, cases, per capita); β is what

has been referred to as the supply side cost sharing parameter (Ellis and McGuire, 1986;

Newhouse, 1996) indicating the portion of incurred costs, C, that are reimbursed in the payment

system. Cost based reimbursement can be characterized by setting α = 0 and β = 1. A pure form

of per case prospective payment for hospitals (similar to Medicare’s Prospective Payment System

or PPS) pays on the basis of admissions to hospitals, sets α = the average cost of a case, and β =

0.20 A “mixed” system is in the general case, where α > 0 and 0 < β < 1. One can use this

categorization for contracts to managed care organizations. Under managed care arrangements in

the mental health and substance abuse area there are three dominant approaches to payment, all

based on the cost of care per capita for a defined population: pure capitation where the per capita

payment is set such that α = the average MH/SA costs per enrollee, and β = 0; mixed payment or

soft capitation where α > 0 and 0 < β < 1; and Administrative Services Only (ASO) contracts

where claims are reimbursed on a fee-for-services basis but the managed care organization is

judged and contract renewal is related to its performance in controlling spending.




20
     The average cost is typically based on actual costs in a previous year and is usually adjusted for the case mix of
     the users of the service. Case mix will be discussed in the context of risk adjusted capitation rates below.


                                                            36
         Representation of payment systems with a prospective and retrospective component, in a

mixed system, has also been useful in research on “optimal payment systems,” which may feature

only partial supply side cost sharing (with 0 < β < 1) for reasons of agency (Ellis and McGuire,

1986), or information issues (Newhouse, 1996).21

         1. Research on Hospital Payment Systems: The impact of payment arrangements on

inpatient psychiatric care has been the subject of many studies.22 Analyses of natural experiments

within Medicare, Medicaid and several states which regulated hospital payments have formed the

foundation for the research. In Medicaid, indicated that there were strong responses to various

forms of prospective payment relative to cost based reimbursement (Frank and Lave 1989; Lave

and Frank, 1990). Studies of Medicaid also suggest that the responses to per case prospective

payments appear to be more complex than one might have expected. For example, relative to

cost-based payment fewer psychiatric patients paid under per case prospective payment had very

short hospital stays (1 to 10 days) and fewer also had long stays (over 30 days) resulting in a

lower average length of stay under prospective payment. Ellis and McGuire (1995) using data

from the state of New Hampshire found hospitals respond both to the level of payment (“α”) in

terms of quality competition, as well as to the degree of supply-side cost sharing (“β”).

         Studies in Medicare used implementation of the PPS quantify general hospital response to

the new payment arrangement (Frank et al., 1987; Freiman et al., 1989; Lave et al., 1988).23 The

estimated impacts of the new payment system showed length of stay reductions for inpatient

psychiatric care in the range of 17% to 25%. The estimated effects of the initial implementation


21
   The average cost is typically based on actual costs in a previous year adjusted for inflation and is usually adjusted
   for the case mix of the users of the service. Case mix will be discussed in the context of risk adjusted capitation
   rates below.
22
   See Harrow and Ellis (1992) for a review of the early literature.
23
    Most specialty mental health providers were exempt from PPS and paid under the mixed system, TEFRA.


                                                          37
of PPS for general medical care was to reduce length of stay by between 9% and 12% (PROPAC,

1986).

         Several states implemented all-payer rate setting programs in the 1970s and 1980s in an

effort to control hospital costs. Rupp, Steinwachs and Salkever (1984) examined the impact of

the per case prospective payment method introduced in Maryland, finding evidence for decreases

in length of stay, and increases in re-admission rates. Frank and Jackson (1989) studied the

introduction of prospectively set hospital budgets (α = historical budget adjusted for general

inflation and β=0) in two regions of New York State during the 1980s. Compared to “control”

hospitals paid using a prospectively set per diem payment, prospectively set budgets led to

reduced admissions of between 16% and 22%.

         In summary the evidence from the application of prospective payment methods to

hospitals suggests strong hospital responses to incentives to reduce costs and utilization of

psychiatric services.

         2. Research on Managed Care and Capitation: The general form of a contract as a

“mixed system” contract can be applied to capitation and managed care. Figure 6 illustrates forms

of contracts that are based on capitation arrangements that are commonly found in connection

with managed behavioral health contracts. The horizontal axis measures actual costs incurred by

the managed care organization. The vertical axis measures payments made to the managed care

organization. The 450 line represents cost based reimbursement, that is payments equal incurred

costs. The horizontal line at C represents “pure” capitation (α = C and β = 0). The managed care

organization bears 100% of the financial risk for incurred costs per enrollee. For managing care

of a population at spending levels to the left of T the managed care organization collects a profit

equal to the vertical distance between the line at C and the 45 degree line. If spending exceeds T


                                                38
the managed care organization incurs a loss equal to the vertical distance between the line at C

and the 45O line. The financial incentive to restrain spending is clear. Most HMOs and some

carve-out programs use this type of payment arrangement.

        The line NEB represents a mixed or soft capitation payment system. Under these types of

arrangements the payer sets a capitation target at T. Thus, if the managed care organization

incurs costs per enrollee equal to T it will break even. If the managed care organization incurs

costs between points L and M on Figure 6, payer and the managed care organization will share

the profit or loss according to the slope of the line segment EB (or β in our characterization of

payment above). At levels of spending above M and below L the payers holds all the risk. Profit

and losses are capped at spending level L and M.            This means that the managed care

organization’s maximum profit is EF and the maximum loss is AB. This is illustrated in Figure 6

by the fact that line segment NE is parallel to the 45O line. Under the soft capitation payment

method there are incentives to reduce spending but they are weaker because the link between

payment and incurred costs has not been fully severed (β > 0).            One rationale for such

arrangements is concern that managed care organizations may “over manage” the mental health

benefit (possibly due to selection incentives discussed below). A second rationale relates to the

fact that most payers are large relative to specialty managed behavioral care organizations and

thus are in a better position to bear risk.

        2a. Evidence: The Early Experiences

        Risk contracting for managed mental health care predates the specialty industry of

managed behavioral health care (MBHC).         Prepaid group practices and health maintenance

organizations (HMOs) have accepted risk contracts for MH/SA services, along with other health

care, for many years. In general, these contracts are capitation contracts in which all the cost or


                                                39
claims risk is born by the prepaid group. As part of the Health Insurance Experiment (HIE),

Manning and colleagues (1989) compared the cost and use of care by families assigned to a

prepaid group practice, the Group Health Cooperative of Puget Sound, with that of families

assigned to receive free care in the fee-for-service sector. Although enrollees with the two types

of insurance sought care at the same rate, the fee-for-service population had mental health

expenditure levels almost three times greater than enrollees in the prepaid health plan ($69.70 vs.

$24.60 in 1977 dollars). Paula Diehr and colleagues compared the use of outpatient mental health

care in a fee-for-service unmanaged benefit plan, a staff model HMO, and an individual practice

association (IPA) prepaid plan for Washington State employees, with results that were consistent

with Manning’s (Diehr et al., 1984). However, because the Washington employees chose their

plan and were not assigned to an insurance condition as in the Health Insurance Experiment, the

Diehr findings may at least partly reflect differences in each study group’s needs and not just an

effect of the plan.

        Prepaid groups can exert direct managerial authority over the supply of mental health

services. Indeed, by controlling the number of therapist hours available, they can almost directly

ration the volume of care to be provided. Managed behavioral health care companies, however,

may have weaker incentives to reduce costs than prepaid groups do, and they typically have much

less direct control over their contracted providers. Thus, the cost reductions from managed

behavioral health care should be expected to be more modest than from prepaid groups.

        The literature on specific MBHC programs is relatively recent. The initial experiences

reported by employers include some instances of large reductions in the costs of MH/SA care.

Hodgkin (1992) reviewed the early literature on the effects of utilization management, finding

very few studies that offered evaluation methods that could produce convincing results. The lone


                                                40
study that was methodologically sound showed savings in the neighborhood of 10% to 15% on

total claims costs, a faint indication of what was to come.

           2b. More Recent Evidence

           The CHAMPUS program experimented with an “at risk” PPO for behavioral health

services during the late 1980s in the Tidewater, Virginia area. That area was known to be a high

cost region with regard to MH/SA outlays. The demonstration showed significant savings (about

31% below expected costs in the absence of the program) stemming largely from reduced use of

inpatient care. In spite of the reported savings, there were clearly areas of considerable waste in

expenditures and difficulties in effectively running the program (Coulam and Gaumer, 1990).24

           A number of private corporations have adopted specialty MBHC carve-out programs. It

is fairly common to see reports of reductions in claims costs of 40% to 50%. The interpretation

of these changes is, of course, quite difficult.              Often, more than one change is made and

attributing cause and effect is difficult. Within a plan, there can be considerable year-to-year

variation for unknown reasons (Dickey and Azeni, 1992; McGuire, 1994). Finally, a version of

the “file-drawer” problem in research may be at work; only “good” (read “publishable”)

experience may see the light.




24
     The CHAMPUS program has continued to experiment with managed care. The program is now subject to three
     differing forms of managed care arrangements. The National Utilization Management program works under a
     CHAMPUS contract with a specialty MBHC vendor to provide pre-admission certification and concurrent review
     on a nation wide basis. The contract with the MBHC vendor does not place the vendor at any financial risk
     related to utilization of MH/SA care. The CRI program under CHAMPUS is a fixed price “at risk” contract that
     is in place in Hawaii and California. Finally, the Tidewater CPA arrangement continues to be in operation. In
     recent years the CRI and the general MBHC arrangement have realized the largest reductions in costs. The
     Tidewater plan reported a small increase in costs. The absence of cost reductions in Tidewater during the 1989
     to 1992 time period may be due to the substantial savings that were realized during the early years of the
     program. A 9% increase over 4 years that was reported for the CRI program is quite small for any health plan
     during that time period.



                                                         41
       With these limitations in mind, we review the reports of the performance of Managed

Behavioral Health Care (MBHC) carve-out programs.             Key aspects of these studies are

summarized on Table 4. As the Table indicates each of these natural experiments has taken place

in the context of different institutional arrangements. Some carve-outs were implemented within

State Medicaid (Massachusetts and Utah) programs while others in privately insured populations

(the GIC and Pacific Bell). The risk sharing arrangements also varied considerably. In Utah a

“pure” capitation contract was phased-in, while in Massachusetts, the GIC and Medicaid

contracts shifted only a small amount of risk to the MBHC vendor. The Pacific Bell ASO

contract involved no financial risk at all to the MBHC vendor.

       Table 4 reports impressive reductions in mental health spending relative to fee-for-service

arrangements (the comparison condition for all the studies). The estimated reductions in spending

range from -17% to -43%. The reductions for the most part took place in the context of

programs that had historically experienced high levels of spending on mental health services, with

the exception of the Utah study. While the observed savings across studies were in many respects

achieved by similar shifts in services utilization patterns, there are some important differences.

Savings were primarily realized by 1) reductions in use of inpatient hospital care (all studies), 2)

reductions in nominal prices paid to providers (Goldman et al., 1998; Ma and McGuire, 1998;

Callahan et al., 1995); and 3) reduced duration of outpatient treatment (Goldman et al 1998,

Huskamp, 1997).

       The studies in Table 4 reflect changes in rates of utilization of any mental health and

substance abuse care for the insured populations. Important differences in the utilization patterns

were observed across studies. The Massachusetts Medicaid experience saw an initial increase in

use of behavioral health care following introduction of the carve-out program (Callahan et al.,


                                                42
1995). After three years the increase in use had largely vanished (Frank, McGuire, Notman and

Woodward, 1996). In the Pacific Bell study a significant increase in the percentage of enrollees

using any behavioral health care was estimated (a 17% rise). In contrast the Massachusetts GIC

experienced very large reductions in the percentage of the population using behavioral health care

(20% to 30% reductions).      It is interesting to note that some companies such as Sterling-

Winthrop report dramatic increases in access to care (50% increase in rates of utilization), due to

expanded use of outpatient care, at the same time that claims cost were falling. Reductions in

rates of use create concern because it may be indicative of reductions in access to care for

individuals that may benefit substantially from treatment. Managed care programs are quite

complicated and use many methods of rationing to control use. The studies discussed also reflect

heterogeneous populations and differences in other institutional features. For this reason there are

as yet no clear explanations for why the response to managed care arrangements might vary so

strongly in terms of the percentage of the population using care.

       Theory implies that the more high-powered incentives associated with pure capitation

should lead to greater cost reductions in comparison to lower-powered incentives with risk

sharing or ASO contracts. Sturm (1997) pointed out, this pattern has not materialized in the

experience so far: large reductions have occurred even without high-powered incentives. The

high/lower power of a contract is one dimension, but actual contracts can be quite complex,

especially with regard to their dynamic incentives. The first Massachusetts Medicaid contract

made a fixed payment for administrative costs (giving incentives not to spend on administration

and managing care), weak incentives for cost reduction, and in some years ratchet effects which

create a link between targets in future years and performance in past years (Frank and McGuire,

1997). A powerful incentive in this new and growing industry is what role contract performance


                                                43
will have on future business. This may be the dominant incentive with respect to all current

contracts (Ma and McGuire, 1998), perhaps serving as an explanation of why large cost savings

emerge in many forms of contracts. Relating experience to the form of the contract seems

particularly treacherous on the basis of current data, given the rich set of incentives that are

probably operative. Case studies are building an empirical base on which conclusions ultimately

can be drawn.

       Although much work remains to be done about the magnitude of savings that can be

expected in particular circumstances and the connections between savings and contract features, it

seems clear that managed care can substantially reduce costs in MH/SA. Some research has taken

place on the quality impact of managed care. Generally, in comparing fee-for-service to capitated

managed care plans does not reveal a uniform quality impact one way or another (Miller and Luft,

1997). In mental health, two studies have found that quality may be adversely affected in HMO-

style managed care (Wells, 1996; Lurie et al., 1992). Merrick (1997) studied the pattern of claims

for persons hospitalized for major depression prior to and post the carve-out plan in the GIC plan

noted above. Her results pointed to more appropriate patterns of care under the carve-out. Re-

admissions did not rise, and contact with outpatient providers following discharge improved under

managed care.

       There is as yet very little research on responses to differences in risk sharing arrangements

across MBHC plans. Sorting out these explanations requires careful measurement of contractual

features and market circumstances facing MBHC vendors.              Thus, while there has been

considerable progress in estimating the gross spending and utilization responses to MBHC

contracts, we have a long way to go to understand the specific contractual and market

mechanisms that generate such changes in the delivery of mental health and substance abuse care.


                                                44
IV.    Insurance Markets, Adverse Selection and Mental Health Care

       The special effort needed to control moral hazard in MH/SA has been put forward as one

reason why MH/SA services are organized and paid for differently than other types of health care.

Managed care represents a new set of institutions that appear to change the terms of Zeckhauser’s

(1970) dilemma, allowing moral hazard to be controlled without reduction in risk spreading

(Mechanic, 1997). The speculation above that managed care can substitute for demand-side cost

sharing as a cost control device would suggest that insurance coverage for MH/SA should

improve with managed care, as the goal of risk spreading could be pursued with less moral hazard

cost. Nevertheless, in the early and mid-1990s, when managed care was emerging, we observed

two significant developments in insurance markets related to MH/SA. First, there was some

evidence of erosion of insurance coverage for MH/SA (Buck and Umland, 1997). In particular,

the portion of health plans which imposed tight limits on coverage of MH/SA care appears to

have grown during the 1990s. This is puzzling given the rapid expansion of enrollment in

managed care plans (PPRC, 1996). A second development has been the growth of specialized

behavioral health carve-out programs (Frank, Huskamp, McGuire and Newhouse, 1996).

Appearance of coverages and insurance arrangements more generally reflect the profit-driven

considerations of adverse selection, as well as concerns for moral hazard. As in the case of moral

hazard, evidence suggests that the forces of adverse selection may work more powerfully in

mental health than in health care.

       In the context of insurance coverage for mental health services, conventional wisdom is

that high cost enrollees are attracted by relatively generous coverage provisions for mental health

and substance abuse care. Competition among indemnity insurance plans may have resulted in


                                                45
inefficiently low levels of coverage for behavioral health care. This was the basis of argument in

the 1980s that justified federal and state “mandated coverage” legislation requiring private

insurance to cover minimum levels of mental health care (McGuire and Montgomery, 1982;

Frank, 1989).

       In the sections that follow, we review the evidence on selection in mental health and

substance abuse, discuss the policy responses by government in the context of fee-for-service

indemnity insurance contracts and then examine selection in the context of managed care. This

discussion will point to explanations for the new institutional arrangements that are arising in the

MH/SA sub-sector.

       A. Evidence of Selection in MH/SA

       The Federal Employees Health Benefit Program (FEHBP) during the 1960’s and 1970’s

provided an early example of how concerns about selection drove competing insurers to lower

benefits for MH/SA services. Plans offering more generous benefits quickly attracted individuals

who wanted to avail themselves of these services. The generous coverage of MH/SA lost viability

as people not expecting to use services enrolled in plans with more limited coverage (Reed,

1974). Use of mental health care has been found to be two to three times higher in the Blue

Cross/Blue Shield “high option” plan compared to the low option plan, even though the actual

coverage differences are quite small (Padgett et al., 1993), implying that the differences in use

were due to selection rather than demand response (moral hazard). Further evidence for adverse

selection in the FEHBP comes from comparing responses to the price of MH/SA care under the

FEHBP and The RAND Health Insurance Experiment (Newhouse et al., 1993). In the RAND

experiment, individuals were randomly assigned to health insurance plans and the observed price

response to differential coverage was substantially lower than what was observed in FEHBP


                                                46
(Newhouse et al., 1993). The differences in price response suggest that where plan choice was

possible (under FEHBP), the “high option” (lower priced) plan differentially attracted poorer risks

making it appear as if the plan with slightly more generous coverage induced much higher

utilization of MH/SA care.

       Adverse selection is an issue for all of health insurance, but may be especially serious in

the mental health area. Deb, Rubin and Wilcox-Gok (1996) found that individuals with a family

member with a mental illness were more likely than otherwise similar members of the U.S.

population to choose coverage with more generous mental health care provisions. Sturm and his

colleagues (1994) analyzed the treatment of depression across health plans as part of the Medical

Outcomes Study (MOS), finding that depressed individuals receiving care from specialists were

more likely to migrate from prepaid to fee-for-service plans. They also found that individuals

switching from prepaid to fee-for-service plans were at risk for poorer outcomes. Ellis (1988)

examined the persistence of spending over time and its implications for health plan choice.

Individuals with a history of mental health care utilization had persistently higher levels of

spending than did otherwise similar insured individuals. He also found that a history of mental

health care utilization had a significant impact on an individual’s choice of health plan. Higher

levels of prior year mental health spending increases the likelihood that an enrollee chooses a low

deductible plan. This suggests choice based on anticipated spending such that the expected

deductible payments exceed the differences in plan premium differentials.

       Perneger and colleagues (1995) found evidence of adverse selection related to mental

health care in the context of insurance markets in Switzerland. They analyzed a situation where

one indemnity plan among several health plans was changed to a managed care plan. The

managed care plan introduced gatekeepers and limits on insurance coverage for psychiatric


                                                47
services. Those who remained in the indemnity plan made on average 2.3 more visits for mental

health care in the previous year and were more likely to receive a prescription for a psychoactive

medication than those who chose managed care.

       Taken together, these results suggest that users of mental health care may have greater

subsequent year health care spending than otherwise similar people, putting plans attracting

mental health users at a financial disadvantage. Persistent levels of above-average spending for

the individuals with severe mental disorders within the Medicaid program was recently reported

by Kronick et al. (1996). In sum, there is both direct and indirect evidence suggesting that the

mentally ill and substance abuse users are associated with higher levels of health care spending

and that they systematically select health plans that offer more generous coverage for behavioral

health treatment. Such behavior creates economic incentives for health plans to adopt strategies

that will reduce their attractiveness to users of mental health care.

       B. Policy Responses to Selection: Fee-for-Service-Indemnity Contracts

       During the 1970s and 1980s competition to avoid “bad risks” was channeled into limiting

coverage for treatment of mental and addictive disorders. Approximately 22 states counteracted

adverse selection by mandated benefit statutes which specified minimum level of coverage for

MH/SA care (McGuire and Montgomery, 1982; Frank, 1989). These statutes generally specified

coverage minimums in terms of coinsurance, limits on outpatient visits and hospital days, and

deductibles. Since benefit design features were the key provisions of an insurance contract

determining coverage, regulation of these components of coverage was potentially effective in

limiting market failure associated with adverse selection. The impact of mandated benefit statutes

was limited due to exemption of self-insured employers under ERISA. It is worth noting that

most large self-insured employers (often with populations in several states) typically offered their


                                                  48
employees health insurance plans that complied or exceeded the terms of most state mandated

benefit statutes.

        This strategy towards “fixing” difficulties in the insurance market continues today. In

1993 and 1994, debate took place regarding mandated benefits in insurance as proposed under

President Clinton’s Health Security Act. The inclusion of MH/SA as part of the benefit mandate

was especially contentious, primarily because of concerns over the costs of such provisions. The

same argument reappeared in 1996 in the form of proposed legislation that would call for parity in

benefit design provisions between health benefits and those for MH/SA care. Again, concern over

the costs of such mandates and the uncertainty around predicted impacts strictly limited the scope

of the legislation that eventually passed (Appropriation Authorization for the Department of

Veterans Affairs, 1996). Attenuating selection-related incentives is the main efficiency argument

supporting policies to mandate insurance benefits.

        C. Selection and Managed Care: Distorting “Quality”

        As competition among managed care plans becomes the predominant form of market

interaction in health care, adverse selection takes a new form which may actually be harder to

address in policy, relative to traditional forms of health insurance contracts discussed above. That

is, as health insurance moves away from traditional fee-for-service-indemnity arrangements, where

enrollees have free choice of providers, and becomes managed care, the mechanisms a health

insurance plan uses to effectuate selection change from readily regulated coinsurance, deductibles,

limits and exclusions, to more difficult to regulate internal management processes which ration

treatment in managed care plans.




                                                49
        Researchers on the economics and payment and managed care are well aware of the issue.

Ellis (in press) labels under provision of care to avoid bad risks as “skimping”. Newhouse et al

(1997) call it “stinting”. As Miller and Luft (1997) put it:

                “Under the simple capitation payments that now exist, providers
                and plans face strong disincentives to excel in care for the sickest
                and most expensive patients. Plans that develop a strong
                reputation for excellence in quality of care for the sickest will
                attract new high cost enrollees…”

        The flip side, of course, is that in response to selection incentives the plan might provide

too many of the services used to treat the less seriously ill, in order to attract good risks. A plan,

motivated by selection, might provide so many of certain services that enrollees may not benefit in

accord to what it costs the plan to provide them (Newhouse et al., 1997). Hence, in the presence

of selection-related incentives, capitation and managed care market forces will generate too little

care in some area and too much in others.

        This set of observations point to the likelihood that competition in the context of managed

care health plans will create strong incentives for rationing rules to be based not just on the

relative benefits provided by a service given an overall health care budget as was implied by the

second best equilibrium among health plans described in section III.B above. Instead, the nature

of competition between health plans forces plans to take account of both the direct cost

containment impacts of rationing (e.g., setting a shadow price at a given level) as well as indirect

effects associated with the types of enrollees that are attracted to a plan under different patterns of

rationing across services. The classic asymmetry of information between insurer and enrollees of

Rothschild and Stiglitz (1976) along with these market forces may create distortions in rationing

rules that result in service competition to attract profitable enrollees.




                                                   50
           We demonstrate this latter point by returning to the model of the planner’s problem of

setting shadow prices for managed care plans given in equations (1)-(4) above. Consider now

profit maximization, and how this condition compares to the condition for efficiency. Profit

maximization is used to describe the objectives of the plan. Earlier, in (4), we described the

conditions for social efficiency in regard to managed care rationing. If selection were not an

issue, a plan seeking to attract enrollees would have incentives to offer efficient insurance

(Zeckhauser, 1970). Otherwise, another plan with the efficient combination of premium and

rationing would attract the business. With the introduction of selection problems, however, the

close relation between the normative (efficient) and positive (profit-maximizing) plan will be

disturbed.

           Here we characterize the nature of the distortion introduced. We also introduce risk

adjustment at this point, since the purpose of risk adjustment is to contend with selection-related

incentives.25 Define Rt to be the risk-adjusted payment a plan gets for enrolling a person of type

t.26 Profits are then:

            π = ∑ N t R t − ∑ N t (∑ mst (q s ))
                  t                 t


Recognize that the number of persons of type t joining a plan, Nt, is a positive function of the

benefits they anticipate, Nt(Bt). Define C t = ∑ m st (q s ) . Ct is the cost of a person of type t. The
                                                                s


first order condition for profit maximization with respect to qs is:

            ∑N B
             t
                  '
                  t   st   m'st R t − ∑ N 't Bst m 'st C t − ∑ N t m'st = 0   ∀s


Rewriting, we have


25
     See also the Chapter in this volume on risk adjustment.
26
     This could be regarded as averaged over the characteristics of persons of type t.


                                                                    51
            ∑N B
             t
                  '
                      st   mst' ( R t − C t ) = ∑ N t m 'st ,
                                                t



with the assumption that the demand elasticity for each type of person is the same for any service,

this implies:

                      N 't
            ∑ N t Bst N ( R t − C t )mst
(6)                      t
                                         =1
                          N

           Comparing conditions (6) and (4) reveals that the efficiency condition is embedded in the

profit maximizing condition, allowing us to characterize the distortion caused by selection. The

             N 't
new term is:      ( R t − C t ) m st in the numerator of (6). The two parts of the term due to the
             Nt

selection distortion have to do with the responsiveness of membership to a change in the

                                                                 N 't
anticipated benefits of membership in the plan,27                     , and to the profit and loss consequences of
                                                                 Nt

membership of a person of type t, and to the level of spending on service s, mst.

                                                                    N 't
           Suppose all types are equally responsive to benefits, so      is the same for all t. Then, the
                                                                    Nt

term that will create distortions is the relation of risk adjustment to cost for persons of type t and

its correlation with spending for a service. Consider first what happens without risk adjustment.

Then, Rt = R, and a common payment is made for all enrollees. The term R – Ct will be smaller

for persons of a “high cost” type. If the cross-product of this term with mst tends to be large, that

is, if people of this high cost type tend to put a high value on service s, then the numerator of (6)

27
     For presentational purposes, we disregard here the nature of persons’ and plans’ expectations about benefits and
     costs. We treat these as common knowledge. Frank, Glazer, and McGuire (1998) analyze a similar model
     where the benefit functions are expected benefits by the consumer. Plans set q’s on the basis of their
     expectations of the distribution of consumers’ expected benefits in the population. Mental health care is
     relatively predictable, making mental health possibly more vulnerable to selection incentives.



                                                                52
will be large, and the shadow price for this service will be set “too high” (relative to the social

optimum) to discourage membership by this high cost type. If the difference Rt – Ct is the same

for each type t, that is, if risk adjustment compensates for type differences in expected cost in a

way to equalize Rt – Ct, then risk adjustment will be effectively dealing with the incentive to

distort just described. Equation (6) describes a situation where the profit-maximizing plan sets q

“too high” (rationing too tightly) for services that are valued by persons for whom risk adjustment

“underpays” and sets q “too low” for services valued by those for whom risk adjustment pays

generously.28

           All services are potential candidates for selection-driven distortions under managed care.

This is another way of saying that incentives to under- or over-provide mental health services

within a capitated plan must be considered in relation to the incentives to supply other services.

Mental health may be one of the services most distorted, but there will be others, and mental

health may not be the most in need of economic rescue. Characterizing the incentives and

monitoring the actions of managed care plans is a central issue in the economics of health and

mental health.

           D. Policy Responses and Managed Care

           Suppose it has been determined that some service, say mental health, needs special

protection in a health insurance market with managed care. One implication of our analysis of


28
     Frank, Glazer and McGuire (1998) develop this line of argument and propose a distortion index stemming from
     the selection-related incentives in the context of profit maximizing health plans paid by risk-adjusted capitation.
     Based on an equation like (6), they show that services that are rationed tightly in managed care are those which
     are predictable by the individual, and those with a positive correlation with other (predicted) spending. The
     Frank, Glazer, and McGuire (1998) index is illustrated using Medicaid data for AFDC-eligible adults from the
     State of Michigan, they calculate the selection-related distortion index for eight major classes of services.
     Mental health expenditures are relatively predictable, largely because of the high year-to-year correlation. They
     are not, however, different in their correlation with other costs, at least in this predominantly young, female




                                                            53
managed care is that policies that focus primarily on the nominal insurance benefit will not be

sufficient to ameliorate the inefficiencies created by selection-related incentives. Managed care

insurance contracts, with their complex rationing devices, are more remote from regulation than

traditional fee-for-service-indemnity contracts. Many of the instruments that are used to ration

care under managed care are difficult for a regulator to observe and require clinical judgments

about individual cases.

        An example is the application of the concept of “medical necessity”. Most managed health

plans cover medically necessary services. Medical necessity and therefore effective coverage

depends on a complex set of interactions involving features of the benefit package, the structure

of the provider network organized by the health plan, financial incentives facing providers and the

administrative mechanisms used to assign patients to specialty care and manage quality assurance.

Determination of medical necessity occurs on a case-by-case basis, thereby conferring discretion

on those making the decisions such as primary care physicians, plan clinical staff, specialists, and

case managers. In a word, the management of care within a health plan has become increasingly

non-contractible. The nominal insurance benefit has become one part of a complex contract

which rations care and provides protection against the financial risks of treating illness.

        For many years, advocates for mental health and substance abuse have sought to achieve

“parity” in insurance benefits. The analysis presented above suggests that such efforts, if they are

successful, will not be sufficient to guarantee equality in access to services in mental health (Frank

and McGuire, 1998). If managed care rationing devices cannot be directly controlled, what

options are available to a regulator?



  population. Applying the index does reveal that mental health is a service more subject to selection problems,
  though the results are sensitive to the informational assumptions used.


                                                        54
       Risk adjustment of capitation payments and carve-out arrangements are two responses to

selection related incentives.   Purchasers of managed care services are making use of each

approach to deal with biased selection in the case of mental health and substance abuse. For

example, the State of Maryland has chosen to integrate substance abuse services for Medicaid

enrollees with all other medical care. Selection related incentives are being addressed by using

risk adjustment to adjust capitation rates for differences in enrollee health care risk. In contrast,

the State of Arizona carves out (as in Figure 2) all mental health and substance abuse care from its

general Medicaid HMOs and contracts separately with one specialized managed behavioral health

care organization (MBHO) in each region of the state. A third configuration is being proposed in

New York, where mental health is carved out of the Medicaid HMO program. However, multiple

MBHOs would be permitted to compete to enroll individuals for their mental health care. Each

competing MBHO is slated to be paid a flat capitation fee (Office of Mental Health, State of New

York, 1996). How well can risk adjustment and carve-outs be expected to do in countering

selection incentives?

       D.1. Risk Adjustment

       Managed care plans can engage in various activities designed to select good (profitable)

risks from an insurance pool (Cutler and Zeckhauser, 1998). They may prevent or discourage

high-cost individuals from joining their plan (sometimes called “dumping”) even if this is

prohibited under “open enrollment” regulations. They may also distort the services they provide

in order to attract the good and deter the bad risks, a perfectly legal activity. Risk adjustment is

intended to counter incentives to engage in activities which may lead to inefficient health plan

services and unequal access for potential enrollees.




                                                 55
        Risk adjustment of capitation rates makes use of information about the characteristics of

individuals to align payments with expected costs. The rationale is that the closer payments track

costs, the less services will be the inefficiencies and ones just mentioned. For example, age, sex,

welfare status, and county of residence have traditionally been used to adjust Medicare’s

capitation to HMOs enrolling program beneficiaries. If those over the age of 75 years are found

to cost more, premium payments on the behalf of those older beneficiaries are adjusted upward by

an estimate of their higher average cost. Most risk adjustment systems rely on demographic

factors and clinical information on individuals from past time periods. The clinical information

usually consists of diagnoses and procedures arranged in clusters based on clinical judgments

regarding the complexity and intensity of past treatment (Ellis et al., 1996; Weiner et al., 1996).

        The empirical research used to develop risk adjusters can be viewed in the context of an

empirical model of health care spending that relies on pooled time series and cross section data

(Newhouse, 1996; Newhouse et al., 1989). Equation (7) is a simple characterization of such a

model

(7)     Sit = a + Xit B + µi + εit

Sit is spending for individual i in period t, Xit represents a set of characteristics of individuals that

are included in the risk adjustment system, µ is a time invariant individual effect, εit is a possible

auto-regressive error with mean zero, and a and B are parameters. Most evaluations of risk

adjustment rely on the ability of models such as that given in equation (7) to explain variation in

individual spending as measured by an R2 statistic. Newhouse and colleagues (1989) pointed out

that a more appropriate standard for judging the ability of a risk adjusted payment system to

attenuate selection related incentives is to measure the portion of the “explainable” variance

accounted for by the risk adjustment system. Individuals (or plans) can only select a health plan


                                                   56
(or deter enrollment) based on spending they can predict. If one makes the assumption that

individuals know the information contained in a set of X’s and their past use, the explainable

variance consists of variation associated with the Xs, µ, and say auto-correlation in ε (Newhouse,

1996).

         Risk adjustment can be thought of as a tax-subsidy scheme (Diamond, 1994), intended to

correct selection-created inefficiencies.     Selection problems can take two general forms:

individual-based discrimination and plan-wide actions such as service distortions. If an empirical

risk adjustment system can set payments at predictable cost person-by-person, both of these

selection problems will be eliminated (Van der Ven and Ellis, Handbook).                 Empirical risk

adjusters do not track predictable costs so closely, so the task for economics is to evaluate the

efficiency implications of feasible risk adjusters. One way this has been done is by R-squared and

related statistical counters(??). These methods quantify how close, in a statistical sense, a given

risk adjustment system falls in relation to a first-best system. In a new literature on optimal risk

adjustment, weights on risk adjusters (such as age) are variables that are solved for within an

explicit market structure and an explicit welfare framework, and this welfare framework can be

used to evaluate alternative policies (Glazer and McGuire, 1998; Encinosa, 1998; Shen and Ellis,

1998).    This new work suggests that statistical and efficiency criteria do not give identical

rankings. In general, the “optimal” risk adjusters from an efficiency standpoint are not regression

coefficients that maximize explainable variance in individual-level health care costs.

         Classification Systems for Mental Health and Substance Abuse: In the development of

risk adjustment systems, little attention has been paid to MH/SA, partly because initial

development of the existing risk adjustment systems proceeded first in the Medicare context,

where MH/SA is a very small part of total spending. Continued applied research on the systems,


                                                 57
including use of younger populations, is leading to more attention to MH/SA. A consistent finding

in the research so far, however, is that however past diagnostic information is configured, it has

little predictive power in behavioral health (Ettner et al., 1998).

        Classification of MH/SA patients has posed a difficult problem for policy makers since the

initial introduction of prospective payment policies in the early 1980s. The development of

Medicare’s Prospective Payment System (PPS) required the federal government to determine

whether psychiatric and substance abuse Diagnosis Related Groups (DRGs) constituted an

adequate patient classification system. Horgan and Jencks (1987) and Jencks and Goldman

(1987) reviewed competing patient classification systems for grouping psychiatric inpatients.

Their conclusion, expressing the notion of a low R square in lay language, was: “In general,

research has not provided a robust explanation of differences in costs between psychiatric

facilities. In particular, research has not developed classification systems that class together

inpatient episodes with similar costs or that have substantial differences in costs between classes”

(Jencks and Goldman, 1987:S42). The low explanatory power of the DRGs for MH/SA was not

the most serious problem. The unexplained variation in cost was systematically related to certain

classes of facilities (conditional on the prior reimbursement system). Even after risk adjustment,

simulation analyses (summarized in Jencks and Goldman) showed that more specialized

psychiatric facilities drew a more costly case mix than general hospitals without specialized

facilitates. Thus the initial effect of putting MH/SA into the PPS would have conferred windfall

gains (on non-specialized facilities) and losses (on specialized facilities). Responses of facilities to

the new system would have modified these loses and gains, but the fundamental unfairness of the

PPS in this case, which, we emphasize could only be evaluated with a conception of how the

equilibrium would look, could not be avoided (Freiman et al., 1987).


                                                  58
       The inadequacies of inpatient discharge level, risk adjustment raises concerns about the

potential of per-person level risk conventional adjustment to adjust capitation rates for mental

health care. Other research in health services suggests that the variation in rates of use of MH/SA

care might be especially large and difficult to capture with the routinely available risk adjusters.

Research on demand for mental health services seldom offers models with explanatory power

comparable to those found in general health services. In the RAND Health Insurance Experiment,

for example, Keeler et al (1986, 1988) were able to group general outpatient medical care into

“episodes” and explain the occurrence and extent of these episodes statistically. A similar effort

met with much less success in the case of outpatient mental health care.

       Two initial evaluations of risk adjusters for MH/SA have been completed using Medicaid

and private insurance data sets. Ettner and Notman (1997) evaluated the predictive power of the

ACG classification system, a set of diagnostic clusters and age and sex groupings using data on

approximately 30,000 Medicaid enrollees in New Hampshire for fiscal years 1993 and 1994. New

Hampshire-specific weights for the classification systems were constructed using fiscal year 1993

data to predict 1994 expenditures.       The authors evaluated the explanatory power of the

classification systems for predicting: 1) total individual health care spending, and 2) individual

MH/SA spending. The results reveal several key points. First, none of the classification systems

studied explained more than 4% of variance in total health spending, with the percent of variance

explained ranging from 2% to 4%. Second, in the MH/SA area the maximum explanatory power

was 13% of the variance. Third in the analysis of MH/SA spending the results suggest that

including age and sex along with a set of variables indicating whether an individual had 1,2 or 3+




                                                59
separate MH/SA disorders indicated in claims during the previous year provided greater

explanatory power than any other method.29

         In the second analysis Ettner et al. (1998) examined risk adjusters within a larger data set

of privately insured employees and their dependents for 1992 and 1993. In that study, data from a

population of approximately 450,000 enrollees were examined to evaluate several conventional

risk adjustment systems.          To study the predictive ability of each system for total MH/SA

spending, the authors made use of actual health plan choices of employees to assess how well

each classification system would account for naturally occurring selection into plans (i.e. selection

with no risk adjustment in place). The 1992 patterns of illness were used to classify enrollees and

to predict 1993 spending. As in the case of New Hampshire, no classification system displayed

strong predictive ability. The results from the analysis of naturally occurring selection across

plans for two large employer groups contained in the data illuminated the weaknesses of all the

classification systems.30 When the payments that would have been made under each classification

scheme were compared with payments based on the simple average for all enrollee (across all plan

choices) little meaningful improvement was contributed by the risk adjusted payment mechanisms.

The results suggest that little of the systematic risk between plans was accounted for by the

classification methods examined. Thus, the condition implied by equation (6) to minimize

selection is unlikely to be met under any regression-based risk adjustment system.




29
   Dunn et al (1995) show that with stratified data and use of ADG, adjusted R2 for total health charges can be as
   high as 0.20. This exceeds the explanatory power found in MH/SA. The ADGs are aggregate of ACGs, which
   include inpatient diagnoses.
30
   The apparent selection across 3 plans may have been quite large. For example, in comparing plans with similar
   deductibles, differences in annual visit limits of 50, 50 and 25, and similar copayments for outpatient care, per
   person per year costs ranged from $6 to $105. Since the cost differences were unlikely to be attributable to
   differences in limits we interpret cost variation to be largely due to selection.


                                                         60
       Risk adjustment policy can be combined with payment system changes. By paying partly

on cost as in a mixed system, incentives to select are reduced (Newhouse, 1996). In mental health

care, mixed payment systems are in use which resemble the one depicted in Figure 6.

       D.2. Behavioral Health Carve-Outs

       Behavioral health carve-outs have become central to payment and delivery of MH/SA

services under managed care. Carve-outs are usually regarded as cost control devices. Carving

out MH/SA from an indemnity plan or in an indemnity/managed care choice plan ensures that all

MH/SA care will be managed. (See Figure 1). Carve-outs may also have a role in diminishing

selection-related incentives. The economic role of carve-out programs can differ significantly

depending on the specific form of the carve-out. For example, the carve-outs shown in Figure 3

are chosen by the health plan and can be viewed as an organizational structure that helps the

health plan implement its desired rationing scheme. Viewed in this manner carve-outs which are

simple sub-contractors of health plans are not expected to have any impact on selection because

consumers continue to choose among integrated health plans where the implementation of

rationing rules across services can affect enrollment patterns. The incentives to ration MH/SA

care to the organization are present with and without a carve-out contract.

       In contrast, the type of carve-out program depicted in Figure 2 separates MH/SA services

from overall health care and as such removes it as a dimension of competition among health plans

for enrollees. This can have potentially large impacts on the incentive to provide services.

Carving-out a service, MH/SA in this case, isolates MH/SA from selection-related incentives.

Rationing will be determined by the contract between the payer and the specialty MBHO. It is

also important to note that the rationing for any one service depends on all the other service

demands. Thus, carving-out any one service will affect the degree of rationing for all others.


                                                61
       Carve-out programs have other pros and cons that must be considered along with the

potential welfare gains related to selection. One controversial question relates to whether MH/SA

care is more effectively delivered in a fashion that is integrated with medical care via a primary

care physician. In theory, “integrated” care is better than “fragmented” care. In practice, a

separate mental health system has some advantages. Primary care physicians tend to overlook

mental illness in their patients (Jencks, 1985; Morlock, 1989).        When mental illnesses are

recognized primary care physicians often fail to provide appropriate treatment (Shapiro et al.,

1987, Wells et al., 1996).

       Carve-out programs add administrative costs. Estimates of the additional administrative

costs associated with carve-out arrangements range from 8% to as much as 20% of MH/SA

benefit costs. Finally, new boundaries between payers’ responsibility creates opportunities for

cost-shifting and strategic behavior.    Anecdotal evidence suggests that carve-out plans are

especially prone to adopt pharmacotherapeutic strategies because the drug benefit represents an

“off budget” set of treatments. Brisson et al. (1998) finds a higher propensity for individuals with

histories of substance abuse treatment to be hospitalized in a general medical setting following

introduction of a carve-out plan.



V.     The Public Mental Health and Substance Abuse Treatment System

       A unique feature of mental health care delivery in most western nations is the large role

assigned to public hospitals and clinics for the care of individuals with mental and addictive

disorders. Direct public services for the most seriously ill persons is a common feature of health

systems that may otherwise be organized to provide and pay for other health care with a range of

approaches (Hollingsworth, 1992).       The public mental health systems in the United States,


                                                62
Germany, Canada, Great Britain and France are quite similar, despite vast differences in their

general approaches to health care financing. Each of these nations assigns responsibility for

mental health care to sub-national government (e.g. states in the U.S., länder in Germany,

provinces in Canada and local authorities in the United Kingdom) and tends to rely on local tax

funding more than either central government or premium-based funding.             The role of local

government-provided mental health care predates the development of either public or private

insurance arrangements and tends to emphasize providing care to the poor and disabled. These

public mental health systems have been the source of public dissatisfaction with respect to the

quality of care and horizontal equity (Mangen and Rao, 1985; Mehnte, 1989). Yet they continue

to play central roles in the care of severe mental and addictive illnesses.

        There are three main factors that explain the commonality. First, the technology of

treating severe mental disorders calls for different organizational and financial arrangements from

other medical conditions.      Second, public mental health systems predate modern insurance

arrangements, and these established systems of public provision may have inhibited other forms of

financing for mental health and substance abuse.          Third, the externalities created by mental

illnesses means that provision of mental health care has a public safety component and therefore

the state has a greater interest in assuming more direct control over the delivery of certain forms

of mental health care to fulfill its obligation of public protection.

        A.          The Technology of Treatment for the Severely Mentally Ill

        The acute health care delivery system is ill-equipped to deal with the array of problems

associated with severe mental disorders. Mechanic (1989) describes the complexity of services

required for treatment of individuals with severe mental disorders this way:




                                                   63
               “Effective community care for the most seriously disabled patients
       requires performance of many of the same functions as the mental hospital,
       ranging from assuring appropriate shelter to managing serious medical and
       psychiatric problems. To do so in the community context requires some influence
       over areas of responsibility involving different sectors (housing, medical care,
       social services, welfare) .… (p. 492)


This characterization suggests important differences in the technology required for treating the

sickest and mostly costly people with mental illnesses from those with most medical conditions.

The observation that medical care delivery systems have difficulty accommodating individuals

with chronic diseases has been widely acknowledged in other contexts (Moon, 1996; Wallack and

Levine, 1996). It appears that this point applies with special force in the case of severe mental

disorders.

       Treatment programs aimed at people with severe mental illnesses must concern themselves

with the acute care of the symptoms of illness, as does the rest of medicine. In addition, however,

mental health care must address the housing, income support, rehabilitation, social contacts, and

social control of the affected individuals. The nature of severe mental illnesses and their treatment

requires that mental health providers coordinate these services. Many of the most successful

innovations in the treatment of severe mental disorders involve new ways of organizing and

coordinating the various elements of care for individuals with severe mental disorders (Stein and

Test, 1980; Dill and Rochefort, 1989; Schwartz, Goldman and Churgin, 1982, Taube, Morlock,

Burns and Santos, 1990). The health systems in the U.S., Germany, Britain and Canada all

confine responsibility of the medical care system for mental health services and treatments to

those that roughly correspond to acute care medical treatments. Such actions are consistent with

recognition of a different technology of treatment that may call for a different set of institutions.




                                                  64
       In European contexts, the organizational response to differences in technology for treating

people with severe mental disorders in great measure reflects the political choices of planners or

the results of political bargaining between different levels of government. In the U.S. context, the

organizational response to the needs of persons with serious mental illness represents a different

set of forces involving market failure, perhaps due to adverse selection and externalities

(discussed below), and the economics of a federalist system.

       B.          Fiscal Federalism and Public Mental Health Care

       In assessing the lessons from the history of mental health policy, Grob (1994) points to the

evolving nature of fiscal federalism as a central force in shaping the role of government in mental

health care delivery. He goes so far as to assert that for some payers, including states, cost

shifting has been as important in designing policies as the impetus to construct a “rational”

system. “Deinstitutionalizing” the mentally ill refers to shrinking or closing state hospitals, and

transferring the care of previously hospitalized patients to a diverse set of care providers. While a

rationale for deinstitutionalization can be made on the basis of single system cost-effectiveness,

cost-shifting was also a motive. State government in the U.S. paid the costs in state hospitals,

and only a share of the costs of care given by alternative providers, courtesy of the federal

Medicaid program.

       Since states (and other regional governments outside the U.S.) make the majority of

spending decisions about public funds for care of mental disorders, the literature has naturally

directed attention towards state choices regarding mental health policy. A simple starting point

for analyses of state mental health policy is to view state policy decisions as being the result of

choices by a social planner seeking to coordinate mental health services for the poor. State policy

makers have two major instruments: direct state spending on services, and the insurance-like


                                                 65
Medicaid program. Michael (1980) and Frank (1985) regard the “state” as a single decision-

maker with an objective function containing: welfare for the poor and state budget costs. The

choices of the state planner are constrained by factors such as the income in the state, the size of

the public mental hospital system, the availability of alternatives to state funded providers (e.g.

nursing homes), federal rules governing Medicaid especially the federal matching rate on

spending,31 and the amount of private insurance coverage in a state. Direct state spending on

mental health care will be reduced, according to this approach, by generous federal matching

provisions,32 the availability of care in settings funded by Medicaid (nursing homes), and

expansion of private insurance coverage for mental health care. These all point to rational cost

shifting responses to exogenous changes in regulation and market structure.

         Although few formal analyses of mental health financing for countries other than the U.S.

have appeared in the literature, similar observations have been made about the relation of central

government financing to local funds.              For example, Britain has experimented with central

government matching grants to local authorities (Knapp, 1990; Yellowlees, 1990). In general,

these schemes have not resulted in the desired effort by localities. In Germany, the sickness funds

have resisted expanding benefits to include long-term care for mental disorders due to concerns

that costs would be shifted from the lander to the sickness funds (Cooper and Bauer, 1987).

         Existing empirical evidence from the U.S. is broadly consistent with the single decision-

maker model predictions. For example, Frank (1985) using a cross section of states for the year

1976 found that the state share of the Medicaid program was positively related to per capita state


31
   The Medicaid program in the U.S. matches state spending according to a formula based on per capita income.
   The federal government constrains minimum participation to 50% and maximum matching rates are about 78%.
   This formula favors high-income states.
32
   It is possible that the state’s elasticity of demand would be high enough to reverse this result, but this is very
   unlikely.


                                                         66
spending for direct mental health services. The size of state mental hospital systems (relative to

population size) was estimated to have a large positive impact on spending, while the presence of

a mandated mental health care insurance statute (creating another destination for cost-shifting)

reduced state mental health spending. Michael (1980) found that the availability of nursing home

services led to reduced use of state mental hospitals. He also shows that the number of mental

hospitals per state senatorial district was estimated to have a positive and significant impact on the

use of public mental hospitals. Gronfein (1985) found that the introduction of Medicaid, and its

opportunity for shifting mental health costs from state budgets was the most important factor

determining the rate of deinstitutionaliztion in states. The Medicaid impact dominated the effects

of innovation in drug treatment and the creation of community mental health centers. During the

period 1955 to 1965, the populations of public mental hospitals were reduced by about 1.5% a

year. Following the implementation of Medicaid the rate of population reduction increased to 6%

a year.

          The prominence of cost shifting in state mental health policy explains tensions between

federal (or central) governments and local governments in the United States and other western

nations in mental health policy. For example, when the Medicaid and Medicare programs were

implemented in the United States, Congress included provisions which prohibited Medicaid

reimbursement for care provided in an “Institution for Mental Disease” (IMD) and limited

Medicare hospital payments to 190 days over an individual’s lifetime. These rules were aimed at

preventing states from shifting the costs of state mental hospitals onto the federal government’s

budget (which turned out to be partially and temporarily successful). Thus, once the federal

government appreciates the responses it will get in a cost shifting game with the states, the result




                                                 67
will be a division of labor that may leave states with their historical responsibility for public mental

hospitals that care for the most impaired and difficult indigent people with mental disorders.

       Cost shifting has also been reported in Canada. Following adoption of the National Health

Insurance plan in 1968, Nova Scotia and other provinces attempted to reorganize mental health

services in order to capture health insurance payments for services which were previously the

responsibility of the provincial government (Rochefort, 1993). The National Health Insurance

plan guarded against cost shifting by (1) strictly limiting the range of providers who could be

reimbursed for supplying mental health care (MDs only), and (2) limiting the scope of services to

acute care treatment, thereby excluding day treatment and rehabilitation services.

       While single decision-maker models are adequate to explain cost shifting behavior

between federal and state (regional) government, this approach may not offer a fully satisfactory

explanation for observed patterns of mental health policy. Within a state, agencies (Medicaid,

mental health, substance abuse) may behave as independent (and possibly competing)

organizations. Casual observations have noted policies which shift responsibility for care of

individuals with mental disorders from state mental health agencies to social welfare agencies,

school systems and criminal justice programs.            Such observations suggest the limits of

characterizing state government behavior in terms of a single planner that coordinates policy

(Rochefort, 1993; Mangen and Rao, 1985; Cooper and Bauer, 1987). One way to investigate the

empirical importance of a state’s organizational choices is to see if different state’s approaches to

dividing up administrative responsibility for Medicaid, mental health, substance abuse, and related

services affect the level of state spending on those services. Using a time-series of the fifty states

in the United States, Jacobsen, Notman, and McGuire (1996) found that organizational changes,

such as putting responsibility for substance-abuse services in a mental health department had,


                                                  68
predictable, but small, effects on levels of spending. If intrastate division of labor among agencies

matters for state fiscal outcomes, the single decision-maker model is contradicted.

       A natural way to regard intergovernmental relations is as a sequential game consisting of

the federal government, state government, local government and participants in private markets

(Frank and McGuire, 1996). The federal government makes policy given the historical role of the

states which in turn sets the stage for state policy action. The state and federal policies determine

the outlines of the market where private parties buy and sell insurance against the consequences of

mental and addictive illnesses.

       Within this framework, the federal government sets rules for public insurance programs

(Medicaid) that seek to limit the shifting of the costs of state mental hospitals from state to federal

budgets. Marmor and Gill (1989) propose a political model along these lines that applies to the

U.S. and Britain. The IMD rule associated with the U.S. Medicaid program, noted above, is one

example of a policy adopted to reduce cost shifting by states. States in turn responded to

matching provisions under Medicaid by orienting program design towards Medicaid.                   For

example, state governments shifted large numbers of elderly residents in state mental hospitals to

nursing homes following the introduction of Medicaid in the late 1960s. This meant that the costs

of treating one segment of the elderly population were moved entirely off budget for the state

mental health agency. State governments retained some financial responsibility via matching

provisions, of roughly 30% to 50%, assigned to the state under the Medicaid program.

       States also set general rules within which individual agencies and local governments

operate. Within state governments, funding for mental health care and substance abuse treatment

is administered and often supplied separately. Nevertheless, there is considerable co-occurrence

of these classes of disorders. Current clinical thought suggests that organizational and payment


                                                  69
arrangements stand in the way of effective treatment for this class of expensive and disabling

conditions. Policy regarding utilization of state mental hospitals offers an example of the response

by local mental health systems to of state payment rules. For many years state mental health

agencies provided public mental hospital services to local public mental health programs “free of

charge” (Frank and Gaynor, 1995). One result was a tendency of local programs to “overuse”

state mental hospitals. This set of institutional arrangements has been pointed to as leading to

distortions in spending towards state mental hospitals and to inefficiently low levels of effort

aimed at treating people with severe mental illness in community programs (McGuire and

Riordan, 1995).

       Private insurance markets offer insurance designs in the context of a public mental health

system that will provide hospital and outpatient care for mentally ill individuals without insurance

coverage. Approximately 55% of individuals admitted to public psychiatric hospitals in 1994 had

no insurance coverage.     In addition, a significant number of people in state hospitals with

coverage had exhausted their mental health benefit. The presence of a public mental health

system along with market forces associated with selection incentives discussed above serve to

undermine the provision of private insurance for mental health and substance abuse care. The

availability of publicly funded and provided mental health care allows employers to strictly limit

insurance coverage for mental health care while at the same time giving their employees recourse

should a catastrophic mental illness strike. As noted earlier, mandated mental health insurance

statutes represent a policy response by states to market failures stemming from adverse selection.

Mandates also represent a means of shifting costs from state government budgets to private

employers (Frisman, McGuire and Rosenbach, 1985).             Mental health mandates have been

politically contentious in state legislature and have been limited in their effect by federal policy.


                                                 70
The federal Employment Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) allows self-insured firms to be

exempt from state laws which govern the business of insurance. During the 1980s and 1990s an

increasing number of mid and large size firms have chosen to become self-insured.            The

consequences are that in most states only a modest portion of the population is subject to

mandated benefit statutes. Thus, federal policy has limited the ability of states to 1) address

market failure in insurance and 2) shift costs onto private employers.

       Mental health policy can be viewed as a cascading cost shifting game. Each of the players

across levels and within levels of the game makes choices subject to rules set at a higher level.

Players are presumed to be aware of the behavior of other players at the same level and below and

develop policies accordingly. These ideas appear also to apply in nations with federal types of

systems in mental health, including Britain, Germany, and Canada (Yellowlees, 1990; Marmor and

Gill, 1989).

       B. Externalities and Public Mental Health Care

       Prior to the 1820s, mental problems were not so clearly part of the medical domain. Care

for “lunatics” or “distracted “ persons was provided through a variety of informal mechanisms

(Grob, 1994). Poor houses and almshouses were settings for the support of people with disabling

mental problems. During the first part of the 19th century a new institution, the asylum, became

the focal point for treatment of more clearly recognized mental illnesses.        Initially these

institutions were the shared responsibility of state and local governments. State government in

the 1820s and 1830s typically provided capital financing for asylums and localities paid for

operating expenses. Initially, the priority populations for treatment in asylums were individuals

viewed as “dangerously insane” (Grob, 1973). The requirement that local government pay for

costs of treating mentally ill people in asylums created an incentive for localities to continue


                                                 71
housing the mentally ill in almshouses which had very low per diem costs. Aware of the problems

created by divided responsibility for asylums, states began to take over all financial and

operational responsibility for asylums. As financial responsibility shifted to state governments,

localities developed new enthusiasm for the use of asylums to treat the mentally ill. Not only did

localities transfer responsibility to state asylums for individuals that were “chronically” mentally

ill, they also redefined senility as a psychiatric condition and shifted responsibility and the costs of

caring for the senile elderly to the state. The state has had the paramount role in mental health

policy ever since.

       Thus from early in the 19th century to the present the state mental hospital system (and

later state mental health systems) has played two roles. First, it has served as an institution for

involuntary treatment and confinement of individuals who were viewed as dangerous due to a

mental disorders. Second, it has served as a safety net institution for housing and care of other

disabled and vulnerable populations (initially the senile elderly, later chronic brain damaged

alcoholics). Two roles of the state have been used to justify the presence and persistence of a

public mental health system that supplies involuntary treatment (Rubin, 1978). These are the

parens patriae doctrine and the police power of the state. The parens patriae doctrine claims

that when an individual is mentally incapable of taking care of him or herself, the state may serve

as an agent of the individual and institutionalize the individual in order to care adequately for

them. The police power of the state justifies institutionalization of individuals who are a danger

to themselves or others in order to protect the individual or society at large. In the latter case the

state can choose between separating an individual from society and offering treatment via the

mental health system or through incarceration in the criminal justice system.




                                                  72
       The presence of external effects provides an efficiency underpinning to both justifications

for assigning the state a role in involuntary commitment for mental health care. The parens

patriae doctrine substitutes judgments of the state for individual choice based on the notion that

there is a collective interest in seeing that individuals who are so impaired by mental disorders

receive sufficient care so as to survive and possibly improve their ability to function or recover.

This collective interest is a consumption externality, the polity benefiting from consumption of

mental health care by those too impaired to make such choices on their own. The police power

rationale also involves an externality.      Protecting affected individuals intent on harming

themselves or protecting the general public from individuals whose mental disorders make them

dangerous to others through treatment and confinement also confers external benefits. Publicly

funded mental hospitals that care for these individuals generate some non-excludable benefits and

therefore have a public good feature.

       All U.S. states have laws and regulations that govern the process by which individuals can

be involuntarily committed to mental institutions. Since the early 1970s there has also been

judicially imposed regulation concerning the conditions of the institutions to which these

individuals are committed. Over the past 30 years there has been considerable flux in public

policy regarding involuntarily commitment to mental hospitals (Rubin, 1978). Since the early

1970s state psychiatric hospitals have been required to provide active treatment and to have

physical facilities and staffs that are consistent with what the courts have viewed as the ability to

provide active treatment.

       Empirical analyses have shown that commitment laws and regulations, as well as court-

dictated facility and staffing guidelines, have had a significant impact on the size of the

populations served in public mental hospitals as well as the budgets of those institutions.


                                                 73
Lambrinos and Rubin (1981) used a simultaneous equations model to estimate the impact of

commitment laws and regulations on average daily census and spending on public mental hospitals

with data from 1974 and 1975. Their results showed that states that institute mechanisms to

protect patient rights such as appointment of an attorney and requiring a formal hearing tend to

reduce use of mental institutions.               States that clearly define “risk” and disability in their

commitment statutes also tend to have lower rates of institutionalization. Rubin (1980) and

Lambrinos and Rubin (1981) offer evidence suggesting that the regulations setting out standards

for staffing and the physical plants of state hospitals have increased spending on public mental

health care.

           The state responsibility for public protection and the care of those who cannot fend for

themselves is a long-established basis for the public mental hospital, a role predating the

development of either public or private insurance mechanisms. Most states continue to have laws

in place that tend to favor society’s interests (externalities) over individual liberties of the mentally

ill. This in part explains the persistence of the state role in provision of mental health care.

Litigation and court decisions during the 1970s have forced states to provide treatment in public

mental institutions which, in turn, increased spending on those institutions in the 1970s and

1980s.33 At the same time the division of labor has shifted whereby private organizations have

increasingly served individuals with insurance (public and private) who are involuntarily

committed. State mental hospitals have become facilities that serve the most impaired, dangerous,

and indigent people with mental illness. Privatization of production in this area of service has

been quite limited.




33
     For an overview of the troubling history of the state mental hospital in the United States see Grob (1973, 1994).


                                                           74
VI.    Conclusions

       Economic analyses of the cost of illness and other assessments of the global burden of

disease testify to the disabling effect of mental disorders. Mental illnesses often persist, and can

be accompanied by a range of social pathologies, generating public misunderstanding and fear.

Public safety is therefore viewed as a key product of the mental health care system, one factor in

explaining the major role assigned to government in the financing and delivery of mental health

services relative to what is found in general medical care. There is an unresolved tension between

the insurance-medical care delivery aspects of mental health care and the public safety role. For

most of this century the public safety role featuring direct government provision appears to have

dominated the organization and financing of this system. Nevertheless, over the past thirty years,

private institutions and markets have ascended to important positions in the provision of mental

health services.   Markets for health insurance and health services have developed against a

background of large publicly funded and managed mental health system, though downsizing has

been one key force affecting the development of private insurance markets in the U.S. and the

design and implementation of public insurance in the U.S., Britain and Canada among other

nations.

       Concerns about insurance arrangements in mental health relative to general medical care

have dominated policy debates in the mental health arena during the 1980s and 1990s. Here the

traditional factors which threaten the efficient functioning of insurance markets, adverse selection

and moral hazard, are important for understanding the performance of the market with regard to

mental health care. Mental health advocates are troubled by the “special treatment” of the

mentally ill in the structure of private insurance. Advocates have tended to understand the special




                                                75
treatment as discrimination rather than as a response to economic fundamentals. Payers have

been deeply troubled by the cost control problems associated with coverage of mental health care

under indemnity-fee for service arrangements.

       In economic terms, the behavior of providers and consumers in the market for mental

health services reflects the characteristics of mental health disorders and their treatments.

Adverse selection and moral hazard appear to hit mental health markets with special force. In

some of the first economic research on mental health, the demand response was found to be high.

The persistence of many mental disorders and the fact that people most likely to suffer from

mental disorders are most likely to choose health plans with generous mental coverage suggests

strong incentives for plans to limit mental health coverage. Sorting out the roles of moral hazard

and selection in explaining observed market outcomes, and in terms of the implications for

optimal policy, has been an ongoing theme in research in the economics of mental health.

       The basis for the institutions governing coverage for mental health care have been

dramatically altered by managed care, which changes the terms of Zeckhauser’s dilemma, wherein

coverage should balance losses from risk and moral hazard. Mental health services are now

rationed by means other than demand-side prices. Even though little is known about internal

rationing methods used within managed care organizations, the ability to control costs in this way

means that the main efficiency argument against parity in mental health coverage is potentially

weakened under managed care. At the same time, parity in demand-side cost sharing delivers less

because expanded nominal coverage is no longer a guarantee of access. Demand-side cost

sharing may no longer be the binding constraint on use.

       Managed care has also continued to treat mental health differently than other illnesses, the

most important example being the emergence of behavioral health carve-out programs. Are these


                                                76
institutions a fiscal discrimination against the mentally ill, or a response to market failure?

Economic research understands these institutions in terms of key functions that they serve. The

first relates to economies of specialization and control of moral hazard, while a second involves

attenuation of selection related incentives common in competitive insurance markets. Payer

carve-outs may increase market efficiency by removing mental health from competition for “good

risks” among health plans.

       As the focus of government policy towards mental health has shifted towards treatment

and away from public safety, maintenance of large publicly supported institutions has been harder

to justify. The public mental hospital is increasingly being consigned to care for involuntarily

committed individuals and the severely impaired, narrowing its public safety function.            The

emergence of private providers of managed behavioral health care that will assume some risk, has

proved to be an attractive alternative to a number of states. The result is a shifting of functions

for many state governments from payer (via grants) and provider to payer (via contracts) and

regulator. A key dilemma facing the states is that while insurance markets continue to be subject

to failures stemming from selection related incentives, state Medicaid programs and the related

federal disability programs are becoming increasingly restricted.         States remain nevertheless

responsible for the indigent mentally ill, yet they are reducing the infrastructure available to attend

to the mental health needs of these vulnerable populations. How states will choose to address

their traditional role as provider of last resort in the context of the new private market for mental

health care is unclear. What is clear is that in the past fifty years resource allocation in mental

health in dealing with state government has moved steadily out of the realm of public

administration and into the domain of economics and mental health.




                                                  77
                   FIGURE 1


                    Employer


            Traditional       Carve
               Plan            Out

Enrollees     managed care plan 1
              managed care plan 2

              Health        Behavioral
                             Health




                       78
            FIGURE 2


                      Employer


                  Plan 1
                            Carve
Enrollees         Plan 2     Out

                  Plan 3

              Health       Behavioral
                             Health




             79
            FIGURE 3


                     Employer

                               Carve Out
                  Plan 1
                                   1

Enrollees         Plan 2       Carve Out
                                   2

                           Plan 3

                  Health       Behavioral
                                 Health




             80
                                    FIGURE 4
           NON-LINEAR PRICE SCHEDULES AND DEMAND FOR MH/SA CARE




   P



 CP

                       D1                   D2                             D4
                                                    D3

                         Q1                        Q2

Source: Frank, RG and Manning, WG. Economics and Mental Health. The Johns Hopkins
              University Press: Baltimore, 1992.




                                       81
                       FIGURE 5
         MANAGED CARE RATIONING BY SHADOW PRICES



              5a                                   5b
      General Health                      Mental Health

     demand
                                         demand
$1


q'
q

              g’ g                                      m’ m




                           82
                      FIGURE 6
          PAYMENT SYSTEMS FOR MANAGED CARE




payment
                                             45o


                                   A

                                    B
      C
              E

                  F
      N
      O           L     T         M            cost




                         83
                                             TABLE 1
 MENTAL HEALTH AND SUBSTANCE ABUSE SPENDING BY SOURCE OF PAYMENT, U.S., 1996

Payer                                                MH/SA %*   All Health %*
Private Insurance                                      25.8         31.0
Private Out-of-Pocket                                  15.1         18.1
Medicare                                               14.0         21.0
Medicaid                                               18.8         14.8
Other Federal                                           3.9          4.3
Other State/Local                                      19.4          7.2
Other Private                                           2.7          3.3
Total                                                  100           100

* Percentages may not sum due to rounding.



Source: McKusick et al., 1998




                                                84
                                        TABLE 2
                    SPENDING ON SPECIALTY CARE ORGANIZATIONS, U.S.
                                  (NOMINAL DOLLARS)


                                                       1969               1994
State Mental Hospitals                             $1,814 million    $7,824 million
General Hospital Psychiatric Units                      298              5,344
Private Psychiatric Hospitals                           450              6,468
VA Medical Centers                                      122              1,386
Residential Treatment Centers                           186              2,360
Free Standing Clinics                                   202              6,046
Community Based Treatment Programs                      220              3,706
                                          Total    $3,293 million    $33,136 million




Source: Mental Health, United States, 1998.




                                              85
                                           TABLE 3
                                RESEARCH ON DEMAND RESPONSE

          Study              Type of Elasticity           MH/SA Estimate   General Health Estimate
McGuire (1981)                Point                            -1.00
Taube et al. (1986)           Point (level of use)             -0.54                -0.13
Horgan (1986)                 Point (level of use)             -0.44                -0.16
Ellis and McGuire (1986)      Point (level of use)             -0.37
Manning et al. (1988)         Arc                              -0.80                -0.30




   Source: McGuire (1989) and authors’ calculations




                                                     86
                                       TABLE 4
                                    CARVE-OUT IMPACTS

    Case                Risk                      Impact                     Studies
                    Arrangement
  Mass GIC               RS           Pre-post Outpatient Spending    Ma and McGuire (1998)
                                            (-25% à-16%)                 Huskamp (1997)

                                            Total Spending
                                                (-32%)

Mass Medicaid            RS                                            Callahan et al. (1995)
                                           Pre-post Spending             Frank et al. (1996)
                                            (-26% à -22%)            Frank and McGuire (1997)


Utah Medicaid           Cap                Pre-post Spending            Christianson (1995)
 1989 – 1992                                    (-17%)


 Pacific Bell           ASO                Pre-post Spending           Goldman et al. (1998)
 1988 - 1995                                    (-43%)



ASO = Administrative Service Only
RS = Risk Sharing
Cap = Capitation




                                             87
                                         REFERENCES

American Psychiatric Association (1995), Diagnostic and Statistical Manual IV, APA Press:
        Washington, DC.
Appropriation Authorization for the Department of Veterans Affairs, (1996).
Arrow, K.J. (1963), “Uncertainty and the Welfare Economics of Medical Care,” American
        Economic Review, 53: 941-969.
Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation (ASPE), (1994). Substance Abuse Among
        Women and Parents, USDHHS: Washington, DC.
Barr, N. (1992), “Economic Theory and the Welfare State: A Survey and Interpretation,” Journal
        of Economic Literature, 30(2): 741-763.
Bartel, A. and Taubman, P. (1986), “Some Economic and Demographic Consequences of Mental
        Illness,” Journal of Labor Economics, 4(2): 243-56.
Baumgardner, J. (1991), “The Interaction between Forms of Insurance Contract and Types of
        Technical Change in Medical Care,” RAND Journal of Health Economics, 22(1): 36-53.
Beinecke, R.H., Shepard, D.S., Goodman, M., and Rivera, M. (1997), “Assessment of the
        Massachusetts Managed Behavioral Health Program: Year Three,” Administration and
        Policy in Mental Health, 24(3): 191-204.
Berndt, E.R., Cockburn, I., and Griliches, Z. (1996), “Pharmaceutical Innovations and Market
        Dynamics: Tracking Effects on Price Indexes for Antidepressant Drugs,” Brookings
        Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics 1996, Brookings Institute, Inc., 133-188.
Berndt, E.R., Frank, R.G., and McGuire, T.G. (1997). “Alternate Insurance Arrangements and
        the Treatment of Depression: What are the Facts?” American Journal of Managed Care,
        3(2): 243-252.
Blomquist, A. (1991), “The Doctor as Double Agent: Information Asymmetry, Health Insurance
        and Medical Care,” Journal of Health Economics, 10: 411-432.
Brisson, A.S., Frank, R.G., et al. (1998), “A Case Study in the Impact of Managed Care on
        Utilization and Costs of Behavioral Health Care in an HMO,” NBER Working Paper
        #6242.
Bruce, M.L., Takeuchi, D., and Leaf, P.J. (1991), “Poverty and Psychiatric Status,” Archives of
        General Psychiatry, 48: 470-474.
Buck, J.A. and Umland, B. (1997), “Trends: Covering Mental Health and Substance Abuse
        Services,” Health Affairs, 16(4): 120-126.
Bureau of Labor Statistics, (1996), Tabulations from Employee Benefits in Medium and Large
        Private Establishments, Washington: USGPO.
Callahan, J.J., Shepard, D.S., Beinecke, R.H., Larson, M.H., and Cavanaugh, D. (1995), “Mental
        Health/Substance Abuse Treatment in Managed Care: The Massachusetts Medicaid
        Experience,” Health Affairs, 14(3): 173-184.
Chang, C.F., Kiser, L.J., Bailey, J.E., Martins, M., Gibson, W.C., Schaberg, K.A., Mirvis, D.M.,
        and Applegate, W.B. (1998), “Tennessee’s Failed Managed Care Program for Mental
        Health and Substance Abuse Services,” JAMA, 279(11): 864-869.
Christianson, J.B. et al. (1995), “Utah’s Prepaid mental Health Plan: The First Year,” Health
        Affairs, 14(3): 160-172.




                                              88
Christianson, J.B., Wholey, D., and Peterson, M.S. (1997), “Strategies for Managing Service
        Delivery in HMOs: An Application to Mental Health Care,” Medical Care Research and
        Review, 54(2): 200-222.
Cooper, B. and Bauer, M. (1987), “Developments in Mental Health Care and Services in the
        Federal Republic of Germany,” International Journal of Mental Health, 16: 78-93.
Cornes, R. and Sandler, T. (1986), The Theory of Externalities, Public Goods and Club Goods,
        Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, England.
Cromwell, J., Ellis, R.P., Harrow, B., and McGuire, T.G. (1992), “A Modified TEFRA System
        for Medicare Discharges from Psychiatric Facilities,” in Frank RG and Manning (Eds.)
        Economics and Mental Health, Johns Hopkins University Press.
Cuffel, B., Goldman, W., and Schlesinger, H. (1998), “The Effects of Increased Mental Health
        Benefits and a MBHC Carve-Out on General Medical Costs,” working paper.
Cutler, D. and Zeckhauser, R. (1998), “The Anatomy of Health Insurance,” in Newhouse JP and
        Culyer AY (Eds.) Handbook of Health Economics, North Holland Press: Amsterdam.
Deb, P., Rubin, J., Wilcox-Gok, V., and Holmes, A. (1996), “Choice of Health Insurance by
        Families of the Mentally Ill,” Health Economics, 5(1): 61-76.
Dickey, B. and Azeni, H. (1992), “Impact of Managed Care on Mental Health Services,” Health
        Affairs, 11(3): 197-226.
Diehr, P., et al. (1984), “Ambulatory Mental Health Services Utilization in Three Provider Plans,”
        Medical Care, 22(1): 1-13.
Duan, N., Manning, W.G., Morris, C.N., and Newhouse, J.P. (1983), “A Comparison of
        Alternative Models of the Demand for Medical Care,” Journal of Business and Economic
        Statistics, 1(2): 115-126.
Elkin, I., Shea, T., Watkins, J.T., Imber, S.D., Sotsky, S.M., Collins, J.F., Glass, D.R., Pilkonis,
        P.A., Leber, W.R., Docherty, J.P., Fiester, S.J., and Parloff, M.B. (1989), “National
        Institute of Mental Health Treatment of Depression Collaborative Research Program:
        General Effectiveness of Treatments,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 46: 971-982.
Ellis, R.P. (1986), “Rational Behavior in the Presence of Coverage Ceilings and Deductibles,”
        Rand Journal of Economics, 17: 158-175.
Ellis, R.P. and McGuire, T.G. (1986), “Cost Sharing and Patterns of Mental Health Care
        Utilization,” Journal of Human Resources, 21(3): 359-380.
Ellis, R.P. and McGuire, T.G. (1986), “Provider Behavior Under Prospective Reimbursement:
        Cost Sharing and Supply,” Journal of Health Economics, xx: 129-151.
Ellis, R.P. and McGuire, T.G. (1988), “Insurance Principles and Design of Prospective Payment
        Systems,” Journal of Health Economics, 7: 215-237.
Ellis, R.P. and McGuire, T.G. (1993), “Supply-Side and Demand-Side Cost Sharing in Health
        Care,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 7(4): 135-151.
Ellis, R.P. and McGuire, T.G. (1996), “Hospital Response to Prospective Payment: Moral
        Hazard, Selection, and Practice-Style Effects,” Journal of Health Economics, 15: 257-
        277.
Ellis, R.P., Pope, G.C., Iezzoni, L.I., Ayanian, J.Z., et al. (1986), “Diagnosis-Based Risk
        Adjustment for Medicare Capitation Payments,” Health Care Financing Review, 17(3):
        101-128.




                                                89
Ellis, R.P. (1988), “The Effect of Prior-Year Health Expenditures on Health Coverage Plan
        Choice,” In Scheffler RM, Rossiter LF (Eds) Advances in Health Economics and Health
        Services Research, Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, 6: 149-170.
Ellis, R.P. (1998), “Creaming, Skimping and Dumping: Provider Competition on the Intensive
        and Extensive Margins,” Journal of Health Economics, 17(5): 537-556.
Encinosa, W. (1988), “Risk Adjusting Health Insurance,” unpublished manuscript, Agency for
        Health Care Policy and Research.
Ettner, S.L. and Notman, E.H. (1997), “How Well Do Ambulatory Care Groups Predict
        Expenditures of Mental Health and Substance Abuse Patients?” Journal of Administration
        and Policy in Mental Health, 24(4): 339-358.
Ettner, S.L., Frank, R.G., and Kessler, R.C. (1997), “The Impact of Psychiatric Disorder on
        Labor Market Outcomes,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 51(1): 64-81.
Ettner, S.L., Frank, R.G., McGuire, T.G., Newhouse, J.P., and Notman, E.H. (1998), “Risk
        Adjustment of Mental Health and Substance Abuse Payments,” Inquiry, 35(2): 223-239.
Fairbank, A. (1989), “Expanding Insurance Coverage to Alternate Types of Psychotherapists:
        Demand and Substitution Effects, “ Inquiry, 26(2): 170-181.
Finch, M. et al. (1992), “The Treatment of Alcohol and drug Abuse Among Mentally Ill Medicaid
        Enrollees: The Utilization of Services in prepaid Plans versus Fee-for-Service Care,” in
        Frank R and Manning W (Eds.) Economics and Mental Health, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
        Press.
Frank, R.G. and Gaynor, M.S. (1995), “Incentives, Optimality and Publicly Provided Goods: The
        Case of Mental Health Services,” Public Finance Quarterly, 23(2): 167-192.
Frank, R.G. and Gertler, P. (1991), “An Assessment of Measurement Error Bias for Estimating
        the Impact of Mental Distress on Earnings,” Journal of Human Resources, 26(1): 154-
        164.
Frank, R.G. and Jackson, C.A. (1989), “The Impact of Prospectively Set Hospital Budgets on
        Psychiatric Admissions,” Social Science and Medicine, 28(8): 861-867.
Frank, R.G. and Lave, J.R. (1989), “A Comparison of Hospital Responses to Reimbursement
        Policies for Medicaid Psychiatric Patients,” Rand Journal of Economics, 20(4): 588-600.
Frank, R.G. and Manning, W.G. (1992), Economics and Mental Health. The Johns Hopkins
        University Press: Baltimore.
Frank, R.G. and McGuire, T.G. (1986), “A Review of Studies of the Impact of Insurance on the
        Demand and Utilization of Specialty Mental Health Services,” Health Services Research,
        21(2): 241-266.
Frank, R.G. and McGuire, T.G. (1996), “Federal Health Financing Reform and State Mental
        Health Policy,” in Rich and White (Eds.) Health Policy, Federalism and the American
        States, Urban Institute Press.
Frank, R.G. and McGuire, T.G. (1997), “Savings from a Carve-Out Program for Mental Health
        and Substance Abuse in Massachusetts Medicaid,” Psychiatric Services, 48(9): 1147-
        1152.
Frank, R.G. and McGuire, T.G. (1998), “The Economic Functions of Carve-out in Managed
        Care,” The American Journal of Managed Care, 4(SP): SP31-SP39.




                                              90
Frank, R.G., Lave, J.R., Taube, C.A., et al. (1987), “The Impact of Medicare's Prospective
       Payment System on Psychiatric Patients Treated in Scatterbeds,” In Advances in Health
       Economics Health Services Research Scheffler R and McGuire TG (Eds.), Greenwich:
       JAI Press 1987, 1-21.
Frank, R.G., Glazer, J. and McGuire, T.G. (1998), “Measuring Adverse Selection in Managed
       Health Care,” working paper.
Frank, R.G., Goldman, H.H., and McGuire, T.G. (1992), “A Model Mental Health Benefit,”
       Health Affairs, 11(3): 98-117.
Frank, R.G., Huskamp, H.A., McGuire, T.G., and Newhouse, J.P. (1996), “Some Economics of a
       Mental Health Carve Out,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 53: 933-957.
Frank, R.G., Koyanagi, C., and McGuire, T.G. (1997), “Political Economy of ‘Parity’ for Mental
       Health in Insurance,” Health Affairs, 16(4): 108-119.
Frank, R.G., McGuire, T.G., and Newhouse, J.P. (1995), “Risk Contracts in Managed Mental
       Health Care,” Health Affairs, 14(3): 50-64.
Frank, R.G., McGuire, T.G., Bae, J., and Rupp, A. (1997), “Solutions for Adverse Selection in
       Behavioral Health Care,” Health Care Financing Review, 18(3): 109-122.
Frank, R.G., McGuire, T.G., Notman, E.H., and Woodward, R.M. (1996), “Developments in
       Medicaid Behavioral Health Care,” In Mental Health U.S. 1996 Manderscheid R. and
       Sonnerscheid M.A. (Eds), Washington: USGPO.
Frank, R.G., McGuire, T.G., Regier, D.A., Manderscheid, R. and Woodward, A. (1994), “Paying
       for Mental Health and Substance Abuse Care,” Health Affairs, 13(1): 337-342.
Frank, R.G., Salkever, D.S. and Sharfstein, S.S. (1991), “A Look at Rising Mental Health
       Insurance Costs,” Health Affairs, 10(2): 116-124.
Frank, R.G. (1985), “A Model of State Expenditures on Mental Hospital Services,” Public
       Finance Quarterly, 13(3): 319-338.
Frank, R.G. (1985), “Pricing and Location of Physician Services in Mental Health,” Economic
       Inquiry, 23: 115-133.
Frank, R.G. (1989), “Regulatory Policy and Information Deficiencies in the Market for Mental
       Health Services,” Journal of Health Politics, Policy and Law, 14(3): 477-503.
Freiman, M.P., Ellis, R.P., and McGuire, T.G. (1989), “Provider Response to Medicare’s PPS:
       Reductions in Length of Stay for Psychiatric Patients Treated in Scatter Beds,” Inquiry,
       26(2): 192-201.
Freiman, M.P., Mitchell, J.B., and Rosenbach, M.L. (1987), “Modifications of the Prospective
       Payment System and Payments for Medicare Psychiatric Admissions,” In McGuire, TG,
       Scheffler, RM (Eds) The Economics of Mental Health Services: Advances in Health
       Economics and Health Services Research, Greenwich, CT and London, UK: JAI Press, 8:
       23-47.
Frisman, L.K., McGuire, T.G., and Rosenbach, M.L. (1985), “Costs of Mandates for Outpatient
       Mental Health Care in Private Health Insurance,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 42:
       558-561.
Glazer, J. and McGuire, T.G. (1998). “Optimal Risk Adjustment in Markets with Adverse
       Selection: An Application to Managed Health Care,” working paper.
Goldman, H.H. and Skinner, A. (1989), “Specialty Mental Health Services: Research on
       Specialization and Differentiation,” in Taube C, Mechanic D, and Hohmann A (Eds.) The
       Future of Mental Health Services Research, Washington: USGPO.


                                              91
Goldman, W., McCulloch, J., and Sturm, R. (1997), “Costs and Utilization of Mental Health
        Services Before and After Managed Care,” Working Paper No. 108, Research Center on
        Managed Care for Psychiatric Disorders, UCLA.
Goulam, G. and Smith, J. (1990), Evaluation of the CPA-Norfolk Demonstration: Final Report.
        Department of Defense Contract MDA 907-87-C-0003, Cambridge, MA: Abt Associates.
Grob, G.N. (1973), Mental Institutions in America: Social Policy to 1875, New York: Free Press.
Grob, G.N. (1994), “Government and Mental Health Policy: A Structural Analysis,” The Milbank
        Memorial Fund Quarterly, 72(3): 471-499.
Grob, G.N. (1991), From Asylum to Community: Mental Health Policy in Modern America,
        Princeton University Press: Princeton, NJ.
Gronfein, W. (1985), “Incentives and Intentions in Mental Health Policy: A Comparison of the
        Medicaid and Community Mental Health Programs,” Journal of Health and Social
        Behavior, 26: 192-206.
Haas, P.J. (1989), “A Comparative Analysis of State Mental Health Policy,” Journal of
        Management Science & Policy Analysis, 6(4): 8-27.
Harrow, B. and Ellis, R.P. (1992), “Mental Health Provider Response to the Reimbursement
        System,” in Frank R and manning W (Eds.) Economics and Mental Health, Baltimore:
        Johns Hopkins Press, 19-39.
Hodgkin, D., Horgan, C.M., and Garnick, D.W. (1997), “Make or Buy: HMOs’ Contracting
        Arrangements for Mental Health Care,” Administration and Policy in Mental Health,
        24(4): 359-376.
Hodgkin, D. (1992), “The Impact of Private Utilization Management of Psychiatric Care: A
        Review of the Literature,” Journal of Mental Health Administration, 19(2): 143-157.
Hollingsworth, E.J. (1992), “Falling Through the Cracks: Care of the Chronically Mentally Ill in
        the United States, Germany, and the United Kingdom,” Journal of Health Politics, Policy
        and Law, 17(4): 899-928.
Horgan, C.M. and Jencks, S. (1987), “Research on Psychiatric Classification and Payment
        Systems,” Medical Care, 25(9): 522-536.
Horgan, C.M. (1986), “The Demand for Ambulatory Mental Health Services from Specialty
        Providers,” Health Services Research, 21(2): 291-320.
Hoult, J. et al. (1983), “A Controlled Study of Psychiatric Hospital versus Community Treatment:
        The Results of a Randomized Trial,” Australia and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry,
        37: 26-31.
Huskamp, H.A. (1997), “The Impact of a Managed Behavioral Health Care Carve-Out and
        Benefit Expansion on Outpatient Spending for Mental Health and Substance Abuse
        Services,” doctoral dissertation, Harvard University.
Hustead, E. and Sharfstein, S.S. (1978), “Utilization and Costs of Mental Illness Coverage in
        FEHBP, 1973,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 135(3): 315-319.
Institute of Medicine. (1993), Employment and Health Benefits, Washington: NAS Press.
Institute of Medicine. (1997). Managing Managed Care, Washington: NAS Press.
J.P. Weiner, (1996), Personal Communication.
Jacobsen, K., McGuire, T.G. and Notman, E.H. (1996), “Organizational Structure and State
        Mental Health Expenditures,” Administration and Policy in Mental Health, 23(6): 475-
        492.
Jencks, C. (1994), The Homeless, Cambridge: Harvard University Press.


                                              92
Jencks, S.F. (1985). “Recognition of Mental Distress and Diagnosis of Mental Disorder in
       Primary Care,” JAMA, 253(13): 1903-1907.
Jencks, S.F and Goldman, H.H. (1987), “Implications of Research on Prospective Payment,”
       Medical Care, 25(9): S42-S51.
Kaplan, R.M. (1995). “Utility Assessment for Estimating Quality Adjusted Life Years,” in Sloan F
       (Ed.) Valuing Health Care, Cambridge University Press: Cambridge UK.
Kapp, M. (1990), “Economic Barriers to Innovation in Mental Health Care: Community Care in
       the United Kingdom,” In Mental Health Care Delivery, Marks IM and Scott R (Eds.)
       Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Keeler, E.B. et al. (1986), The Demand for Episodes of Mental Health Services, Santa Monica:
       Rand Report R-3432-NIMH.
Keeler, E.B., Manning, W.G., and Wells, K.B. (1988), “The Demand for Episodes of Mental
       Health Services,” Journal of Health Economics, 7(2): 369-392.
Keeler, E.B., Newhouse, J.P., and Phelps, C.E. (1997), “Deductibles and Demand: A Theory of
       the Consumer Facing a Variable Price Schedule Under Uncertainty,” Econometrica,
       45(3): 641-655.
Keeler, E.B., Carter, G.M. and Newhouse, J.P. (1998), “A Model of the Impact of
       Reimbursement Schemes on Health Plan Choice,” Journal of Health Economics, xx(x):
       pp-pp.
Kelleher, K., Chaffin, M., Hollenberg, J., and Fischer, E. (1994), “Alcohol and Drug Disorders
       Among Physically Abusive and Neglectful Parents in a Community-Based Sample,”
       American Journal of Public Health, 84: 1586-1590.
Kenkel, D.S. and Ribar, D.C. (1994), “Alcohol Consumption and Young Adults’ Socioeconomic
       Status,” Brookings Papers in Microeconomics.
Kessler, R.C., McGonagle, K., Zhao, S., Nelson, C., Hughes, M., Eshleman, S., Wittehen, H.,
       and Kendler, K. (1994), “Lifetime and 12-Month Prevalence of DSM-III-R Psychiatric
       Disorders in the United States,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 51(1): 8-19.
Kessler, R.C., Frank, R.G., Edlund, M., et al. (1997), “Differences in the Use of Psychiatric
       Outpatient Services Between the United States and Ontario,” New England Journal of
       Medicine, 336(8): 551-557.
Knapp, M. (1997), “Cost Effectiveness Accountability and Their Relationship to Alternative
       Fiscal Mechanisms: Results from Great Britain and the United States,” Proceedings
       Mental Health and Fiscal Reform, The Clarke Institute: Toronto, Canada.
Knesper, D.J. (1989), “Substitution in Production as the Basis for Research and Policy Relevant
       to Mental Health Specialists,” in Taube C, Mechanic D, and Hohmann A (Eds.) The
       Future of Mental Health Services Research, Washington:USGPO.
Kouzis, A.C. and Eaton, W.W. (1994), “Emotional Disability Days: Prevalence and Predictors,”
       American Journal of Public Health, 84(8): 1304-1307.
Kronick, R. et al. (1996), “Diagnostic Risk Adjustment for Medicaid: The Disability Payment
       System,” Health Care Financing Review, 17(3): 7-34.
Kupfer, D.J. et al. (1992), “Five Year Outcomes for Maintenance Therapies in Recurrent
       Depression,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 49: 769-773.
Lambrinos, J. and Rubin, J. (1981), “The Determinants of Average Daily Census in Public Mental
       Hospitals: A Simultaneous Model,” Medical Care, 19(9): 895-906.




                                              93
Lave, J.R. and Frank, R.G. (1988), “Factor Affecting Medicaid Patients’ Length of Stay in
        Psychiatric Units: The Effect of Provider Incentives,” Health Care Financing Review,
        10(2): 57-66
Lave, J.R. and Frank, R.G. (1990), “The Effect of the Structure of Hospital Payment on Length
        of Stay,” Health Services Research, 25(2): 327-348.
Lave, J.R., Frank, R.G., Taube, C.A., et al. (1988), “PPS and Psychiatry: The First Year,”
        Inquiry, 25(3): 354-363.
Link, B.G., Andrews, H., and Cullen, F.T. (1992), “The Violent and Illegal Behavior of mental
        Patients Reconsidered,” American Sociological Review, 57: 275-292.
Link, et al. (1986), “Contact with the Mentally ill and Perceptions of How Dangerous they Are,”
        Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 27(4): 289-302.
Lowry, R., Holtzman, D., Truman, B.I., Kann, L., Collins, J.L. and Kolbe, L.J. (1994),
        “Substance Use and HIV-Related Sexual Behaviors Among US High School Students:
        Are They Related?” American Journal of Public Health, 84: 1116-1120.
Lurie, N., Moscovice I.S., Finch, M., Christianson, J.B., and Popkin, M.K. (1992), “Does
        Capitation Affect the Health of the Chronically Mentally Ill? Results from a Randomized
        Trial,” Journal of the American Medical Association, 267(24): 3300-3304.
Ma, C.A. (1995), “Health Care Payment Systems: Cost and Quality Incentives,” Journal of
        Economics & Management Strategy, 3(1): 93-112.
Ma, C.A. and McGuire, T.G. (1997), “Optimal Health Insurance and Provider Payment,”
        American Economic Review, 87(4): 685-704.
Ma, C.A. and McGuire, T.G. (1998), “Network Effects in Managed Health Care,” working paper,
        Boston University.
Mangen, S.P. and Rao, B. (1985), “United Kingdom: Socialised System-Better Services?” in
        Mangen SP (Ed.) Mental Health Care in the European Community, London: Croom Helm
        Books.
Mangen, S.P. (1985), “Germany: The Psychiatric Enquete and Its Aftermath,” in Mangen SP
        (Ed.) Mental Health Care in the European Community, London: Croom Helm Books.
Manning, W.G. et al. (1981), “The Two-Part Model of the Demand for Medical Care: Preliminary
        Results from the Health Insurance Study,” in Van der Gaag J and Perlman M (Eds.)
        Health, Economics and Health Economics, Amsterdam: North Holland.
Manning, W.G., Wells, K.B., Buchanan, J.L., Keeler, E.B., Valdez, E.B., and Newhouse, J.P.
        (1989), “Effects of Mental Health Insurance: Evidence from the Health Insurance
        Experiment,” RAND R-3015-NIMH/HCFA.
Manning, W.G. and Frank, R.G. (1992), “Econometric Issues in the Demand for mental Health
        Care under Insurance,” in Frank R. and Manning W. (Eds.) Economics and Mental Health,
        Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press.
Manning, W.G. and Marquis, S. (1992), “Effect of Mental Health Insurance: Evidence from the
        HIE,” working paper, University of Michigan.
Marmor, T.R. and Gill, K.C. (1989), “The Political and Economic Context of Mental Health Care
        in the United States,” Journal of Health Politics, Policy, and Law, 14(3): 459-475.
Matus, M. et al. (1986), “Mental Illness and the Media: II, Context Analysis of Press Coverage of
        Mental Health Topics,” Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 31(5): 431-433.
McKusick, D., Mark, T., King, E., et al. (1998), “Spending for Mental Health and Substance
        Abuse Treatment 1996,” Health Affairs, 17(5): 147-157.


                                               94
McGuire, T.G. (1989), “Financing and Reimbursement of Mental Health Services,” Taube and
        Mechanic (Eds.) The Future of Mental Health Services Research, National Institute of
        Mental Health.
McGuire, T.G. (1994), “Predicting the Costs of Mental Health Benefits,” Milbank Memorial
        Fund Quarterly: Health And Society, 72(1): 3-23.
McGuire, T.G. (1996) “Commentary,” [on Rizzo and Blumenthal. “Is the Target Income
        Hypothesis an Economic Heresy?”] Medical Care Research and Review, 53(3): 267-273.
McGuire, T.G. and Ellis, R.P. (1990), “Optimal Payment Systems for Health Services,” Journal
        of Health Economics, 9: 375-396.
McGuire, T.G. and Montgomery, J. (1982). “Mandated Mental Health Benefits in Private Health
        Insurance Policies,” Journal of Health Politics, Policy and Law, 7(2): 380-406.
McGuire, T.G. and Riordan, M.H. (1995), “Incomplete Information and Optimal Market
        Structure: Public Purchases from Private Providers,” Journal of Public Economics,
        56:125-141.
McGuire, T.G. (1981), Financing Psychotherapy: Costs Effects and Public Policy, Cambridge,
        MA.
McGuire, T.G. (1998), “Physician Agency,” In Newhouse, J.P. and Culyer AY (Eds.) Handbook
        of Health Economics, North Holland Press: Amsterdam.
Mechanic, D., Schlesinger, M., and McAlpine, D. (1995), “Management of Mental Health and
        Substance Abuse Services: State of the Art and Early Results,” Milbank Memorial Fund
        Quarterly, 73: 19-55.
Mechanic, D. (1997), “Muddling Through Elegantly: Finding the Proper Balance in Rationing,”
        Health Affairs, 16(5): 83-92.
Mechanic, D. (1998), “The Functions and Limitations of Trust in Provision of Medical Care,”
        Journal of Health Politics, Policy and Law, 23(4): 661-686.
MedPac. (1998), Report to Congress: Medicare Payment Policy, Washington: USGPO.
Mental Health, United States, 1996. Washington, USGPO, 1996.
Merrick, E.L. (1997) “Impact of a Behavioral Health Carve Out on Treatment of Major
        Depression,” doctoral dissertation, Barndeis University.
Michael, R.J. (1980), “Bureaucrats, Legislators and the Decline of the State Mental Hospital,”
        Journal of Economics and Business, 32(3): 198-205.
Miller, R.H. and Luft, H.S. (1997), “Does Managed Care Lead to Better or Worse Quality of
        Care?” Health Affairs, 16(5): 7-25.
Moon, M. (1996), “The Special Health Care Needs of the Elderly,” in Altman S and Reinhardt U
        (Eds.) Strategic Choices for a Changing Health Care System, Chicago: Health
        Administration Press.
Morlock, L.L. (1989), “Recognition and Treatment of mental Health Problems in the General
        Sector,” in Taube C, Mechanic D and Hohmann H (Eds.) The Future of Mental Health
        Services Research, Washington: USGPO.
Mullahy, J. and Sindelar, J.L. (1993), “Alcoholism, Work and Income,” Journal of Labor
        Economics, 11(3): 494-520.
Mullahy, J. and Sindelar, J. (1990), “Gender Differences in the Effects of Mental Health on Labor
        Force Participation,” in Sirageldin I, Sarkin A, and Frank, R.G. (Eds.) Research in Human
        Capital and Development. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, pp.125-145.




                                               95
Mulvey, E.P. (1994), “Assessing the Evidence of a Link Between Mental Illness and Violence,”
       Hospital and Community Psychiatry, 45(7): 663-668.
National Advisory Mental Health Council (1997)
Newhouse, J.P. and Phelps, C.E. (1976), “New Estimates of Price and Income Elasticities for
       Medical Care Services,” in Rosett R (Ed.) The Impact of Health Insurance on the Health
       Services Sector, New York: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Newhouse, J.P. and the Insurance Experiment Group (R.W. Archibald, H.L. Bailit, R.H. Brook,
       M. Brown, A.R. Davies, N. Duan, G.A. Goldberg, E.B. Keeler, A. Leibowitz, K.N. Lohr,
       W.G. Manning, K.H. Marquis, M.S. Marquis, C.N. Morris, C.E. Phelps, W.H. Rogers,
       C.A. Sherbourne, R.B. Valdez, J.E. Ware, K.B. Wells). (1993), Free for All? Lessons
       from the RAND Health Insurance Experiment, Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Newhouse, J.P., Beeuwkes Buntin, M., and Chapman, J.D. (1997), “Risk Adjustment and
       Medicare: Taking a Closer Look,” Health Affairs, 16: 26-43.
Newhouse, J.P., Manning, W.G., Keeler, E.B. and Sloss, E. (1989), “Adjusting Capitation Rates
       Using Objective Health Measures and Prior Utilization,” Health Care Financing Review,
       10(3): 41-54.
Newhouse, J.P., Phelps, C.E., and Marquis, M.S. (1980), “On Having Your Cake and Eating It
       Too: Econometric Problems in Estimating the Demand for Health Services,” Journal of
       Econometrics, 13(3): 365-390.
Newhouse, J.P. (1994), “Patients at Risk: Health Reform and Risk Adjustment,” Health Affairs,
       13(1): 132-146.
Newhouse, J.P. (1996), “Reimbursing Health Plans and Health Providers: Selection versus
       Efficiency in Production,” Journal of Economic Literature, 34(3): 1236-1263.
Nunnally, J. (1961), Popular Conceptions of Mental Health: Their Development and Change,
       New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
O’Flaherty, B. (1996), Making Room: The Economics of Homelessness, Cambridge: Harvard
       University Press.
Office of Mental Health, State of New York. (1996), Managed Behavioral Health Care for
       Medicaid, unpublished memo.
Oss, M. (1995). Managed Behavioral Health Market Share in the United States, Gettysburg, PA:
       Open Minds.
Padgett, D. et al. (1993), “The Effect of Insurance Benefit Changes and Use of Child and
       Adolescent Outpatient mental Health Services,” Medical Care, 31(2): 96-110.
Pauly, M.V. (1968), The Economics of Moral Hazard: Comment,” American Economic Review,
       58: 531-537.
Pauly, M.V. (1985), “What is Adverse about Adverse Selection?” in Advances in Health
       Economics and Health Services Research: Biased Selection in Health Care Markets,
       Scheffler RM and Rossiter LF, (Eds.), Greenwich, CT: JAI Press Inc, 281-286.
Perneger, T.V., Allaz, A.F., Etter, J.F., and Rougemont, A. (1995), “Mental Health and Choice
       Between Managed Care and Indemnity Health Insurance,” American Journal of
       Psychiatry, 52(7): 1020-1025.
Phelps, C.E. and Mooney, C. (1993), “Variation in medical Practice Use: Causes and
       Consequences,” In Arnold R and White W (Eds.) Competitive Approaches to Health Care
       Reform, Urban Institute Press: Washington, DC.
Phelps, C.E. (1998), “Comments on Price Index Papers,” In Helms and Triplett (Eds.)


                                             96
Phelps, C.E. (forthcoming), “The Role of Information in the Supply and Demand for Health
       Care,” In Newhouse, J.P. and Culyer AY (Eds.) Handbook of Health Economics, North
       Holland Press: Amsterdam.
PROPAC (1986), Report to Congress.
Ramsey, F. (1927), “A Contribution to the Theory of Taxation,” Economic Journal, 37: 41-61.
Ramsey, S. and Pauly, M.V. (1997), “Structure Incentives and Adoption of Medical Technologies
       in HMO and Fee-for-Service Health Insurance Plans,” Inquiry, 34: 228-236.
Reed, K. (1975), Coverage and Utilization of Care for Mental Health Conditions Under Health
       Insurance , Various Studies 1973-74, Washington: APA.
Rice, D. et al. (1990), The Cost of Alcohol and Drug Abuse and Mental Illness, Washington:
       USGPO.
Rice, T. (1998), The Economics of Health Reconsidered, Health Administration Press: Chicago.
Rochefort, D.A. (1993), From Poor Houses to Homelessness, Westport: Auburn House.
Rothschild, M. and Stiglitz, J. (1976), “Equilibrium in Competitive Insurance Markets: An Essay
       in the Economics of Imperfect Information,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 90: 629-
       649.
Rubin, J. (1978), Economics, Mental Health, and the Law, D.C. Heath and Company: Lexington,
       MA.
Rubin, J. (1980), “Judicial Standards and the Financing of Mental Health Services,” Inquiry,
       17(2): 165-171.
Rupp, A., Steinwachs, D.M. and Salkever, D.S. (1984), “The Effect of Hospital Payment
       Methods on Patterns and Cost of Mental Health Care,” Hospital and Community
       Psychiatry, 35(5): 450-458.
Scheffeler, R.M. and Watt, C.A. (1986), “Inpatient Mental Health Use among the Heavily
       Insured,” Journal of Human Resources, 21(3): 338-358.
Scheffeler, R.M., Grogan, C., Cuffel, B., and Penner, S. (1994), “A Specialized Mental Health
       Plan for Persons with Severe Mental Illness under Managed Competition,” Hospital and
       Community Psychiatry, 44: 937-942.
Secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services. (1993), Alcohol and Health,
       USGPA: Washington, DC, Chapter 9.
Segal, S., Silverman, C., and Baumohl, J. (1989), “Seeking Person-Environment Fit in
       Community Care Placement,” Journal of Social Issues, 45(3): 49-64.
Shapiro, S., German, P., Skinner, A., et al. (1987), “An Experiment to Change Detection and
       Management of Mental Health Morbidity in Primary Care,” Medical Care, 25(4): 327-
       339.
Shen, Y. and Ellis, R.P. (1998), “Cost Minimizing Risk Adjustment,” working paper, Boston
       University.
Steadman, H.J., Mulvey, E.P., Monohan, J., Robbins, P.C., Appelbaum, P.S., Grisso, T., Roth,
       L.H., and Silver, E. (1998), “Violence by People Discharged from Acute Psychiatric
       Inpatient Facilities and by others in the Same Neighborhoods,” Archives of General
       Psychiatry, 55: 1-9.
Stein, L.I. and Test, M.A. (1980), “Alternative to Mental Hospital Treatment,” Archives of
       General Psychiatry, 37: 392-397.
Sturm, R. (1997), “How Expensive is Unlimited Mental Health Care Coverage under Managed
       Care?” JAMA, 278: 1533-1537.


                                              97
Sturm, R. et al. (1994), “Provider Choice and Continuity for the Treatment of Depression,” Rand
        paper DRU-692-AHCPR.
Swendsen, J.D., Merikangas, K.R., Canino, G.J., Kessler, R.C., Rubio-Stipec, M., and Angst, J.
        (1998), “The Comorbidity of Alcoholism with Anxiety and Depressive Disorders in Four
        Geographic Communities,” Comprehensive Psychiatry, 39: 176-184.
Taube, C.A., Kessler, L.G., and Burns, B.J. (1986), “Estimating the Probability and Level of
        Ambulatory Mental Health Services Use,” Health Services Research, 21(2): 321-340.
Torrey, F.E. (1994), “Violent Behavior by Individuals with Serious Mental Illness,” Hospital and
        Community Psychiatry, 45(7): 653-662.
Triplett, J.E. (1998), “What’s Different About Health? Human Repair and Care Repair in National
        Accounts,” Health Affairs, (in press).
Umland, B. (1995), “Behavioral Healthcare Benefit Strategies of Self-Insured Employers,”
        Behavioral Healthcare Tomorrow, vol: 65-70.
Von Korff, M. and Kramer, M. (1978), “Mental and Nervous Disorders Utilization and Cost
        Survey,” NIMH and OPM, Washington.
Wallack, S.S. and Levine, H.J. (1996), “Managed Care for People with Disabilities: Caring for
        those with the Greatest Need – Overview,” in Altman S and Reinhardt U (Eds.) Strategic
        Choices for a Changing Health Care System, Chicago: Health Administration Press.
Watts, C.A., Scheffler, R.M., and Jewell, N.P. (1986), “Demand for Outpatient Mental Health
        Services in a Heavily Insured Population: The Case of the Blue Cross and Blue Shield
        Association’s Federal Employees Health Benefits Program,” Health Services Research,
        21(2): 267-290.
Weiner, J.P., Dobson, A., Maxwell, S.L., Coleman, K., Starfield, B.H., and Anderson, G.F.
        (1996), “Risk-Adjusted Capitation Rates Using Ambulatory and Inpatient Diagnoses,”
        Health Care Financing Review, 17(3): 77-99.
Weinstein, M.C. and Zeckhauser, R.J. (1972), “Critical Ratios and Efficient Allocation,” Journal
        of Public Economics, 2(2): 147-157.
Weinstein, M.C. (1995), “From Cost-Effectiveness Ratios to Resource Allocation: Where to
        Draw the Line,” In Sloan F (Ed.) Valuing Health Care, Cambridge University Press:
        Cambridge UK.
Weisbrod, B.A. (1983), “A Guide to Benefit-Cost Analysis as Seen through a Controlled
        Experiment in Treating the Mentally Ill,” Journal of Health Politics, Policy and Law,
        7(4): 88-845.
Wells, K.B. et al. (1996), Caring for Depression, Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
World Health Organization. (1994), Global Comparative Assessments in the Health Sector:
        Disease Burden Expenditures and Intervention Packages, Geneva: WHO.
Yellowlees, H. (1990), “Administrative Barriers to Implementation and Diffusion of Innovative
        Approaches to Mental Health Care in the United Kingdom,” In Marks IM and Scott RA
        (Eds.) Mental Health Care Delivery: Innovations, Impediments and Implementation.
        Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Zeckhauser, R. (1970), “Medical Insurance: A Case Study of the Trade-Off Between Risk-
        Spreading and Appropriate Incentives,” Journal of Economic Theory, 2: 10-26.




                                              98
