       Changes in asset prices reflect, among other things, changing information about future

economic conditions. Identifying the impact of different macroeconomic shocks on asset prices

is important because it can reveal sources of economic fluctuations, measure risk premia, and

help predict future economic fluctuations. Economic tracking portfolios are a way of connecting

asset prices with news about economic variables. An economic tracking portfolio is a portfolio

of assets whose returns track an economic variable, such as expected output, inflation, or returns.

       The portfolios constructed here have unexpected returns with maximum correlation with

news about future macroeconomic variables. I call these "economic tracking" portfolios, rather

than "factor mimicking" portfolios, to make clear that these portfolios are not only useful for

explaining the statistical properties (means and covariances) of asset returns, but are

fundamentally economic in nature.

       Empirical finance has a long tradition of explaining current returns with other current

returns. A second tradition is to try to explain returns with contemporaneous economic

variables, or with future economic variables, or with both (e.g. Chen, Roll, and Ross (1986),

Fama (1990), and Campbell and Ammer (1993)). Economic tracking portfolios represent a

middle ground between these two alternatives. On the one hand, tracking portfolios are asset

returns. On the other hand, they are returns with an interpretable economic content.

Constructing economic tracking portfolios is a way of using current asset returns as instruments

for changes in expectations of future variables. The use of instruments is required because

realized variables are noisy measures of innovations in expectations.

       This paper builds on Breeden, Gibbons, and Litzenberger (1989). They construct

economic tracking portfolios (which they call "maximum correlation portfolios") for current


                              Economic Tracking Portfolios - Page 1
consumption, in order to test the Consumption Capital Asset Pricing Model (CCAPM). This

paper has several differences. First, and most importantly, it constructs tracking portfolios for

future (not current) economic variables, since asset returns reflect information about future cash

flows and discount rates. Second, as a consequence, it uses only the unexpected component of

returns (not total returns) in constructing the tracking portfolios. Last, it constructs tracking

portfolios for a variety of economic variables (not just consumption).

       Tracking portfolios have several uses. One use is measuring risk premia. If tracking

portfolios earn risk premia, then the signs of the risk premia and the identities of the premia-

generating economic variables can reveal which state variables are important determinants of

expected returns, and can help evaluate asset pricing models. Tracking portfolio have (at least)

three other uses that do not rely on the portfolios earning non-zero risk premia.

       First, tracking portfolios can serve as hedging tools for individuals who wish to insure

themselves against a particular economic risk. For example, individuals who wish to insure

against inflation could take a position in the inflation tracking portfolio. Second, tracking

portfolios forecast economic variables. Since asset returns are available on a daily basis,

tracking portfolios can provide daily information about the market's expectations about future

economic variables. Third, by measuring innovations in expectations, tracking portfolios

illuminate the structure of the economy and the reaction of prices to economic news. This paper

concentrates on this last use of tracking portfolios, and studies the reaction of stock and bond

prices to news about future production, interest rates, and expected returns.

       These three uses are empirically testable, and do not depend on a particular asset pricing

model. For example, suppose the CAPM is true. In that case, an economic tracking portfolio


                              Economic Tracking Portfolios - Page 2
would have an expected return that is a linear function of covariance with the market, but its

unexpected return would still reveal news about future economic variables. Alternatively,

suppose that asset markets are inefficient, irrational sentiment affects market prices, and returns

are partially predictable. In this case, as long as asset prices reflect some information about

future economic variables, tracking portfolio returns will still be useful for hedging, forecasting,

and understanding the economy.

       This paper is organized as follows. Section 1 defines tracking portfolios, states their

statistical properties, and introduces the notation. Section 2 discusses the relation of tracking

portfolios to previous research. Section 3 describes the data. Section 4 shows the properties of

the estimated tracking portfolios. Section 5 uses tracking portfolios to test hypotheses about the

effect of news on asset prices. Section 6 shows the out-of-sample tracking ability of the

portfolios, and performs robustness tests. Section 7 concludes by summarizing the results and

discussing possible applications and extensions of tracking portfolios.

1. Definitions and basic properties

Simple tracking portfolios

       A tracking portfolio for any variable y can be obtained as the fitted value of a regression

of y on a set of base asset returns. The portfolio weights for the economic tracking portfolio for

y are identical to the coefficients of an OLS regression. If y happens to be to be a state variable

for asset pricing, then a multi-factor model holds with one of the factors being y's tracking

portfolio (Breeden, 1979). However, even if y is not a state variable for asset pricing, its

tracking portfolio is still an interesting economic object, since it reveals changes in market

expectations about y.


                              Economic Tracking Portfolios - Page 3
       The following three statements are equivalent descriptions of an economic tracking

portfolio. Out of all possible linear combinations of the base asset returns, the portfolio: (a) has

the minimum variance out of all portfolios with a given beta (univariate regression coefficient) in

a regression of portfolio return on y; (b) has returns with the maximum possible correlation with

y; (c) has the highest R-squared in a univariate regression of y on returns.

        Breeden, Gibbons, and Litzenberger (1989) show with matrix algebra the equivalence of

these three properties, and it is worth showing the intuition even more simply. Let r be the return

on a portfolio of base assets, r=bR where b is a vector of portfolio weights and R is a vector of

returns on a set of base assets. The tracking portfolio is defined as the portfolio with weights that

minimize the variance of the tracking portfolio given its loading on y. In other words, pick b to

                                          σ ry
minimize σ r2 given β = β (where β ≡             is the coefficient in a regression of r on y).
                                          σ 2y

              σr                                                   σy 2
Since β = ρ      , minimizing σ r2 is equivalent to minimizing ( β   ) , which is equivalent to
              σy                                                   ρ

maximizing ρ2 (where ρ is the correlation of y and r). Since the R-squared from a univariate

regression is simply ρ2, and since OLS also maximizes R-squared, the solution to this

maximization problem is identical to an OLS regression.

Tracking portfolios for news

       This paper constructs portfolios with unexpected returns which are maximally correlated

with unexpected components of future y. Specifically, the target variable is "news" about yt+k,

where yt+k is a macroeconomic variable such as the inflation rate in period t+k. News is

innovations in expectations about yt+k with notation ∆Et[yt+k]≡Et[yt+k]- Et-1[yt+k]. For example,


                               Economic Tracking Portfolios - Page 4
∆Et[yt+k] might be the news that the market learns in July 1980 about the inflation rate between

July 1980 to July 1981.

        The tracking portfolio returns are rt-1,t =bRt-1,t, where rt-1,t and Rt-1,t are returns from the

end of period t-1 to the end of period t. The tracking portfolio is constructed using unexpected

returns on the base assets. Unexpected returns are actual returns minus expected returns, with
         ~
notation R t-1, t ≡ Rt-1,t - Et-1[Rt-1,t]. The portfolio weights, b, are chosen so that ~rt -1, t is maximally

correlated with ∆Et[yt+k].

        Estimating tracking portfolios for news is only slightly more complicated than estimating

simple tracking portfolios. One can always write a projection equation of news on unexpected

returns. The key assumption in this paper is that innovations in returns reflect innovations in

expectations about future variables, so that a is non-zero in the projection equation:
                      ~
        ∆Et[yt+k] = a R t-1, t + ηt                                                   (1)

where ηt as the component of news that is orthogonal to unexpected returns. Since unexpected

asset returns reflect news about future cash flows and discount rates, the vector a will generally

be non-zero for any variable that is correlated with future cash flows and discount rates.

        As equation (1) is written, it seems as if one needs to obtain ∆Et[yt+k], the period t news,

in order to run the regression. Fortunately, this daunting task is not necessary in order to
                                                               ~
construct a tracking portfolio for news. All that is needed is R t-1, t , unexpected returns in period

t.

        The realization of yt+k can be written as the sum of the expectation in period t-1, the

innovation in expectations occurring in period t, and the innovation in expectations from period t


                                  Economic Tracking Portfolios - Page 5
to period t+k:

        yt+k = Et[yt+k] + et,t+k =Et-1[yt+k] +∆Et[yt+k]+ et,t+k                       (2)

        The second assumption made here is that expected returns on the base assets in period t

are linear functions of Zt-1, a vector of control variables known at period t-1:

        Et-1[Rt-1,t]= dZt-1                                                           (3)

While the assumption in equation (3) is a potential source of model misspecification, one might

expect the empirical results to be relatively robust to this form of misspecification, since asset

returns are largely unpredictable at short horizons.

        Last, for notational convenience, define the projection equation of lagged expectations of

y on the lagged control variables:

        Et-1[yt+k] = f Zt-1 +µt-1                                                     (4)

Combining (1) - (4) results in the representation:

        yt+k     = bRt-1,t+cZt-1+εt,t+k.                                              (5)

        where b=a, c=f-ad, and εt,t+k = ηt + µt-1+ et,t+k. Equation (5) is regression equation with

realized future y on the left hand side and period t returns and period t-1 control variables on the

right hand side. It is consistent because the three components of εt,t+k are all by definition

orthogonal to both Rt-1,t and Zt-1.

        The OLS regression defined by equation (5) produces bRt-1,t, the portfolio having

unexpected components maximally correlated with ∆Et[yt+k]. This paper estimates equation (5)

and examines the properties of the resulting tracking portfolios. Equation (5) is completely

atheoretical and depends only on the assumptions that changes in expectations about future y are

reflected in asset returns, and that expected asset returns are a function of the lagged control

                                    Economic Tracking Portfolios - Page 6
variables.

       Here I make several comments on empirical implementation of equation (5). First, this

paper uses zero cost portfolio returns for Rt-1,t. Using zero cost portfolios means that there is no

need to impose the restriction that the portfolio weights in b add to anything. The resulting

tracking portfolio is zero cost because it is a linear combination of zero cost portfolios.

       Second, this paper uses monthly returns for the base assets. One should be careful using

longer horizons for base assets (such as annual returns), since as horizons lengthen, return

predictability rises (see Campbell (1991)), and the estimates might become more sensitive to

violations of equation (3).

       Third, one wants to pick base asset returns that are informative about changes in

expectations about future y. It is important that the different assets have different sensitivities to

future y, so that the regression can pick the linear combination of returns that hedges out

common sources of return variation that are unrelated to future y.

       Fourth, the main reason to include control variables is to model expected returns, so Zt-1

should include variables that forecast base asset returns. If asset returns were completely

unpredictable, or if Et-1[Rt-1,t] were uncorrelated with Et-1[yt+k], then one would not need any

control variables. A secondary role for the lagged control variables in equation (5) is to help

explain future y. By including variables in Zt-1 that are correlated with Et-1[yt+k], one can

decrease the variance of the residual in equation (5), and thus gain more precise estimates of b.

       Fifth, adding variables to Rt-1,t and Zt-1 is not costless, since more variables raise the

problem of overfitting, poor out-of-sample performance, and spurious inferences.




                              Economic Tracking Portfolios - Page 7
2. Relation to previous research

       One use of economic tracking portfolios is to hedge economic risk using existing assets.

An alternative approach is to create entirely new assets indexed to economic variables. Shiller

(1993), Shiller and Athanasoulis (1995), and Davis and Willen (1998) discuss the creation of

these new assets and the resulting welfare gains. Economic tracking portfolios using existing

liquid assets should make such financial innovation easier because tracking portfolios help the

issuers of new securities partially hedge their exposure to economic risk.

       Another use of economic tracking portfolios is to understand the connection between

economic variables and asset prices. Previous research has drawn this connection in three ways:

using current economic variables, using future economic variables, and using both via vector

autoregression models.

Contemporaneous macroeconomic variables

       The first approach involves regressing asset returns on contemporaneous economic

variables. Examples of this approach include Chen, Roll, and Ross (1986) and numerous papers

testing the CCAPM. Chen, Roll, and Ross (1986) find that covariance with industrial production

growth, inflation, and bond market returns all lead to risk premia.

       Unfortunately, attempts to identify factor mimicking portfolios for macroeconomic

variables have been disappointing. Chan, Karceski, and Lakonishok (1998) construct portfolios

by sorting stocks on monthly contemporaneous correlations over a five-year estimation period.

They form portfolios based on inflation and industrial production. After examining these

returns, they conclude that the macroeconomic factors are basically noise, and are not

distinguishable from randomly generated portfolios.


                             Economic Tracking Portfolios - Page 8
Future macroeconomic variables

        The second approach involves regressing current returns on future realizations of

economic variables. Examples of this approach include Fama (1981, 1990) and Schwert (1990),

who seek to evaluate how much of the variance of returns on some test asset, rTt-1,t, is due to

news about future economic conditions.

        The relationship that this approach would like to estimate is:

        rTt-1,t = a1∆Et[yt+k] + a2Zt-1+ut                                        (6)

where again Zt-1 measures expected returns on the test asset. The error term ut reflects test asset

returns that are not related to changes in expectations about y.

        Since ∆Et[yt+k] is unobservable, the regression that this approach actually runs is to

substitute realizations of future y for the news term in equation (6):

        rTt-1,t = a1yt+k + a2Zt-1+vt                                                     (7)

Using equation (2), vt = ut -a1Et-1[yt+k] -a1et,t+k. Since vt is correlated with the regressors in

equation (7), estimation of (7) will produce faulty inferences about a1 and the estimated

properties of ut.

        The economic tracking portfolio approach to the same question is to regress the test asset

on the tracking portfolio for news and control variables for expected returns. That is, the

economic tracking portfolio analog to (7) is

        rTt-1,t = a1bRt-1,t + a2Zt-1+ θt                                                 (8)

where b is defined by equation (5).

        It turns out that the relation between these two approaches is simple: equation (8) is

numerically identical to an instrumental variable estimation of equation (7), with the instruments

                                  Economic Tracking Portfolios - Page 9
being Rt-1,t. Section 5 further discusses this relation and estimates instrumental variable

regressions.

        In equation (7), a good instrument is something that is both correlated with ∆Et[yt+k] but

uncorrelated with vt. The tracking portfolio return satisfies the first criterion for a good

instrument, since it is correlated with the desired object. It satisfies part of the second criterion,

because it is uncorrelated with et,t+k. Unfortunately, the tracking portfolio return is not a perfect

instrument because it is likely to be correlated with ut. bRt-1,t might be correlated with ut because

both of these objects are derived from asset returns and might reflect common return variation

that is unrelated to news about the target.

Vector Autoregression Approach

        The third approach is pursued by Campbell in a series of papers (Campbell (1991),

Campbell (1996), Campbell and Ammer (1993), and Campbell and Mei (1993)). Like the first

approach, it uses innovations in contemporaneous variables to explain current asset returns. Like

the second approach, it is interested in how changes in expectations about future economic

variables affect asset returns. It uses the innovations from a vector autoregression (VAR) system

to estimate changes in expected future variables, and uses the resulting estimated changes to

explain asset returns.

        Campbell uses a variety of current economic variables to explain asset returns. He uses

both return and non-return forecasting variables (for target variables such as inflation, interest

rates, labor income and future returns), and then tests whether innovations in these forecasting

variables (from a VAR) are factors in asset returns.1

        The VAR procedure for detecting loadings on the factors is mediated through a specific


                              Economic Tracking Portfolios - Page 10
dynamic model of all the variables in the system. This requirement introduces a potential source

of model misspecification. In contrast, the tracking portfolio approach lets the data choose

loadings directly from regressions of future variables on returns, without having to rely on a

complete description of the time series process generating the data .

3. Data and summary statistics

Target variables and horizon

       The targets (yt+k) include seven macroeconomic variables suggested by theory and

previous empirical work (such as Chen, Roll, and Ross (1986), Campbell and Ammer (1993),

Campbell (1996), and Jagannathan and Wang (1996)). The seven target variables are: industrial

production growth, real consumption growth, real labor income growth, inflation, excess stock

returns, excess bond returns, and Treasury bill returns.

       Industrial production is the change in the log of total production, seasonally adjusted.

Consumption is the change in the log of real consumption of services and nondurable goods,

seasonally adjusted. Labor income is the change in the log of personal income from wages and

salaries, seasonally adjusted, minus CPI inflation. Inflation is the change in the log of the

Consumer Price Index, not seasonally adjusted. Excess stock returns are continuously

compounded returns on the CRSP value weighted aggregate portfolio minus continuously

compounded returns on Treasury bills. Excess bond returns are continuously compounded

returns on a portfolio of long-term government bonds minus continuously compounded returns

on Treasury bills. Nominal Treasury bill returns are continuously compounded returns on

Treasury bills. More details about the data are provided in the appendix.2

       I construct tracking portfolios for news about annual changes in variables, using monthly


                             Economic Tracking Portfolios - Page 11
data on the target variables and tracking future 12-month ahead changes in these variables. In

the terms of the notation, period t is a month and k=12. For example, future 12-month inflation

in month t is the inflation rate from the end of month t to the end of month t+12. The forecasting

regressions use monthly control variables and base asset returns from 1947:1 to 1994:12, and

target variables from 1947:1 to 1995:12 (except for consumption, which starts in 1959:1).

Base assets

       The 13 base assets, Rt-1,t, consist of four bond portfolios, eight industry-sorted stock

portfolios, and the market portfolio for the stock market. All asset returns are in excess of the T-

bill return. The four bond market portfolios are a portfolio of long-term government bonds, a

portfolio of intermediate-term government bonds, a portfolio of one-year government bonds, and

a portfolio of low-grade corporate bonds. The eight value-weighted industry portfolios consist of

all stocks in CRSP sorted by SIC code: basic industries, capital goods, construction, consumer

goods, energy, finance, transportation, and utilities. The eight industry classifications come from

Sharpe (1982) and are defined in more detail in Table A. Last, the market (RMRF) is the CRSP

NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ value-weighted portfolio.3

       These 13 portfolio returns are likely to be informative about future economic conditions.

Industry portfolios are potentially useful because of obvious variations across industry in

cyclicality, and because of evidence (see Boudoukh, Richardson, and Whitelaw (1994)) that this

cyclicality is reflected in stock returns. Bond returns are likely to be useful since bond yields

have also been shown to forecast future economic activity (see Stock and Watson (1989)). Last,

the aggregate stock market has traditionally been used to forecast aggregate economic changes.




                             Economic Tracking Portfolios - Page 12
Control variables

        The lagged control variables, Zt-1, include nine variables (plus a constant term). These

nine variables are the Treasury bill return, a term premium for long-term government bonds

(yield on long bonds minus Treasury bill yield), a term premium for one-year government notes

(yield on one-year notes minus Treasury bill yield), a default premium for corporate bonds (BAA

yield minus AAA yield), a default premium for commercial paper (commercial paper yield

minus Treasury bill yield), the dividend yield on the CRSP value weight aggregate portfolio, and

12-month production growth, CPI inflation, and excess stock returns. It is important to note that

the Treasury bill return in month t is a control variable, not a base asset, since the Treasury bill

return in month t is known as of month t-1.

        The lagged control variables include the standard variables known to forecast returns on

stocks and bonds. As a side effect, these Z's should also help forecast the target variable as well

since the same variables that forecast returns also forecast economic activity (that is, Zt-1 is

correlated with Et-1[yt+12]).

        Table 1 shows summary statistics for the variables yt+12, Rt-1,t, and Zt-1. It also shows the

correlation of these variables with yt+12.

4. Properties of Estimated Tracking Portfolios

        Table 2 shows the forecasting regressions that define the economic tracking portfolios for

the seven target variables. Table 2 reports coefficients from OLS regressions of the 12-month

ahead macroeconomic variables (from month t to month t+12) on returns in month t and lagged

variables in month t-1. The standard errors have been corrected for the overlapping dependent

observations.4 Since the 13 base assets have returns that are highly collinear, the portfolio


                                Economic Tracking Portfolios - Page 13
weights are not easy to interpret and have no particular meaning. More meaningful are the

properties of the tracking portfolios shown in Table 3. Table 3 contains hypothesis tests and

summary statistics for the tracking portfolio returns defined by the regressions of Table 2.

Do the tracking portfolios track their target variables?

          A crucial assumption for the use of tracking portfolios, in equation (1), is that returns

reflect revisions in expectations about the target variable. Panel A of Table 3 reports p-values

from tests of whether the returns forecast the target variable (the p-values are simply exclusion

tests from the regressions presented in Table 2). The first row of Panel A reports tests of

whether all 13 return series jointly forecast the target variables. The p-values reject the null of

no forecasting ability, indicating that the returns are useful given the control variables in Zt-1.

This result verifies that innovations in returns are correlated with innovations in expectations

about future variables, so that it is feasible to track all seven target variables using the base

assets.

          The other rows of Panel A test whether three subsets of returns forecast the target

variable (given the other returns): the 12 returns excluding the market portfolio, the eight

industry portfolios, and the four bond portfolios. For example, the second row shows that for all

seven variables, forecasting power is not limited to just the aggregate stock market. In general,

both bonds and stocks contribute tracking power.

Tracking ability

          Panel A shows that the tracking portfolios do track. How well do the tracking portfolios

track? They are designed to track news, so to evaluating the tracking power, what we would like

to do is run a regression of news on unexpected returns (∆Et[yt+k] on ~rt-1, t ), and see if the R-


                                Economic Tracking Portfolios - Page 14
squared is high. Unfortunately, the answer to this question is unknowable, since we do not

observe ∆Et[yt+k].

        One can calculate a partial R-squared that gives a lower bound on the percent of the

variance of news that is captured by tracking portfolio returns. Specifically, one runs a

regression of yt+k-E[yt+k|Zt-1] on bRt-1,t -E[bRt-1,t |Zt-1], which in the notation is the same as

running a regression with µt-1+∆Et[yt+k]+ et,t+k on the left hand side and ~rt-1, t on the right hand

side. The R-squared in this regression is lower bound for the R-squared in a regression of

∆Et[yt+k] on ~rt-1, t . Panel B of Table 3 shows this partial R-squared. The lower bound ranges

from 0.04 to 0.23.

Risk premia on tracking portfolios

        Panel C of Table 3 shows mean excess returns for the tracking portfolios. The numerical

magnitude of these risk premia show the price of one unit of exposure to ∆Et[yt+k]. Panel C also

shows the standard deviation of these portfolio returns, and the t-test for the hypothesis that the

mean return is zero.5

        The production, consumption, and labor income portfolios have risk premia which are

positive and significantly different from zero. Chen, Roll, and Ross (1986) also find positive risk

premia for stocks with returns that move with production. The positive risk premia is one

measure of the cost of business cycles: investors demand high returns on assets exposed to

macroeconomic fluctuations.

        The inflation and T-bill portfolios have risk premia which are negative but insignificantly

different from zero. Chen, Roll, and Ross also find a negative risk premia for stocks with returns



                               Economic Tracking Portfolios - Page 15
that covary with inflation.

        For future stock and bond returns, the theoretical sign is ambiguous and depends on risk

aversion (see for example Campbell 1996). Panel C shows that both future stock and bond

return portfolios earn negative returns, suggestive (loosely) of a coefficient of relative risk

aversion that is less than one. However, these negative returns are insignificantly different from

zero.

Market model regressions

        The market model regressions in Panel D of Table 3 evaluate the ability of the CAPM to

explain the risk premia on tracking portfolios. Before discussing the results, a statistical fact:

since the tracking portfolios are linear combinations of the base assets, the α's of the tracking

portfolios are linear combination of the α's of the base assets. In other words, the CAPM can

only misprice the tracking portfolio if it also misprices one or more of the 13 base assets.

        Only the consumption portfolio has an α that is significantly different from zero. The

primary reason for the consumption portfolio's mispricing by the CAPM is that returns on one of

the base assets (the one-year treasury bond portfolio) is also mispriced by the CAPM. Removal

of this portfolio from the set of base assets results in an insignificant α for consumption.6

The correlation of tracking portfolio returns: Economic interpretation

        Panel E shows correlations of the seven tracking portfolio returns with each other, as well

as correlations of the tracking portfolios with the base assets. This subsection makes a few

comments about these correlations, and the next subsection discusses them further.

        Economists often test hypotheses about the predictive power of aggregate stock returns

for various economic variables. For example, Stock and Watson (1989) find that given other

                              Economic Tracking Portfolios - Page 16
forecasting variables, aggregate stock returns do not help predict future economic activity. The

correlation of aggregate stock returns (RMRF) with tracking portfolios in Panel E show how

different the market portfolio is from the optimal portfolio for forecasting future economic

activity. Tracking portfolios might perform better than aggregate stock returns because they

hedge out portions of aggregate return variation that are unrelated to future production (such as

changes in taxes, liquidity, or sentiment). For example, Panel E shows that the correlation of the

production tracking portfolio and the market portfolio is 0.57, so that the market portfolio is far

from being the optimal predictive portfolio for production.

       Panel E also shows the production portfolio is positively correlated with the inflation

portfolio, suggesting that innovations to output are positively correlated with innovations to

inflation. This correlation is evidence in favor of an upward sloping Phillips-curve. As shown in

Table 1, this positive correlation is not present in realizations of inflation and production,

suggesting that tracking portfolios are able to disentangle the different effects of unexpected and

expected components.

The correlation of tracking portfolio returns: Comparison to VAR approach

       Table 4 compares the correlations of the tracking portfolios with the analogous results

from Campbell and Ammer (1993). Panel A reprints their table showing correlations of

innovations to different variables. They construct these innovations using a first-order monthly

VAR.

       Panel B of Table 4 shows the corresponding results using the economic tracking

portfolios approach, both for the full sample and for Campbell and Ammer's sample of 1952:1-

1987:2. It shows the correlations of unexpected returns on different tracking portfolios. The


                              Economic Tracking Portfolios - Page 17
unexpected returns, ~rt -1, t are calculated as the residual in the projection equation:

        b̂R t -1, t = aZ t-1 + ~rt-1, t                                                    (9)

Campbell and Ammer examine innovations in real future short-term interest rates, so Panel B

transforms the tracking portfolio for nominal T-bill returns into a tracking portfolio for real T-bill

returns by subtracting the inflation portfolio return (since the portfolio weights are linear, one

can add and subtract returns in this way).

        Since Campbell and Ammer's variables are innovations to the weighted sum of the

realizations of the variable into the infinite future, and tracking portfolio innovations are merely

for the next 12 months, these tables are conceptually (as well as methodologically) different.

Nevertheless, Table 4 shows the results are quite similar. The similarity is striking since the

tracking portfolios rely on a fairly different set of econometric assumptions.

        For example, news about future inflation and news about future expected stock returns

are negatively correlated (the correlation is –0.65 for Campbell and Ammer (1993) and –0.58 for

the tracking portfolio approach using the same sample period). Another example is that

innovations in expected stock returns and expected bond returns are positively correlated (the

correlation is 0.82 for Campbell and Ammer (1993) and 0.58 for the tracking portfolio

approach). This result suggests that risk premia on stocks and bonds move together over time.

Examining the implied forecasts

        Figures 1-3 show the time series of the cumulative innovations in returns on the

production, inflation, and stock return portfolios from 1947 to 1994. These figures cumulate

unexpected returns on the tracking portfolio ( ~rt -1, t from equation (9)). By cumulating, the



                                          Economic Tracking Portfolios - Page 18
intention is to approximately display Et[yt+k]. Since the series are based on regression residuals,

by construction they always begin and end at zero.

        The figures also show actual growth rates of the target variable from month t-12 to month

t. If tracking portfolios are working well, one should see the tracking portfolio return predict

subsequent moves in the target variable.

        Since the tracking portfolios have been chosen in-sample to forecast the 12-month ahead

target variable, it is no surprise that one can see some of this forecasting ability in the figures.

Figure 1 shows the recession of 1990-1991. The recession started in August 1990; the

production tracking portfolio peaked 12 months earlier (as it should), in August 1989. Figure 2

shows that inflation tracking portfolio was forecasting greatly increased inflation during the 1973

and 1979 oil shocks. Figure 3 shows that the stock return tracking portfolio falls sharply in the

first half of 1987, right before the October 1987 crash.

5. Estimating the reaction of prices to news using instrumental variables

        Tables 5-7 use tracking portfolios to test hypotheses about the reaction of aggregate stock

prices to news, the reaction of bond prices to news, and the reaction of small stock prices to

news. In each case, a test asset return is on the left-hand side of the regression and tracking

portfolio returns (along with lagged control variables) are on the right-hand side. As mentioned

in section 2, a regression of current test asset returns on b̂R t -1, t and Zt-1 is identical to an

instrumental variables regression of current test asset returns on future target variables yt+k and

Zt-1 on the right-hand side, and current base assets returns and Zt-1 as instruments.7 As usual, the

inclusion of Zt-1 is meant to control for expected returns.

        If the returns from the tracking portfolios are correlated with the residuals in the desired

                                Economic Tracking Portfolios - Page 19
equation (equation (6)), then the tracking portfolio will not be a valid instrument. While it is

impossible to eliminate this potential source of bias, Tables 5-7 attempt to mitigate it by using

tracking portfolios constructed using a set of base assets that do not include the test asset on the

left-hand side.

Stock prices and future economic activity

       Table 5 runs regressions of current stock returns on future industrial production growth.

Table 5 puts stock returns on the left-hand side of the regression, so in constructing the tracking

portfolio returns on the right-hand side of the regression, only the four bond returns are used.

More information about these tracking portfolios with restricted base assets is given later, in

Table 9.

       The first two regressions show useful benchmarks for explanatory power. The first

regression shows that the control variables alone have an R-squared of 0.08. Since the tracking

portfolio for production is constructed only using bond returns, the second regression shows the

ability of long bond returns to explain stock returns. Together with the control variables, the R-

squared is 0.14. The low R-squared is similar to results from Fama and French (1993), who find

that bond market returns have little ability to explain stock market returns.

       The third regression uses realized production as a right hand side variable in an OLS

regression, and the fourth regression shows instrumental variable estimation of the same

regression. The two statistics of interest are the coefficient on production and the R-squared.

       First, compare the coefficient on production in the two regressions. The OLS regression

shows that future production does indeed help explain this month’s stock return, with a positive

and significant coefficient. The coefficient of 0.10 is similar in magnitude to the coefficients


                             Economic Tracking Portfolios - Page 20
estimated by Fama (1990), and implies that news that production growth will be one percent

higher over the next year results in a tenth of a percent increase in aggregate stock prices today.

In the instrumental variables regression, the coefficient rises by an order of magnitude, so that

news that production growth will be one percent higher over the next year results in a 2.77

percent in aggregate stock prices today.

       Second, compare the R-squareds. Fama (1990) uses the OLS R-squareds in similar

regression as a measure of market rationality. The R-squared rises from 0.09 using realized

production to 0.25 using the production tracking portfolios.

       The last regression in Table 5 is a single factor model where aggregate stock returns have

a 2.77 loading on the bond-only production tracking portfolio. The regression makes a statistical

statement with an economic interpretation. The statistical statement is that bond returns explain

some of the variation in stock returns. The economic interpretation is that bond returns explain

stock returns because both are exposed to news about future production. The tracking portfolio

procedure imposes discipline.8 Compared to an unrestricted regression of aggregate stock

returns on the four bond portfolio returns, the tracking portfolio imposes the restriction that the

portfolios can only enter the regression in a specific linear combination.

       What is the cost of this restriction, in terms of explanatory power? Answering this

question serves two purposes. First, it provides a statistical evaluation of how much of the

common variation in asset returns is captured by the production factor. In this context, the

common variation is between four bond portfolios on the one hand, and the aggregate stock

portfolio on the other. Second, it provides an answer to the economic question of whether bond

returns help explain aggregate stock returns only because of their common exposure to


                             Economic Tracking Portfolios - Page 21
production news.

       Substituting the four bond returns for the production tracking portfolio returns results in

an R-squared that rises from 0.25 to 0.31, so that 0.06 is the cost of imposing the restriction that

four bond portfolios have the weights given by the production tracking portfolio. However, this

increase in R-squared is statistically insignificant.9 Thus one cannot reject the hypothesis that

the only reason that bond returns explain stock returns is because both reflect news about future

production.

Bond prices, future interest rates, and future risk premia

       Table 6 uses tracking portfolios to explain movements in aggregate bond prices. Bond

prices should covary negatively with news about future excess returns on bonds and future

nominal risk free interest rates.

       Table 6 puts bond returns on the left-hand side of the regression, so in constructing the

tracking portfolio returns on the right-hand side of the regression, only the nine stock returns are

used. The first regression shows control variables alone, and the second uses contemporaneous

stock market excess returns to explain returns on long-term government bonds.

       The third regression shows OLS estimation where realized future Treasury bill returns

and excess returns on long-term government bonds are placed on the right-hand side of the

regression. The coefficients are both negative (as expected) and statistically significant.

       The last regression shows instrumental variables estimation using the excess bond return

and nominal T-bill return tracking portfolios. These tracking portfolios are constructed using

only the nine stock return portfolios. Again, the coefficients all rise substantially.

       The last regression in Table 6 is a two factor model where long bonds have a -0.62


                              Economic Tracking Portfolios - Page 22
loading on the (stock-only) bond risk premia factor, and a -5.89 loading on the (stock-only) risk-

free rate factor. Looking again at the cost of imposing the restriction that the nine stock

portfolios have weights given by the tracking portfolios, the R-squared rises from 0.20 in the

restricted regression to 0.31 in an unrestricted regression. In this case, the increase in R-squared

is significant, so that stock returns do not explain bond returns only because of common

exposure to year-ahead risk premia and interest rates. This diagnostic indicates that the two

factor model in Table 6 fails to capture common variation in asset returns, and that one needs to

find other economic variables in order to understand the covariation of returns.

The cyclicality of small stocks

       Table 7 tests the hypothesis that small stocks have returns that are more cyclical than

large stocks, beyond the fact that small stocks have higher market β’s. This is an interesting

hypothesis to test because of other evidence that small firms are more exposed to aggregate

fluctuations (see Lamont, Polk, and Saá-Requejo, 1999 for evidence and a review of this

literature). The small stock portfolio consists of firms in the smallest size quintile.

       The dependent variable in Table 7 is excess returns on the small stock portfolio; the

second regression shows that small stocks have market β's that are above one. The third

regression puts future production on the right-hand side, controlling for the current market

return. By controlling for the market return, one is using the market's sensitivity to future

production as a benchmark. The coefficient on future production will be positive if small stocks

have a higher sensitivity to production news than the market has. The coefficient on future

production is insignificant: using realized production growth, one cannot reject the hypothesis

that small stocks are not more cyclical than predicted by their high market β’s.


                              Economic Tracking Portfolios - Page 23
           The last regression instruments for future production growth using the thirteen base asset

returns, and shows that the coefficient on future production rises and becomes significant. The

last regression says that news that production growth will be one percent higher than expected

causes prices on small stocks to rise about one percent more than predicted by the market model.

           The last regression of Table 7 is a two factor model where small stock returns have a 0.99

loading on the market factor and a 1.14 loading on the industrial production factor. Going from

this regression to an unrestricted regression with all 13 returns on the right-hand side, the R-

squared increases from 0.76 to 0.82. This increase is statistically insignificant, so that one

cannot reject the idea that industry returns and bond returns explain small stock returns only

through exposure to news about future industrial production (and through loadings on the market

factor).

           In summary, using tracking portfolios to measure news results in a substantial rise in the

estimated magnitude of the reaction of prices to news. Tables 5-7 are simultaneously

instrumental variables estimates about reaction to fundamental news, and factor models which

explain common variation in returns. As instrumental variables estimation, Tables 5-7 are not

perfect, since the coefficients are subject to bias. As factor models, Tables 5-7 are an

improvement over less structured estimation, because they have economic meaning.

6. Robustness Tests

Rolling regressions

           Table 8 uses rolling regressions to examine the out-of-sample performance of tracking

portfolios. Panel A shows regressions generated using a twenty-year estimation window. Panel

B uses a five-year estimation window. Five-year estimation periods for covariances are


                                Economic Tracking Portfolios - Page 24
traditional in finance, although one might wonder if this period is long enough when estimating

covariances with economic variables such as output or inflation.

        The tracking portfolios in Panel A are generated as follows. Every month, one runs the

tracking portfolio regression using only historical data, up to and including this month's

realization of the target variable. In month t, one estimates b̂ t and ĉt using the past 20 years of

monthly data. This procedure is repeated every month, and the result are two times series:

b̂ t R t-1, t and ĉt Zt-1. b̂ t R t-1, t is the return from a dynamic portfolio strategy following a well-

defined trading rule that is a function only of observable data.

        Using these two forecast components, Table 8 reports regressions of yt+12 on b̂ t R t-1, t and

ĉt Zt-1. The coefficient on b̂ t R t-1, t in these OLS time-series regressions is a measure of how well

the tracking portfolios tracks out-of-sample. If the tracking portfolio generated using the rolling

procedure were perfect, then the coefficient would be one. If the tracking portfolio were useless,

the coefficient would be zero. In general, one would expect a coefficient of less than one

because of error in coefficient estimates, and possibly because of changing true parameter values

as well. The issue is similar to the shrinkage of CAPM β’s.

        Panel A of Table 8 shows that using a twenty-year estimation window, tracking portfolios

demonstrate an ability to track the target variable out-of-sample, since the coefficient is in all

seven cases significantly different from zero. The coefficients range from 0.37 to 0.73.

Forecasting deterioration is not limited to tracking portfolios. The coefficients on ĉt Zt-1 range

between 0.27 and 1.03, indicating that non-return variables also are not perfect out-of-sample.

        Panel B shows that out-of-sample performance using a five-year estimating window is

                                 Economic Tracking Portfolios - Page 25
disastrous. None of the coefficients on b̂ t R t-1, t are above 0.26 or close to significant. The

coefficients on ĉt Zt-1 are also dramatically worse in the five-year case. In short, a five-year

sample period is not a good idea when tracking macroeconomic variables, or in trying to capture

to covariance of asset returns with innovations to macroeconomic expectations.

        In summary, tracking portfolios do track out-of-sample (using a sensible estimation

period). Tracking portfolios are a feasible way for investors to hedge economic risk in real time,

although investors should take into account the predictable out-of-sample deterioration.

Alternative horizons for target variables and base assets

        Table 9 shows various alternative ways of constructing tracking portfolios. Panel A

reprints relevant statistics from Table 3. Panels B-F each show a different variation on the

baseline specification of Table 2.

        The table shows three sets of facts about the differently constructed tracking portfolio.

First, it tests whether the tracking portfolios track: it shows p-values from exclusion tests in the

forecasting regression, which evaluate whether the returns have forecasting ability. Second, it

shows the partial R-squared of the target variable on tracking returns. Third, it shows the

correlation of the baseline tracking portfolios with the tracking portfolio constructed using the

various different methods.

        Panel B shows results using a five-year target variable instead of one-year target variable.

The first row shows that the tracking portfolios do track. The second row shows that the partial

R-squared is generally lower than in Panel A. This fact is unsurprising since only a smaller

percentage of news about the next five years is released in any given month. The last row shows

that the correlations with the baseline tracking portfolios are moderately high, ranging from 0.27

                              Economic Tracking Portfolios - Page 26
to 0.84.

       Panel C shows results using quarterly base asset returns instead of monthly base asset

returns. These regressions continue to use monthly observations, but they use returns Rt-3,t and

control variables Zt-3. Again, quarterly tracking portfolios do track. Not surprisingly, the partial

R-squared’s rise, since more information is released in three months than in one. The

correlations with baseline portfolios are calculated using monthly returns, where the portfolio

weights come from the regression using quarterly returns. The correlations are very high (0.91

to 0.97), indicating that it is essentially irrelevant whether one calculates portfolio weights using

monthly or quarterly regressions.

Restricting the base assets

       Panels D and E show tracking portfolio returns constructed with subsets of the 13 base

assets, Rt-1,t. Panel D uses only the nine stock portfolios, and Panel E uses only the four bond

portfolios. These are the same portfolios used in Tables 5 and 6.

       With the exception of the stock-only consumption tracking portfolio, the p-values in

Panels D and E show that one can track the target variables with either bond returns or stock

returns. Except for the nominal T-bill tracking portfolio, the correlations with baseline are

higher for the stock-only tracking portfolios (0.70-0.94) than for the bond-only portfolios (0.43-

0.83), indicating that the baseline portfolios are more influenced by stock returns than bond

returns.

Restricting the control variables

       Panel F shows results with no control variables, so that the right-hand side of the

regression contains a constant term and 13 base asset returns. These regressions are surely


                              Economic Tracking Portfolios - Page 27
misspecified, but they give a sense of the importance of the control variables. With the

exception of the inflation tracking portfolio, the tracking portfolios still track.

        For the nominal T-bill return, the baseline portfolio correlation is near zero, suggesting

that control variables are a very important ingredient in constructing its tracking portfolio.

Nominal T-bill returns over the next year are very predictable (as shown by the R-squared of

0.91 in Table 2). Thus excluding lagged control variables, such as the lagged T-bill return,

makes a dramatic difference in the properties of the tracking portfolio.

        For the other six tracking portfolios, the baseline portfolio correlations are fairly high,

ranging from 0.63 to 0.89. For these tracking portfolios, then, control variables are not as

important.

Other potential base assets

        The analysis so far has used 13 base assets in constructing tracking portfolios. Table 10

examines three additional stock portfolios which might potentially be useful in tracking

economic variables. One could imagine adding other interesting portfolios such as gold, real

estate, and international securities, but these extensions are beyond the scope of this paper.10

        Table 10 shows two facts about the candidate portfolios. First, it shows whether the

candidate portfolio adds forecasting ability in the presence of the 13 base asset returns. This test

corresponds to the p-value for the hypothesis that the candidate can be excluded from the

baseline regression. Second, Table 10 shows the correlation of the candidate portfolio with the

tracking portfolios.

        The three portfolios are the value factor, the size factor, and the momentum factor. The

value and size factors were both originally constructed by Fama and French (1993), and are


                              Economic Tracking Portfolios - Page 28
available 1947:1-1994:12 from Davis, Fama and French (1999). The momentum factor is

available 1963:7-1994:12 from Carhart (1997).

         The value factor is HML, and measures stock returns related to the book-to-market ratio.

HML (high minus low) is constructed by subtracting a low book-to-market portfolio return from

a high book-to-market portfolio return. The size factor is SMB (small minus big), and measures

return variation related to firm size. SMB is constructed by subtracting a large firm portfolio

return from a small firm portfolio return (size is measured by market capitalization). The

momentum factor is PR1YR (prior one-year return), and measures return variation related to past

price momentum. PR1YR is constructed by subtracting returns from a portfolio of losers (firms

with low returns in the past year) from a portfolio of winners (firms with high returns in the past

year).

         First, Table 10 shows that in general the three candidate portfolios do not help track the

target variables, so that excluding them from the baseline specification is appropriate. There are

21 different p-values in Table 10, and only one of them (the test for whether the size factor helps

forecast inflation) is significant at the 5% level. One out of 21 is the expected number due to

random chance.

         Second, Table 10 shows that the three candidate portfolios are not particularly highly

correlated with any of the tracking portfolios. The highest is the 0.33 correlation between the

size factor and the production tracking portfolio. This correlation is consistent with results from

Table 7: small stocks load heavily on the production tracking portfolio.

Summary of robustness results

         In general, the results of this section suggest that the portfolios estimated in Table 2 are


                               Economic Tracking Portfolios - Page 29
robust to different specifications. The baseline portfolios are not very different from portfolios

constructed using alternative methods. Some changes (such as using 3-month returns on base

assets or dropping all bonds from the base assets) make virtually no difference in most cases.

Value, size, and momentum are not particularly related to or useful for tracking economic

variables.

7. Conclusions

Summary of the results

       Using post-war US data, it is possible to track expectations about future economic

variables using stocks from different industries and bonds of different maturities and qualities.

These tracking portfolios do not merely reflect the aggregate stock market or aggregate bond

market, but instead combine the different returns optimally. Out-of-sample results suggest that

going into the future, tracking portfolios will be useful in forecasting and hedging

macroeconomic variables.

       The properties of the tracking portfolio returns shed light on a variety of hypotheses

about the relationship between returns and economic variables. In general, the results using

tracking portfolios are quite similar to conclusions based on VAR methods of estimating

innovations using non-return variables. In contrast, the results using tracking portfolios are quite

different from regressing returns on realizations of future variables. Using returns as

instrumental variables results in a much higher estimated sensitivity of asset prices to news about

future economic variables, compared to previous results.

       The instrumental variable results are an example of a factor model where one regresses

returns on the left-hand side against returns on the right-hand side. In this case, however, the


                             Economic Tracking Portfolios - Page 30
coefficients have an economic interpretation. Using tracking portfolios imposes discipline: asset

returns are only allowed to go on the right-hand side of the regression if they contain information

about economic variables.

Extensions

       One could also construct tracking portfolios using daily returns. This would allow one to

estimate daily updates on what financial markets think about future inflation, economic activity,

and expected returns, and to examine specific episodes. E.g., when the Fed announces it is

tightening monetary policy, do the inflation and output forecasting portfolios fall?

       Forming daily tracking portfolios could also address a long-standing puzzle. Bond prices

react dramatically to macroeconomic announcements, but aggregate stock prices typically do not

(e.g. McQueen and Roley (1993)). It could be that stock prices do not react because competing

effects on future discount rates and cash flows cancel out in aggregate. It is possible to

investigate this explanation using tracking portfolios. In this respect, tracking portfolios have an

inherent advantage over monthly VAR's using non-return variables.




                             Economic Tracking Portfolios - Page 31
APPENDIX: Data sources.

Target variables

       Industrial production is provided by the Federal Reserve. Consumption is provided by

DRI Basic Economics (formerly Citibase), and using the variable names is equal to GMCQ-

GMCDQ. Labor income is provided by DRI Basic Economics, variable name GMW. The CPI

index, the CRSP value weighted aggregate portfolio returns, the Treasury bill portfolio return,

and the long-term government bond portfolio returns are all provided by Ibbotson Associates.

Base assets

       The eight industry portfolio returns are calculated by the author using data provided by

CRSP. The four bond portfolio returns are provided by Ibbotson Associates.

Control variables

       The long bond yield, one-year yield, and commercial paper yield are provided by

Ibbotson Associates. The T-bill yield, BAA yield, and AAA yield are provided by DRI Basic

Economics, variable names FYGM3T, FYBAAC, and FYAAAC. The dividend yield is

constructed using the total and capital gains-only returns on CRSP value weight aggregate

portfolio, provided by Ibbotson Associates.

Other variables

       HML and SMB are provided by Eugene Fama. PR1YR is provided by Mark Carhart. I

thank these two individuals for graciously providing their data. Small stock returns are provided

by Ibbotson Associates.




                            Economic Tracking Portfolios - Page 32
FOOTNOTES
1
    Both Campbell's papers and this paper assume that the coefficients do not change over

time. An alternative would be to allow for conditional coefficients, as in Ferson and

Harvey (1991).
2
    Ideally, one would like to use seasonally unadjusted data since the seasonal adjustment

procedures can distort the properties of time-series data. Unfortunately, monthly labor

income and personal nondurable consumption are not published in unadjusted form.
3
    The eight industry portfolios, value weighted, aggregate to the market. However, the

weights are time-varying since each industry contains a changing fraction of total market

value. Thus the market portfolio and the eight industries are not exactly collinear, though

of course they are very highly correlated.
4
    The standard errors are calculated using Newey-West with 24 lags. The exact

correction would be Hansen-Hodrick with 12 lags, but this covariance matrix was not

convenient to use since it resulted in undefined test statistics for some of the tests

performed in this paper.
5
    The reported standard deviation is the usual time-series standard deviation, taken b̂ as

given (so that one can generate the in-sample Sharpe ratio by taking the ratio of the mean

and standard deviation). The t-statistic, in contrast, is calculated using GMM, and takes

into account the estimation error of b̂ .
6
    In comparing the consumption portfolio to the other tracking portfolios, it is also

important to note that the consumption portfolio reflects a shorter sample period than the

other portfolios.




                           Economic Tracking Portfolios - Page 33
7
    The explanatory power and the coefficients on the macroeconomic variables/tracking

variables are numerically identical. The coefficients on Zt-1 correspond to δ in the

regression rTt-1,t = δZt-1+φ(bRt-1,t+cZt-1)+vt,t+12. Also, as is usual in instrumental variable

regressions, the standard errors in Tables 5-7 have been corrected to reflect for the

imprecision of the first-stage regression.
8
    Dumas (1994) uses a similar disciplined approach to finding variables that predict

returns. To avoid data mining, he predicts returns using only those variables that predict

future economic activity.
9
    The p-value for the hypothesis that the portfolio weights are different from the tracking

portfolio weights is 0.12. This test is carried out by adding three of the bond returns to

the right-hand side of the instrumental variables regression, and running an exclusion test

for the three bond returns. One can also not reject the hypothesis that the industrial

production tracking portfolio has a zero coefficient (the coefficient is 2.92 and the t-

statistic is 1.20) in this regression, so the tests are fairly uninformative.
10
     Titman and Warga (1989) examine real estate returns and inflation forecasts.




                           Economic Tracking Portfolios - Page 34
REFERENCES

Boudoukh, Jacob, Matthew Richardson, and Robert F. Whitelaw, 1994, Industry returns and the
Fisher effect, Journal of Finance 49, 1595-1616.

Breeden, Douglas T., 1979, An intertemporal asset pricing model with stochastic consumption
and investment opportunities, Journal of Financial Economics 7, 265-296.

Breeden, Douglas T., Michael R. Gibbons, and Robert Litzenberger, 1989, Empirical tests of the
consumption-oriented CAPM, Journal of Finance 44, 231-262.

Campbell, John Y., 1991, A variance decomposition for stock returns, Economic Journal 101,
157-179.

Campbell, John Y., 1996, Understanding risk and return, Journal of Political Economy 104, 267-
297.

Campbell, John Y., and John Ammer, 1993, What moves the stock and bond markets? A
variance decomposition for long-term asset returns, Journal of Finance 48, 3-38.

Campbell, John Y., and Jianping Mei, 1993, Where do betas come from? Asset price dynamics
and the sources of systematic risk, Review of Financial Studies 6, 567-592.

Carhart, M.M., 1997, "On the persistence of mutual fund performance," Journal of Finance, 52,
57-82.

Chan, Louis K.C., Jason Karceski and Josef Lakonishok, 1998, The risk and return from factors,
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 33, 159-188.

Chen, Nai-Fu, Richard Roll, and Stephen A. Ross, 1986, Economic forces and the stock market,
Journal of Business 59, 383-403.

Davis, James, Eugene F. Fama and Kenneth R. French, 1999, Characteristics, covariances, and
average returns: 1929-1997, February 1999, Center for Research in Security Prices
Working Paper 471.

Davis, Steven J., and Paul Willen, 1998, "Using financial assets to hedge labor income risks:
Estimating the benefits," University of Chicago working paper.

Dumas, Bernard, 1994, A test of the international CAPM using business cycle indicators as
instrumental variables, in Jeffrey Frankel, ed.: The Internationalization of Equity Markets
(University of Chicago Press, Chicago, Ill.).


                            Economic Tracking Portfolios - Page 35
Fama, Eugene F., 1981, Stock returns, real activity, inflation, and money, American Economic
Review 71, 545-565.

Fama, Eugene F., 1990, Stock returns, expected returns, and real activity, Journal of Finance 45,
1089-1108.

Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and
bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3-56.

Ferson, Wayne E. and Campbell R. Harvey, 1991, The variation of economic risk premiums,
Journal of Political Economy 99, 385-415.

Jagannathan, Ravi and Wang, Zhenyu, 1996, The conditional CAPM and the cross-section of
expected returns, Journal of Finance 51, 3-53.

Lamont, Owen, Christopher Polk and Jesús Saá-Requejo, 1999, Financial constraints and stock
returns, working paper.

McQueen, Grant and V. Vance Roley, 1993, Stock prices, news, and business conditions, Review
of Financial Studies 6, 683-707.

Schwert, G. William, 1990, Stock returns and real activity: A century of evidence, Journal of
Finance 45, 1237-1257.

Sharpe, William F., 1982, Factors in New York Stock Exchange Security Returns, 1931-1979,
Journal of Portfolio Management Fall 1982.

Shiller, Robert J., 1993, Macro markets (Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK).

Shiller, Robert J., and Stefano Athanasoulis, 1995, World income components: Measuring and
exploiting international risk sharing opportunities, NBER Working Paper No. 5095

Stock, James, and Mark W. Watson, 1989, New indexes of coincident and leading economic
indicators, in Blanchard, Olivier Jean Blanchard and Stanley Fischer, eds: NBER
Macroeconomics Annual 1989 (University of Chicago Press, Chicago).

Titman, Sheridan and Arthur Warga, 1989, Stock returns as predictors of interest rates and
inflation, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 24, 47-57.




                            Economic Tracking Portfolios - Page 36
Table 1: Summary Statistics for Target Variables, Control Variables, and Base Asset Returns, 1947:1-1994:12
                                 Mean    Std dev   Production      Consumption      Labor income    Inflationt,t+12   Excess stock      Excess bond        Nom. T-bill
                                                   growtht,t+12    growtht,t+12     growtht,t+12                      returnst,t+12     returnst,t+12      returnst,t+12
  Productiont,t+12                3.46      6.07                                                      Correlation
  Consumptiont,t+12               3.14      1.62            0.68             1.00
  Labor incomet,t+12              2.93      3.30            0.86             0.82            1.00
y Inflationt,t+12                 4.00      3.11           -0.20            -0.47           -0.41              1.00
  Excess stock returnst,t+12      6.57     15.11            0.24             0.25            0.26             -0.35              1.00
  Excess bond returnst,t+12       0.36      9.26           -0.22             0.04           -0.09             -0.38              0.33               1.00
  Nom.T-bill returnst,t+12        4.81      2.93           -0.29            -0.44           -0.42              0.64             -0.32              -0.09               1.00
  RMRFt-1,t (market)              0.61      4.14            0.22             0.13            0.20             -0.08              0.01              -0.11              -0.08
  BASIC INDSt-1,t                 0.58      4.89            0.19             0.08            0.16             -0.02             -0.03              -0.17              -0.07
  CAPITAL GOODSt-1,t              0.65      5.10            0.19             0.14            0.17             -0.08             -0.01              -0.12              -0.10
  CONSTRUCTIONt-1,t               0.53      5.62            0.21             0.10            0.17             -0.06              0.02              -0.14              -0.07
  CONSUMER GDSt-1,t               0.68      4.44            0.22             0.15            0.20             -0.09              0.00              -0.10              -0.05
  ENERGYt-1,t                     0.72      5.03            0.16             0.03            0.12              0.04             -0.03              -0.18              -0.06
R FINANCEt-1,t                    0.66      4.39            0.23             0.14            0.21             -0.09              0.04              -0.10              -0.09
  TRANSPORTNt-1,t                 0.58      5.40            0.23             0.13            0.21             -0.06              0.03              -0.11              -0.06
  UTILITIESt-1,t                  0.49      3.30            0.16             0.11            0.15             -0.13              0.06              -0.02              -0.09
  LONGBONDt-1,t                   0.04      2.50            0.05             0.11            0.06             -0.13              0.16               0.06              -0.07
  INTRMDBONDt-1,t                 0.08      1.40            0.04             0.10            0.05             -0.12              0.17               0.08              -0.07
  ONEYRBONDt-1,t                  0.07      0.44            0.02             0.12            0.04             -0.10              0.15               0.07              -0.04
   JUNKBONDt-1,t                  0.21      2.22            0.21             0.14            0.20             -0.13              0.09               0.02              -0.10
  RFt-1,t                         0.40      0.26           -0.37            -0.42           -0.46              0.53             -0.21               0.10               0.93
  TERMLONGt-1                     1.40      1.31            0.34             0.22            0.27             -0.24              0.19               0.37              -0.14
  TERM1YRt-1                      0.51      0.50           -0.04             0.04           -0.10              0.26             -0.03               0.19               0.47
Z DEFBONDt-1                      0.93      0.44            0.02            -0.04           -0.12              0.24              0.03               0.18               0.62
  DEFCPt-1                        0.68      0.47           -0.32            -0.20           -0.37              0.25              0.01               0.01               0.34
  DIVYIELDt-1                     3.95      1.09           -0.02            -0.13            0.03              0.04              0.40               0.00              -0.09
  Productiont-13,t-1              3.62      6.25           -0.28             0.01           -0.09              0.10             -0.27              -0.07              -0.12
  Inflationt-13,t-1               4.23      3.44           -0.37            -0.40           -0.50              0.60             -0.16              -0.08               0.49
  Excess stock returnst-13,t-1    6.11     15.25            0.28             0.16            0.40             -0.21             -0.19              -0.18              -0.17


                                                        Economic Tracking Portfolios - Page 37
Notes to Table 1

Production growtht,t+12 is (in percentage points) the change in natural log of industrial production from month t to month t+12. Labor
income growtht,t+12 is (in percentage points) the change in natural log of real personal income from wages and salaries from month t to
month t+12. Inflationt,t+12 is (in percentage points) the change in natural log of the CPI index, from month t to month t+12. Excess stock
returnst,t+12 is the continuously compounded total return, in percent, on the CRSP value weighted NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ portfolio,
minus the continuously compounded return on a portfolio of Treasury bills, from month t to month t+12. Excess bond returnst,t+12 is the
continuously compounded return, in percent, on the long term government bond portfolio, minus the continuously compounded return on a
portfolio of Treasury bills, from month t to month t+12. Nom. T-bill returnst,t+12 is the continuously compounded return on a portfolio of
Treasury bills, from month t to month t+12. RMRFt-1,t is the simple return in month t, in percent (with reinvested dividends), on the CRSP
value weighted NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ portfolio, minus the simple return on a portfolio of Treasury bills. BASIC INDUSTRIES,
CAPITAL GOODS, CONSTRUCTION, CONSUMER GDS, ENERGY, FINANCE , TRANSPORTATION, and UTILITIES are simple
returns in month t, in percent (with reinvested dividends), on the value weighted industry stock portfolios constructed from CRSP data,
minus the simple return on a portfolio of Treasury bills. The industries are constructed using CRSP SIC codes and the classification
system given in Table A. LONGBOND is the simple return in month t, in percent, on the long term government bond portfolio, minus the
simple return on a portfolio of Treasury bills. INTRMDBOND is the simple return in month t, in percent, on the intermediate term
government bond portfolio, minus the simple return on a portfolio of Treasury bills. ONEYRBOND is the simple return in month t, in
percent, on the one-year maturity bond portfolio, minus the simple return on a portfolio of Treasury bills. JUNKBOND is the simple
return in month t, in percent, on the high yield corporate bond portfolio, minus the simple return on a portfolio of Treasury bills. RF is the
simple return in month t on a portfolio of Treasury bills. TERMLONG is the term premium for long term bonds, in percent in month t-1,
calculated as the yield on the long term government bond portfolio minus the Treasury bill yield. TERM1YR is the term premium for one-
year bonds, in percent in month t-1, calculated as the yield on the one-year government bond portfolio minus the Treasury bill yield.
DEFBOND is the default premium for bonds, in percent in month t-1, calculated as the yield on AAA corporates minus the yield on BAA
corporates. DEFCP is the default premium for commercial paper, in percent in month t-1, calculated as the yield on 3-6 month commercial
paper minus the Treasury bill yield. DIVYIELD is the dividend yield, in percent in month t-1, on the value weighted
NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ portfolio, calculated as the sum of the past 12 months of dividends divided by the level of market value of the
portfolio. All data are monthly, 1947:1-1994:12, with the exception of consumption which is 1959:1-1994:12.




                                                  Economic Tracking Portfolios - Page 38
Table 2
Regression coefficients and portfolio weights, yt+12 = bRt-1,t+cZt-1+εt,t+12

                                         Production   Consumption Labor income Inflationt,t+12 Excess stock     Excess bond        Nom. T-bill
                                         growtht,t+12 growtht,t+12   growtht,t+12              returnst,t+12    returnst,t+12      returnst,t+12
                                         Coef     SE   Coef       SE  Coef      SE Coef     SE  Coef         SE  Coef         SE    Coef        SE
         RMRFt-1,t (market)              -0.38 0.33      0.11 0.11      0.20 0.16  -0.40 0.24     2.94 0.73        3.98       0.63   -0.30 0.07
         BASIC INDUSTRIESt-1,t            0.03 0.09     -0.02 0.03     -0.08 0.05   0.17 0.07    -0.71 0.35       -0.66       0.15    0.06 0.02
         CAPITAL GOODSt-1,t              -0.16 0.14     -0.02 0.04     -0.16 0.08   0.03 0.06    -0.85 0.29       -0.53       0.20    0.03 0.02
         CONSTRUCTIONt-1,t                0.02 0.08     -0.05 0.03     -0.04 0.04   0.05 0.05     0.14 0.22       -0.32       0.16    0.03 0.02
         CONSUMER GDSt-1,t                0.20 0.12      0.02 0.04      0.06 0.07   0.00 0.07    -0.73 0.42       -0.93       0.26    0.08 0.03
         ENERGYt-1,t                      0.13 0.06     -0.04 0.02     -0.03 0.03   0.11 0.04    -0.42 0.16       -0.79       0.13    0.06 0.01
Rt-1,t   FINANCEt-1,t                     0.14 0.08      0.01 0.04      0.08 0.05   0.04 0.04    -0.37 0.25       -0.35       0.12    0.03 0.01
         TRANSPORTATIONt-1,t              0.20 0.08      0.02 0.02      0.10 0.04   0.03 0.03     0.00 0.21       -0.36       0.12    0.03 0.02
         UTILITIESt-1,t                  -0.09 0.10     -0.04 0.05     -0.10 0.05  -0.01 0.07    -0.62 0.26       -0.32       0.19    0.02 0.02
         LONGBONDt-1,t                   -0.08 0.10      0.03 0.03     -0.06 0.05  -0.01 0.04    -0.19 0.26       -0.68       0.20    0.02 0.03
         INTRMDBONDt-1,t                 -0.15 0.14     -0.12 0.07     -0.09 0.08   0.13 0.07     0.58 0.64        0.16       0.47   -0.06 0.07
         ONEYRBONDt-1,t                   1.13 0.63      0.56 0.20      0.85 0.32  -1.10 0.44     4.15 2.11        2.28       1.27   -0.81 0.26
          JUNKBONDt-1,t                   0.11 0.12     -0.01 0.04      0.05 0.07   0.02 0.05    -0.38 0.28        0.07       0.16    0.00 0.03
         Constant                         7.82 2.78      2.76 0.97      4.03 1.78   1.96 1.43 -11.95 6.61 -10.28              4.03    0.69 0.43
         RFt-1,t                        -11.20 2.95     -4.65 1.59     -6.05 1.76   4.59 1.80    -6.72 5.33 11.08             6.58    9.84 0.74
         TERMLONGt-1                     -0.05 0.50     -0.20 0.18     -0.12 0.34  -0.29 0.23     2.99 1.15        3.93       0.98   -0.01 0.10
         TERM1YRt-1                       1.95 0.86      0.29 0.28      0.82 0.48   0.89 0.41    -0.87 1.55       -2.51       1.59    0.62 0.22
Zt-1     DEFBONDt-1                       3.48 1.56      1.00 0.52      1.92 0.80  -0.98 0.98    -0.97 3.01       -1.04       3.34    0.15 0.43
         DEFCPt-1                        -1.82 0.86     -0.02 0.27     -0.53 0.45  -0.30 0.42     1.50 2.03        1.34       1.26    0.06 0.20
         DIVYIELDt-1                     -0.22 0.60      0.75 0.36      0.18 0.32  -0.15 0.40     6.64 1.38        1.38       0.79   -0.16 0.09
         Production growtht-13,t-1       -0.30 0.09     -0.02 0.03     -0.06 0.05   0.05 0.03    -0.49 0.21        0.07       0.11    0.01 0.01
         Inflationt-13,t-1               -0.32 0.25     -0.20 0.10     -0.29 0.10   0.41 0.14    -1.30 0.30       -0.64       0.31    0.07 0.05
         Excess stock returnst-13,t-1     0.05 0.03      0.01 0.01      0.05 0.02   0.00 0.01    -0.22 0.10       -0.14       0.05    0.01 0.01
         R2                               0.45           0.38           0.48        0.54          0.45             0.35               0.91



                                                     Economic Tracking Portfolios - Page 39
Notes to Table 2

Shows seven different monthly OLS regressions of the form yt+12 = bRt-1,t+cZt-1+εt,t+12. yt+12 is a macroeconomic variable from month t to
month t+12, Rt-1,t is a vector of monthly returns in month t, and Zt-1 is a vector of control variables observed in month t-1. See Table 1 for
a description of all the variables. The sample period is 1947:1-1994:12, except for consumption which is 1959:1-1994:12. Robust
standard errors are calculated with Newey-West 24 month lags.




                                                   Economic Tracking Portfolios - Page 40
Table 3
Forecasting ability and descriptive statistics for tracking portfolios, 1947-1994
                   Production Consumption Labor Inflation Excess Excess Nom. T-bill
                   growth      growth            income               stock     bond         returns
                                                 growth               returns returns
Panel A -- P-values from exclusion tests on b̂ , in regression yt+12 = bRt-1,t+cZt-1+εt,t+12
all returns               0.00             0.00       0.00      0.00       0.00     0.00                    0.00
all except RMRF           0.00             0.00       0.00      0.00       0.00     0.00                    0.00
eight industries          0.00             0.42       0.00      0.00       0.00     0.00                    0.00
four bonds                0.24             0.00       0.05      0.01       0.00     0.00                    0.00
Panel B -- Partial R2: R-squared from the regression of yt+k-E[yt+k|Zt-1] on b̂R t -1, t -E[ b̂R t -1, t |Zt-1]
                          0.05             0.04       0.06      0.10       0.08     0.12                    0.23
Panel C -- Summary statistics for portfolio returns: properties of b̂R t -1, t
Mean                      0.17            0.04       0.10     -0.04              -0.20 -0.13              -0.02
Std Dev                   1.04            0.27       0.60      0.71               3.45  2.88               0.50
(t-stat)                (2.76)          (2.06) (2.78)        (0.76) (0.89) (0.77)                        (0.66)
Panel D -- Market model regression: b̂R t-1, t = α + β (RMRFt-1, t ) + ξ t -1, t
α                         0.09            0.04       0.06     -0.06               0.09  0.09              -0.05
(t-stat)                (1.30)          (2.32) (1.40)        (1.50) (0.47) (0.59)                        (1.46)
β                         0.14           -0.00       0.06      0.05              -0.48 -0.36               0.04
(t-stat)                (3.24)          (0.10) (2.25)        (1.89) (5.45) (3.76)                        (3.09)
R2                        0.32            0.00       0.20      0.07               0.33  0.27               0.10
Panel E -- Correlation matrix for tracking portfolio returns and base asset returns
Consumption                   0.14
Labor income                  0.82             0.59
Inflation                     0.29            -0.80      -0.23
Excess stock                 -0.26             0.54       0.10       -0.70
Excess bond                  -0.57             0.42      -0.10       -0.73      0.68
Nom. T-bill                   0.21            -0.68      -0.17        0.85     -0.80      -0.62
RMRF                          0.57            -0.03       0.45        0.27     -0.58      -0.52            0.31
BASIC                         0.56            -0.19       0.30        0.51     -0.67      -0.65            0.43
CAPITAL                       0.39            -0.04       0.25        0.27     -0.63      -0.50            0.34
CONSTRUCT                     0.56            -0.15       0.38        0.34     -0.52      -0.59            0.36
CONSUMER                      0.54             0.09       0.49        0.16     -0.57      -0.48            0.31
ENERGY                        0.56            -0.36       0.23        0.53     -0.52      -0.61            0.40
FINANCE                       0.64             0.08       0.56        0.20     -0.53      -0.53            0.24
TRANSPORT                     0.71             0.04       0.59        0.30     -0.48      -0.56            0.34
UTILITIES                     0.37             0.03       0.37       -0.06     -0.37      -0.29           -0.02
LONGBOND                      0.17             0.45       0.31       -0.41      0.26      -0.15           -0.55
INTRMDBOND                    0.20             0.41       0.34       -0.44      0.38      -0.03           -0.69
ONEYRBOND                     0.31             0.60       0.46       -0.54      0.45       0.06           -0.78
 JUNKBOND                     0.58             0.11       0.52        0.02     -0.24      -0.30           -0.12

                                Economic Tracking Portfolios - Page 41
Notes to Table 3

Shows the properties of the tracking portfolios defined by the regressions in Table 2,
yt+12 = bRt-1,t+cZt-1+εt,t+12. Shows additional information about the statistical significance of
returns in the regressions in Table 2. For consumption, all statistics are calculated using data
from 1959:1-1994:12. For the other series, the data are 1947:1-1994:12.

A.) P-values report tests of the hypothesis that different elements of Rt-1,t can be omitted from the
    regressions in Table 2. "all returns" tests whether all 13 base assets can be omitted from the
    regressions in Table 2. "all except RMRF" tests whether the 8 industry stock portfolios and 4
    bond portfolios can be omitted from the regressions in Table 2. "eight industries" tests
    whether the 8 industry stock portfolios can be omitted from the regressions in Table 2. "four
    bonds" tests whether the 4 bond portfolios can be omitted from the regressions in Table 2. P-
    values are constructed using robust standard errors with Newey-West 24 month lags.

B.) Shows R-squared in a regression where the left hand side is the residual from a regression of
    yt+12 on Zt-1, and the right hand side is the residual from a regression of b̂R t -1, t on Zt-1. b̂ is
    derived from the regression in Table 2

C.) Summary statistics show mean, standard deviation, and t-statistic for the monthly tracking
    portfolios, b̂R t -1, t . b̂ is derived from the regression in Table 2. The mean and standard
    deviation are simply the time series statistics for b̂R t -1, t . The t-statistic tests the hypothesis
    that b̂R t -1, t is zero, using GMM standard errors. The GMM standard errors take into account
    the estimation error of b̂ .

D.) Market model regressions show univariate regressions of tracking portfolio returns on the
    market excess return. b̂ is derived from the regression in Table 2. The t-statistics use GMM
    standard errors, which take into account the estimation error of b̂ .

E.) The correlation matrix shows correlations of tracking portfolio returns b̂R t -1, t with itself and
    with base asset returns Rt-1,t, using monthly data. b̂ is derived from the regression in Table 2.




                               Economic Tracking Portfolios - Page 42
Table 4
Correlation matrix for innovations: Tracking portfolios vs. vector autoregressions

Panel A
VAR innovations from Campbell and Ammer (1993)
                                 Innovation in future         Innovation in future     Innovation in future
                                 excess stock returns          real interest rates          inflation
                                                             1952:1-1987:2
Innovation in future                                0.42
real interest rates                               (0.27)
Innovation in future                               -0.65                       -0.30
inflation                                         (0.23)                      (0.17)
Innovation in future                                0.82                        0.48                  -0.54
excess bond returns                               (0.17)                      (0.22)                 (0.14)

Panel B
Correlation matrix for unexpected tracking portfolio return
                               Unexpected return on excess Unexpected return on real Unexpected return on
                                  stock return portfolio    T-bill return portfolio   inflation portfolio
                                                              1947:1-1994:12
Unexpected return on                                  0.24
real T-bill return portfolio                        (0.36)
Unexpected return on                                 -0.70                        -0.74
inflation portfolio                                 (0.17)                       (0.17)
Unexpected return on                                  0.67                         0.53                  -0.72
excess bond return portfolio                        (0.13)                       (0.22)                 (0.11)
                                                              1952:1-1987:2
Unexpected return on                                 -0.06
real T-bill return portfolio                        (0.40)
Unexpected return on                                 -0.58                        -0.66
inflation portfolio                                 (0.23)                       (0.19)
Unexpected return on                                  0.58                         0.50                  -0.77
excess bond return portfolio                        (0.18)                       (0.24)                 (0.09)

Panel A reprints Table V from Campbell and Ammer (1993). Panel B reports the correlation of
unexpected returns on tracking portfolios, ~rt -1, t , calculated as the residual in the regression
b̂R = aZ + ~r . The standard errors, in parenthesis, are calculated using GMM and take
   t -1, t   t -1   t -1, t

into account the estimation error in the portfolio weights. The real T-bill return tracking
portfolio is defined as the nominal T-bill return tracking portfolio minus the inflation tracking
portfolio. The tracking portfolio returns are defined by Table 2 (except that the 1952:1-1987:2
sample in panel B uses a different sample period to estimate equations (5) and (9)).


                                Economic Tracking Portfolios - Page 43
Table 5
Explaining aggregate stock returns using future industrial production growth: OLS vs. IV

                                    OLS                     OLS                     OLS        Instrumental Variables
                               Coef     SE             Coef     SE             Coef     SE        Coef        SE
Constant                         -0.83    0.94           -0.17    0.92           -1.60    0.98      -21.69      11.15
RFt-1,t                          -3.20    1.20           -3.55    1.16           -2.05    1.26       27.96      15.00
TERMLONGt-1                       0.11    0.20           -0.04    0.19            0.11    0.19        0.11       1.47
TERM1YRt-1                       -0.69    0.44           -0.70    0.42           -0.85    0.44       -5.07       3.25
DEFBONDt-1                        2.24    0.70            2.23    0.68            1.84    0.71       -8.56       6.08
DEFCPt-1                         -0.16    0.48           -0.35    0.46            0.03    0.48        5.20       3.63
DIVYIELDt-1                       0.39    0.17            0.28    0.17            0.41    0.17        0.74       1.64
Production growtht-13,t-1        -0.02    0.03           -0.02    0.03            0.01    0.03        0.81       0.37
Inflationt-13,t-1                -0.11    0.06           -0.06    0.06           -0.08    0.06        0.81       0.80
Excess stock returnst-13,t-1     -0.01    0.01            0.00    0.01           -0.02    0.01       -0.15       0.07

LONGBONDt-1,t                                             0.44        0.07
Industrial Productiont,t+12                                                        0.10        0.04        2.77        0.96

R2                                0.08                    0.14                     0.09                    0.25

Shows three OLS regressions, and an instrumental variable regression. The dependent variable is excess return on the aggregate stock
market in month t, RMRFt-1,t. In the instrumental variables regression, the instruments include the 10 Zt-1 terms that are on the right-
hand side of the regression, plus four bond portfolio returns. The variable that is instrumented out is the growth in industrial
production from the month t to month t+12. The OLS regressions report simple standard errors; the instrumental variable regressions
report robust standard errors with Newey-West 24 month lags. The sample period is 1947:1-1994:12.




                                               Economic Tracking Portfolios - Page 44
Table 6
Explaining aggregate bond returns using future excess bond returns and future Treasury-bill returns: OLS vs. IV

                                    OLS                     OLS                     OLS        Instrumental Variables
                               Coef     SE             Coef     SE             Coef     SE        Coef        SE
Constant                         -1.53    0.58           -1.39    0.56           -1.61    0.55       -3.08       1.99
RFt-1,t                           0.81    0.73            1.33    0.71           11.71    1.37       64.95      15.94
TERMLONGt-1                       0.35    0.12            0.33    0.12            0.68    0.12        2.65       0.69
TERM1YRt-1                        0.03    0.27            0.14    0.26            0.40    0.25        2.01       1.46
DEFBONDt-1                        0.01    0.43           -0.35    0.42            0.05    0.40        0.06       2.25
DEFCPt-1                          0.42    0.29            0.45    0.28            0.52    0.27        1.15       0.81
DIVYIELDt-1                       0.26    0.11            0.20    0.10            0.20    0.10        0.06       0.33
Production growtht-13,t-1         0.01    0.02            0.01    0.02            0.02    0.02        0.08       0.06
Inflationt-13,t-1                -0.11    0.04           -0.09    0.04           -0.08    0.04       -0.02       0.16
Excess stock returnst-13,t-1     -0.02    0.01           -0.02    0.01           -0.02    0.01       -0.02       0.03

RMRFt-1,t                                                  0.16        0.02
Excess Bond Returnst,t+12                                                         -0.09        0.01       -0.62        0.13
Nominal T-bill returnst,t+12                                                      -1.02        0.11       -5.89        1.44

R2                                 0.06                    0.12                    0.18                    0.20

Shows three OLS regressions, and an instrumental variable regression. The dependent variable is excess return on the long term
government bonds in month t, LONGBONDt-1,t. In the instrumental variables regression, the instruments include the 10 Zt-1 terms that
are on the right-hand side of the regression, plus nine stock portfolio returns. The variables that are instrumented out are the excess
returns on long term government bonds from month t to month t+12, and the return on T-bills from month t to month t+12. The OLS
regressions report simple standard errors; the instrumental variable regressions report robust standard errors with Newey-West 24
month lags. The sample period is 1947:1-1994:12.

                                               Economic Tracking Portfolios - Page 45
Table 7
Explaining small stock returns using current market returns and future industrial production growth: OLS vs. IV

                                    OLS                    OLS                      OLS         Instrumental Variables
                               Coef     SE            Coef     SE              Coef     SE         Coef        SE
Constant                         -0.32     1.28          0.64     0.69            0.27     0.72       -8.12       4.11
RFt-1,t                          -4.23     1.63         -0.57     0.88           -0.05     0.93       11.80       5.75
TERMLONGt-1                       0.02     0.27         -0.11     0.14           -0.11     0.14       -0.10       0.62
TERM1YRt-1                       -1.09     0.59         -0.31     0.32           -0.39     0.32       -2.22       1.31
DEFBONDt-1                        3.30     0.95          0.74     0.52            0.57     0.53       -3.36       2.62
DEFCPt-1                         -0.36     0.65         -0.17     0.35           -0.08     0.35        2.02       1.50
DIVYIELDt-1                       0.24     0.24         -0.21     0.13           -0.20     0.13       -0.01       0.67
Production growtht-13,t-1        -0.03     0.04         -0.01     0.02            0.00     0.02        0.33       0.12
Inflationt-13,t-1                -0.06     0.08          0.07     0.05            0.09     0.05        0.44       0.32
Excess stock returnst-13,t-1      0.00     0.02          0.01     0.01            0.01     0.01       -0.05       0.03

RMRFt-1,t                                                 1.15         0.03        1.14        0.03         0.99        0.07
Industrial Productiont,t+12                                                        0.05        0.03         1.14        0.28

R2                                0.06                    0.73                     0.73                     0.76

Shows three OLS regressions, and an instrumental variable regression. The dependent variable is excess return on a portfolio of small
stocks in month t. The portfolio of small stocks consists of all stocks on NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ with market capitalization in the
bottom quintile of NYSE stocks. In the instrumental variables regression, the instruments include the 10 Zt-1 terms that are on the
right-hand side of the regression, plus the 13 portfolio returns including 9 stock and 4 bond portfolios. The variable that is
instrumented out is the growth in industrial production from the month t to month t+12. The OLS regressions report simple standard
errors; the instrumental variable regressions report robust standard errors with Newey-West 24 month lags. The sample period is
1947:1-1994:12.

                                              Economic Tracking Portfolios - Page 46
Table 8
Out-of sample results using rolling regressions

                     Production Consumption            Labor            Inflation Excess Excess Nom. T-bill
                     growth     growth                 income                       stock   bond    returns
                                                       growth                       returns returns
                                      yt+12 = κ+λ b̂ t R t-1, t +π ĉt Zt-1+ξt,t+12
Panel A: 20 Year Estimation
                 λ̂      0.40                   0.45        0.56        0.56       0.37       0.73           0.66
           (t-stat)    (2.21)                 (3.66)      (5.49)      (4.21)     (2.65)     (3.33)         (4.02)
                πˆ       0.67                   0.48        0.56        0.54       0.27       0.29           1.03
           (t-stat)    (7.01)                 (9.63)      (8.24)      (4.13)     (1.43)     (1.60)        (10.25)
                R2       0.34                   0.36        0.37        0.36       0.04       0.09           0.67
Panel B: 5 Year Estimation
                 λ̂     -0.22                   0.16        0.04       -0.02      -0.11       0.26              0.22
           (t-stat)    (0.77)                 (0.80)      (0.19)      (0.06)     (1.08)     (1.33)            (0.74)
                πˆ       0.06                   0.26        0.19        0.50       0.16       0.05              0.71
           (t-stat)    (0.46)                 (3.51)      (1.41)      (3.51)     (1.65)     (0.77)            (6.24)
                R2       0.01                   0.14        0.07        0.30       0.06       0.01              0.61

Every month, for each target variable, the rolling regression procedure estimates the OLS
regression yt+12 = bRt-1,t+cZt-1+εt,t+12. This regression uses j months of past data (the target
variable data is from month t-j-1 to t and the return data is from month t-j-11 to t-12). For the
20-year rolling estimation, j=240 months; for the 5-year estimation period, j=60 months. Each
month, this regression produces a b̂ t and ĉt . After calculating a time series of b̂ t and ĉt , the
table reports the results from the out-of sample regression yt+12 =κ+ λ b̂ t R t-1, t +π ĉt Zt-1+ξt,t+12 .
The constant term, κ, is not shown. For the twenty-year rolling regressions, the sample period
for the reported regression is 1967:12-1994:12(1979:12-1994:12 for Consumption). For the five-
year rolling regressions, the sample period is 1952:12-1994:12 (1964:12-1994:12 for
Consumption). The t-statistics are OLS time-series statistics, using robust standard errors with
Newey-West 24 month lags.




                                Economic Tracking Portfolios - Page 47
Table 9
Tracking portfolios constructed using alternative methods

                                       Production    Consumption        Labor       Inflation Excess        Excess   Nom. T-bill
                                       growth        growth             income                     stock    bond     returns
                                                                        growth                     returns  returns
                                                       Panel A -- Baseline
P-values from exclusion test                    0.00             0.00        0.00         0.00         0.00     0.00         0.00
Partial R2                                      0.05             0.04        0.06         0.10         0.08     0.12         0.23
Correlation with baseline portfolio             1.00             1.00        1.00         1.00         1.00     1.00         1.00
                             Panel B -- 60 Month Ahead Target Variable: yt+60 = bRt-1,t+cZt-1+εt,t+60
P-values from exclusion test                    0.00             0.00        0.00         0.00         0.00     0.00         0.00
Partial R2                                      0.04             0.03        0.03         0.03         0.08     0.07         0.08
Correlation with baseline portfolio             0.27             0.50        0.58         0.81         0.84     0.70         0.79
                                Panel C -- 3 Month Base Asset Returns: yt+12 = bRt-3,t+cZt-3+εt,t+12
P-values from exclusion test                    0.00             0.03        0.00         0.00         0.00     0.00         0.00
Partial R2                                      0.09             0.10        0.12         0.19         0.22     0.23         0.34
Correlation with baseline portfolio             0.91             0.92        0.96         0.97         0.95     0.97         0.94
                                  Panel D -- Stock only in base assets: yt+12 = bRt-1,t+cZt-1+εt,t+12
P-values from exclusion test                    0.00             0.52        0.00         0.00         0.00     0.00         0.00
Partial R2                                      0.04             0.02        0.05         0.08         0.06     0.11         0.11
Correlation with baseline portfolio             0.93             0.75        0.90         0.89         0.85     0.94         0.70
                                  Panel E -- Bonds only in base assets: yt+12 = bRt-1,t+cZt-1+εt,t+12
P-values from exclusion test                    0.01             0.00        0.00         0.01         0.00     0.00         0.00
Partial R2                                      0.02             0.02        0.02         0.04         0.04     0.02         0.15
Correlation with baseline portfolio             0.63             0.70        0.60         0.63         0.69     0.43         0.83
                                     Panel F -- No control variables: yt+12 = bRt-1,t+c +εt,t+12
P-values from exclusion test                    0.00             0.00        0.00         0.27         0.00     0.00         0.01
Partial R2                                      0.08             0.06        0.07         0.06         0.06     0.11         0.03
Correlation with baseline portfolio             0.77             0.66        0.75         0.63         0.63     0.89         0.09



                                               Economic Tracking Portfolios - Page 48
Notes to table 9

Table 9 shows results from different ways of estimating the regression yt+k = bRt-j,t+cZt-j+εt,t+j. The different ways of constructing
tracking portfolios are choosing different values for k (target horizon), different values for j (base asset return period), and different
compositions of R and Z. "P-values from exclusion test" report tests of the hypothesis that Rt-j,t can be omitted from the regression,
and is constructed using robust standard errors with Newey-West 24 month lags (except in the case of 60-month ahead target
variables, which use 120 month lags). "Partial R2" is the R-squared from a regression of yt+k-E[yt+k|Zt-j] on b̂R t - j, t -E[ b̂R t - j, t |Zt-j]; in
other words, the R-squared in a regression where the left hand side is the residual from a regression of yt+k on Zt-j, and the right hand
side is the residual from a regression of b̂R t - j, t on Zt-j. "Correlation with baseline portfolio" shows the correlation of the tracking
portfolio for the given target variable with the baseline tracking portfolio for the same target variable. The baseline tracking portfolio,
 b̂R t -1, t is derived from Table 2. For Panel B, the sample period is 1947:1-1990:12, except for consumption which is 1959:1-1990:12.
For Panels A and C-F, the sample period is 1947:1-1994:12, except for consumption which is 1959:1-1994:12.


A) Reprints information from Table 3.
B) Uses 5-year ahead target variables.
C) Uses 3 month excess returns for base assets. The correlation with baseline portfolio is corr( b̂ Table 9c R t -1, t , b̂ Table 2 R t -1, t ) . In other
   words, the portfolio weights are taken from the regression yt+12 = bRt-3,t+cZt-3+εt,t+12 but the returns are monthly.
D) The base asset return vector Rt-1,t includes only the nine stock market portfolio returns.
E) The base asset return vector Rt-1,t includes only the four bond market portfolio returns.
F) The control variable vector Zt-1 includes only a constant term. The partial R-squared’s are now equivalent to simple R-squareds.




                                                       Economic Tracking Portfolios - Page 49
Table 10
Value, size, and price momentum: Incremental forecasting power and correlation with tracking portfolio returns

                                        Production      Consumption  Labor    Inflation Excess    Excess    Nom. T-bill
                                        growth          growth       income              stock    bond      returns
                                                                     growth              returns  returns
                                                           Value: HML
P-values from exclusion test                     0.66           0.12     0.32       0.94     0.71      0.09          0.44
Correlation of HML                               0.17          -0.08     0.09       0.08     0.12     -0.01         -0.06
with tracking portfolio returns
                                                            Size: SMB
P-values from exclusion test                    0.48             0.32        0.99        0.03       0.82       0.07             0.08
Correlation with SMB                            0.33            -0.02        0.29        0.08      -0.20      -0.24             0.20
with tracking portfolio returns
                                                    Price momentum: PR1YR
P-values from exclusion test                    0.49           0.39     0.73             0.86       0.31       0.88             0.25
Correlation of PR1YR                           -0.13           0.04    -0.10            -0.03       0.10       0.06            -0.07
with tracking portfolio returns

This table shows the incremental forecasting power of the value factor, the size factor, and the momentum factor, and the correlation
of these three factors with tracking portfolio returns. "P-values from exclusion test" shows the test of the hypothesis that the candidate
portfolio return has a zero coefficient, when added to the right-hand side of the regression in Table 2. "Correlation with tracking
portfolio returns" shows the correlation of the candidate portfolio return with the economic tracking portfolios generated from the
regressions in Table 2. HML, from Davis, Fama, and French (1999), is high minus low, which measures the book-to-market factor by
subtracting returns of a portfolio of low book-to-market firm stocks from the returns of a portfolio of high book-to-market firm stocks.
SMB, from Davis, Fama, and French (1999), is small minus big, which measures the size factor by subtracting returns of a portfolio of
big firm stocks from the returns of a portfolio of small firm stocks. PR1YR, from Carhart (1997), is a portfolio return constructed by
subtracting the returns of a portfolio experiencing low returns in the past 11 months from the returns of a portfolio experiencing high
returns in the past 11 months. For HML and SMB, the sample period is 1947:1-1994:12, except for the consumption which is 1959:1-
1994:12. For PR1YR, the sample period is 1963:7-1994:12.



                                                Economic Tracking Portfolios - Page 50
Table A: Sharpe Classification of Industries, 1947:1-1994:12

INDUSTRY            COMMENTS                            SIC CODES                          Number of firms
                                                                                                        Fraction of
                                                                                                        total market
                                                                                                        value
                                                                                           Min Max Avg Avg
Basic Industries    Chemicals, Mining, Paper, Steel    1000-1299, 1400-1499, 2600-2699,     155 377 262          0.13
                                                       2800-2829, 2870-2899, 3300-3399
Capital Goods       Computers, Electronic Equipment, 3400-3419, 3440-3599, 3670-3699.       105   1571       629   0.11
                    Industrial Machinery, Instruments, 3800-3849, 5080-5089, 5100-5129,
                    Machinery                           7300-7399
Construction        Lumber, Stone Clay and Glass       1500-1999, 2400-2499, 3220-3299,      23    227       121   0.02
                                                        3430-3439, 5160-5219
Consumer Goods      Apparel, Food, Furniture, Leather, 0000-0999, 2000-2399, 2500-2599,     376   2707   1356      0.33
                    Motor Vehicles and Equipment,      2700-2799, 2830-2869, 3000-3219,
                    Printing, Rubber, Services,        3420-3429, 3600-3669, 3700-3719,
                    Tobacco, Wholesale and Retail      3850-3879, 3880-3999, 4830-4899,
                    Trade                               5000-5079, 5090-5099, 5130-5159,
                                                       5220-5999, 7000-7299, 7400-9999
Energy              Petroleum and coal                 1300-1399, 2900-2999                  42    420       171   0.14
Finance             Insurance, Real Estate             6000-6999                             38   2166       619   0.10
Transportation      Transportation Equipment,          3720-3799, 4000-4799                 105    216       151   0.04
                    Railroads, Air Transportation
Utilities           Communications, Electric, Gas,     4800-4829, 4900-4999                  48    329       177   0.14
                    Sanitary Services




                                              Economic Tracking Portfolios - Page 51
                                                              Figure 1
                                                   Industrial Production Growth
                                                      Monthly Data, 1947:1-1994:12
          30



          20



          10
Percent




           0



          -10



          -20



          -30
                47 48 49 50 52 53 54 55 57 58 59 60 62 63 64 65 67 68 69 70 72 73 74 75 77 78 79 80 82 83 84 85 87 88 89 90 92 93 94

                                 Cumulative Unexpected Tracking Portfolio Returns     Realized Industrial Production Growth




                                                    Economic Tracking Portfolios - Page 52
                                                                 Figure 2
                                                                 Inflation
                                                      Monthly Data, 1947:1-1994:12
          25

          20

          15

          10

           5
Percent




           0

           -5

          -10

          -15

          -20
                47 48 49 50 52 53 54 55 57 58 59 60 62 63 64 65 67 68 69 70 72 73 74 75 77 78 79 80 82 83 84 85 87 88 89 90 92 93 94

                                           Cumulative Unexpected Tracking Portfolio Returns     Realized Inflation




                                                       Economic Tracking Portfolios - Page 53
                                                               Figure 3
                                                         Excess Stock Returns
                                                      Monthly Data, 1947:1-1994:12
          80


          60


          40


          20
Percent




           0


          -20


          -40


          -60


          -80
                47 48 49 50 52 53 54 55 57 58 59 60 62 63 64 65 67 68 69 70 72 73 74 75 77 78 79 80 82 83 84 85 87 88 89 90 92 93 94

                                     Cumulative Unexpected Tracking Portfolio Returns     Realized Excess Stock Returns




                                                      Economic Tracking Portfolios - Page 54
Notes to Figures 1, 2, and 3

The figures show cumulative unexpected returns on the tracking portfolios defined by Table 2. Unexpected returns are calculated as

the residual, ~rt -1, t , from the regression b̂R t -1, t = aZ t-1 + ~rt-1, t . ~rt -1, t is summed to make cumulative returns. Realized production growth is

(in percentage points) the change in natural log of industrial production from month t to month t+12. Realized inflation is (in

percentage points) the change in natural log of the CPI index, from month t to month t+12. Realized excess stock return is the

continuously compounded total return, in percent, on the CRSP value weighted NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ portfolio, minus the

continuously compounded return on a portfolio of Treasury bills, from month t to month t+12.




                                                       Economic Tracking Portfolios - Page 55
