NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CAN TAXES ON CARS AND ON GASOLINE
MIMIC AN UNAVAILABLE TAX ON
EMISSIONS?

Don Fullerton
Sarah West

Working Paper 7059
http://www.nber.org/paperslw7059

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 1999

We are grateful for helpful comments from Winston Harrington, Robert Innes, Raymond Robertson, Dan
Slesnick, Kenneth Small, Margaret Walls, Pete Wilcoxen, Paul Wilson, and Ann Woverton. In addition, we
would like to thank the Public Policy Institute of California (PPIC) for funding this research. Thispaper is
part of NBER's research program in Public Economics. The views expressed in this paper are those of the
authors and do not reflect those of the PPIC or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©

1999

by Don Fullerton and Sarah West. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Can Taxes on Cars and on Gasoline Mimic
an Unavailable Tax on Emissions?
Don Fullerton and Sarah West
NBER Working Paper No. 7059
March 1999

JEL No. D62, H23, Q28
ABSTRACT
A tax on vehicle emissions can efficiently induce all of the cheapest forms of abatement.
Consumers could drive less, buy a smaller car with better gas mileage, use cleaner gasoline, and
repair pollution control equipment (PCE). However,the technology is not yet available to measure
and tax each car's total emissions. We thus investigate alternative instruments. In a simple model

with identical consumers, we show conditions under which the same efficiency can be attained by

the combination of a tax on gas, a tax on engine size , and a subsidy to PCE. In a model with
heterogeneous consumers, the same efficiency can again be obtained, but only if each person's
gasoline tax rate can be made to depend on the characteristics of the car. We solve for these firstbest tax rates. Assuming that tax rates must be uniform across consumers, we then characterize
second-best tax rates on gasoline and on characteristics.

Don Fullerton
Department of Economics
University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712
and NBER
dfullert@eco.utexas.edu

Sarah West
Department of Economics
University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712
sewest@maxwell.syr.edu

-1-

Continued growth of cities, increases in vehicle-miles traveled, and Americans'
renewed love for large vehicles contribute to increasing externalities from vehicle

emissions, including worsened health, diminished visibility, and possible global
warming. Technological advances in the measurement of car emissions renew hope

that a tax can be levied directly on these emissions (Harrington, et al., 1994). If so,
individuals would reduce pollution efficiently (Pigou, 1932). At least for the time
being, however, the emissions taxes or permits that work well for stationary sources

such as electric generating plants are not considered feasible for mobile sources of
pollution. The technology is not available to measure the emissions of each vehicle in a
way that is cost-effective and reliable, that is resistant to tampering by the vehicle's
owner, and that satisfies legal restrictions against the search of a private vehicle. In this
paper, we investigate alternative market incentives for the reduction of car pollution.
We focus on economic incentives because these kinds of policies "tend to be
less costly than approaches which regulate the technology of the car or the fuel"

(Harrington, et aL, 1994: p. 16).' If a true Pigovian tax on vehicle emissions were
available, it would reduce pollution by inducing households to drive fewer miles, to buy
fuel-efficient cars, to install pollution control equipment (PCE), to purchase cleaner
fuel, to avoid cold start-ups, and perhaps to drive less aggressively.2 Thus, any efficient
alternative policy would need to induce the same behavior. In this paper, we investigate
combinations of other policies that would influence people to buy smaller cars, better
pollution control equipment, and cleaner fuel with lower volatility or higher levels of
oxygenation. Moreover, a true Pigovian tax would automatically account for consumer
1

For an estimate of the cost savings from the use of incentive instruments rather than mandates, see Kling
(1994), For a review of such studies, see Bohm and Russell (1985). Many researchers evaluate costs of
current air pollution or the costs and benefits of abatement due to new vehicle and fuel technologies
(Faiz, et al., 1996; Hall, et al., 1992; Kahn, 1996a; Kazimi, 1997; Krupnick and Portney, 1991; Krupnick
and Walls, 1992; Small and Kazimi, 1995). Others focus on the effects of command and control (CAC)
policies such as emissions requirements and Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) standards
(Goldberg, 1998; Harrington, 1997; Kahn, 1996b).

2Because of cold-start up emissions, Burmich (1989) finds that a 5-mile trip has almost three times the
emissions per mile as a 20-mile trip at the same speed. Sierra Research (1994) finds that a car driven
aggressively has a carbon monoxide emissions rate that is almost 20 times higher than when driven
normally.

-2-

heterogeneity. For example, the driver of a dirty car would pay more tax than the driver

of a clean car, for the same miles.

Our specific question is whether a combination of taxes on gasoline and on cars
can achieve this efficient outcome. It is an example of the general problem in public
economics regarding the optimal correction of externalities in the face of heterogeneity.
To determine the form of these efficient policy combinations, we model the

household choice of miles, vehicle attributes, pollution control equipment (PCE), fuel

cleanliness, and other goods. Initially, we clarify our basic framework using a model of
homogeneous consumers. We then allow consumers to differ by income and by two

taste parameters, one for miles and the other for vehicle size. We use our model of
heterogeneous consumers to find closed-form solutions for a first-best gas tax that

depends on the vehicle, and a tax on the vehicle that depends on miles driven. Since
these measurements may be too costly, we derive conditions that characterize second-

best optimal uniform tax rates. We then discuss how these optimal uniform tax and
subsidy rates may depend on the joint distribution of tastes for miles and engine size.3

This paper builds upon a large literature pertaining to vehicle emissions, but it
also builds upon a different body of literature pertaining to other types of emissions

when a Pigovian tax is not available. Eskeland and Devarajan (1996) show how
different combinations of policies can be used to approach the effect of a Pigovian tax.

Fullerton (1997) introduces a "two-part instrument" and shows how it can exactly
match the effects of a Pigovian tax on industrial emissions, at least in a simple model

with homogeneous firms and consumers. As shown in Fullerton and Wolverton (1999),
a tax on output is equivalent to a tax on all inputs, including both clean inputs and dirty
inputs (emissions). Then this tax is returned as a subsidy to all inputs except emissions.
In this way, emissions remain the sole taxed input.
Optimal tax results are derived here analytically, using general functional forms. h a later paper,
Fullerton and West (1999) assign specific functional forms, use a large sample of households, simulate
second-best policies, and compare welfare gains as a percentage of the gain from the ideal-butunavailable Pigovian tax.

-3-

The vehicle emission literature also struggles with the special information
problems associated with pollution.4 For example, Eskeland (1994) builds a simple
general equilibrium model with homogeneous consumers and fixed abatement
mandates, and he then fmds the additional welfare-improving tax on gasoline.
Harrington, et a!. (1998) consider the cost-effectiveness of a mandated vehicle
inspection and maintenance (JIM) program compared to an incentive program under

conditions of uncertainty. The incentive is a fee that is based on the vehicle's emission

rate, assuming miles are not observable. Thus, motorists can reduce their fee by
repairing their vehicle, but not by driving less. Sevigny (1998) incorporates the choice
of miles with a second-best emissions tax, but this tax requires knowledge of each
vehicle's average emissions per mile and the accurate measurement of miles traveled.5
Since our paper provides a general equilibrium model with heterogeneous

consumers who can choose miles and car characteristics, it is most similar to the

existing paper by Innes (1996). He also analyzes first-best and second-best
combinations of feasible policy instruments. We state below where some of our results
confirm those of Innes, but we also show how some other results differ in ways that can

be attributed to assumptions employed in each model. Because of the recent increase in
consumers' affinity for large vehicles, we focus on engine size as one important

determinant of emissions.6 Thus our model differs from Innes in three respects. First,
example, Kohn (1996) shows that any combination of a tax on vehicle emissions and a subsidy to
emissions abatement are equivalent, For any such combination to be administered, however, emissions
must be measurable. Train, et al. (1997) analyze "feebates," in which rebates are provided to vehicles
with higher-than-average fuel efficiency and fees are levied on less efficient vehicles. These feebates are
feasible incentives because fuel efficiency can be measured, but they are not perfectly efficient because
they do not depend on miles driven.

All of these schemes are imperfect. Emissions per mile (EPM) cannot be measured perfectly, because it
depends on how the car is driven. Miles cannot be measured perfectly, because drivers can roll back the
odometer. Harrington et a! (1994) discuss remote sensing at a selection of locations as a good
approximation, but some drivers may disproportionately miss or intentionally avoid those locations. Our
schemes are not perfect either, as they miss some behaviors mentioned above (cold start-ups, aggressive
driving).
6

Current Clean Air Act regulations impose the same restrictions on all cars, so new-vehicle emissions
vary by engine size only because of weaker regulations for trucks and sport utility vehicles (SIJV). Light
trucks and SLJVs are "one out of every two family vehicles sold," and will be the "fastest growing source
of global warming gases in the United States over the next decade" (Bradsher, l997,p. A24). In addition,
actual subsequent emissions rates may vary by engine size, even within a vehicle class.

-4-

we allow consumer heterogeneity in terms of two different taste parameters (for miles

and for engine size). Second, we write explicit expressions for miles per gallon (MPG)

and emissions per mile (EPM) that are functions of engine size and other car

characteristics. Third, we derive closed-form solutions for first-best tax rates on
gasoline, engine size, and PCE.
In a simple model with homogeneous consumers, we fmd that the effects of a
first-best Pigovian tax on emissions can be replicated perfectly by a three-part

instrument with tax rates on gasoline, engine size, and PCE. In a model with
heterogeneity, however, the first best requires that the gasoline tax depend on engine

size and that the tax on size depend on miles driven. Such rates may not be feasible, so
we solve for conditions that characterize the second-best uniform rate of tax on gasoline
(for all vehicles) and on engine size (for any mileage). This model presents
policymakers with complicated conditions for setting these second best tax rates, so we
then investigate easier approaches. In particular, we investigate the bias from the
simple but erroneous assumption that consumers are homogeneous and that all drive the

mean number of miles in the mean sized car (using the closed-form expressions for

first-best tax rates, evaluated at mean miles and engine size). As it turns out, this bias
depends on convexity of MPG and EPM as functions of engine size, and on the

correlation in consumer preferences for desired miles and engine size. Preliminary
evidence suggests that both MPG and EPM are convex, and that therefore the erroneous
assumption of homogeneity would understate the desired second-best uniform tax on
gasoline. On the other hand, preliminary evidence suggests that miles and engine size
are negatively correlated and that therefore the erroneous assumption of homogeneity
would overstate the desired second-best uniform tax on engine size.

L Homogeneous Consumers
In this section, we use a simple model of homogeneous consumers to exposit the

basic characteristics of a first-best policy package. This model provides three main
insights into the problem of controlling vehicle pollution. First, this model shows a case
in which a three-part instrument is equivalent to a Pigovian tax on car emissions. This

-5-

policy package includes taxes on gasoline and "size" and a subsidy to a "clean-car

characteristic." Second, if emissions per mile depend on clean-fuel characteristics, a
subsidy to such attributes is not necessary as long as the gas tax can depend on the

amount of this attribute. Third, consumers may or may not derive utility from the
clean-car or clean-fuel characteristic. If not, the government would have to subsidize
consumers by 100 percent of the cost of the clean characteristic (such as PCE or fuel
additives) in order to influence them to buy any of it. Moreover, because consumers are
then indifferent between buying and not buying the clean good, the quantity purchased

is indeterminate. These are the reasons that Innes (1996) includes mandates for cleaner
fuel in his optimal second-best policy package.7
The homogeneous-consumer model is constructed in the spirit of Baumol and

Oates (1988), as extended by Fullerton and Wolverton (1999). For this exposition, we
simplify the analysis by assuming that information is perfect, lump-sum taxes are
available, and the only market failure is a negative externality from emissions. This is a
general equilibrium model, but a simple one where production prices are fixed (and

consumer prices vary with tax rates). The economy consists of n identical households,
each of which owns one vehicle. Each vehicle is made up of characteristics that affect
emissions such as engine size, fuel efficiency, and PCE, and characteristics that do not
affect emissions (such as leather seats or a sunroof). Households buy gasoline in order
to drive miles, and they choose among grades of fuel-cleanliness.

Households gain utility from driving miles m , the "size" of the vehicle s, and

a composite-commodity, x. Broadly interpreted, s represents any vehicle
characteristic that gives households utility and that increases emissions per mile. More

specifically, we can define s to be a measure of engine size such as cubic inches of
displacement (CID). Also, consumers may gain or lose utility from pollution-control

equipment, c, and per-gallon fuel cleanliness, f. Pollution-control equipment includes
catalytic converters and other emissions-reducing equipment directly installed on a

vehicle. In general, this c should reflect the condition as well as the amount of PCE.
We ignore existing mandates in the theoretical model below, but we recognize that these mandates
affect the estimated ways in which actual emissions per mile depend on engine size and other car
characteristics. Thus, incentive policies may work because they encourage purchase of regulated cars.

-6-

Fuel cleanliness is an attribute of gasoline such as volatility or oxygenation.8 We

assume that cleaner fuel is more expensive. The composite commodity consists of all
vehicle characteristics not related to emissions and all other goods purchased by the

consumer. In addition, household utility is affected by aggregate auto emissions, E.
Thus the household's utility function is:

u=u(m,s,c,f,x,E)

(1)

The emissions per mile (EPM) that a car discharges depends positively on size

and negatively on PCE and the clean-fuel characteristic. Thus EPM = EPM(s, c, f).

Since each of the n households drives m miles, aggregate emissions E can be
calculated by nmEPM(s,c,f). Next, fuel efficiency is measured in miles per gallon
(MPG) and depends on engine size and the quantity of the clean-car good on the

vehicle,10 so MPG = MPG(s,c). Cars with larger engines get lower gas mileage, so

MPGS MPG/ös

is negative. The addition of a clean-car characteristic such as a

catalytic converter adds weight to a vehicle, diminishing fuel efficiency, and therefore
MPGC is also likely to be negative.1'
8

More volatile gasolme leads to more evaporative emissions. The addition of oxygenates to gasoline
alters the stoichiometric air/fuel ratio. Provided the carburetor setting is unchanged, this alteration may
reduce emissions of carbon monoxide (CO) and hydrocarbons (HC), but can also increase emissions of
oxides of nitrogen (NOX). And, if the mixture becomes too lean (high air/fuel), HC emissions can
increase due to misfiring (OECD, 1995).

Driver utility may also be affected by the age of the vehicle, and vintage is an important determinant of
emissions. For simplicity, in this paper, we ignore vintage and thus the possibility of a subsidy to
newness. Adding vintage is straightforward, and it yields a newness subsidy analogous to the size tax
below (see Fullerton and West, 1999).

efficiency may also be a function of the clean-fuel characteristic, f. Oxygenated fuel contains
methyl tertiary butyl ether (MTBE) or ethanol, each of which have lower energy content per gallon than
conventional gasoline. For simplicity, we do not incorporate f into MPG. Instead, we provide intuitive
explanation of this effect when warranted.
According to Dunleep (1992), the addition of one cylinder decreases fuel efficiency by 3 percent. Also,
the equipment mandated in U.S. tier 1 emissions regulations lowers fuel efficiency by 1 percent.

-7-

Consumers do not purchase m directly, but through the combination they
choose of gasoline (g), size (s), and the clean-car characteristic (c). In otherwords, the
demand for gasoline is a derived demand, where

m

(2)

MPG(s, c)
Consumers incorporate these relationships when they decide what size car and how
much gasoline will maximize their utility in equation (1) above.

Our research strategy is to solve the social planner's problem, then solve the

household's problem, and compare. We then find tax rates in the household's
optimization problem that induce households to behave in a way that achieves the

outcome of the social planner's problem.

A. The Social Planner's Problem
The social planner maximizes the utility of the representative household, subject

to the household's income, y , by choosing m, s, c, f, and x. The social planner
recognizes that individuals' choices affect aggregate emissions. In other words, the
social planner maximizes utility in equation (1) subject to equation (2) and a resource
constraint:

u[m, s, c, f ,x,nmEPM(s,c, f)]+ s[

_[+P

)n — pss

—

pcc

—

(3)

with respect to m, s, c, f, and x. The price per gallon of gasoline without any clean

characteristic is p, and the price per unit of the clean-fuel characteristic per gallon is

p. The total price of a gallon of gasoline is (pg + pj-f), and the private cost of driving a
mile is (pg-1-pjf)IMPG(s, c). The price of s is s , which represents the price of adding
an additional cubic inch of displacement to an engine. The price perunit of the clean-

car characteristic is c , and the price of x is normalized to one.

12

This maximization yields first-order conditions in equations (4), shown in Table

I. Subscripts on u, EPM, and MPG indicate partial derivatives (Urn = öu/m), and 5
12

In practice, in order to get constant production prices for s, c, and f, one coulddefine these variables

as deviations from their mean values.

Table I: First-Order Conditions with Homogeneous Consumers
Equations (4) from the social planner's problem:

Urn

+UEflEPM(S,C,f) =

8 Pg + p1f 1

(4a)

[MPG(s, c)]

(p +p1f )MPGS '\1

u3+unmEPM =S[Ps+m

MPG(s,c)2

+p1f )MPGC "1

U +uEnmEPMC [ [(P8MPG(s,c)2
U! +uEnmEPMJ

(4b)

Jj
(4c)

Jj

p1m

(4d)

o[MPG(SC)]
(4e)

Equations (6) from the household problem:

+tg +(p1
Urn

1[pg

u =4g. +t
UC

=[P.

u=

+tC

r(p1 +tf)m +
LMPG(s,c)

u =4i+t}

(6a)

+tf)fEPM(f)]

MPG(s, c)

+tg +(p1 +t1)f)MPG3
MPG(s, c)2

(6b)

]+teEPMSm]

(Pg +tg +(p1 +t)f)MPG
MPG(s,c)2

t EPM m]

(6c)

]+teEPMcm]
(6d)

(6e)

-8-

is the marginal social value of income. The quantity in brackets in (4a) is the total

implicit price of a mile, while the quantity in brackets in (4b) is the overall cost per unit
of size, including the extra amount that must be paid for miles due to the lower MPG

caused by the incremental unit of s. Similarly, the quantity in brackets in (4c) is the
overall cost of PCE, including the extra amount that must be paid for miles due to the
lower MPG. In (4d), the term in brackets is the overall cost per unit of the clean-fuel
characteristic.

These first-order conditions say that the marginal social gain from driving

another mile or from an additional unit of s, c, f or x, is equal to the marginal social
cost of each respective good. The presence of the UE term on the left-hand sides of
(4a-4d) reflects the effect on utility of the increment to aggregate emissions from

driving an additional mile, increasing vehicle size, adding PCE, or buying cleaner
gasoline.

B. The Household Problem
In contrast to the social planner, a household does not recognize that its own
choices affect aggregate emissions. However, it may face taxes or subsidies on its

consumption of s, c, f, x, and g. If it were available, a tax on emissions would enter
the budget constraint. The household optimization problem is to choose m, s, c ,f,

and x to maximize:
(5)

u(m,s,c,f,x,E)
F

((p +t +(p +t )f)'
MPG(s,c)

+t)s—(p +tc)c—(l+tx)x—teEPM(s,c,f)m

1n—(p5

In the budget constraint, tg is the tax per gallon of gas, tJ- is the tax per unit of cleanfuel characteristic, t is the tax per unit of size, t is the tax per unit of PCE, t is the

tax per unit of x, and te

is

the tax per unit of emissions.

The first-order conditions for this problem are equations (6), also shown in
Table I. Emissions can be made to enter the consumer problem implicitly through the

-9-

pollution tax te. The price per mile would then include the emissions tax per mile.

Similarly, the implicit prices of s, c, and f include the emissions tax associated with
the change in emissions.

C. Solutions

1. The Pigovian Tax

The tax on emissions, t, provides the basic efficient policy against which
alternatives can be compared. Suppose all other tax rates are set to zero (tg

t1 = ts =

= t = 0). In this case, (4e) and (6e) imply A = ô. To equate the first order
conditions for miles, (4a) and (6a), replace A = ô into (4a) and subtract it from (6a) to
obtain:

te=7MED

(7)

We define the right-hand side as "marginal environmental damages" (MED) per unit of

emissions. It is the sum of all n households' disutilities from emissions, uE,
translated into money terms when divided by the marginal utility of income. This is the

usual Pigovian tax, and it is greater than zero so long as UE < 0. Using this value of te,

and A = 5, then the first order condition (4b) matches (6b), (4c) matches (6c), and (4d)
matches (6d).

Thus the Pigovian tax on emissions by itself induces households to make all the
optimal choices. Because of the tax on emissions, consumers will drive fewer miles,
buy smaller cars, buy cleaner fuel, and install more pollution control equipment (or opt
for a vehicle model that is already equipped with better pollution control equipment).

2. Taxes on Gasoline and Size with a Subsidy to PCE
If the measurement of emissions were difficult or impossible, so that te = 0, we
can fmd a different policy combination that attains the exact same efficient outcome.
This policy is a three-part instrument that begins with a tax schedule for gasoline and is

complemented by a tax on size and a subsidy to PCE. For ease of exposition, we solve

for a subsidy on f and show how it can be incorporated into the gasoline tax. To solve

for the policy parameters, assume for the moment that c and f do enter household

-10-

utility ( u 0 and U1 0). Then, set tx = te = 0. Thus A still equals (5,and we
have equality between (4e) and (6e). Using A = (5, we can solve for the subsidy on the
clean-fuel characteristic by equating (4d) and (6d) to get:

=

(8)

'"EPM1MPG(s,c)

This tax is negative (a subsidy) as long as emissions per mile decrease with an

incremental unit of clean-fuel characteristic. It equals the value of the emissions
reduction due to an additional unit of cleanliness per gallon, calculated as the damage

per unit of emissions (MED) times the change inemissions per mile (EPM1) times
miles per gallon (MPG).'3

To solve for the tax on gasoline, plug A = (5 into (4a) and the clean-fuel subsidy
(8) into (6a). Then subtract (6a) from (4a) to obtain:

=

EPM(s, c, f )MPG(s, c) + f

EPMJ fMPG(s, c)

(9)

This tax on gasoline has two components. The first term is positive and represents the

additional damage caused by an increase of one gallon of gasoline. it is the damage per

unit emission (MED) times emissions per mile (EPM) times miles per gallon (MPG).
The second term is also positive. The dollar amount of this second term exactly
matches the dollar amount of the subsidy ft1 in equation (8), but we cannot just cancel

these terms and use only the first term in (9). In effect, a "deposit" is collected in the

gas tax, assuming a fixed "baseline" level of f, and then a "refund" or subsidy t1
encourages the

individual to choose more fuel cleanliness f. Still, however, the

subsidy t1 is paid at the same time that tg

is

collected, so the net result is a schedule

that we will call one instrument: a gas tax that depends on the cleanliness of that gas.

To obtain the tax on size, plug A = (5 into (4b) and the clean-fuel subsidy (8) and
the gas tax (9) into (6b). Then subtract (6b) from (4b) to obtain:

' If

the clean-fuel characteristic negatively affects MPG, the clean-fuel subsidy in (8) would include a
positive second term, and the gas tax (below) would include an offsetting term (to leave only the direct
effect on emissions).

-11-

t =_UEflm[EPM +EPM(s,c,f) MPG 1
) [
MPG(s,c)j
S

(10)

Like the gas tax, the size tax has two components. The first term is -uEn/A (that is,
MED) times the change in emissions per mile from a change in size (EPMS), times

miles (m). This gives the direct damage caused by an increase of one unit of size. This
term is positive as long as emissions affect utility negatively (UE < 0) and size affects

emissions positively (EPM> 0). The second term is an indirect effect from an
additional unit of size through its effect on fuel efficiency.'4 As long as MPGS <0, this
term is negative and is thus a rebate. Specifically, it is a rebate of part of the gas tax in
(9). Because an additional unit of size decreases fuel efficiency, the household knows

that an increase in the size of its vehicle's engine will cost additional gas tax. Thus part
of the external cost of size is already internalized by the gas tax. After this rebate, only

the cost of size that is separate from its effect on MPG remains taxed. Conceptually,
this rebate is the same as that which appears in Innes' second-best vehicle tax, where
that tax approximately equals the "predicted social costs of emissions, less the portion
of these costs that are internalized by the gasoline tax" (Innes, 1996: p. 212).
Because the two components of the size tax are opposite in sign, this theory does

not predict the sign of t. Since the right-hand term before the brackets is positive, the

sign of t

is

determined by the sign within the brackets. Thus the size tax is positive

whenever
EPM5

-MPG

EPM(s, c, f) MPG(s, c)

(11)

These two terms are proportional effects of size on emissions per mile (EPM) and on

miles per gallon (MPG). When an additional unit of size brings about a larger
percentage change in emissions per mile than in fuel efficiency, the size tax is positive.
If emissions rise at the same rate that fuel efficiency deteriorates, then the size tax is

zero. If fuel efficiency deteriorates proportionally more than emissions increase, then
size is subsidized! In this last case, the gasoline tax more than completely internalizes
14

Both of these terms contain in, the "baseline" number of miles. This in is not the individual's own
choice of miles, or else the individual's first order condition (8a) would include the derivative of t with

respect to m.

-12-

the impact of size on emissions. Empirical exploration of the relative effects in (11)
will uncover the sign of the size tax.'5

To solve for the tax on PCE, we follow similar procedures to obtain:

t = UEfl EPM in+ UEfl EPM(s,c,f)m

MPGC

MPG(s,c)

(12)

The tax on PCE is perfectly analogous to the size tax. The first term is negative to
reflect the effect on damages of an added unit of PCE. The second term is a rebate due
to the effect that PCE has on fuel efficiency (already internalized by the gas tax). Since
the second term is also negative, the sign of the clean-car tax is always negative. That

is, t is necessarily a subs jdy.'6
All of these tax rates together induce households to make socially optimal trade-

offs at the margin, so they are valid only for internal solutions. A more complete
analysis is required to deal with corner solutions.17 If households dislike pollution

control equipment enough (u << 0), then the subsidy in (12) may not induce them to
buy any of it. In this extreme case, the corner solution with c = 0 is indeed part of the
social optimum, even though the marginal conditions (6) are not satisfied. If
households care nothing about this equipment, however, then a different problem arises.

To see this, note that when u = 0, the right-hand side of first order condition (6c) must
equal zero at the optimum. By assumption, for this analysis, the emissions tax is set
equal to zero. Therefore, to induce consumers to buy any pollution equipment, the

subsidy to PC'E (ta) must be equal to the entire private cost of PCE, including both the
direct cost of equipment, c, and the extra gasoline costs incurred due to the negative
15

Also, note that the size tax in (10) depends on the number of miles driven. Of course, in this model
with homogeneous consumers, all households drive the same type of vehicle the same number of miles
per year, and the size tax is the same for everyone. When we introduce heterogeneity in Section II, the
first-best solution requires that each household pay a size tax that reflects its own choice of miles.
16

jc

measures the amount of PCE installed, this subsidy could be paid upon purchase of the vehicle.
More generally, if c reflects the condition of the equipment as well as the amount, then this subsidy
could reward testing, maintenance, and repair of PCE.
17

We derived Kuhn-Tucker conditions from a model with non-negativity constraints on the purchase of
clean-car and clean-fuel characteristics. The results of that model include equations (9), (10) and (12) for
internal solutions and an inequality to characterize each corner solution. The additional intuition is
minimal, however, so we just outline these results in the text.

-13-

effect that PCE has on fuel efficiency. With a 100 percent subsidy, however, the choice

of c is indeterminate. Thus, if u = 0, then incentives do not work. The optimal PCE
can only be achieved by a mandate (as in Innes, 1996).

The same analysis applies to the clean-fuel characteristic. When uj = 0, the
right-hand side of (6d) must equal zero at the optimum. For households to choose
cleaner gas, the subsidy must equal the entire cost of the attribute, pj.
Individuals may or may not gain utility from driving cleaner cars and using

cleaner fuel. People may like using the latest technologies, or feel peer pressure do so.
On the other hand, pollution control equipment may negatively affect performance by

increasing vehicle weight and decreasing acceleration. In addition, if cleaner fuel can
be found only in a limited number of locations, the inconvenience costs of refueling
could be high.

For these reasons, we think that U( and u1 are unlikely to be exactly zero. In

fact, these marginal utilities are likely to fall with the amount of c or f. Even if

u is

negative, a big enough subsidy can induce the household to buy more of this good, until

u on the left-hand side of (6c) falls to the level of the (negative) private marginal cost
on the right-hand side of (6c).

The optimality of these results also depends on our assumptions about the

available abatement technologies. Since emissions depend on EPM(s, c,f), the three-

part instrument (tg, t, t) attains the same first-best equilibrium as that reached by the
Pigovian tax. Despite the fact that emissions are never measured, the three-part policy
can attain 100 percent of the improvement in social welfare achieved by the Pigovian
tax.

II. Heterogeneous Consumers
The tax rates derived in the previous section are uniform across all consumers.
In this section, we introduce heterogeneity to see if and when the optimal tax rates need

to differ among consumers. If the emissions tax te were available, we confirm that a

-14-

single te = MED would achieve the first-best social optimum (FBSO). If not, then

individual-specific tax rates on other goods can still achieve the FBSO. If policy is
unable to apply individual-specific tax rates, then it cannot achieve the FBSO. We then
characterize the second-best uniform tax rates that best approximate the unavailable tax
on emissions.
In his model of heterogeneous consumers, Innes (1996) allows households to

differ in terms of income and one taste parameter. In our model, we wish to allow
households to differ in terms of income and two taste parameters. We use the parameter

a to represent the household's preference for miles, and we use the parameter ft to
represent the preference for size of the car. Together with income, these parameters are

jointly distributed according to the distribution function h (a, ft, y) with positive

support on [a,&]x [i3,1x [y,y]. The integral of this distribution over a , ft, and y is
the population, n . In a CES or Cobb-Douglas specification of utility, for example, a
could be the weight on miles, ft would be the weight on size, and (1- a -ft) would be
the weight on x. Our analysis is not limited to these special cases, however, and it is

not limited by any particular relationship between a and ft. Those who live far from
their place of work have a high demand for miles (a), but they may prefer either a small

car (for better gas mileage) or a large car (for comfort and safety). We show the

importance of the correlation between a and ft.
To focus on the issue of heterogeneity, we now ignore the clean-car and clean-

fuel characteristics. Thus fuel efficiency and emissions per mile depend only on size,

and each household generates ,nEPM(s) units of emissions. Aggregate pollution is thus

E = $JJm.EPM(s)h(a, f3, v)Jcxaf3y

(13)

a$y
where choices of in and s are individual-specific. A household's utility function is

U=u[m,s,x;a,f3,y]—JJE

(14)

where p is the household's change in welfare from an additional unit of pollution

(aU/oE). While we allow a and ft to differ among households, in order to analyze

-15-

different choices and abatement costs, we are not concerned with differential benefits

from environmental protection. We thus assume .z is the same for all consumers.

A. The Social Planner's Problem
The social planner must maximize a measure of social welfare such as a

weighted sum of n households' utilities. To set up this problem, we must specify
weights. For present purposes, we want weights that meet three criteria. First, we want
to abstract from the welfare effects of any pure redistribution and focus instead on

comparing the efficiency of various policies. Therefore, we choose weights so that a
dollar given to any household has the same effect on social welfare. To achieve this
condition, we divide each household's utility by its own marginal utility of income (A)18

Second, when te

is

available, we want the maximization of our social welfare function

to yield the solution of Pigou (1932). Since this solution is based on marginal
conditions (such as marginal environmental damages) at the optimum, we use the

values for A that occur at the first-best social optimum (2*). Third, we want to be able
to compare policies using the same welfare weights. When first-best instruments are
not available, we want to be able to find second-best uniform tax rates that maximize

the same social welfare function. Therefore we use prices at the Pigovian equilibrium
to evaluate A *, and we use those A * to get the weights (1/2*) for all subsequent

evaluations of other policies. The result is a money-metric measure of social welfare.
The social planner's problem is to maximize this welfare function subject to a
resource constraint (the integral over all individual budget constraints):

xl
J $ [mEPM(s)(a, fi,
j j j [u[nis. - j4ay

MPG(S)
18

fi, y)a$y

(15)

in- ps x}(afl Y)Y]

To avoid redistributions in the tax rate problem below, we assume that all tax revenues are returned in
lump-sum fashion to the same consumer.

-16-

with respect to each consumer's in, s, and x (given their individual a, /1 and y). The

multiplier on the resource constraint is (5, the marginal social value of income. To
maximize (15), we can ignore the outer integral to obtain the individual marginal
conditions and then incorporate the impact an individual's choice of miles and size has
on emissions by differentiating the aggregate emissions term with respect to the

individual's m and s.
The resulting first-order conditions for household i are equations (16), shown
in the top of Table II. The first term in each equation represents the individual's money
value of marginal utility from each good. The second term in (16a) represents the

external cost of an additional mile driven by individual i. Similarly, the second term in
(16b) represents the external cost of an additional unit of size purchased by individual i.
The first-order conditions (16) say that the money-metric social marginal utility of each

good equals the social marginal cost of that good. Also, looking at (l6c), note that the

left-hand side equals individual i's change in utility from an additional unit of x,
divided by the marginal utility of income. In other words, it is the dollar value of

another unit of x (the price of x). Since the price of x equals one, (16c) says that the
social marginal utility of income, (5,also equals one.

B. The Household Problem
In contrast to the social planner, a household does not recognize that its own
emissions add to aggregate emissions. The household problem is to maximize:

—(p+t)s —(1+t)x _iEPM(si)mi1

(17)

with respect to in1, s, and x1. The first-order conditions are shown in equations (18)
of Table II. These equations are heterogeneous counterparts to the first-order
conditions (6) of Table I, but without the clean-car and clean-fuel characteristics. In
addition, each consumer has a separate set of optimality conditions.

C. Solutions
1. The Pigovian Tax

Table II: First-Order Conditions with Heterogeneous Consumers
Equations (16) from the social planner's problem:

(au,

LJ —nEPM(s)

__

(16a)

[MPGS2]

(au,
"\1

—n/1mEPM31

(16b)

MPG(s,)2 J]
[ +[PMPGSI

(16c)

Equations (18) from the household problem:

Pg +tg
am,

[

au,
as,
au.

ax,

(l8a)

[MPG(S)J+teEPM(Si)]

L

*

+tg)MPGs1 '

[_(pgMPG(s1)

2

)

+teEPMsim

]

(18b)

(18c)

-17-

To solve for a Pigovian tax, set all taxes except te equal to zero (ts=tg=tx=O).

Then, using ô = 1, (16c) and (18c) match each other. Also using ö = 1, set (16a) and
(18a) equal to each other. The household-specific variables drop out, leaving:

t=-MED

(19)

Using ô = 1 and this value of tc, then first-order conditions for size (16b) and (18b),
also match each other.

Thus, given the weights we have chosen, a uniform Pigovian tax on emissions
by itself induces all households, no matter their tastes for miles and size, to drive the
optimal number of miles in the right sized cars. Of course, policy makers do not
necessarily weight households so that income to one is the same as income given to

another. They may want instead to incorporate explicit distributional concerns into

environmental taxes. In this paper, however, we are not concerned with issues of
distribution. We weight households simply in a way that implies that the maximization
of social welfare yields the standard Pigovian formula in (19). This first-best uniform
Pigovian tax can be used as a benchmark to identify other first-best policy instruments,

and more importantly, against which to evaluate other second-best instruments.

2. First-best Taxes on Gasoline and Size
As in the representative-agent model, when a Pigovian tax is not possible (te =

0), we can derive another first-best set of instruments. Using the solution technique
explained in Section I.C, we obtain the heterogeneous counterpart of the gasoline tax:

t81 =njtEPM(s1)MPG(s1)

(20)

The subscript i on size indicates that the first-best tax on gasoline would have to differ
across consumers according to their chosen size (si). In order for the FBSO to be
attained, the tax on gasoline must differ according to characteristics of the vehicle at the
pump. Such a gas tax would be costly to administer.19
19

"For example, a tamper-resistant computer code would likely be required on each automobile;
similarly, gasoline pumps would have to be equipped to automatically tack the appropriate tax onto any

-18-

With heterogeneous consumers, the size tax is also household-specific:2°

t. = n/JEPM rn + n/1EPM(s)MPGS11n,
SI

SI

(21)

!vJPG(s1)

To implement this tax on a car of size s, its miles would have to be known. If the size
tax were assessed when the vehicle is purchased, then some measure of the discounted

total expected miles for the life of the vehicle would be necessary. Since conditions
change, however, the one time size tax would not provide the right subsequent

incentives (e.g. retirement). If the size tax were assessed yearly, then annual odometer
readings would be necessary. This would provide incentive for individuals to roll back
their odometers.2'

These results can be reconciled with those of limes (1996). He does not solve
for first-best tax rates on gasoline or car characteristics that would replicate the effects
of an emissions tax, but he finds that the outcome would include a fuel-content

standard, an auto-specific fuel tax, and no regulation of the automobile (p. 226). We
derive the auto-specific fuel tax (in 20), but we also find a mileage-specific auto tax (in

21). This difference in results can be attributed directly to differences between the

models. The consumer's optimization problem in (17) writes MPG and EPM
explicitly as functions of s1 , but it treats tax rates as parameters that are fixed to the

consumer. Yet (20) says that the optimal t is npEPM (s )MPG(s1) , a function of s.
if we plug that tgi function into (17) before we differentiate with respect to S, then

additional terms in the first order condition (1 8b) would involve derivatives EPM5 and
MPGS1, just like in (21). The tax on size in (21) would then be unnecessary (Innes,

1996). In other words, results depend on what consumers are assumed to know. If
gasoline that is dispensed to a particular automobile. Moreover, since a simple siphoning of gas will
permit consumers to bypass taxes on high-emission vehicles, the scope for abuse, particularly among
those high-emitting consumers who are arguably the most important targets of the tax, would be
tremendous" (Innes, 1996: p. 226).
20

Again, the FBSO requires that government know nzj , in order to set the baseline ni in (21), but that
the individual face a fixed t, that does not depend on individual choice of in (the individual
optimization of (17) does not take a derivative of r, with respect to in).
21

"Even if only a small proportion of consumers cheat in this way, those who cheat are likely to be those
who drive the most, who therefore have the greatest incentive to cheat and who are arguably the most
important targets of mileage taxation" (Innes, 1996: p. 226-227).

-19-

individuals know that their individualized gas tax rate will depend on their own choice

of engine size, then that gas tax alone can induce the optimal size. Preliminary

regression results indicate that the effect of size on EPM may be important. We find
that emissions per mile are a U-shaped function of engine size.22

Successful implementation of these first-best policies seems unlikely.

Therefore, we next assume that policy is limited. If the gas tax cannot be made to
depend on vehicle type, then a separate tax on size becomes important. If both the size
tax and the gas tax are constrained to be uniform across consumers, and therefore fixed

to each consumer, then how should these rates be set? Since the tax rates in (20) and

(21) depend on s and m, one possibility is that the size and gas tax could be calculated
from (20) and (21) using the mean size and miles. How well these uniform tax rates

would perform depends on the technological relationships EPM(s) and MPG(s) and
the relationship in preferences between size and miles. In the next section, we fmd
conditions that characterize second-best (uniform) tax rates. Then, we discuss how
these rates might compare with those from (20) and (21) using mean size and miles.

ifi.

Second-Best Taxes on Gasoline and Size

To fmd the second-best tax rates, we must find the single (uniform) gas tax rate
and single size tax rate that maximize social welfare, taking as given households'

demand behavior for miles, size, and the composite commodity. Assuming producer
prices are fixed, this is equivalent to maximizing this weighted sum of indirect utilities:

22

Because an extensive literature search did riot yield satisfactory estimates of the effect of engine size on
emissions per mile, we use data from the California Air Resources Board (CARB) to obtain our own
estimates. The CARB tested the CO. HC, and NOX emissions of 342 gasoline-powered passenger cars,
light-duty trucks and medium duty vehicles of model years 1962 through 1995 (CARB, 1997). Emissions
per mile of the three pollutants appear to first decrease in CID, then increase, in convex U-shapes. This
log-log fitted regression for CO is typical (standard errors in parentheses):
InCO = 34.24— 13.281nCID + 1.361nCID2
R2 .14 , n = 342
(8.89) (3.43)
(.33)
Regressions that include dummy variables for light trucks and medium-duty vehicles differ little from this
one; coefficients on the dummy variables are not statistically significant.

-20-

y,a, /3)

tg

PE}2(a

a$y

/3, y)aaf3y

(22)

with respect to t5 and tg. As a normalization, the tax on x can be set to zero, as in the
first-best scenario.23 Using Roy's Identity, this maximization results in the first order
conditions:

jjj
afiy

- tf f5 [A(t5 )}i(cx, I,
a/Jy

S
si[ fJJ [t
)}z(a, /3,
afly
aJiy
where,

/3, y)aaJ3y =
Y)aaa/3Y}1(a

Y)a/3Y}l(a

/3, y)aJ3y = 0

(23a)

(23b)

(forj = s, g):
A(t1) gMPG(s)EPM3 —+ gEPM(s)MPG

-+ EPM(s)MPG(s)-

(24)

The chosen quantities (s, g, and x) as well as the marginal utility of income (A) are
functions of

a and ft. In (23a), the first term in the integral (-As/A *) represents the

change in welfare from a change in the size tax, holding aggregate emissions constant.

The second term, involving A(t), is the change in utility due to the effect that a size tax
has on aggregate emissions.24 Similarly, the first term in (23b) is the change in welfare

from a change in the gas tax, holding aggregate emissions constant. The second term
incorporates the change in welfare from the effect that the gas tax has on aggregate
emissions.

Thus the tax rates on size and gasoline should each be set so that the aggregate
marginal gain in private welfare equals the aggregate loss from the effect on emissions.
As shown in the A(t3) term of each first order condition, the extent to which emissions
are reduced depends on the degree of responsiveness of miles and size to taxes on size

and gasoline. Thus second-best optimal (SBO) tax rates on size and gasoline depend on
23

Income, y, is exogenous, so a (lump-sum) tax on income t is equivalent to a tax on all commodities
at the same rate; any set of (tx, t, t) can be scaled up or down, with commensurate changes in t,. Thus
any one rate can be set to zero (see Fullerton, 1997).

-21-

the elasticities of demand for these goods. But the way in which changes in size affect
emissions is through the technological relationships that size has with emissions per

mile and fuel efficiency. The functions EPM(s) and MPG(s) are therefore major
determinants of the second-best tax rates.
These first order conditions cannot be used to solve for the second-best uniform

tax rates on size and gasoline. To find closed-form solutions we would have to specify

the functional forms of h(a , fi, y), EPM(s), MPG(s) and the demands for size, miles,
and the composite commodity. Still, these first order conditions can be used to shed
some light on the nature of such taxes. First, note how this problem differs from the

usual second-best optimal tax problem. Much of the public economics literature
assumes that consumers demand leisure and other goods, that leisure cannot be taxed,

and that the government must set other tax rates to minimize excess burden subject to a
revenue requirement. The resulting second-best tax rates depend primarily on price
elasticities: higher tax rates are placed on goods that are inelastically demanded or that
are complements to leisure.25 In contrast, our problem does not involve any

labor/leisure choice, or even a revenue requirement. Individual-specific lump-sum
taxes are available. For this reason, the resulting second-best tax rates will not depend
in the same way on behavioral responses to prices. The goal here, instead, is to tax

something that approximates the consumers emissions. In particular, if consumers with
a high preference for miles (high a) also happen to have a high preference for size (high
,8), then that correlation is likely to affect the second-best optimal tg and ta..

addition, preferences for size determine emissions through the relationship size has with

MPG and EPM.
We therefore want to investigate the potential importance of these technological

relationships and of the correlation between miles and size. In addition, first order
conditions (23) do not provide clear guidance about how to set uniform tax rates in the

face of heterogeneity. Closed-form solutions for the SBO tax rates are not available,

but two alternatives come to mind. First, we can calculate the "expected value" or
24

When an emissions tax achieves the FBSO, where A = A", then (23a) says that the cost to the taxpayer
of an increase in t, is the amount of s purchased, and that this marginal cost should be equal to the
marginal benefits in terms of reduced emissions.

-22-

weighted average of the first-best individual-specific tax rates in equations (20) and

(21). These average rates might then be applied uniformly to all individuals. These
rates are not the same as the SBO rates from (23), but at least they incorporate

information about the distribution h(a, ft, y) of heterogeneous individuals. Second,
policymakers might simply ignore heterogeneity, and just use the economy-wide means

for miles and size as if all individuals were the same. A comparison of these two
alternatives will reveal the direction of the bias from ignoring heterogeneity.
The average of all different gas tax rates in (20) is:

-

JJJ npEPM (s1 )MPG(s1 )h(cx, /3, y)aaa/3ay
= afi y

JJfh(a, /3,

= JfJEPM(s)MPG(s1)(a, /3, y)aaaf3ay

aI3y

(25)

We ask how this concept differs from the simple calculation of the gas tax rate for the
person with average choices:

t9 () = nEPM()MPG()

(26)

Specifically, we want to identify the circumstances under which the average of the gas
tax in (25) is greater than the gas tax rate for the person with average choices in (26).
We can thus discover the conditions under which uniform taxes based on average
choices would likely fall short of attaining the second-best emissions reduction.
Note that households with bigger cars driving proportionally more miles than

small-car owners would pay a proportionally higher gas tax even with a uniform gas tax
rate, because they would use more gas to drive the extra miles. Whether (25) exceeds
(26) depends on the characteristics of EPM(s) and MPG(s) and particularly on the

convexity of each function. Convexity of EPM(s), for example, would mean that
increases in size increase emissions per mile at an increasing rate. This would raise the
25

For comprehensive treatments of optimal taxation, see Auerbach (1985) or Stern (1987).

-23-

weighted average using EPM(s) in (25) relative to the tax rate using average size in

(26). Convexity in MPG(s) also raises (25) relative to (26). So, if either function is
sufficiently convex (or if both are convex), then the use of average size to calculate the

gas tax rate would understate the second-best uniform tax rate. Conversely, if either

EPM(s) or MPG(s) is sufficiently concave, then using the average value of size to
calculate the gas tax rate would overstate the second-best uniform tax rate.
To determine the likely magnitude of (25) relative to (26), we need estimates of
the possible nonlinear effect of engine size on fuel efficiency and emissions. While it is
widely known that fuel efficiency decreases with engine size, a literature search locates

no statistical estimates of the nonlinear nature of this relationship. Nor could we fmd
any estimates of the effect of size on emissions per mile.26 For these reasons, we use

the CARB data to estimate EPM and MPG as polynomial functions of engine size.
These regressions omit other explanatory variables in order to capture the full effect of

size, the only taxed characteristic. These very preliminary results suggest that EPM is
increasing over most of the range of size and convex, while MPG is decreasing and
also convex in size.27 Thus the use of average car size would likely understate the
second-best optimal gas tax.

Now consider the individual-specific size tax rate in (21). We want to reveal the
circumstances under which the average of the size tax rate,

t = JJJ /IEPM m1h(cc, 13, y))cxL3/3Jy + jj /1EPM(s1)MPGm1h(cz, 13, y)3af3t)y (27)
a$y

aJ3y

S1

is larger than the size tax for the person with the average choices,

Dunleep (1992) provides only rough estimates of the effect of size on MPG. Kahn (1996b) examines
the effect of size on emissions in parts per million rather than on emissions per mile.
27

Typical results for regressions of EPM on size are shown in footnote (22). The following regression
indicates that MPG is decreasing and also convex in engine size measured by CID (standard errors in
parentheses):
MPG=35.41—.1O6CID + .00012C1D2
R2=,72,n=342
(.0085)
(.000017)
(.88)
EPA data on MPG yield similar results.

-24-

-—

— n/iEPM()MPG-ñi

t(s,m)=njiEPM-m+
5'

MPG(s)

(28)

lithe size tax is positive, then emissions per mile increase proportionately more
with size than fuel efficiency deteriorates, and the first terms in (27) and (28) dominate

the second terms. In this case, whether the average size tax rate (27) exceeds the size
tax rate using average miles and size (in 28) depends only on whether the first term in

(27) exceeds the first term in (28). Note that in the first term of each equation, EPMS

is multiplied by m. If size and miles are positively correlated, because a and fi are
positively correlated, then this term is superadditive in miles and size. In this case, even

if EPM(s) is linear, (27) exceeds (28). The use of the average person's size tax is likely
to understate the second-best size tax, if those who own larger cars drive

proportionately more miles than those with smaller cars. Moreover, if EPM is a
convex function of size, then the optimal size tax increases even more quickly with

miles and size. Conversely, if miles and size are negatively correlated and EPM is
linear or concave in size, then (27) would be less than (28),
We use the 1994 Residential Transportation Energy Consumption Survey
(RTECS) to find preliminary evidence on the correlation of size and miles, and fmd a
very small but statistically significant negative correlation.28 However, since

preliminary estimates show EPM(s) to be convex, we cannot determine whether the
size tax based on average size would likely overstate or understate the second-best
uniform size tax.

Do uniform tax rates calculated using mean miles and size and (20) and (21)

approximate the second-best tax rates? We have shown that the answer depends on the

technological relationships EPM(s) and MPG(s), and the relationship between
preferences for size and miles h(a, fi, y). The average gas tax is likely to exceed the tax

calculated using average size, since EPM and MPG are found to be convex in size.
The average size tax may exceed the size tax calculated using average size and miles,
28

We use the RTECS because other sources lack data on annual miles or engine size. CARB data does
not list annual mileage, while the Nationwide Personal Transportation Survey (NPTS) has annual miles
but not engine size. The 1994 Consumer Expenditure Survey has multiple odometer readings that enable
mileage to be calculated, and it has the number of cylinders, but not CID, Using vehicles in the RTECS,

-25-

but only if size and miles are positively correlated and/or EPM is sufficiently convex in

size. In contrast, if tastes for size and miles are independently distributed and emissions
per mile and miles per gallon are linear functions of size, then average tax rates equal
the tax rates calculated using mean miles and size.

It appears unlikely that the second-best uniform tax rates would be closely
approximated by the rates based on the means. In order to maximize social welfare, we
need a comprehensive empirical investigation of the technological relationships
EPM(s) and MPG(s), the distribution h(a,fl,y), and behavioral parameters.

IV. Conclusions
In a simple model, we duplicate the outcome from a tax on emissions by instead

taxing gasoline and engine size, and by subsidizing PCE. The gas tax induces
households to drive fewer miles and to buy more fuel-efficient cars. In addition, since
the rate of tax depends on the cleanliness of the gasoline, the optimal gas tax also
encourages households to buy cleaner fuel. The tax on size induces households to buy

cars with smaller engines, while a subsidy to PCE encourages purchase and repair of
emissions-reducing equipment. Of course, vehicle age is also an important determinant
of emissions, because emissions standards have become increasingly stringent over
time, because emissions-control equipment deteriorates over time, and because new

technologies and lighter materials have become available. Thus policies that accelerate
vehicle retirement might also reduce emissions in a cost-effective way. The theory in
this paper could be extended to incorporate such policies.29

Current policies for the control of car pollution already involve many

government mandates, in addition to some economic incentives. We do not include any
explicit vehicle-emissions standards in our model, but we recognize that existing
standards affect the current relationships between vehicle size, vehicle age, and
the correlation between CID and annual miles is -.0439, significant at the 2.6% level. Also, regression
analysis indicates that miles and size may be nonlinearly related.
29
Alberini, et a!., (1995, 1996) derive a theoretical model of owners' car tenure and scrappage decisions,
and they analyze the results from an experimental vehicle retirement program in Delaware. Innes (1996)
and Fullerton and West (1999) also incorporate vintage choice into their models.

-26-

emissions per mile. Thus incentives that affect the choice of vehicle rely for their

effectiveness on the existence of those standards.

While the model of homogeneous consumers is useful to clarify the role of each
alternative policy m attaining the social optimum, it cannot tell us how variation in

tastes for miles and size might affect optimal tax or subsidy rates. To explore this issue,
we build a model of consumers that differ by tastes for miles and engine size. The firstbest alternative policies are household-specific taxes on gasoline and size. For the firstbest gas tax to be feasible, the attributes of each vehicle would have to be identifiable at
the pump.

Because such implementation would likely be expensive, we characterize
second-best uniform tax rates. A simple alternative is based on the erroneous
assumption that consumers are identical and so all drive the mean number of miles in

the mean sized car. We reach two main conclusions. First, if the addition of a unit of
size increases emissions per mile at an increasing rate, or if it decreases fuel efficiency

at a decreasing rate, then a second-best uniform gas tax rate would exceed that simple
calculation (using mean size and miles). Second, because we identify consumer
preferences using two parameters, one for miles and one for size, we find that a higher
positive correlation of these taste parameters increases the second-best uniform tax on
size.

If tastes for miles and size are positively correlated, and EPM and MPG are
convex in size, then second-best uniform tax rates are likely to be larger than tax rates
calculated by ignoring heterogeneity (using the means of size and miles). Only if tastes

are independently distributed and both EPM and MPG are linear would the tax rates
evaluated at the means be optimal. Thus an investigation of the economic incentives for
the control of car pollution requires empirical exploration of the technological
relationships between vehicle attributes and emissions per mile, and of the distribution
of preferences for miles and size.

References
Alberini, Anna, Winston Harrington and Virginia McConnell. "Determinants of
Participation in Accelerated Vehicle-retirement Programs." The Rand Journal of
Economics 26 (Spring 1995): 93-112.
Alberini, Anna, Winston Harrington and Virginia McConnell. "Estimating an Emissions
Supply Function from Accelerated Vehicle Retirement Programs." The Review
of Economics and Statistics 78 (May 1996): 25 1-263.

Auerbach, Alan J. "The Theory of Excess Burden and Optimal Taxation," in Martin
Feldstein and Alan Auerbach, eds., Handbook of Public Economics, Volume 1.
(Amsterdam: North Holland, 1985): 61-125.
Baumol, William J. and Wallace E. Oates. Theory of Environmental Policy. Second
edition. (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1988).
Bohm, Peter and Clifford S. Russell. "Comparative Analysis of Alternative Policy
Instruments," in Allen V. Kneese and James L. Sweeney, eds., Handbook of
Natural Resource and Energy Economics, Volume 1. (Amsterdam: North
Holland, 1985): 395-460.
Bradsher, Keith. "Favors Benefit Light Trucks, But May Be Harmful." The Austin
American-Statesman. (December 7, 1997): A25, A42, A43.
Burmich, Pam. The Air Pollution-Transportation Linkage. (Sacramento, CA: State of
California Air Resources Board, Office of Strategic Planning, 1989).
California Air Resources Board (CARB). Test Report of the Light-Duty Vehicle
Surveillance Program, Series 13 (LDVSP13) Project. (September 3, 1997).
Dunleep, K.G. NEMS Transportation Sector Model. (Arlington, VA: Energy and
Environmental Analysis, 1992).

Eskeland, Gunnar. "A Presumptive Pigovian Tax: Complementing Regulation to
Mimic an Emissions Fee." The World Bank Economic Review 8.3 (September
1994): 373-394.
Eskeland, Gunnar and Shantayanan Devarajan. Taxing Bads by Taxing Goods:
Pollution Control with Presumptive Charges. (Washington, DC: The World
Bank, 1996).
Faiz, Asif, Christopher S. Weaver and Michael P. Walsh. Air Pollution From Motor
Vehicles. (Washington, DC: The World Bank, 1996).

-R2-

Fullerton, Don. "Environmental Levies and Distortionary Taxation: Comment." '[h
American Economic Review 87 (March 1997): 245-251.
Fullerton, Don and Ann Wolverton. "The Case for a Two-Part Instrument: Presumptive
Tax and Environmental Subsidy," forthcoming in Paul R. Portney and Robert
M. Schwab, eds., Environmental Economics and Public Policy: Essays m Honor
of Wallace E. Oates. (Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar Publishing Ltd., 1999).
Fullerton, Don and Sarah West. "Tax and Subsidy Combinations for the Control of Car
Pollution." Working paper prepared for the Public Policy Institute of California
(March, 1999).
Goldberg, Pinelopi K. "The Effects of Corporate Average Fuel Efficiency Standards in
the US." The Journal of Industrial Economics 46 (March 1998): 1-33.
Hall, Jane V., Arthur M. Winer, Michael T. Kleinman, Frederick W. Lurmann, Victor
Brajer and Steven D. Colome. "Valuing the Health Benefits of Clean Air."
Science 255 (February 14, 1992): 8 12-817.

Harrington, Winston. "Fuel Economy and Motor Vehicle Emissions." Journal of
Environmental Economics and Management 33 (July 1997): 240-252.
Harrington, Winston, Margaret Walls and Virginia McConnell. "Shifting Gears: New
Directions for Cars and Clean Air." Discussion Paper 94-26-REV. (Washington,
DC: Resources for the Future, 1994).
Harrington, Winston, Virginia McConnell and Anna Alberini. "Economic Incentive
Policies under Uncertainty: The Case of Vehicle Emission Fees," in Roberto
Roson and Kenneth A. Small, eds., Environment and Transport in Economic
Modelling. (Dordrect, The Netherlands: Kiuwer Academic Publishers, 1998).
Innes, Robert. "Regulating Automobile Pollution Under Certainty, Competition, and
Imperfect Information." Journal of Environmental Economics and Management
31 (September 1996): 219-239.

Kahn, Matthew E. "New Estimates of the Benefits of Vehicle Emissions Regulation."
Economics Letters 51 (June 1996a): 363-369.

Kahn, Matthew E. "New Evidence on Trends in Vehicle Emissions." Rand Journal of
Economics 27 (Spring 1996b): 183-196.
Kazimi, Camilla. "Evaluating the Environmental Impact of Alternative-Fuel Vehicles."
Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 33 (June 1997): 163185.

-R3Kling, Catherine L. "Emissions Trading versus Rigid Regulations in the Control of
Vehicle Emissions." Land Economics 70 (May 1994): 174-188.
Kohn, Robert E. "An Additive Tax and Subsidy for Controlling Automobile Pollution."
Applied Economics Letters 3 (July 1996): 459-462.
Krupnick, Alan J. and Paul R. Portney. "Controlling Urban Air Pollution: A Benefit
Cost Assessment." Science 252 (April 26, 1991): 522-528.

Krupnick, Alan J. and Margaret A. Walls. "The Cost-effectiveness of Methanol for
Reducing Motor Vehicle Emissions and Urban Ozone." Journal of Policy
Analysis and Management 11 (Summer 1992): 373-396.
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). Motor Vehicle
Pollution: Reduction Strategies Beyond 2010. (Paris: OECD, 1995).
Pigou, Arthur C. The Economics of Welfare. Fourth edition. (London: MacMillan and
Co., 1932).
Sevigny, Maureen. Taxing Automobile Emissions for Pollution Control. (Cheltenham,
UK: Edward Elgar Publishing Ltd., 1998).
Sierra Research. "Analysis of the Effectiveness and Cost-Effectiveness of Remote
Sensing Devices." Report SR94-05-05, prepared for the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency. (Sacramento, CA: Sierra Research, 1994).

Small, Kenneth A. and Camilla Kazimi. "On the Costs of Air Pollution from Motor
Vehicles." Journal of Transport Economics and Policy 29 (January 1995): 7-32.
Stern, Nicholas H. "The Theory of Optimal Commodity and Income Taxation: An
Introduction," in David M. Newbery and Nicholas H. Stern, eds., The Theory of
Taxation in Developing Countries. (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1987): 2259.

Train, Kenneth E., William B. Davis and Mark D. Levine. "Fees and Rebates on New
Vehicles: Impacts on Fuel Efficiency, Carbon Dioxide Emissions, and
Consumer Surplus." Transportation Research (Logistics and Transportation
Review) 33 (1997): 1-13.

