                                        Table of Contents

1. Introduction

2. Theories of taxation and saving
       2.1. The life cycle hypothesis
                2.1.1. Positive analysis of taxation and saving
                2.1.2. Normative analysis of taxation and saving
                        2.1.2.1. Optimal taxation of the returns to saving
                        2.1.2.2. The welfare costs of taxing the returns to saving
       2.2. Variants of the life cycle hypothesis
                2.2.1. Bequest motives
                2.2.2. Liquidity constraints
                2.2.3. Uncertainty and precautionary saving
       2.3. Behavioral theories
                2.3.1. Positive analysis of taxation and saving
                2.3.2. Normative analysis of taxation and saving

3. Evidence on responses to changes in the after-tax rate of return
       3.1. The consumption/saving function approach
       3.2. The Euler equation approach

4. Evidence on responses to tax-deferred savings accounts
       4.1. Individual Retirement Accounts
               4.1.1. Direct survey evidence
               4.1.2. Evidence on the frequency of limit contributors
               4.1.3. Correlations between IRA and non-IRA saving
               4.1.4. Exogenous changes in eligibility
               4.1.5. Evidence of psychological effects
       4.2. 401(k)s
               4.1.1. Exploiting exogenous variation in eligibility
               4.1.2. Exploiting transitional effects
               4.1.3. Exploiting variation in matching rates
       4.3. General evidence from the U.S. experience
       4.4. Evidence from countries other than the United States

5. Evidence on other links between taxation and saving
       5.1. The size and scope of the pension system
               5.1.1. Incentives for pension saving
               5.1.2. Do pensions crowd out other personal saving?
       5.2. Employer-controlled pensions vs. participant-controlled pensions
       5.3. Taxation and corporate saving
       5.4. Other activities undertaken by employers
       5.5. Marketing and promotion of financial products
6. Concluding comments

TAXATION AND SAVING
B. DOUGLAS BERNHEIM
Stanford University, Stanford, CA
National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA


1. Introduction

         Recognizing the importance of saving as a determinant of both personal economic security and

national economic performance, policymakers worldwide have become increasingly interested in developing

effective strategies for stimulating (or in some cases discouraging) thrift. This interest has become

particularly acute in the United States, where rates of saving are currently very low both by historical

standards and in comparison to other developed countries. Concerns over low saving have led to a variety of

policy proposals designed to stimulate thrift through the tax system, ranging from narrowly focused tax-

deferred savings accounts to broad-based consumption taxation. Economic research has played an important

role in the resulting public policy debates, and economists have weighed in on virtually all sides of the

pertinent issues.

         In this survey, I summarize and evaluate the extant literature concerning taxation and personal

saving.1 I describe the theoretical models that economists have used to depict saving decisions, and I explore

the positive and normative implications of these models. The central positive question is whether and to what

extent specific public policies raise or lower the rate of saving. The central normative question is whether

and to what extent it is desirable to tax the economic returns to saving. I also examine empirical evidence on

the saving effects of various tax policies. This evidence includes econometric studies of the generic relation


   1
    National saving consists of two components: private saving and public saving. Private saving takes place among
households (personal saving) and corporations (corporate saving). Public saving is the sum of budget surpluses (or
deficits) for federal, state, and local governments. For the most part, this chapter concerns the impact of tax policy on
the personal component of national saving. However, collateral effects on other components of national saving (e.g.
changes in government revenue and shifts between corporate saving and private saving) are considered where relevant.

                                                            1
between saving and the after-tax rate of return, as well as analyses of responses to the economic incentives

that are imbedded in tax-deferred retirement accounts. Finally, I also discuss several indirect channels

through which tax policy may affect household saving by altering the behavior of third parties, such as

employers.

        The remainder of the chapter is divided into five sections. Section 2 discusses theories of taxation

and saving. It investigates the positive and normative implications of taxing the returns to saving under

several variants of the life cycle hypothesis, as well as under behavioral alternatives. Section 3 describes the

available evidence on the generic relation between saving and the after-tax rate of return. It identifies two

distinct approaches to measurement (estimation of consumption or saving equations, and estimation of

consumption Euler equations), and it discusses the limitations of each. In section 4, I examine evidence on

the effects of opportunities to save through tax-deferred retirement accounts. This section focuses primarily

on U.S. tax policies, and includes detailed discussions of Individual Retirement Accounts (IRAs) and

401(k)s. Both IRAs and 401(k)s have accounted for large flows of saving, but there is heated controversy

over the extent to which these flows represent new saving. In section 5, I shift attention to indirect links

between taxation and household saving. I discuss the implications for household saving resulting from tax-

induced changes in other aspects of the economic environment, including the size and scope of the pension

system, the characteristics of employment-based pensions, the level of corporate saving, the availability of

employment-based investment and retirement education, and the intensity with which financial institutions

market and promote specific financial products. Section 6 concludes.



2. Theories of taxation and saving

        For more than fifty years, the framework of intertemporal utility maximization has dominated

economists’ thinking about the tax treatment of saving. This framework traces its roots to Irving Fisher

(1930), and lies at the heart of the Life Cycle Hypothesis (LCH) articulated by Modigliani and Brumberg


                                                        2
conditions are required to guarantee that the optimal long-run tax on capital income is zero. Specific results

depend on assumptions about the government’s use of other policy instruments. When the government has

sufficient control over the generational distribution of resources, the task of designing an optimal tax system

is, in steady state, equivalent to the standard Ramsey tax problem for a representative finite-lived

individual.17 Though the limiting arguments mentioned in the preceding discussion no longer apply, the

optimal capital income tax rate is still zero in the long run if preferences are weakly separable into leisure and

consumption, and homothetic in consumption.

         When the government cannot optimize its use of debt, capital income taxes play an important role in

determining capital intensity. The steady-state welfare effects of capital income taxation then depend on the

divergence of initial steady state capital intensity from the golden rule, and on the sensitivity of steady-state

capital intensity to the after-tax rate of return. When capital accumulation is too low (fN(k) > n, where fN(k) is

the marginal product of capital and n is the population growth rate), the optimal tax structure reflects the

benefits of setting capital income taxes so as to encourage greater saving. Notably, in contrast to the standard

Ramsey tax problem, the sign and magnitude of these benefits are governed by the uncompensated interest

elasticity of saving, rather than the compensated elasticity. Since it is impossible to sign the uncompensated

interest elasticity of saving as a matter of theory, the optimal tax structure can involve either a tax or a

subsidy on capital income, even when there is too little capital accumulation in the initial steady state. In

general, it is no longer desirable to refrain from taxing or subsidizing capital income even when the usual


on the welfare of transitional generations. This favors policies that redistribute resources from transitional generations to
steady state generations, e.g. by moving the economy towards the golden rule growth path. Such policies are not
necessarily attractive when judged purely on the grounds of efficiency.

   17
     For the most part, the literature considers models in which households live for two periods. In that setting, the
equivalence result described in the text holds as long as the government can use public debt to achieve the desired
steady-state capital stock. More generally, when households have T period lifespans, the government needs T-1
redistributional instruments. The equivalence result also assumes that the government can implement age-specific taxes,
for example by applying different tax rates to capital income earned by two distinct cohorts at the same point in time.
The problem becomes more complicated when the government must apply the same tax rates to all cohorts at each point
in time. However, the optimal long-run tax on capital income continues to be zero under the same conditions identified
in the text.

                                                            19
sufficient conditions (weak separability of preferences between consumption and leisure coupled with

homotheticity in consumption) are satisfied.



2.1.2.2. The welfare costs of taxing the returns to saving

        The second set of normative questions mentioned at the outset of section 2.1.2 concerns the welfare

effects of tax reforms. As a general matter, proposals to reform some arbitrary status quo by reducing or

eliminating capital income taxes can either raise or lower social welfare. Clearly, such proposals must

inevitably reduce welfare when the status quo coincides with an optimal tax scheme involving positive taxes

on capital income. Even when the optimal capital income tax rate is zero, the welfare losses resulting from

the taxation of investment returns can be either large or small, depending on the features of the economic

environment.

        Under certain conditions, one can approximate the welfare losses associated with the taxation of a

consumption good by computing the area of a “Harberger triangle” (Harberger, 1964). Since this area is

proportional to the product of the square of the tax rate and the good’s compensated demand elasticity, a

small elasticity implies a small welfare loss. In the context of capital income taxation, the pertinent

behavioral margin involves the response of saving to a change in the after-tax rate of return. As discussed in

section 3, various studies have placed the uncompensated interest elasticity of saving at or near zero. If we

take this evidence at face value and assume that the income effect in equation (8) is small (e.g. because

saving, s0, is a small fraction of lifetime earnings, W), it is tempting to conclude that the compensated interest

elasticity of saving must also be near zero, and to infer that the welfare costs of capital income taxation are

small. This inference is inappropriate: capital income taxation may be highly inefficient even when

compensated changes in the after-tax rate of return have little or no effect on saving (Feldstein, 1978).

        To understand this point, imagine an individual who lives for two periods, supplying labor

inelastically during the first period, and retiring prior to the second period. The relevant consumption goods


                                                       20
are current consumption and future consumption, not current consumption and saving. Saving is related to

expenditure on future consumption. To compute the size of the Harberger triangle, one must use the

compensated elasticity of demand for second-period consumption with respect to the interest rate, rather than

a compensated interest elasticity of saving.18 Consequently, the Harberger triangle can be sizable even if the

uncompensated interest elasticity of saving is zero and income effects are small.

         Feldstein (1978) uses the Harberger approximation to compute the welfare cost of capital income

taxation in a simple, two-period, representative agent model. In the first period of life, the individual chooses

labor supply and consumption; second period consumption is determined as a residual. Assuming that the

relevant uncompensated elasticities (the interest elasticity of saving, the labor supply elasticity, and the

associated cross-price elasticities) are all zero, Feldstein finds that capital income taxation entails substantial

welfare losses. Specifically, when the initial tax rates on capital and labor income are both 40 percent,

replacement of the capital income tax with an equal-yield labor income tax increases welfare by roughly 18

percent of tax revenue.19

         Notably, Feldstein’s analysis abstracts from general equilibrium effects, in that pre-tax factor returns

(the wage rate and the interest rate) are taken as fixed. Other authors have explicitly considered the welfare

costs of capital income taxation in general equilibrium growth models. This literature is divided into two

segments: studies that employ models with infinite-lived households, and studies that employ models with

overlapping generations of finite-lived households.

         Chamley (1981) studies the welfare effects of replacing a capital income tax with a non-distortionary

lump sum tax in a model with a representative, infinite-lived household.. He solves for the adjustment path

from an initial steady state by linearizing the economy’s equations of motion. Noting that the marginal


  18
     The notion of a compensated interest elasticity of saving is not even well-defined, since its size differs according to
whether compensation is distributed in the first period or in the second period.

   19
    It does not necessarily follow that the optimal income tax system involves no taxation of capital income under these
parametric assumptions; Feldstein does not investigate this issue.

                                                             21
deadweight loss of taxation is zero at the first-best allocation, he uses a quadratic approximation to compute

the associated change in welfare. Under plausible parametric assumptions, he finds that, when labor supply

is fixed, the welfare cost of capital income taxation is approximately 11 percent of revenue when the tax rate

is 30 percent, and 26 percent of revenue when the tax rate is 50 percent. The quadratic approximation

implies that the welfare cost is roughly twice as high for the marginal dollar of revenue. These figures

increase by as much as a third when Chamley allows for the possibility that capital income taxes may also

distort labor supply.

         Judd (1987) studies a similar model, but improves upon Chamley’s analysis in two ways: first, he

considers experiments involving revenue-neutral changes in other distortionary taxes; second, he linearizes

around steady states with positive taxes to obtain exact expressions for the marginal deadweight loss of

taxation given any initial tax system. He finds that, on the margin, replacing capital income taxation with

labor income taxation raises welfare for a broad range of estimated taste and technology parameters. Since

the optimal long-run capital income tax rate converges to zero for this class of models (see section 2.1.2.1),

this finding is understandable.20 Judd’s preferred calculations suggest that the welfare gain of an immediate

and permanent cut in capital taxation exceeds 25 cents on each dollar of revenue, and exceeds one dollar per

dollar of revenue under plausible assumptions.

         A somewhat different set of considerations governs the welfare effects of capital income taxation in

models with overlapping generations of finite-lived households. First, relative to models with infinite-lived

agents, more restrictive conditions are required to guarantee that the optimal capital income tax rate




   20
     For many of his parametric calculations, Judd also assume that utility is additively separable in consumption and
leisure, and that the consumption and leisure components are both homothetic. Chamley makes a similar assumption
when he modifies his model to allow for variable labor supply. When wage taxes are available but consumption taxes
are not, these conditions imply that the optimal capital income tax rate is exactly zero after some initial period of
transition. Thus, when the government abandons the capital income tax, it gives up an efficient levy on the initial capital
stock, but this effect is swamped by the benefits of eliminating intertemporal distortions (at least for these parametric
cases). Judd also considers parametric cases with non-separable utility for which optimal capital income tax rates
presumably converge to zero more gradually, and obtains similar results.

                                                            22
converges to zero in the long run (see section 2.1.2.1). Consequently, there is less reason to believe a priori

that a reduction in the capital income tax rate will necessarily raise welfare. Second, unless the government

adopts offsetting deficit policies, different tax systems may have different consequences for the

intergenerational distribution of resources. It is important not to confuse these distributional effects with

efficiency effects.

         Taxes affect intergenerational distribution both directly and indirectly. Direct distributional effects

result from different patterns of nominal incidence at fixed prices. For example, relative to a wage tax, a

consumption tax distributes resources away from generations that are currently retired toward those that are

currently working. Indirect distributional effects result from changes in equilibrium prices. For example, all

else equal, an increase in capital accumulation during any period raises wages in subsequent periods by

increasing the marginal productivity of labor, thereby benefitting later generations.21

         In OLG models, tax policy affects capital accumulation (and hence intergenerational distribution) in

two ways. First, saving may be sensitive to the after-tax rate of return. The associated effects of tax policy

on capital accumulation and intergenerational distribution are governed by the uncompensated interest

elasticity of saving. Second, there are general equilibrium feedback effects from intergenerational

distribution to capital accumulation (and hence back to intergenerational distribution). To illustrate, consider

once again the choice between a wage tax and a consumption tax. Relative to a consumption tax, the wage

tax leaves greater resources in the hands of current retirees, and less in the hands of current workers. Since

retirees have higher marginal propensities to consume out of income, this tends to reduce capital

accumulation, thereby depressing wages in subsequent periods and distributing resources away from workers


   21
      A permanent increase in steady-state capital accumulation makes each steady-state generation better off only if the
increase in labor productivity, and hence in after-tax wages, exceeds the required increase in saving. If the economy is
on the “wrong” side of the golden rule growth path (so that capital accumulation is inefficiently high, in the sense that
f’(k) < n), then greater capital accumulation reduces steady state welfare. In that case, tax policies that move the
economy toward the golden rule growth path can generate pure efficiency gains. However, it is generally believed that
this is not the empirically relevant case. Movements toward the golden rule growth path from below (f’(k) > n) raise
issues of intergenerational distribution, rather than efficiency.

                                                            23
over a short-term horizon.

         Diamond (1970) and Summers (1981) use OLG models to study the steady state effects of capital

income taxation. Diamond obtains qualitative results for a model in which households live for two periods,

while Summers attempts to quantify tax effects for a more realistic, parameterized model in which households

live for fifty-five periods. The length of the household’s horizon is important in this context because it

affects the duration of the household’s earnings stream, and hence the magnitude of the uncompensated

interest elasticity of saving (see section 2.1.1), which in turn governs the responsiveness of capital

accumulation to changes in the after-tax rate of return. Summers’ preferred calculations imply that steady-

state welfare (expressed as a percentage of lifetime income) would rise by roughly 12 percent if capital

income taxes were replaced with consumption taxes, and by roughly 5 percent if capital income taxes were

replaced with wage taxes.

         In evaluating Summers’ results, one must bear several considerations in mind. First, he ignores the

economy’s transition path following tax reform.22 The steady-state effects that he calculates are large

because (i) the economy is below the golden-rule growth path (f’(k) > n), (ii) the model implies a substantial

uncompensated interest elasticity of saving, and (iii) the effects of tax reform on capital accumulation are not

offset by changes in government deficit policy. As discussed in section 2.1.1, the implied value of the interest

elasticity of saving -- and hence the size of the associated steady-state welfare effect -- is sensitive to

parametric assumptions. More importantly, by focusing only on steady-states, Summers’ welfare calculations

blend distributional effects with efficiency effects. It is important to remember that movements toward the

golden-rule growth path benefit steady-state generations at the expense of transitional generations. If

redistribution toward steady state generations is desirable, the government could accomplish this objective in

other ways (e.g. by running surpluses), without abandoning capital income taxation.



   22
    Summers (1981) cites an earlier unpublished version of his paper in which he examined the speed of transition,
assuming myopic expectations.

                                                         24
        Second, Summers assumes that households supply labor inelastically. Since this implies that the

optimal capital income tax rate is zero, reforms that eliminate capital income taxes are inevitably welfare-

improving. Consumption taxation and wage taxation are, in this model, equivalent to non-distortionary

lump-sum taxation. Consequently, Summers does not examine policy experiments wherein the capital

income tax is replaced with another distortionary tax.

        The equivalence of consumption taxes and wage taxes to lump-sum taxes, and hence to each other,

may seem inconsistent with Summers’ calculations, which imply that these two alternatives have very

different steady-state effects. The explanation is that the switch from one system to the other would alter the

timing of tax collection, but Summers does not permit offsetting changes in deficit policy. On average,

consumption occurs later in life than earnings. One can achieve a completely equivalent outcome, including

an equivalent steady state, with a consumption tax or a wage tax levied at the same flat rate, provided that the

government runs a higher debt with the consumption tax to compensate for the fact that it is collecting

revenue later in the life of each individual. If one then eliminates this incremental debt (which Summers

implicitly requires), steady-state capital accumulation will rise. Provided that the economy is initially below

the golden rule growth path, this increases steady-state welfare. The effect is, however, somewhat artificial,

since the government could achieve the same outcome in the wage-tax setting by running a surplus.

        Auerbach, Kotlikoff, and Skinner (1983) (henceforth AKS; see also Auerbach and Kotlikoff, 1987)

study a similar model, but improve upon Summers’ analysis by allowing for variable labor supply, and by

using computational methods to solve for the full dynamic path of the economy under rational expectations.

Perhaps most importantly, they explicitly separate efficiency effects from distributional effects by examining

two distinct types of tax reform experiments. In the first type of experiment, tax rates are set to balance the

government’s budget period by period, and no government borrowing or lending takes place. This

corresponds to Summers’ approach. In the second type of experiment, tax rates are set to cover real

exogenous government spending each period, but lump sum transfers are used in combination with deficits


                                                         25
and/or surpluses to alter the distribution of resources across generations. In particular, the authors hold fixed

the utility of generations that are alive at the time of the tax reform, while distributing the net benefits or costs

of the reform equally (expressed as percentages of lifetime income) across all subsequent generations. For

the first type of experiment, results reflect a blend of distributional and efficiency effects, while the second

type of experiment isolates efficiency effects.

         Simulation results for the AKS model reveal a number of noteworthy patterns.23 If the government

were to replace the income tax with a consumption tax without adjusting deficit policy to fine-tune the

intergenerational distribution of resources (a tax reform experiment of the first type), the utility of the oldest

initial cohorts would decline, but steady state welfare (expressed as a percentage of lifetime income) would

rise by roughly 6 percent. For a similar experiment involving the replacement of the income tax with a wage

tax, the utility of the oldest initial cohorts would rise, but steady state welfare would fall by roughly 4 percent.

For tax reform experiments of the second type, the welfare of all generations (other than those alive at the

time of the reform) would rise by roughly 2 percent for a consumption tax, and fall by roughly 2 percent for a

wage tax.

         To understand the AKS results, it is helpful to begin with tax reform experiments of the first type, for

which steady state results are directly comparable with Summers’ analysis. Since labor supply is variable, the

alternatives to capital income taxation are not distortion-free in the AKS setting, and consequently the steady

state outcomes with consumption taxation and wage taxation are considerably less attractive than in

Summers’ model. The steady-state ranking of consumption taxation and wage taxation continues to be

driven by differences in the timing of revenue collection, coupled with the assumption that the government

balances its budget period by period.

         Differences between the transitional effects of consumption taxation and wage taxation originate



   23
     These results presuppose an initial income tax rate of 30 percent. Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1987) provide results
for a lower initial income tax rate (15 percent).

                                                          26
from the divergent treatment of individuals who are already alive when the reforms are enacted. Since

existing retirees earn no wages, they are plainly better off when the income tax is replaced with a wage tax,

and worse off when it is replaced with a consumption tax. This differential treatment of the initial

generations has two further effects. First, it implies that a consumption tax is less distortionary than a wage

tax. In effect, the consumption tax supplements the wage tax with a non-distortionary capital levy. Since

households must fund their consumption either from wages or from initial assets, the consumption tax base is

strictly larger (in present value terms) than the wage tax base, and the government can raise the same revenue

with a lower tax rate. Like the wage tax, the consumption tax falls on labor and distorts the labor-leisure

choice, but to a lesser extent since the rate is lower. Unlike the wage tax, the consumption tax also falls on

initial assets, but this portion is non-distortionary since individuals cannot retroactively alter the labor

earnings from which they accumulated their initial assets.

        Second, the differential treatment of initial generations implies that consumption taxation promotes

saving and capital accumulation in the short run, while wage taxation has the opposite effect. Within the life

cycle model, the marginal propensity to consume resources rises with age. Relative to an income tax, a

consumption tax distributes resources away from older generations at the time of the reform, while a wage tax

distributes resources towards these generations. The utilities of the oldest cohorts fall with consumption

taxation, but younger generations benefit because higher capital accumulation raises wages and expands the

tax base (permitting the government to apply even lower rates). In contrast, the utility of the oldest cohorts

rises with wage taxation, but younger generations are adversely affected because lower capital accumulation

depresses wages and contracts the tax base (requiring the government to impose even higher tax rates).

        Now consider tax reform experiments of the second type, in which taxes are set to cover real

exogenous government spending each period, but lump sum transfers are used in combination with deficits

and/or surpluses to alter the distribution of resources across generations. Under consumption taxation,

transitional generations require compensation, so the steady state outcome becomes less attractive (a welfare


                                                        27
gain of 2 percent, instead of 6 percent). Under wage taxation, the government can extract compensation from

the oldest cohorts, so the steady state outcome becomes more attractive (a welfare loss of 2 percent, instead

of 4 percent). The consumption tax outcome is Pareto superior to the wage tax outcome solely because the

consumption tax incorporates a non-distortionary levy on existing capital, and thereby permits the

government to impose a lower implicit tax rate on labor. Relative to income taxation, consumption taxation

has three effects: (i) it eliminates intertemporal distortions, (ii) it alters labor-leisure distortions, and (iii) it

adds a non-distortionary levy on initial capital. The net impact of the first two effects is unclear,24 but the

third effect is plainly beneficial. Relative to income taxation, wage taxation also has the first two effects, but

it adds a lump-sum subsidy to initial capital. This third effect is plainly detrimental, since it requires the

government to raise tax rates, aggravating the labor-leisure distortion. It is natural to wonder about the sign

and magnitude of pure efficiency effects when one eliminates surprise capital levies and subsidies (the third

effect) by considering fully anticipated tax reforms, but AKS do not undertake such experiments.

         Subsequent research has refined, elaborated, and extended the work of Summers and AKS (see

Auerbach and Kotlikoff, 1987, Seidman, 1983, 1984, Hubbard and Judd, 1986, Starrett, 1988, McGee, 1989,

Gravelle, 1991a, Auerbach, 1996, and Fullerton and Rogers, 1993, 1996). Some of these studies are

discussed in the next section, which considers variants of the life cycle hypothesis.



2.2 Variants of the life cycle hypothesis

         Various studies have usefully extended the positive and normative analysis of capital income



   24
     Although AKS do not solve for the optimal long-run capital income tax rate when deficit policy is also optimized,
there is no particular reason to believe that it is zero, since AKS depart from the assumptions that are known to generate
this result. Specifically, AKS use a nested CES representation of preferences, with a parameter governing the
substitutability between leisure and consumption within each period, and another parameter governing the
substitutability between felicity in different periods. These preferences are not weakly separable in consumption and
leisure. A natural conjecture is that the optimal capital income tax rate is positive when contemporaneous consumption
and leisure are substitutes (since this suggests that one should tax consumption more heavily during retirement), and
negative when they are complements. However, without further analysis, it is impossible to know whether
considerations arising from non-separability are quantitatively significant.

                                                           28
taxation within life cycle models to settings with additional realistic features. Chief among these features are

bequest motives, liquidity constraints, and uncertainty. This section briefly summarizes these branches of the

literature. For more detailed surveys, see Johnson, Diamond, and Zodrow (1997) and Engen and Gale

(1996a).



2.2.1 Bequest motives

        Though there is widespread agreement that intergenerational transfers account for a significant

fraction of household wealth, quantitative estimates vary widely. Kotlikoff and Summers (1981) conclude

that roughly 50 to 80 percent of total wealth is due to intergenerational transfers, but subsequent studies tend

to place this figure between 25 and 50 percent (see Aaron and Munnell, 1992, Barthold and Ito, 1986, Gale

and Scholz, 1994a). To some extent, the dispute is definitional (see Modigliani, 1988, and Kotlikoff, 1988).

        Theories of bequest motives fall into several distinct categories. One school of thought holds that

bequests result from uncertainty concerning length of life coupled with restrictions on the availability of

annuity insurance contracts (see Davies, 1981). A second maintains that individuals care directly about the

amount of wealth bequeathed to their heirs (see Blinder, 1974, or Andreoni, 1989). A third is predicated on

the assumption that individuals have altruistic preferences, in the sense that they care directly about the utility

or consumption of their heirs (see Barro, 1974, or Becker, 1974). A fourth depicts bequests as payments

associated with transactions within families (see Bernheim, Shleifer, and Summers, 1985, or Kotlikoff and

Spivak, 1981).

        A number of studies have examined the empirical validity of these various alternatives.

Collectively, the evidence points to a mixture of motives. Several authors have investigated the hypothesis

that bequests are intentional, rather than accidental (Bernheim, Shleifer, and Summers, 1985, Hurd, 1987,

1989, Bernheim, 1991, Gale and Scholz, 1994a). A number of studies have tested the altruism hypothesis by

attempting to determine whether intergenerational transfers compensate for earnings differentials between


                                                        29
generations and across children (Tomes, 1981, Kurz, 1984, Altonji, Hayashi, and Kotlikoff, 1992, and

Laitner and Juster, 1996). Bernheim and Bagwell (1988) argue that the altruism model leads inevitably to

stronger, empirically untenable conclusions. Specific implications of exchange motives have also been

examined (Bernheim, Shleifer, and Summers, 1985, and Cox, 1987). All available theories have difficulty

accounting for the robust empirical finding that more than two-thirds of U.S. testators divide their estates

exactly equally among their heirs (Menchik, 1980, Wilhelm, 1996).25

         The implications of bequest motives for tax policy depend critically upon the type of motive that one

assumes. For example, the taxation of bequests and inheritances is clearly non-distortionary if

intergenerational transfers are accidental, but may have substantial efficiency costs if individuals have other

motives. Different assumptions therefore lead to different implications concerning the desirability of

including bequests in the consumption tax base, or inheritances in the wage tax base.

         The interest elasticity of saving is also sensitive to one’s assumptions about the nature of bequest

motives. Standard formulations of the altruistic motive imply that the long-run interest elasticity of saving is

much higher than in the absence of a bequest motive (Summers, 1981, Evans, 1983, Lord and Rangazas,

1992); indeed, the long-run partial equilibrium interest elasticity of saving is infinite. In contrast, several

studies have found that the interest elasticity of saving declines when one introduces accidental bequests

(Engen, 1994) or preferences for bequests that are defined over the amount of wealth bequeathed rather than

over heirs’ consumption or utility (Evans, 1983, Starrett, 1988, Fullerton and Rogers, 1993). These are not

general results, but depend instead upon the form of the utility function, and on the manner in which one

recalibrates other parameters of the model when bequests motives are introduced.26 In some instances, the


   25
     Bernheim and Severinov (1999) argue that it is possible to account for the prevalence of equal division in a model
with altruistic bequest motives if the division of bequests serve as a signal of the parent’s relative affection for each
child.

   26
      The introduction of a bequest motive raises the steady-state capital-labor ratio and lowers the interest rate. If one
adjusts other parameters (such as the intertemporal elasticity of substitution) to replicate baseline data, this will affect the
interest elasticity of saving.

                                                              30
interest elasticity of saving can even be negative. This might, for example, occur if an individual seeks to

bequeath a fixed level of wealth: with a higher rate of return, less saving is required to reach the target.

        Bequest motives also alter the welfare implications of capital income taxation. If these motives are

altruistic, then one can treat a sequence of finite-lived generations as a single, infinite-lived dynasty, and

proceed as in Chamley (1981) and Judd (1987). If individuals’ preferences are defined over the size of their

bequest, the welfare effects of taxing the returns to saving become sensitive to the manner in which the model

is calibrated. For such models, bequest are similar to consumption from the point of the testator, but they

differ from consumption from the point of view of the economy because they add to capital accumulation.

Consequently, when one incorporates bequests, one must recalibrate other parameters to replicate a baseline

capital-labor ratio and interest rate. Evans (1983) recalibrates by adjusting the intertemporal elasticity of

substitution, and finds that the introduction of a bequest motive significantly increases the impact of capital

income taxation on steady state consumption. In contrast, Seidman (1984) recalibrates by adjusting the

subjective discount rate, and finds that the welfare costs of capital income taxation are relatively insensitive

to the presence or absence of a bequest motive. Seidman also argues that the addition of a bequest motive

reduces the transitional losses suffered by the initial generation of elderly individuals following a

consumption tax reform. This occurs for two reasons. First, when the model is recalibrated in the presence

of a bequest motive, it implies less life cycle saving, and hence less taxable consumption during retirement.

Second, Seidman finds that, in the presence of a bequest motive, the elderly benefit from a slower rate of

convergence to the new steady-state.



2.2.2 Liquidity constraints

        Up to this point, I have abstracted from liquidity constraints by assuming that individuals can borrow

and lend at the same interest rate. The appropriateness of this assumption is debatable. There is a large

empirical literature that attempts to assess the importance of liquidity constraints. One important branch


                                                        31
examines data on asset holdings and the availability of credit, while another studies the sensitivity of

consumption to income. A review of this literature is well beyond the scope of this chapter, but the interested

reader can find citations, summaries, and evaluations in a variety of other places (see e.g. Attanasio, 1995,

Hubbard and Judd, 1986, or Hayashi, 1985).

         Liquidity constraints can in principle play an important role in determining the positive and

normative effects of capital income taxation. However, the nature of this role depends on one’s assumptions

concerning the characteristics of the market failure that gives rise to limitations on borrowing. The simplest

approach is to model these limitations as exogenous non-negativity constraints on net worth (excluding

human capital). One can justify this approach by appealing to transactions costs and/or the possibility of

personal bankruptcy.

         Since liquidity-constrained individuals do not alter their saving in response to small changes in the

rate of return, the interest elasticity of aggregate saving tends to fall as binding credit constraints become

more common. The introduction of an exogenous limitation on borrowing also implies that tax-deferred

savings accounts can increase saving even in the presence of contribution limits. If desired saving is less than

the limit and if the individual has no other wealth, then the limit must not bind. The availability of the tax-

deferred account can therefore increase the individual’s rate of return on the marginal dollar of saving --

something that could not occur without liquidity constraints (see section 2.1). Limitations on borrowing also

imply that saving in tax-deferred accounts may not be a perfect substitute for other saving (in contrast to the

simple life cycle model of section 2.1). Since the government generally imposes significant penalties for early

withdrawal, individuals sacrifice liquidity when they transfer assets into these accounts. If they anticipate a

need to access savings prior to retirement (such as educational expenses for a child), they may prefer to save

through other instruments.27 It follows that individuals may choose to contribute less than the limit even



   27
    If the anticipated needs are sufficiently far in the future, the individual may be better off saving through a tax-
deferred account and paying the early withdrawal penalty.

                                                             32
when they have positive savings outside of tax-favored accounts, and that tax-favored saving may represent

new saving even when contribution limits bind.

        According to Hubbard and Judd (1986), the welfare costs of capital income taxation in simulation

models tend to be smaller (relative to the costs of labor income taxation) in the presence of exogenous

liquidity constraints. This reflects two considerations. First, since constrained individuals must deviate from

their unconstrained optima, policies that exacerbate the severity and/or duration of the constraints are likely

to have substantial, first-order efficiency costs. This effect is particularly pronounced when the intertemporal

elasticity of substitution is low. A switch from capital income taxation towards wage taxation reduces the

consumption of constrained consumers, which produces a first-order reduction in welfare. Second, the

potential efficiency gains from a reduction in capital income taxation are smaller in the presence of borrowing

limitations because constrained individuals do not alter their current consumption in response to a change in

the after-tax rate of return. Due to these factors, the efficiency costs associated with an increase in the rate of

labor income taxation may exceed the efficiency gains resulting from a revenue-neutral reduction in the rate

of capital income taxation, even when the initial rate of capital income taxation is substantial. It follows that

the optimal capital income tax rate may be positive (see also Aiyagari, 1995). Similar issues arise with

respect to consumption taxation. Though consumption tends to occur later in life than earnings, the two tax

bases are identical during periods in which an individual encounters the borrowing constraint.

        In some instances, it may be inappropriate to model liquidity constraints by introducing exogenous

lower bounds on net worth. If credit market failures result from informational asymmetries, the location of

the constraint may be sensitive to other features of the economic environment. Under some conditions,

changes in the timing of taxes over the life cycle can produce completely offsetting endogenous movements in

borrowing constraints (see Hayashi, 1985, as well as the discussions in Yotsuzuka, 1987, and Bernheim,

1987). In that case, a shift to wage taxation would not necessarily reduce current consumption.




                                                        33
2.2.3 Uncertainty and precautionary saving

         Throughout the preceding discussion, I have assumed that households face no uncertainty with

respect to their future incomes, exogenous expenses (such as medical costs), or any other factor. This is

obviously a simplification. In practice, uncertainty plays a potentially important role in the life cycle planning

process, and gives rise to precautionary motives for saving. There is an extensive empirical literature that

attempts to evaluate the importance of these motives. Various authors have examined the relationship

between saving and measures of uncertainty, such as income variability and mortality risk. Others have relied

on self-reported assessments of saving motives. A review of this literature is well beyond the scope of this

chapter, but the interested reader is referred to the discussion in Engen and Gale (1996a).

         The positive effects of capital income taxation can change significantly when one introduces

uncertainty. Unlike life cycle saving, precautionary saving tends to be relatively insensitive to the after-tax

rate of return. Consequently, when one adds uncertainty to a simulation model and recalibrates the model to

replicate the same baseline capital-labor ratio and interest rate, the interest elasticity of saving can fall

considerably. Using an overlapping generations model similar to that of Summers (1981), Engen (1994)

finds that this elasticity is more than ten times as large in the absence of uncertainty than in the presence of

stochastic earnings.

         The introduction of uncertainty also has important implications concerning the positive effects of

tax-deferred saving accounts. In the presence of credit constraints, uncertainty increases the value of

liquidity, and thereby further reduces the degree of substitutability between liquid financial assets and illiquid

tax-deferred saving. In the stochastic life cycle model, the desire for liquidity is stronger among younger

individuals, and the substitutability between tax-favored saving and other saving is lower. Consequently, as

an individual ages, a shrinking fraction of tax-favored saving represents new saving. By the same token,

contributions rise with age as the cost of illiquidity declines. Thus, the bulk of tax-favored saving is

undertaken by individuals with a high degree of substitutability between tax-favored saving and other saving,


                                                         34
for whom a relatively small fraction of tax-favored saving represents new saving. Simulations suggest

nevertheless that tax-favored saving accounts increase national saving significantly in the long-run, but

saving may decline in the short run as individuals fund their contributions from existing stores of wealth

(Engen and Gale, 1993, 1996a, and Engen, Gale, and Scholz, 1994).

           The introduction of uncertainty also alters the normative effects of capital income taxation. Using the

overlapping generations model mentioned above, Engen (1994) shows that steady-state welfare gains from

replacing a capital income tax with either a wage tax or a consumption tax are much smaller when income is

stochastic. This finding reflects several factors. In Engen’s model, the steady-state welfare cost of capital

income taxation is lower in the presence of uncertainty because the uncompensated interest elasticity of

saving is smaller, and because it is necessary to recalibrate other parameters to compensate for the emergence

of precautionary saving. Uncertainty also changes the welfare costs and benefits of labor income taxation.

Wage taxes mimic insurance by reducing the variability of after-tax income.28 This beneficial effect is

particularly pronounced when the labor income tax is progressive. However, the associated reduction in

uncertainty also mutes precautionary saving motives, thereby reducing capital accumulation and steady-state

welfare.

           Several authors have also explored normative aspects of capital income taxation in stochastic models

with infinite-lived agents. Given a particular realization of the state of nature, there is no reason to believe

that it is optimal to tax consumption at an identical rate in any two consecutive periods. Consequently, the

implied rate of capital income taxation need not be zero, even in the long run. However, if the state of nature

is not yet known, one might imagine that expectations about the optimal time-dated commodity tax rates

would converge to some limiting distribution over a long horizon. If these expectations are the same for

periods t and t+1, then the sets of implied positive and negative capital income tax realizations are mirror


   28
      Engen assumes that income variability is not insurable in the private sector, but he does not model the implied
market failure explicitly. Depending upon the source of the market failure, the welfare gains from public insurance
provision (e.g. through a wage tax) could be illusory.

                                                           35
images of each other. It is therefore natural to conjecture that the optimal long-run ex ante capital income tax

rate is zero. Zhu (1992) shows that this conjecture is valid only under certain conditions, but Chari,

Christiano, and Kehoe (1994) find that the optimal long-run ex ante capital income tax rate is approximately

zero for plausible parameterizations of a stochastic simulation model.



2.3 Behavioral theories

        In recent years, a number of economists have questioned the suitability of the life cycle hypothesis

for modeling the effects of tax policy on personal saving. Their concerns fall into two categories: issues

related to bounded rationality, and issues related to self-control. I consider each of these in turn.

        Issues of bounded rationality arise from the complexity of intertemporal planning. To determine the

solution of a standard life cycle problem, an individual would require a high level of sophistication and

extensive information on pertinent economic parameters. Yet much of the population appears ill-equipped to

make even the most basic economic calculations (see Bernheim, 1994a, or, for a general review of evidence

on bounded rationality, Conlisk, 1996).

        It is often argued that unsophisticated individuals may nevertheless act as if they solve complex

mathematical problems. This view is particularly plausible when either (i) the activity in question is

frequently repeated (so that the individual has the opportunity to experiment and learn), (ii) decisions taken

by other individuals, as well as the consequences of these decisions, are both observable and pertinent (i.e.

relevant vicarious experience is plentiful), or (iii) individuals recognize the need to obtain advice from

qualified professionals, and have no difficulty obtaining this advice and monitoring its quality. Skeptics

maintain that none of these conditions are satisfied in the context of the life cycle planning problem. With

respect to the first possibility, individuals usually retire only once -- they have no opportunity to practice the

life cycle process. With respect to the second possibility, information on others’ decisions is often poor.

Moreover, since the consequences of these decisions are not fully known until well after an individual retires,


                                                        36
and since 30 year-olds face very different economic conditions than the 90-year olds whose consequences are

fully known, vicarious observation of others tends to be either incomplete or of questionable relevance.

Finally, with respect to the third possibility, unsophisticated individuals may be ill-equipped to evaluate the

quality of information and advice provided by financial experts, or to evaluate experts’ qualifications. In

addition, they may not recognize or acknowledge the need for advice in the first place.

         Formal models of bounded rationality typically proceed in one of several different directions (see

Conlisk, 1996, for a literature review). Some impose structure on beliefs, for example by assuming a bias

toward excessive optimism, a penchant for noticing salient or reassuring information, a tendency to forget

information in the absence of rehearsal or corroboration, or a proclivity to update beliefs in a simplistic

manner (e.g. through adaptive expectations). Others impose restrictions on decisions, limiting behavior to

simple rules of thumb, such as saving a fixed fraction of income.29 These restrictions are often empirically

motivated. However, since they are not derived from generally applicable principles, this approach is

necessarily somewhat ad hoc, and it fails to provide applied economists with a “tool kit” for addressing new

problems. Other models envision costs to optimization (e.g. the notion of “satisficing,” due to Simon, 1955).

While this approach appears to proceed from general principles, the application of these principles is

ultimately somewhat arbitrary. Instead of solving a particular optimization problem, one can certainly

formulate and solve an alternative meta-problem that incorporates costs of computation. However, it is no

less objectionable to assume that an individual can costlessly solve this meta-problem, than to assume that

the individual can costlessly solve the original problem. Any coherent treatment of computational costs

would therefore appear to lead to an infinite regress (Lipman, 1991).

         The second issue -- self-control -- refers to the ability to follow through on intertemporal plans that



    29
       Notably, the advice of professional financial planners is often guided by extremely rough rules of thumb. According
to the standard materials used for the curricula required to obtain the designation of Chartered Financial Consultant, “as
a rule of thumb financial planners suggest that most families should plan to devote about 20 percent of their gross
income to accumulation objectives” (Doyle and Johnson, 1991).

                                                           37
require an individual to forego short-term gratification. While the life cycle hypothesis implicitly assumes that

self-control is perfect, a large body of psychological research suggests that imperfect self-control lies at the

heart of many intertemporal decision-making problems (see e.g. Ainslie, 1975, 1982, 1984, 1992, Maital,

1986, Furnham and Lewis, 1986, Schelling, 1984, Thaler and Shefrin, 1981, Shefrin and Thaler, 1988, and

Hoch and Lowenstein, 1991).

         One can formalize problems of self-control in a number of different ways. Thaler and Shefrin (1981)

propose a model in which an individual decision-maker consists of two distinct “selves” -- a farsighted,

patient “planner” and a shortsighted, impatient “doer.” The planner can keep the doer in check only by

expending costly effort (“willpower”). Laibson (1994a,b, 1996) analyzes a class of models in which

problems with self-control arise directly from time-inconsistent preferences.30 In contrast to the LCH,

Laibson’s formulation of the intertemporal planning problem assumes that an individual becomes less willing

to defer gratification from period t to some period s > t once period t actually arrives. As a result, the

individual is typically unwilling to follow through on an optimal intertemporal plan. One can derive Laibson’s

model from a multiple-self framework similar to that of Thaler-Shefrin by assuming that the “planner” and

the “doer” strike an efficient bargain in every period.

         Existing models of self-control have at least one serious drawback: their solutions are significantly

more complex than those of standard life cycle problems. For example, the application of Laibson’s

framework requires one to solve for the equilibrium of a dynamic game played between an individual’s

current “self” and all of his or her future incarnations. Thus, in “solving” the problem of self-control, these

frameworks accentuate the problems associated with cognitive limitations.



2.3.1. Positive analysis of taxation and saving


   30
      Laibson’s approach is motivated by psychological research, indicating that rates of time preference are
approximately “hyperbolic” (see e.g. Ainslie, 1992). His analysis of behavior is an outgrowth of earlier work on time
inconsistent preferences by Strotz (1955), Phelps and Pollak (1968), and others.

                                                          38
        One can find a fair number of references to alternative behavioral hypotheses in otherwise

conventional analyses of tax policy (see e.g. the discussions of IRA advertising in Venti and Wise, 1992, and

of “false” contribution limits in Feenberg and Skinner, 1989). Yet these references are usually haphazard,

and mentioned in a rather ad hoc way as possible explanations for otherwise puzzling phenomena. With rare

exceptions, alternative behavioral hypothesis have not been used as frameworks for organizing lines of

inquiry concerning the effects of taxes on saving.31

        Certain behavioral hypotheses have clear implications concerning the effects of tax policy on saving.

Consider, for example, the possibility that advice from professional financial advisors has a significant

impact on behavior. If this view is correct, then to say something about the interest elasticity of saving, one

should examine the nature of advice and determine how this advice changes with a change in the after-tax rate

of return. The most common retirement planning technique involves setting some fixed target for retirement

(usually derived from an arbitrary earnings replacement rate) and computing the annual inflation-adjusted

contribution to savings sufficient to achieve this target (see Doyle and Johnson, 1991). The resulting interest

elasticity is negative because higher rates of return make it easier to accumulate the resources required to

reach the target.

        While the implications of other behavioral hypotheses are often less clear, some alternatives lend

themselves to formal analysis. Laibson, Repetto, and Tobacman (1998) examine the steady-state effects of

providing consumers with opportunities to save through accounts that resemble 401(k)s (contributions are

deductible, earnings accumulate tax-free, and early withdrawals are penalized). Their model is similar to that

of Engen, Gale, and Scholz (1994), except that the specification of consumer preferences allows for

hyperbolic discounting. According to their simulations, the steady-state rate of national saving rises

significantly in the presence of tax-deferred retirement accounts, and the effect is roughly 30 percent larger



  31
    Exceptions include Thaler (1994), Bernheim (1994a,1995b, 1997), Laibson (1996, 1998), and Laibson, Repetto,
and Tobacman (1998).

                                                       39
when consumers have hyperbolic preferences (relative to the baseline case in which consumers have standard

exponential preferences).

         Though the literature on behavioral alternatives to the LCH contains few sharp predictions

concerning the positive effects of tax policy on saving, it does suggest a number of pertinent qualitative

principles. Specifically, taxes can change perceptions concerning the costs and benefits of saving, they can

affect the feasibility of self-control by influencing the structure of private behavioral rules, and they can have

an impact on personal saving indirectly by altering the decisions of third parties. I will elaborate on each of

these possibilities in turn.



(i) Perceptions of the costs and benefits from saving. When saving incentives are in place, boundedly

rational individuals may be more likely to learn that others regard the benefits of saving as important. For

example, the availability of a 401(k) may stimulate conversations about contributions and investments, and

thereby produce “peer group” influences involving both demonstration and competition.32 Likewise, tax

incentives may stimulate promotional and educational activities that underscore the long-term benefits of

saving (see the discussion of third party activities later in this section, as well as sections 5.4 and 5.5). The

very existence of a pro-saving policy may indicate that "authorities" perceive the need for greater thrift.

Likewise, individuals may attach significance to contribution limits (expressed either as fixed amounts or as

fractions of compensation), on the grounds that these limits reflect the judgement of experts.

         By segmenting retirement saving from other forms of saving, certain kinds of tax-favored accounts

may make it easier to monitor progress towards long-term objectives. Information on total accumulated

balances is usually provided automatically, or is readily available. Thus, individuals have a convenient

yardstick for measuring the adequacy or inadequacy of their thrift. For those who save little, this may have



   32
     There is considerable evidence that economic decisions in general are strongly affected by peer group effects. See
e.g. Whyte (1943), Rainwater (1970), Stack (1974), or Jones (1984).

                                                          40
the effect of making the costs of short-sightedness more explicit.

        Thaler and Shefrin’s behavioral life cycle model assumes that the planner values saving, while the

doer does not. In this setting, one imagines that tax incentives might affect saving by altering the planner’s

perceptions of costs and benefits. However, it is also possible that saving incentives might affect behavior by

influencing the doer’s perceptions. Scitovsky (1976) has raised the possibility that some individuals may

view saving as a virtuous activity in and of itself, without any explicit contemplation of future consequences

(see also Katona, 1975). Pro-saving policies may promote this outlook by reinforcing the notion that, as

something worthy of encouragement, saving is intrinsically rewarding and immediately gratifying.

        Under certain circumstances, contributions to tax-favored accounts may also instill the perception

that saving yields more concrete short-run benefits. By making tax-deductible contributions to a tax-favored

account (when permitted), an individual can reduce the amount of taxes owed in the current year, or increase

the size of his or her refund. Feenberg and Skinner (1989) have argued that the prospect of writing a larger

check to the bank and a smaller check to the IRS may be particularly appealing on psychological grounds.

Since the basis of this appeal (beating the IRS today) is a form of instant gratification, up-front deductibility

may weaken the doer’s opposition to thrift. This observation has potentially important implications

concerning the choice between “front-loaded” and “back-loaded” plans. In a front-loaded plan, contributions

are deductible and withdrawals are fully taxable; in a back-loaded plan, contributions are not deductible and

withdrawals of principal are not taxable. The preceding discussion suggests that front-loaded plans may be

more effective, since they may coopt impatient selves with the immediate reward of a current-year tax

deduction. In contrast, under the LCH, individuals should prefer front-loaded plans to back-loaded plans if

and only if they expect their marginal tax rates to fall.



(ii) Private rules. The literature on self-control emphasizes the use of "private rules." Hoch and Lowenstein

(1991) argue that individuals overcome impulsive inclinations by attaching global significance to small


                                                        41
transgressions of these rules. For example, individuals may stake some aspect of their personal self-worth on

their ability to follow a self-imposed rule; the benefits of breaking the rule in any isolated instance are

counterbalanced by the loss of self-esteem. Similarly, an individual may construe transgressions of a rule as

evidence that he or she will never be able to follow similar rules; consequently, the short-term gains from

deviation are weighed against the losses associated with all related failures of self-discipline, now and in the

future. With hyperbolic discounting, behavior of this kind is sustainable as an equilibrium of the

intertemporal game played between an individual and his or her future incarnations (Laibson, 1994a).

        Saving incentives may facilitate the formation of effective private rules in three ways. First, they

may provide a natural context for developing rules concerning the level of saving. Possible rules could

include always "maxing out" on tax-favored contributions, or always contributing some smaller amount to

tax-deferred plans. Certain plans, such as 401(k)s, actually provide participants with limited ability to

commit themselves to these rules for short periods of time.

        Second, individuals may also develop private rules regarding the allowable uses of funds that they

have previously placed in tax-favored accounts. For example, they might promise themselves that they will

not withdraw these funds for any purpose short of a dire emergency. This phenomenon relates to the notion

of "mental accounting" discussed by Shefrin and Thaler (1988). The existence of penalties for early

withdrawal may help the individual establish and enforce barriers around tax-favored accounts. Somewhat

paradoxically, these barriers may be high precisely because impatient selves (doers) have a strong aversion to

paying immediate penalties. Anticipating a possible future loss of self-control, an individual may actually be

more likely to contribute to a tax-favored account that provides a credible mechanism for precommitment. In

contrast, under the life cycle hypothesis, restrictions on early withdrawals reduce the likelihood that

individuals will be willing to make contributions.

        Third, as mentioned above, tax-favored savings accounts may make it easier to monitor progress

toward long-term objectives. Effective monitoring is essential for the enforcement of private rules.


                                                        42
According to Thaler and Shefrin (1981), "[s]imply keeping track seems to act as a tax on any behavior which

the planner views as deviant."



(iii) Third-party activities. Non-neutralities in the tax system may stimulate activities by "third parties" --

that is, parties other than the individuals who benefit directly from the tax provisions, such as employers or

vendors of tax-favored investments products. These activities may in turn affect the level of personal saving

through either life cycle or psychological channels.

        The most obvious example of this phenomenon is the private pension system. As discussed in

section 5.1, the tax benefits accorded pensions probably account, at least in part, for their popularity. When

an employer offers a traditional defined benefit or defined contribution pension plan, saving automatically

increases unless the individual takes steps to negate this effect. Pure life cycle decision-makers would pierce

the "pension veil" and treat the accrued value of pension benefits as a close substitute for other long-term

saving. Even so, mandatory pensions may increase the saving of some households by forcing them to

undertake more long-term saving than they would otherwise choose. Contributions to pension plans may also

represent incremental private saving under various alternative behavioral hypotheses. Households may pierce

the pension veil imperfectly, they may track pension accruals in different "mental accounts" than other long-

term saving, or the mere presence of a pension plan may make them more aware of retirement issues.

        Selective saving incentives may also have subtle effects on the features of pension plans. For

example, 401(k) plans have historically received favorable tax treatment only if they satisfied non-

discrimination requirements regarding the relative levels of benefits provided to highly compensated and non-

highly compensated employees. Rather than risk losing tax-favored status, many firms have taken steps to

increase the participation and contributions of non-highly compensated employees, and/or to decrease the

contributions of highly compensated employees (Garrett, 1995). These steps often included provisions

whereby firms matched employee contributions, and the adoption of retirement education programs. These


                                                       43
kinds of plan features have the potential to affect overall saving by eligible workers. Education may be

particularly effective if low saving results from a failure to appreciate financial vulnerabilities.

        Selective incentives may also encourage the vendors of tax-favored savings vehicles to advertise and

promote their products actively. These promotional efforts may serve an educational function, or simply

focus public attention on retirement income security. For example, the expansion of eligibility for IRAs to all

taxpayers in 1981 was accompanied by a great deal of advertising and media fanfare.



        The distinctive positive implications of the behavioral framework are perhaps most apparent when

one considers the choice between broad-based policies for promoting saving, such as consumption taxation,

and more limited strategies, such as IRAs. IRAs and other narrowly focused programs raise the marginal

after-tax rate of return only for particular types of saving, and only if this saving does not exceed contribution

limits. In contrast, a shift to broad-based consumption taxation would raise the marginal after-tax rate of

return for all households, irrespective of the amount saved or the reason for saving. Provided that the interest

elasticity of saving is positive, the LCH therefore leads us to expect that saving would increase more in

response to consumption taxation than to narrower programs. Yet some of the behavioral considerations

discussed in this section suggest the opposite. Narrow measures can focus attention on a single issue (such as

the adequacy of saving for retirement), expose individuals to information concerning the importance of

saving, provide a natural context for the development and enforcement of private rules, and promote the

growth of pro-saving institutions. Contribution limits in particular may actually stimulate saving if they

validate specific targets, provide natural focal points for the formation of private rules, or make it easier to

monitor compliance with these rules. Conversely, a broad-based consumption tax could undermine the narrow

focus on specific objectives that may be essential for the exercise of self-control. It would remove one of the

primary reasons for compensating workers through pension plans, and it would eliminate the special feature

of particular financial instruments (such as IRAs and life insurance policies) that make them especially


                                                        44
marketable. It would also eliminate the quirky aspects of the tax system that subtly promote activities such as

employee retirement education.

        Before moving to a discussion of the evidence on taxation and saving, it is also important to

emphasize that, depending upon whether one adopts the perspective of the LCH or some behavioral

alternative, one may be inclined to draw very different positive inferences from the same set of empirical

findings. As an example, consider the generalizability of evidence on the interest elasticity of saving. Within

the context of the LCH, all saving incentives motivate changes in behavior through the same fundamental

mechanism: an increase in the after-tax rate of return alters the intertemporal terms of trade. Measurement of

a “generic” interest elasticity of saving therefore emerges as a central research priority. Alternative

behavioral hypotheses allow for the possibility that the interest elasticity of saving may vary according to

context, and that households may respond (both positively and negatively) to aspects of tax incentive

programs that are not directly related to the after-tax rate of return. In that case, measurement of the interest

elasticity of saving in one context may shed little light on the effectiveness of tax policy in another context.



2.3.2. Normative analysis of taxation and saving

        Proponents of pro-saving policies frequently argue that the prevailing rate of saving is "too low," and

that individuals are providing inadequately for their futures (see e.g. Bernheim, 1997b). Although it is

possible to make sense of these claims within the context of the LCH, further clarification is required. A

deliberate, forward-looking life cycle planner carefully weighs the costs and benefits of saving. While

impatient individuals may appear to save too little from the perspective of those with greater patience, this is

merely a reflection of preferences. A traditional guiding principle of U.S. economic policy is respect for free

choice and diversity of tastes. A devotee of classical music might similarly deplore popular musical genres,

but this is hardly an argument for subsidizing recordings of Stravinsky.

        Once one steps away from the LCH, it is much easier to make sense of the claim that individuals save


                                                        45
too little (e.g. if profligacy results from a failure to understand financial vulnerabilities, or from an unintended

break-down of self-control). Moreover, the welfare gains associated with these policies are likely to be much

larger than those implied by the LCH. In general, variations in consumption have greater effects on welfare

when initial choices are farther removed from an optimum. Thus, under the LCH, the welfare costs of a small

tax on capital income are second order, and the welfare costs of a larger tax are limited by the extent to which

that tax induces a departure from the optimum. In contrast, under alternative behavioral hypotheses, an

individual may depart substantially from his or her optimum even in the absence of a tax. Thus, the marginal

benefits from stimulating saving are potentially much greater. According to Laibson’s (1996) simulations,

customers with hyperbolic preferences are willing to sacrifice nine-tenths of a year’s worth of income to

induce the government to implement optimal revenue-neutral saving incentives.



3. Evidence on responses to changes in the after-tax rate of return

        Much of the literature on the relation between taxation and personal saving attempts to measure the

interest elasticity of saving without reference to a specific policy. Studies of this kind implicitly assume there

is a well-defined generic interest elasticity of saving. While this premise is valid under the LCH, some

behavioral alternatives suggest that it is impossible to separate behavior meaningfully from institutional

context (see section 2.3).

        The magnitude of the interest elasticity of saving is inherently an empirical issue; as discussed in

section 2, even the sign of this elasticity is theoretically ambiguous. The extant literature reflects two distinct

approaches to measurement. One approach involves the estimation of functions describing either

consumption or saving. The second approach involves the recovery of structural preference parameters

through the estimation of consumption Euler equations. I will discuss each of these in turn. The interested

reader may also wish to consult Elmendorf’s (1996) survey for additional details.




                                                        46
3.1. The consumption/saving function approach

          The earliest approach to measuring the interest elasticity of saving involved the estimation of a

consumption function or saving function featuring an interest rate among the list of explanatory variables.

Since the initial work of Wright (1969), this approach has yielded a variety of elasticity estimates, ranging

from essentially zero (Blinder, 1975, Howrey and Hymans, 1980, Skinner and Feenberg, 1989) to 0.4

(Boskin, 1978, Boskin and Lau, 1978). This range is somewhat misleading, since the estimates tend to

cluster near zero. There has been considerable discussion in the literature concerning the sources of the

discrepancies between these various estimates (see e.g. Sandmo, 1985), with particular attention being given

to the proper measurement of the real after-tax rate of return.33

          This approach has been criticized on the grounds that explanatory variables such as disposable

income and the interest rate are potentially endogenous. A more fundamental problem follows from the

“Lucas critique” of reduced-form empirical models (Lucas, 1976). Since the relation between consumption

(saving) and interest rates depends on expectations (which in turn result from the broader economic context),

there may not exist anything that one could properly regard as a stable saving or consumption function. If

changes in the interest rate are correlated with changes in expectations about future resources or economic

conditions, this will confound efforts to identify the interest elasticity of saving. In short, the historical

relation between saving and the after-tax rate of return may provide a poor basis for forecasting the manner in

which saving might respond to future changes in tax policy.

          An inspection of historical U.S. data reinforces this concern. Low elasticity estimates are largely

attributable to data from the 1970s, during which saving was relatively high and ex post real rates of return

were very low. Since the 1970s were unusual in many other respects that might have affected expectations,

this limited experience provides a questionable basis for forecasting future changes in saving. Unfortunately,



   33
      Given the complexity of the U.S. tax system, some have even questioned whether it is possible to summarize the intertemporal
terms of trade with a single number (Balcer and Judd, 1987).

                                                                47
the historical record does not offer a "clean" macroeconomic experiment involving a change in the rate of

return and no change (or, at least, a known change) in expectations, from which one might directly infer the

interest elasticity of saving.



3.2. The Euler equation approach

         As discussed in section 2, a variety of studies compute interest elasticities of saving, as well as the

welfare costs of alternative tax systems, in hypothetical economies populated by optimizing agents. Various

authors have used these models to map estimates of structural preference parameters into estimates of

elasticities and efficiency effects.

         Naturally, the positive and normative effects of capital income taxation depend upon a large number

of economic parameters. As noted in section 2.1.1, one critical preference parameter is the intertemporal

elasticity of substitution in consumption (1/( in equation (9)). Equation (10) (the consumption Euler

equation) implies that this parameter governs the rate at which the slope of the consumption trajectory

responds to changes in the after tax rate of return.

         Note that one can rewrite (10) as follows:


                                               ) cJ       1     1
                                                      .     r &   * ,                                         (25)
                                                cJ        (     (


where r is the real after-tax rate of return (i(1 - m) in the model of section 2.1.1), and D /1/(1 + *).34

Equation (25) suggests that it is possible to estimate the intertemporal elasticity of substitution by regressing

the fractional change in consumption on the real after tax rate of return. As a formal matter, since we derived

(25) from a model with no uncertainty, it is a deterministic relation and not a stochastic regression equation.

Under some conditions (see e.g. Hall, 1988, or Deaton, 1992), equation (25) generalizes in the presence of


   34
     To obtain this expression, take logs of both sides of (10) and use ln (1 + x) . x.

                                                             48
uncertainty to the following expression:


                                     ) cJ       1     1
                                            .     r &   * % µ % , ,                                           (26)
                                      cJ        (     (


where µ depends on the variance of errors in forecasting consumption growth and , is a random disturbance.

        In principle, it is possible to estimate (26) and recover 1/( from the coefficient of the real after-tax

rate of return. The contemporaneous value of r may be correlated with the error term, either because it is

determined endogenously with the change in consumption or because it is associated with new information

that affects the level of consumption. However, theory implies that , is orthogonal to all information

available prior to time J, including past disturbances. Lagged variables are therefore necessarily exogenous,

and make ideal instruments for r.

        The procedure described in the preceding paragraph finesses a number of problems that arise with

respect to the estimation of functions explaining aggregate consumption and/or saving. It provides a

theoretically coherent treatment of endogeneity issues, it identifies structural preference parameters, and it

avoids the estimation of reduced form coefficients that are confounded by expectational and informational

effects. Naturally, some problems remain (e.g. difficulties associated with the measurement of an after-tax

real rate of return), and a number of new problems emerge (see below).

        The interpretation of the coefficient of r in equation (26) as the intertemporal elasticity of

substitution is, of course, model-specific. As Hall (1988) notes, the standard life cycle model makes an

automatic connection between this intertemporal elasticity and the coefficient of risk aversion, whereas no

connection appears to exist in practice. Although Hall exhibits one specification of utility that breaks this

connection while still generating an Euler equation with an identical interpretation, there is no guarantee that

this conclusion follows for other specifications. Other models obscure the structural interpretation of (26),

thereby rendering the approach vulnerable to the Lucas critique. For example, in the presence of uncertainty


                                                       49
and liquidity constraints, individuals may engage in “buffer stock” saving. The expected desirability of next

period’s consumption -- and hence the slope of the optimal consumption profile -- may then depend on all

factors affecting the probability that the individual will run out of liquid wealth, including expectations about

future income. If one moves to other behavioral hypotheses, estimates of (26) may have no structural

underpinnings.

        For the United States, there has been relatively little historical correlation between the growth rate of

aggregate consumption and measures of the after-tax rate of return. Consequently, estimates of aggregate

consumption Euler equations imply intertemporal elasticities of substitution near zero (Hall, 1988, and

Campbell and Mankiw, 1989). Unfortunately, the assumptions required for valid aggregation are extremely

restrictive (Deaton, 1992), and there is some evidence that aggregation leads to quantitatively significant

biases in practice (Attanasio and Webber, 1993). Most household-level studies imply that intertemporal

elasticities of substitution are significantly greater than zero (Leontief preferences) and less than unity (Cobb-

Douglas preferences), but estimates vary considerably within this range (see e.g. Shapiro, 1984, Zeldes,

1989, Runkle, 1991, Lawrance, 1991, Dynan, 1993, Attanasio and Weber, 1993, 1995, and Attanasio and

Browning, 1995). Though the use of household panel data avoids the aggregation problems mentioned

above, it necessitates other compromises. Panels are typically short, and data are often available only for

isolated components of consumption (e.g. food).35 Microeconomic studies also frequently rely on variation in

after-tax rates of return arising from cross-sectional differences in marginal tax rates, even though this

variation is plausibly related to other pertinent household characteristics (e.g. factors explaining differences in

wealth and income).

        In the current context, it is also important to emphasize that one cannot infer the interest elasticity of

saving directly from estimates of an Euler equation. Though equation (26) provides information on the shape



  35
   Attanasio and Webber (1995) address these problems by constructing a longer, synthetic panel using the Consumer
Expenditure Surveys, which contain more comprehensive consumption data.

                                                        50
of the consumption profile, it does not tie down the level of consumption. This statement requires some

clarification. In the simplest life cycle models, the present discounted values of consumption and lifetime

resources must be identical; consequently, one can infer the level of consumption, and thereby deduce the

interest elasticity of saving, from the shape of the consumption profile. However, when one adds uncertainty,

the intertemporal budget constraint becomes considerably more complex, and when one adds bequests (either

intentional or accidental), the present discounted value of consumption need not equal the present discounted

value of lifetime resources. In such models, the level of consumption is not recoverable from the shape of the

consumption profile, and depends instead on a broader range of factors. Even fixing the parameters of the

Euler equation, the implied interest elasticity of saving is sensitive to assumptions concerning bequest

motives, the variability of income and expenses, risk aversion, and the prevalence of liquidity constraints (see

section 2).36 Similar statements hold for the welfare effects of alternative tax policies.



4. Evidence on responses to tax-deferred savings accounts

         The existing literature on tax-deferred savings accounts focuses primarily (though not exclusively)

on Individual Retirement Accounts (IRAs) and 401(k)s in the United States. A large branch of this literature

attempts to measure a direct effect: all else equal, how much less would contributors have saved had these

programs not existed? This question is the focus of the current section.37 Tax-deferred accounts may also

affect saving indirectly, for example by displacing other types of pensions. I consider the available evidence

on some indirect effects in section 5.




   36
     Many of these parameters are difficult to estimate. For example, though the constant term in the Euler equation
depends on the pure rate of time preference (D), it also depends on risk aversion and the variability of consumption
(through µ). One cannot separately identify D and µ without further assumptions.

   37
    Other useful surveys include Hubbard and Skinner (1996), Poterba, Venti, and Wise (1996a,b), Engen, Gale, and
Scholz (1996a,b), and Bernheim (1997c).

                                                          51
4.1. Individual Retirement Accounts

        The U.S. government first permitted individuals without pensions to open Individual Retirement

Accounts (IRAs) in 1974. These accounts featured tax deductible contributions up to a fixed limit, tax-free

accumulation, taxation of principal and interest on withdrawal, and penalties for early withdrawal. Congress

extended eligibility to all workers in 1981, and raised annual contribution limits to $2,000 for an individual

worker, or $2,250 for a married couple with one earner. The Tax Reform Act of 1986 restricted eligibility for

deductible contributions, based on adjusted gross income (AGI). Deductibility was phased out for AGI

between $40,000 and $50,000 for joint filers, and between $25,000 and $35,000 for single filers. Individuals

with higher levels of AGI remained eligible to make non-deductible contributions up to the same annual

limits, and continued to benefit from tax-free accumulation. Beginning in January, 1998, taxpayers could

also make contributions to Roth IRAs, which feature non-deductible contributions up to the same fixed limit,

tax-free accumulation, tax-free withdrawal of contributions and earnings, and penalty-free early withdrawal

of contributions.

        Prior to the Tax Reform Act of 1986, IRAs had become quite popular. Annual contributions grew

from roughly $5 billion in 1981 to roughly $38 billion in 1986, representing approximately 20 percent of

personal saving. Contributions plummeted after 1986, falling to less than $10 billion in 1990. While it is

indisputable that the flow of saving through IRAs was substantial, there is considerable controversy

concerning to the extent to which this flow represented new saving. The existing evidence on the efficacy of

IRAs falls into five general categories.



4.1.1. Direct survey evidence

        One approach to measuring the effect of IRAs on saving is simply to ask people how they funded

their contributions. In one such survey (Johnson, 1985), about half of respondents said that they would have

saved the money anyway, about 10 percent said that they would have spent all of it, and about 40 percent said

that they would have saved some and spent some. Johnson concludes that, on average, individuals reduced


                                                      52
consumption by roughly 32 cents to fund each dollar of IRA saving.

        Evidence of this type suffers from a variety of problems. The relevant survey question asks

individuals to imagine what they would have done in a counterfactual and purely hypothetical situation.

Respondents may not think very hard about the hypothetical. If they think about it, they may assess the costs

and benefits of various decisions differently than they would have in practice. They may accurately report

what their intention would have been in the hypothetical situation, but actions and intentions do not always

coincide. They may also misrepresent their probable intentions in the hypothetical situation, particularly if

they believe that some answer is more "virtuous," or if they think that the interviewer is looking for a

particular response.



4.1.2. Evidence on the frequency of limit contributions

        Historically, roughly seventy percent of all IRA contributors save at exactly the contribution limit

(Burman, Cordes, and Ozanne, 1990, and Gravelle, 1991b). Some analysts contend that the IRA program

does not encourage thrift among these limit contributors because it fails to reduce their implicit price of future

consumption, relative to current consumption, on the margin (the substitution effect). If this premise is valid,

then IRAs may actually reduce saving through an inframarginal income effect (see section 2.1.1).

        As a matter of theory, there is no compelling reason to accept the premise mentioned in the previous

paragraph. In the most basic life cycle model, individuals always wish to surpass contribution limits even if

this requires them to borrow or shift assets (see section 2.1.1). Consequently, binding contribution limits do

indeed reflect the absence of a substitution effect, and the impact of IRAs is dominated by the inframarginal

income effect. However, this basic model also has the counterfactual implication that all individuals should

make the maximum allowable contribution. In fact, many households do not contribute at all, 30 percent of

contributors do not reach the limit, and 70 percent of contributors fall short of the limit at least once over a

three year period (Hubbard and Skinner, 1996).

        To account for non-limit contributors in the context of the life cycle model, one must assume that


                                                        53
individuals face borrowing restrictions and value liquidity (see sections 2.2.2 and 2.2.3). In that case, the

substitution effect is certainly present for non-limit contributors. More to the point, it may also be present for

limit contributors.38 IRAs may encourage some individuals to increase their long-term, illiquid saving until

they reach the contribution limit, and this increase may come at the expense of consumption, rather than

liquid saving.

         If one credits behavioral alternatives to the life cycle hypothesis (section 2.3), then evidence on the

frequency of limit contributors is even less pertinent. Contribution limits may encourage saving by validating

specific saving targets. IRAs may increase awareness of the need for retirement saving, or enhance efforts to

impose self-discipline. Even if IRAs do not stimulate inflows into households' long-term savings, they may

deter outflows (Thaler, 1994).



4.1.3. Correlations between IRA and non-IRA saving

         A number of authors have attempted to measure the effects of IRAs on saving through more rigorous

econometric analysis. Most of these studies have, with varying degrees of sophistication, examined the

underlying correlations between IRA and non-IRA saving activity.

         Before describing these studies, it is useful to begin by describing an ideal experiment for assessing

the effects of IRAs. The contrast between the ideal data and the available data explains why the measurement

of IRA effects has proven so difficult. Imagine that we are given some large sample of individuals, and that

we randomly partition this sample into two subsamples. We treat the individuals in these subsamples exactly

the same in all respects (identical initial assets, wages, fringe benefits, working conditions, and so forth), but

we permit the individuals in one subsample to contribute to IRAs (the "experimental" group), while

withholding this opportunity from the other subsample (the "control" group). In this way, we create


   38
    Since the existence of the contribution limit induces a kink in the individual's budget constraint, it is simply
incorrect to argue that a limit contributor’s marginal rate of return is the same as in the absence of IRAs. Rather, the
marginal rate of return on tax-deferred investments is not well-defined at the kink. The marginal rate of return on long-
term, illiquid investments is well-defined (and unaffected by the existence of the IRA) only if the limit contributor has
additional investments of this kind.

                                                            54
exogenous variation in IRA eligibility. We then compare the total saving of individuals in the two

subsamples to determine the effects of IRAs.

         Unfortunately, between 1982 and 1986, there is no exogenous variation in IRA eligibility. Instead,

we observe variations in participation. One could imagine attempting to mimic the ideal experiment by using

this variation to identify new "experimental" and "control" groups, in effect asking whether the saving or

assets of IRA contributors are higher than, lower than, or the same as the saving or assets of non-

contributors. Evidence based on this approach reveals that IRA contributors do not save less in other forms

than non-contributors; in fact, they save a good deal more (see e.g. Hubbard, 1984).39 Unfortunately, this

finding tells us very little about the extent to which IRAs displace other saving. Some households save a lot,

while some save little. This is presumably attributable to differences in preferences. Since the decision to

contribute is endogenous, contributors probably consist of households with stronger preferences for saving.

Therefore, one should not be surprised to discover that those who contribute to IRA accounts also save more

in other forms than those who choose not to contribute.

         In principle, one solution to this problem would be to identify some exogenous variation in IRA

contributions that is unrelated to preferences towards saving. One could then use instrumental variables to

estimate a specification explaining non-IRA saving or total saving as a function of IRA saving. Since

eligibility was universal from 1982 to 1986, a potential source for this variation is difficult to imagine, let

alone measure.

         Rather than attempt to identify an instrumental variable, the literature has proceeded by reexamining

the relation between IRA saving and non-IRA saving, controlling for initial wealth. This procedure is based

on the assumption that two individuals with the same initial wealth must have the same underlying

preferences towards saving; thus, the source of the spurious upward bias between IRA saving and total

saving is supposedly removed. This approach has been followed in a study by Feenberg and Skinner (1989)


   39
      Hubbard's (1984) data are drawn from the 1979 President's Commission on Pension Policy, and therefore include
some non-contributors who were ineligible for IRAs. Thus, the sample selection problem discussed in the text is
perhaps less pronounced than for estimates based on data collected between 1982 and 1986.

                                                         55
and a series of studies by Venti and Wise (1986, 1990, 1991, 1992). Analysis of a variety of data sources

(including the Michigan Tax Panel, the Survey of Consumer Finances, the Consumer Expenditure Surveys,

and the Survey of Income and Program Participation) uniformly demonstrate that total saving is positively

correlated with IRA saving, even when one controls for initial wealth. The conditional correlation between

IRA saving and non-IRA saving is typically non-negative. Some studies have interpreted these findings as

indicating that IRA contributions are new wealth.

        The central problem with this strategy is that initial wealth may be a relatively poor control for an

individual's current underlying disposition toward saving. One problem is that wealth varies for reasons

unrelated to tastes for saving (such as the receipt of unexpected inheritances). Another difficulty is that an

individual's disposition to save may change through time due to fluctuations in income, household

composition, perceived needs, or other factors; thus, the individual's disposition to save during any time

period may differ from the dispositions that led to the accumulation of initial wealth at the start of the period.

Even if wealth were perfectly correlated with the relevant aspects of tastes, it is well-known that asset values

are measured with a great deal of error. Any residual unobserved variation in the current inclination to save

that is left after controlling for initial wealth will continue to bias the correlation between IRA saving and

non-IRA saving upward: those who, for unobserved reasons, are inclined to save more overall will probably

save more in both forms.

        The underlying econometric justification for this procedure is also suspect. Even if it were possible

to control perfectly for all aspects of tastes that determine non-IRA saving, this would not allow one to

calculate the extent to which IRA contributions displace other saving, unless one could identify some

significant exogenous variation in IRA contributions independent of tastes for saving. But with universal

eligibility, it is hard to imagine any significant factor that would have affected IRA saving without also

directly affecting non-IRA saving. If there is no source of exogenous variation in contributions, the relation

of interest is presumably not identified.

        In some of their work, Venti and Wise also place additional structure on the data. Specifically, they


                                                        56
estimate the parameters of a model in which an individual maximizes a utility function defined over

consumption, IRA saving, and non-IRA saving. The specification allows for a range of elasticities of

substitution between the two forms of saving. Based on estimates of this model, Venti and Wise conclude

that IRA contributions represented new saving, in the sense that they were funded almost entirely by

reductions in consumption and income taxes.

        The low estimates of the substitution parameter that emerge from estimation of the Venti-Wise

model appear to be driven by two considerations. The first consideration is the non-negative correlation

(noted above) between IRA saving and non-IRA saving, conditional on initial wealth (which appears in the

Venti-Wise model through the budget constraint). For reasons that I have already discussed, this correlation

is probably a poor barometer for the true degree of substitutability.

        The second consideration has to do with a technical feature of the model. As formulated, the model

implies that, if IRA saving and non-IRA saving are perfect substitutes, then no individual would be willing to

engage in non-IRA saving until reaching the IRA contribution limit. Since this prediction is manifestly false

(many individuals who saved something did not contribute to IRAs), Venti and Wise's estimation strategy

automatically guarantees the result that the two forms of saving are imperfect substitutes. This inference is

unwarranted. Although it is evident the IRA saving and non-IRA saving must not be perfect substitutes for

savers who do not contribute to IRAs (perhaps due to differences in liquidity), it does not follow that these

two forms of saving are poor substitutes for individuals who do contribute to IRAs. On the contrary, one

could easily imagine that, among IRA contributors, IRAs are quite good substitutes for other saving. This

could occur if, for example, IRA contributors tend to save a lot in all forms, and are therefore relatively

unconcerned (on the margin) about liquidity.

        Gale and Scholz (1994b) estimate an alternative econometric model, in which they permit the

parameters of the saving relation to vary according to whether or not an individual is an IRA contributor.

This is intended to capture the possibility that those who do not contribute to IRAs may have different

attitudes towards IRA and non-IRA saving than those who do contribute. In this way, Gale and Scholz avoid


                                                       57
the automatic bias towards low substitution that is present in the analysis of Venti and Wise.

         Intuitively, Gale and Scholz identify the degree of substitution between IRA and non-IRA saving as

follows. Suppose we measure the marginal propensity to save (out of income) in IRAs (MPSI,N), and the

marginal propensity to save in other forms (MPSO,N) for non-limit contributors, as well as the marginal

propensity to save in other forms (MPSO,L) for limit contributors. If all IRA saving is new saving, then we

should find MPSO,L = MPSO,N. On the other hand, if IRA saving simply displaces other saving dollar-for-

dollar, we would expect to find MPSO,L = MPSO,N + MPSI,N. On the basis of this kind of comparison, Gale

and Scholz conclude that a negligible fraction of IRA contributions represent new saving.40

         The analysis of Gale and Scholz suggests that the conclusions of Venti and Wise are sensitive to

assumptions about the nature and distribution of unobserved preferences. This does not imply, however, that

their particular procedure generates reliable estimates of the extent to which IRAs substitute for other forms

of saving. Identification of the Gale-Scholz model depends on the assumption that all IRA contributors have

the same preferences towards saving, conditional on a list of covariates, regardless of whether they are limit

contributors. There is an obvious tension between this assumption and the motivating premise of their

analysis, which holds that attitudes towards saving differ according to IRA participation status even when

conditioned on the same list of covariates.

         To understand the potential bias resulting from the Gale-Scholz homogeneity assumption, consider

the following illustrative example. Suppose that there are three types of savers, with (respectively) low,

medium, and high inclinations to save. Those with greater inclinations to save are assumed to have larger

average and marginal saving propensities. Low savers never contribute to IRAs, and are therefore of no

further interest to us. As long as moderate savers are not constrained by the IRA contribution limit, they save

5 cents out of each dollar in IRAs, and 5 cents in other forms. If they are constrained by the contribution

limit, they still save 5 cents out of each dollar in other forms. As long as high savers are not constrained by



   40
    According to Poterba, Venti, and Wise (1996a), this central finding of Gale and Scholz is sensitive to changes in the
specification and in the criteria used for selecting the sample.

                                                           58
the IRA contribution limit, they save 10 cents out of each dollar in IRAs, and 10 cents in other forms. If they

are constrained by the contribution limit, they still save 10 cents out of each dollar in other forms. Our final

assumption is that all moderate savers end up contributing less than the contribution limit, while all high

savers turn out to be limit contributors.

        Note that, in this example, all IRA contributions represent new saving. However, applying the Gale-

Scholz procedure, one would calculate that MPSO,L = 0.10 = 0.05 + 0.05 = MPSO,N + MPSI,N, and infer

incorrectly than IRA saving completely displaces other forms of saving. I have constructed this particular

example to demonstrate that the bias could be quite large. Obviously, hypothetical examples cannot establish

the magnitude of the actual bias. However, the principle (and therefore the direction of the bias) generalizes:

heterogeneity among those who contribute to IRAs typically implies that those who contribute more (and who

therefore have higher average propensities to save) will also tend to have higher marginal propensities to

save. As a result, the data will appear to show that the marginal propensity to save in forms other than IRAs

rises as contributions pass the allowable limit. But this is precisely the pattern that Gale and Scholz would

interpret as evidence of displacement.

        Some authors argue that correlations between IRA saving and non-IRA saving are particularly

informative for new contributors. Using 1984 and 1985 data from the Survey of Income and Program

Participation (SIPP), Venti and Wise (1995) demonstrate that the inception of IRA contributions for a

household does not coincide with a significant decline in other financial assets. They interpret this to mean

that even new contributors engage in very little asset shifting to fund contributions, and that these

contributions must therefore represent new saving. Yet the observed patterns do not rule out the possibility

that many new contributors were simply people with positive current shocks to saving, in which case these

individual would have increased non-IRA savings in the absence of IRAs. Consequently, the evidence is

consistent with significant asset shifting.

        Attanasio and De Leire (1994) undertake a similar exercise, but suggest that it is appropriate to

evaluate the behavior of new contributors treating old contributors as a control group. If new contributions


                                                       59
come from consumption and if new and old contributors have similar preferences, then (it is argued) new

contributors should exhibit slower consumption growth, and essentially the same growth in non-IRA assets,

as old contributors. In contrast, if new contributions come from saving, then new contributors should exhibit

the same growth in consumption, but slower growth in non-IRA assets than old contributors. The authors

implement this test using the Consumer Expenditure Surveys, and find the second of these patterns. They

conclude that IRA contributions primarily reflect asset reshuffling, rather than new saving.

         Unfortunately, there does not appear to be any compelling justification for using old IRA

contributors as a control group. It is natural to conjecture that old contributors opened IRA accounts earlier

than new contributors because they have stronger innate predispositions to save. Obviously, this would

account for their higher rates of saving. In principle, Attanasio and De Leire rule this possibility out by

showing that consumption does not grow more rapidly for old contributors than for new contributors.41

However, as a practical matter, consumption growth rates appear to be poor indicators of intrinsic thrift (see

Bernheim, Skinner, and Weinberg, 1997).

         Even if old contributors were a valid control group, Attanasio and De Leire’s inference would not

follow. If new and old contributors have similar preferences and if IRA contributions reflect asset shifting for

both groups, then one should not observe any systematic differences in either saving or consumption, contrary

to the authors’ findings. The observed pattern would instead suggest that contributions among new

participants reflect asset shifting, while contributions among old participants represent new saving.



4.1.4. Exogenous changes in eligibility

         Another possible approach to mimicking the ideal experiment is to exploit the exogenous variation in

IRA eligibility that existed prior to 1982 and after 1986. For example, one could imagine estimating a

regression explaining non-IRA saving as a function of IRA contributions using eligibility as an instrument, or


   41
      If differences in saving result from differences in the pure rate of time preference and if the intertemporal elasticity
of substitution is positive, then, under the LCH, those who prefer to save more would experience more rapid
consumption growth.

                                                              60
directly as a function of eligibility. There are two problems with this suggestion; one is conceptual, the other

practical. Conceptually, a problem arises because, in contrast to the ideal experiment, IRA eligibility was

non-random. Eligibility was triggered by the absence of pension coverage prior to 1982, and by a

combination of pension coverage and AGI after 1986. Since both pension coverage and income are

potentially important determinants of household saving, concerns about correlations with underlying

preferences are still present. The practical problem arises because, with certain data sources, eligibility is

difficult to assess. Information on pension coverage is sometimes unavailable, incomplete or inaccurate, and

one must extrapolate AGI from income.

        The concern that IRA eligibility (prior to 1982 or after 1986) might have been correlated with

preferences towards saving leads to a slightly more sophisticated suggestion. If the heterogeneity in

preferences is captured by an individual-specific fixed effect, then it should be possible to eliminate this

heterogeneity by differencing saving. One can then relate changes in saving to changes in eligibility, which

differed across individuals both in 1982 and 1987. The impact of IRAs is then, in effect, inferred from

differences in differences. For example, using panel data that crosses 1982, one attempts to determine

whether those who became eligible for IRAs increased their saving by more than those who remained eligible.

        This is the general approach taken in Joines and Manegold (1995) and Engen, Gale, and Scholz

(1994). Both of these studies make use of the IRS/University of Michigan Tax Panel. Unfortunately, this

data set contains no information on pension coverage, and therefore provides no way to measure IRA

eligibility prior to 1982. Of course, individuals who contributed to IRAs prior to 1982 must have been

eligible. Joines and Manegold therefore propose using this as the control group. By defining the control

group in this way, they tend to select individuals who have the highest predispositions to save among the

eligible population. To counteract this selection effect, they use as their experimental group a sample of

individuals who also contributed to IRAs (and therefore who also have high predispositions to save), but who

began to contribute after 1982. While this experimental group includes some individuals who were eligible

prior to 1982, it also includes many individuals who became eligible as of 1982. Therefore, on average,


                                                       61
allowable contributions increased by a larger amount for members of the experimental group than for

members of the control group. Both studies nevertheless demonstrate that there is relatively little difference

between the changes in saving across 1982 for the experimental and control groups. Their preferred

estimates suggest that IRAs had a moderate effect on saving (raising the contribution limit by one dollar

raises saving by less than 30 cents).

        One difficulty encountered by Joines-Manegold and Engen-Gale-Scholz is that the IRS/University of

Michigan Tax Panel does not contain measures of either saving or wealth. The authors are compelled to

impute wealth from dividend and interest income. They then difference estimated wealth to obtain a measure

of saving. This variable is the focus of their differences-in-differences analysis. Thus, their key results are

based on third differences (twice across time and once across subgroups) of an imputed variable. One must

seriously question how much "news" is left over after these operations. Not surprisingly, the authors obtain a

wide range of estimates, and the key effects are generally estimated with large standard errors.

        The selection criteria used to construct the control subgroup and the experimental subgroup are also

potentially problematic. It is doubtful that these groups have comparable characteristics or similar

dispositions to save. The differences-in-differences procedure is ostensibly designed to handle this problem,

since it removes the fixed effect for each group. However, the validity of this solution depends critically on

two assumptions: that tastes enter the saving equation additively, and that tastes do not affect the size of the

response to a given change in the policy variable. In this context, these assumption are objectionable.

        To further explore this point, suppose that the saving of group i at time t is given by the following

equation:


                                         si,t ' µ i % "t % 0i Mit ,                                            (27)

where µ i and 0i are fixed group-specific coefficients, "t is a time effect, and Mit is the IRA contribution limit

applicable to this group. One would expect µ i and 0i to be positively correlated, since higher savers are more

likely to respond to an increase in the contribution limit. The differences-in-differences estimator is then


                                                        62
                                  ) set & ) sct ' 0e ) Met & 0c ) Mct ,                                                 (28)

(where "e" indicates the experimental group, and "c" indexes the control group). Note that one will correctly

estimate the effect of the policy change on the experimental group as long as 0e = 0c (i.e. if there is no

heterogeneity in the response to a given change in policy), or if ) Mc t ' 0 (i.e. the control group does not

experience a change in the policy variable).42 In this instance, neither condition applies: it is likely that

heterogeneity in preferences towards saving (as reflected in 0i) remains, and contribution limits were raised

for the control group (albeit to a lesser extent than for the experimental group, so that

) Me t > ) Mc t > 0 ).

         The resulting bias in the estimates depends on whether the control group is innately more inclined to

save or less inclined to save than the experimental group. Suppose for the moment the control group consists

of particularly high savers, so that 0c > 0e. Then the sign of the differences-in-differences estimator becomes

ambiguous, even if an increase in the contribution limit actually stimulates saving for both groups. To take

an example, if a $2,000 increase in the contribution limit induces a $1,000 increase in the average IRA saving

of the control group and a $250 increase in the average saving of the experimental group (because the control

group largely consists of more highly motivated savers), then a $500 increase in the contribution limit for the

control group (e.g. from $1,500 to $2,000) and a $2,000 change in the contribution limit for the experimental

group (e.g. from $0 to $2,000) will have the same total effect on saving ($250).

         Unfortunately, with the available data, it is impossible to test whether the control group is more or

less predisposed to undertake long-term saving than the experimental group. However, the following is

suggestive. Prior to 1982, only a tiny fraction of those eligible for IRAs actually made contributions. While

these individuals had one characteristic that might be indicative of a predisposition for low saving (no


   42
     Even if one of these conditions were satisfied, one would still obtain a biased estimate of 0e in practice. Recall that
the experimental group is contaminated by the inclusion of households that were eligible to make IRA contributions
prior to 1982, and that therefore properly belong in the control group. By ignoring this problem, these studies overstate
the average change in the contribution limit for members of the experimental group ()Met). If the true value of 0e is
positive, this implies that the estimated value of 0e is biased downward (since it equals ()set - )sct)/ ()Met - )Mct)).

                                                             63
employer pension), they were nevertheless a very highly selected subset of this population. The fact that they

both discovered and took advantage of a little-known IRA provision suggests that they may have been

exceptionally motivated to save for retirement. In contrast, since a much larger segment of the population

contributed to IRAs after 1982, and since IRAs were more widely publicized, the experimental group may be

less highly selected. If this is the case, then the differences-in-differences estimator understates the true effect

on saving of an increase in the IRA limit. Of course, if the opposite proposition is true, then the differences-

in-differences estimator overstates the effect.43

         As is well known, the differences-in-differences estimator may go awry for other reasons as well.

One obvious possibility is that other changes in the economic environment may have affected the two groups

differently. Since the changes in IRA eligibility were accompanied by other significant tax changes, as well

as a variety of important macroeconomic developments (including large changes in inflation and interest

rates, as well as business cycle effects), attributing the difference-in-difference of saving exclusively to

relative changes in IRA eligibility is dicey.

         Finally, it is important to realize that, under some of the behavioral alternatives to the LCH, the

procedure used by Joines-Manegold and Engen-Gale-Scholz would be incapable of detecting certain kinds of

links between IRAs on personal saving. Suppose, for example, that the expansion of the IRA program

stimulated saving by enhancing awareness of retirement issues, creating peer-group effects, and triggering

aggressive promotion of investment vehicles (see the discussion of the evidence on psychological effects,

immediately below). If these developments affected members of the control group and the experimental

group equally, the differences-in-differences estimator would falsely indicate no increase in saving.




   43
     Engen, Gale, and Scholz (1994) replicate Joines and Manegold’s procedure, but also estimate a fixed effects model
using the full sample, treating all non-contributors prior to 1982 as if they were ineligible. In effect, this enlarges the
Joines-Manegold experimental group by adding households that were eligible prior to 1982, but that never contributed
to an IRA. This increases the likelihood that members of the experimental group are, on average, less inclined to save
than members of the control group, and is therefore more likely to build in a bias against the hypothesis that IRAs added
to total saving.

                                                            64
4.1.5. Evidence of psychological effects

         The theoretical arguments that lead one to doubt the efficacy of IRAs are largely predicated on the

view that saving is a consequence of rational and deliberate life cycle planning. It is therefore possible to

shed light on the key issue by asking whether other aspects of individuals' responses to IRAs are consistent

with the predictions of standard life cycle theory. If they are not consistent, then one should be very cautious

about drawing inferences concerning the efficacy of IRAs from anything but the most direct evidence.

         The literature identifies a number of patterns in IRA contributions that appear to be anomalous from

the perspective of the standard model. The following four are particularly provocative.

         First, it is difficult to account for the explosion of IRAs after 1982 and the collapse of IRA

contributions after 1986, unless one credits the role of visibility and promotion (Long, 1990, Venti and Wise,

1992). Recall that only 1 percent of taxpayers made contributions to IRAs prior to 1982, despite the fact that

roughly half were eligible to contribute up to $1,500. This figure rose to 15 percent by 1986. Recall also

that many individuals remained eligible to make deductible IRA contributions after 1986 (those with

sufficiently low AGIs, or without pension coverage); moreover, all other individuals could still make non-

deductible contributions and benefit from tax-free accumulation. Yet the fraction of taxpayers contributing to

IRAs dropped to 4 percent by 1990. IRA contributions may have followed promotional activity (which

exploded after 1982 and contracted after 1986) much more closely than actual economic incentives.44

         Second, there has been a pronounced tendency for individuals to delay their IRA contributions until

the end of a tax year (Summers, 1986). This is puzzling because minimization of tax liabilities requires

taxpayers to make these contributions as early as possible. To some extent, the tendency to delay

contributions may result from the desire to maintain liquidity throughout the tax year (Engen, Gale, and



   44
     Engen, Gale, and Scholz (1994) argue that IRA contributions may have declined after 1986 because of reductions
in marginal tax rates and limits on deductibility. But unless one believes that the interest elasticity of saving is
enormous, this could not have accounted for the magnitude of the decline in contributions. They also attribute the
decline in IRA saving to the increased availability of 401(k)s and/or the possible depletion of non-IRA financial assets.
There is little evidence to support this claim, and it is doubtful that either phenomenon can account for the sharpness of
the decline in IRA contributions.

                                                            65
Scholz, 1994). But, even allowing for the potential importance of liquidity, it is difficult to explain why more

IRA contributors (particularly those with significant non-IRA assets) do not at least make a series of smaller

contributions during the course of the tax year (Bernheim, 1994b).

         Third, individuals are significantly more likely to make IRA contributions if they owe the IRS money

at the end of the tax year. Feenberg and Skinner (1989) interpret this as an indication that, psychologically,

individuals would rather write a check to an IRA account than write a somewhat smaller check to the IRS. It

is conceivable that this result could reflect spurious correlations of both underwithholding and IRA

contributions with third factors, such as income, tax filing status, or asset holdings (Gravelle, 1991b).

However, the pattern is apparent even when Feenberg and Skinner include plausible controls for these factors.

         Fourth, there is evidence of "focal point" saving. Engen, Gale, and Scholz (1994) find that, among

those who could have contributed more than $2,000 but who contributed less than the limit, 47 percent

contributed exactly $2,000. This finding invites the interpretation that the well-publicized, "officially

endorsed" $2,000 figure created a focal target for saving, and that the very existence of this target may have

influenced the behavior of many less serious savers (such as those contributing less than the limit).45



4.2. 401(k)s

         Congress originally authorized employers to establish 401(k) plans in 1978, but this option remained

unpopular until after the Treasury issued clarifying regulations in 1981. In many ways, 401(k)s are similar to

IRAs: contributions are tax deductible up to specified limits, the returns to investments are accumulated tax

free, and there are restrictions on early withdrawals. There are also a number of important differences.


   45
     One alternative explanation for this phenomenon concerns transactions costs. While single-earner married couples
could contribute up to $2,250 per year, contributions in excess of $2,000 would have required them to open a second
account. A contribution of $250 might seem insufficient to justify the effort. However, it is important to bear in mind
that the one-time costs of opening the account must be weighed not against the benefits of a single $250 contribution,
but rather against the benefits of a $250 contribution that recurs for many years. Moreover, even among those with a
$4,000 limit, 38 percent of those contributing less than the limit contributed exactly $2,000. Others have argued that the
focal point saving phenomenon results from bargaining among spouses with conflicting objectives (Burman, Cordes,
and Ozanne, 1990). Yet it is hard to see how this would emerge in a formal model of household bargaining, without the
introduction of significant transactions costs.

                                                           66
Contribution limits are significantly higher and bind much less frequently. Consequently, there is general

agreement that 401(k)s increase the marginal after-tax rate of return for most eligible households. This effect

is often reinforced through provisions whereby employers match employee contributions. From a behavioral

perspective, higher contribution limits may provide authoritative validation for higher saving targets.

Moreover, 401(k)s may be more conducive to the exercise of self-discipline because contributions occur

through regular payroll deductions rather than through discretionary deposits. Finally, since 401(k)s are

organized around the workplace, they may create positive spillovers between employees (e.g. through

conversations among employees and other "peer group" effects).

           From the perspective of econometric modeling, one of the most salient differences between IRAs and

401(k)s is that eligibility for 401(k)s is determined at the level of the employer. This has two implications.

First, at all points in time there is substantial variation in 401(k) eligibility across households. Second, at

least some of the variation in eligibility (and therefore in contributions) arises from sources that are plausibly

exogenous to the individual. These considerations make it easier in principle to identify the effects of

401(k)s.

           Studying 401(k)s in practice is made considerably more difficult by the relative scarcity of good

data. For example, none of the available waves of the Survey of Consumer Finances contains a clean

measure of 401(k) eligibility. Of the standard public use data sources, only the SIPP contains good

information on eligibility, participation, and asset balances for 401(k)s. Unfortunately, the SIPP does not

provide longitudinal information that is useful for studying these plans. The literature has therefore treated

the SIPP as a series of three cross-sections (1984, 1987, and 1991). An additional limitation of this data is

that 401(k) plan balances are not available in 1984. Taken together, these limitations seriously handicap

efforts to measure the behavioral effects of 401(k)s. Nevertheless, the literature has developed and explored

several estimation strategies that attempt to finesse these limitations.



4.1.1. Exploiting exogenous variation in eligibility


                                                        67
         Imagine for the moment that each firm's decision to offer a 401(k) is completely random. Then

401(k)s would provide the perfect experimental setting for studying the effects of saving incentives.

Eligibility is certainly not random, since it is demonstrably correlated with a variety of individual

characteristics (such as income). But as long as variation in 401(k) eligibility is orthogonal to the unobserved

individual characteristics that determine saving, the experiment is still a clean one.

         Poterba, Venti, and Wise (1994, 1995) proceed from the assumption that 401(k) eligibility is

exogenous to the process that determines saving. Using the 1987 and 1991 waves of the SIPP, they

demonstrate that, controlling for other relevant factors, eligibility is significantly correlated with median

financial wealth. Indeed, eligibility has very little effect on median non-401(k) financial wealth. They

interpret this finding as an indication that virtually all 401(k) contributions represented new saving.

         The central problem with this procedure is that 401(k) eligibility is probably not exogenous. On the

contrary, there are several reasons to suspect that eligibility would be significantly correlated with the

underlying predisposition to save (Bernheim, 1994c, Engen, Gale, and Scholz, 1994). First, employees with

tastes for saving probably tend to gravitate towards jobs that provide good pension coverage, including

401(k)s. Second, employers frequently install 401(k) plans as a direct response to expressions of employee

interest (Buck Consultants, 1989).

         Asset ownership patterns are consistent with the view that 401(k) eligibility is endogenous.

Specifically, differences in median financial assets between eligibles and non-eligibles are often several times

as large as 401(k) balances for eligibles (Poterba Venti, and Wise, 1994, Engen, Gale, and Scholz, 1994,

Bernheim and Garrett, 1995).46 Either 401(k)s crowd-in other forms of saving at the implausible rate of four

or five to one, or eligibility is strongly correlated with the innate inclination to save.

         As in the case of IRAs, one could attempt to control for differences in tastes by using initial wealth as

a taste proxy in a model explaining flow saving (see Bernheim and Garrett, 1995). Unfortunately, as


   46
      This may seem inconsistent with the earlier statement that eligibility bears little relation to median non-401(k)
financial wealth. Both statements are nevertheless accurate. The apparent anomaly occurs because median financial
assets do not equal the sum of median 401(k) assets and median non-401(k) financial assets.

                                                            68
discussed in section 4.1.3, observed wealth varies for many reasons that are unrelated to underlying tastes for

saving. Consequently, some correlation between 401(k) eligibility and unobserved tastes for saving may

remain, even when one conditions on initial wealth. This continues to bias the coefficient of interest.47



4.2.2. Exploiting transitional effects

         A second approach to measuring the effects of 401(k)s does not require one to assume that eligibility

is exogenous. Instead, this approach exploits the fact that the legislative authorization for 401(k)s was

relatively recent. To understand this approach, first imagine two idealized worlds, one in which 401(k)s have

always been available, and one in which 401(k)s have never been available. Suppose for simplicity that each

economy has converged to a steady state with a stable cross-sectional age-wealth profile. This profile may

well be higher for the world in which 401(k)s have always been available, but this does not necessarily

indicate that 401(k)s stimulate saving, since there may be other differences (such as tastes) between the two

worlds. Now imagine a world in which 401(k)s have never been available in the past (so that this economy

has also converged to a steady-state cross-sectional age-wealth profile), but where they are established

unexpectedly as of some point in time (without any change in tastes). At that point, each individual departs

from his or her initial wealth trajectory, and begins to move along some new wealth trajectory. Eventually,

the cross-sectional age-wealth profile will converge to a new steady state. But during the transition period, if

401(k)s stimulate saving, this profile should begin to shift upwards relative to the profile from any world in

which eligibility is unchanged.




   47
     Once one conditions on initial wealth, the direction of the bias is no longer clear. This is because the partial
correlation between 401(k) eligibility and tastes for saving may be either positive or negative. To understand how it
could be negative, imagine two individuals who are the same in all observable respects (including initial wealth), except
that one is eligible for a 401(k), while the other is not. Suppose for the moment that 401(k)s actually stimulate saving to
some unknown extent. It is very likely (due to the presence of high serial correlation in eligibility) that the eligible
individual was also eligible in past years. Thus, without eligibility, this individual's initial wealth would have been lower
than that of the individual who is actually ineligible. Consequently, under identical conditions (including eligibility), the
eligible individual would have accumulated less wealth than the ineligible individual. This suggests that the ineligible
individual is more inclined to save (given the observation that initial wealth is the same). If so, then assuming that
401(k)s stimulate saving, the estimated coefficient of eligibility would be biased downward.

                                                            69
         In the ideal implementation of this strategy, one would identify a large group of workers who became

eligible for 401(k)s relatively soon after the enabling legislation (say before 1984) and who remained eligible

in all subsequent years, as well as a large group of workers who never became eligible for 401(k)s. One

would then follow these same individuals through time, estimating cross-sectional age-wealth profiles for

each group in each year. The relative amplitudes of these profiles in any particular year would prove nothing,

since eligibility may be related to preferences. However, as time passes, the number of years of accumulated

eligibility for the first group increases. Therefore, the cross-sectional age-wealth profiles for the eligible

group should shift upward relative to the profile of the ineligible group.

         Unfortunately, as mentioned above, good panel data on 401(k)s are not available. Poterba, Venti,

and Wise (1995) therefore implement this strategy for a series of cross-sections (1984, 1987, 1991) obtained

from the SIPP. In each year, they compare the accumulated financial assets of those who are eligible for

401(k)s and those who are not eligible. The data unmistakably show the predicted upward shift in relative

financial assets held by those who are eligible for 401(k)s. Indeed, there is no noticeable decline in the

relative level of non-401(k) financial assets held by this group. According to the authors, this finding

supports the hypothesis that individuals funded 401(k) contributions through a combination of reduced taxes

and spending, and not by diverting funds that they would have saved in any event.

         Of course, Poterba, Venti, and Wise depart from the ideal strategy by using an unrelated sequence of

cross-sections. It is important to consider how this affects their results. If successive cross-sections of

eligibles (and ineligibles) are simply random draws from the same population of eligibles (ineligibles), then

there is no problem. A problem only arises if the average innate inclination to save among eligibles (or

ineligibles) changes systematically through time.

         Since new workers became eligible for 401(k)s over time, it is virtually certain that some

compositional changes occurred between the successive surveys used by Poterba, Venti, and Wise.48


   48
      As noted by Engen and Gale (1997), some eligible workers also became ineligible over time, and the effects of this
migration were most likely opposite those noted in the text. However, the predominant flow during this period was into
the eligible pool.

                                                           70
Moreover, these compositional changes are necessarily problematic.49 Recall that this methodology is

motivated by the observation that the average innate inclination to save differs between eligibles and

ineligibles. But then the movement of individuals from the ineligible population into the eligible population

must, of necessity, change the average innate inclination to save among eligibles, ineligibles, or both.

         The duration and magnitude of the resulting bias depends on the characteristics of newly eligible

workers. These individuals are probably systematically different from those who have been eligible for

longer periods. The most motivated "serious" savers probably sought out employers who offered 401(k)s, or

encouraged their existing employers to provide 401(k)s, relatively soon after these plans became available.

Less motivated, "occasional" savers were probably less likely to seek out or agitate for 401(k)s, and more

likely to drift into these plans slowly through time. Thus, as time passes, the eligible population becomes

increasingly skewed towards less motivated savers. Bernheim (1994b) refers to this as the "dilution" effect.50

It is likely that the dilution effect became more severe after 1986, when more demanding non-discrimination

requirements were established for private pensions. Since dilution creates a downward shift in the estimated

cross-sectional age-wealth profile of eligible workers, it has the potential to partially offset, completely offset,



   49
     One obvious implication is that, as one moves forward in time by, say, four years, the average length of exposure to
401(k)s within the eligible population increases by less than four years. One can imagine cases in which this could
create problem. For example, if 401(k)s pass through a period of sufficiently rapid growth, the average length of
eligibility among eligibles could actually decline. However, under more plausible assumptions, the effect would simply
be to slow the observed rate at which the assets profile of the eligible population shifts relative to the profile of the
ineligible population.

   50
     To determine whether dilution occurs in practice, one can examine changes through time in the relations between
401(k) eligibility and variables that provide stable proxies for underlying tastes. One plausible proxy for the
predisposition to save is ownership of an IRA. It is doubtful that this taste proxy is stable for the period of universal IRA
eligibility (prior to 1987), since dilution probably affected the set of IRA participants in the same way that it affected the
set of 401(k) participants. However, dilution of the IRA population probably declined significantly once eligibility for
IRAs was restricted since the frequency of new participation fell dramatically. It is therefore plausible that IRA
ownership is a stable taste proxy for the 1987-1991 period. Notably, the fraction of individuals eligible for 401(k)s who
owned IRAs declined significantly (relative to ineligibles) between 1987 and 1991. This is a good indication of the
dilution effect. Engen and Gale (1997) note that 401(k) participation rates have risen over time, and they assert that this
is evidence of reverse dilution. Given the overall increase in 401(k) eligibility, it is more likely that rising participation
results from other factors, such as increased familiarity with 401(k)s or the intensification of employer efforts to
encourage participation. Since there is also a certain amount of “stickiness” to 401(k) participation decisions, one
would also naturally expect participation rates to ratchet upward over time even without any change in the eligible
population.

                                                             71
or even reverse any upward shift due to the behavioral effect of 401(k)s.

        Were this the only effect of dilution, the direction of the resulting bias would be clear. However,

migration of workers from the ineligible population into the eligible population also changes the composition

of the ineligibles. Though newly eligible workers are probably less serious savers on average than those who

have been eligible for longer periods, they are probably more serious savers on average than those who

remain ineligible. Thus, as time passes, the ineligible population may also become increasingly skewed

towards less motivated savers. Since this leads to a downward shift in the estimated cross-sectional age-

wealth profile of ineligibles, it has the potential to create the spurious appearance that the profile for eligibles

has shifted upward relative to the profile for ineligibles.

        The net effect of dilution is theoretically ambiguous. If newly eligible workers are typical of the

eligible population, then there will be a spurious downward shift in the cross-sectional age-wealth profile of

the ineligible population, and no spurious shift in the profile of the eligible population. In that case, the

approach would overstate the effects of 401(k)s. If newly eligible workers are typical of the ineligible

population, then there will be a spurious downward shift in the cross-sectional age-wealth profile of the

eligible population, and no spurious shift in the profile of the ineligible population. In that case, the approach

would understate the effects of 401(k)s.

        Engen, Gale, and Scholz (1994) use the same approach as Poterba, Venti, and Wise, but restrict

attention to selected subgroups of the eligible and ineligible populations. Specifically, they compare cross-

sectional age-wealth profiles for 401(k) contributors to profiles for individuals with IRAs who are ineligible

for 401(k)s. The purpose of this strategy is to homogenize the unobserved preferences of eligibles and

ineligibles by focusing in each instance on “high savers.” The authors find that the cross-sectional age-

financial wealth profile of 401(k) contributors actually shifted downward between 1987 and 1991, whereas

the profile for the selected ineligibles shifted upward. They interpret this as indicating that 401(k)s did not

increase personal saving. It is important to realize, however, that this approach continues to suffer from the

dilution problem because it does not eliminate unobserved variation in tastes for saving. By changing the


                                                        72
selection criteria used to define the samples, the authors have probably altered the nature and extent of

dilution for the eligible and ineligible groups. Bernheim (1994b) argues that these changes reverse the

direction of the dilution effect for the ineligibles, and thereby create a bias against the finding that 401(k)s

increase saving.51

         It is also important to emphasize that Poterba, Venti, and Wise focus exclusively on financial assets.

This is a potential limitation, since 401(k)s may displace other forms of wealth. To evaluate the importance

of this limitation, Engen and Gale (1997) make similar calculations using a broader definition of wealth.

Their results indicate that mortgages grew and home equity fell in successive cross-sections for the 401(k)-

eligible population (both IRA participants and IRA non-participants), resulting in smaller overall wealth

growth than for the control groups. They interpret this finding as an indication that 401(k) saving was offset

almost completely by larger mortgages.

         Bernheim (1997c) questions the plausibility of the Engen-Gale results by arguing that, if 401(k)s do

displace other saving, they are more likely to reduce the accumulation of financial assets than to encourage

greater borrowing against homes. Concerns about plausibility are compounded by problems with Engen and

Gale’s evidence. While the absolute decline in home equity was greater for the 401(k)-eligible population

than for the ineligible population, the 401(k)-eligible group started out with more housing wealth; the

percentage decline was essentially identical for the two groups. This suggests that the phenomenon may be

attributed to unrelated third factors. Naturally, the Engen-Gale procedure continues to suffer from the

problems associated with dilution.52 In addition, the results for total wealth are extremely imprecise. Engen

and Gale typically cannot rule out (at conventional levels of confidence) the possibility that 401(k)s


   51
     The argument is that there may have been migration out of IRA accounts after eligibility was restricted in 1986, and
that those retaining their IRA accounts were presumably the most serious savers. This would lead to a spurious upward
shift in the estimated cross-sectional age-wealth profile for ineligibles.

   52
     Alert to this issue, they attempt to control for unobserved preferences by including a measure of IRA participation
status. Poterba, Venti, and Wise employ a similar approach in some of their work. Unfortunately, this does not solve
the problem. The trend in the probability that the typical 401(k) worker owns an IRA is properly regarded as a symptom
of dilution, rather than as the source of the underlying problem (Bernheim, 1994b). It is highly unlikely that this single
binary variable adequately controls for the full variation of preferences towards saving among eligibles and ineligibles.

                                                           73
contributed significantly to total wealth accumulation. This raises the possibility that their finding might not

be robust. Using the same data, Poterba, Venti, and Wise (1986b) conclude that the timing of changes in

mortgage debt and net home equity over time is inconsistent with a causal relationship between 401(k)

contributions are mortgage debt. These conflicting findings are not easily reconciled.

        Engen and Gale also point out that the cross-sectional age-wealth profiles of 401(k)-eligible renters

did not shift upward relative to those of ineligible renters between 1987 and 1991.53 This suggests that

Poterba, Venti, and Wise’s central result may not be robust when one focuses on the population segment for

which non-financial wealth is relatively unimportant. While these findings are thought-provoking, their

proper interpretation is unclear. Renters as a whole are a peculiar group in that they save practically nothing

to begin with (Congressional Budget Office, 1993). Those who are eligible for 401(k)s do accumulate

significant financial assets (though significantly less than comparable homeowners); however, the median net

worth of renters who are not eligible for 401(k)s is near zero. These observations have two implications.

First, the sample of eligible renters appears to be more highly selected than the sample of eligible

homeowners. As a result, eligibility for 401(k)s may be more strongly related to underlying tastes among

renters than among homeowners. Sample selection biases and the associated effects of dilution should

therefore play out differently in the two samples. It would not be surprising if eligible renters, being more

highly selected to begin with, were subject to greater dilution with the passage of time. Second, sample

selection issues aside, the absence of significant wealth among ineligible renters can potentially invalidate the

methodology used to draw inferences about the effects of 401(k)s. If economic forces were tending to

depress saving by renters during the relevant time period, then the absence of a downward shift in the age-

wealth profile for eligible renters would indicate that 401(k)s stimulated saving by this group. In theory, the

Engen-Gale procedure would detect this by noting a downward shift in the age-wealth profile for ineligible

renters. However, in practice, liquidity constraints would have prevented this downward shift from occurring.



  53
   There is some evidence of an upward shift between 1984 and 1991, but Engen and Gale argue that the 1987-1991
comparison is more reliable due to data limitations affecting the 1984 survey.

                                                       74
4.2.3. Exploiting variation in matching rates

        Employers frequently match employee contributions to 401(k) plans, and there are substantial

differences across employers both in the matching rates and in the amounts matched. The economic rewards

associated with 401(k) saving therefore vary considerably, even among eligible workers. In principle, one

could attempt to assess the effects of economic incentives (including taxes) on saving by exploiting this

variation.

        To date, relatively few studies have attempted to relate 401(k) plan provisions, such as employer

matches, to the choices of employees. Moreover, the existing studies focus exclusively on 401(k)

contributions. Even if 401(k) contributions respond strongly to employer matching provisions, it is

conceivable that this could reflect asset shifting rather than new saving. Thus, a high elasticity of

contributions with respect to the match rate would not necessarily establish that individuals save more when

the returns to saving are more generous. If, however, contributions do not rise with the match rate, then it

seems unlikely that total saving would respond to changes in the after-tax rate of return.

        The evidence on the effect of 401(k) match rates is mixed. Using survey data gathered by the

General Accounting Office, Poterba, Venti, and Wise (1992) conclude that the existence of a match rate is

correlated with higher participation, but that the level of the match has little effect. Papke, Petersen, and

Poterba (1993) survey a small sample of firms and corroborate this finding. Papke (1992) analyzes data

drawn from IRS Form 5500 filings, and finds that the effect of higher match rates is positive at low match

rates, but negative at high match rates. Her results are somewhat sensitive to the introduction of fixed effects.

Andrews (1992) studies household level data from the May 1988 Current Population Survey, and concludes

that, while the existence of a match increases participation, there is actually a negative relation between the

match rate and contributions. Kusko, Poterba, and Wilcox (1993) analyze employee-level data for a single

company, and find that contributions and participation are relatively insensitive to changes in the matching


                                                       75
rate through time. Scott (1994) argues that most of the negative results on the effects of matching provisions

are attributable to the use of ex post rather than ex ante match rates. Using the 1985-89 Employee Benefit

Surveys (for which ex ante match rates are available), he finds some evidence that the size of the match

matters; however, even Scott's results indicate that most of the effect is attributable to the existence of the

match, rather than to its magnitude.

        The evidence on match rates is therefore somewhat puzzling. Within the context of the traditional

life cycle hypothesis, it is surprising (though conceivable) that employees would respond so differently to

match rates of 0% and 5%, but behave almost identically with match rates of 5% and 100%. Naturally, these

findings could be spurious if the existence of a match is positively correlated with the underlying preferences

for saving among employees. This would occur if, for example, high-saving workers sort themselves into

plans with matches, or demand that their employers provide matches. It is, however, hard to understand why

the same considerations would not induce a correlation between contributions and the size of the match.

There is also some reason to believe that matching provisions are adopted as remedial measures to stimulate

contributions in instances where employees are predisposed against saving (Bernheim and Garrett, 1995). In

that case, the available results would understate the impact of a match.

        The evidence on matching provisions is potentially reconcilable with alternative behavioral

hypotheses. The availability of a match may focus employee attention on the 401(k) plan, authoritatively

validate the importance of long-term saving objectives, undermine the resistance of impatient selves (due to

the immediacy of the match), and provide additional impetus for establishing a private rule. Conceivably,

these effects could emerge discontinuously with the introduction of a match, irrespective of its size.



4.3. General evidence from the U.S. experience

        In section 4.2.2, I discussed the manner in which transitional phenomena generated by the relative

novelty of 401(k)s have been used to assess their effects. More generally, one could regard the 1980s as a


                                                        76
grand experiment with several different types of tax-favored accounts, and ask whether these accounts had

the effect of shifting up the age-wealth profiles of entire cohorts. To take an example, if tax incentives were

effective, then the typical individual reaching age 65 in, say, 1991 should have had more wealth than the

typical individual reaching retirement in, say, 1984 (due to differences in years of eligibility for tax-favored

saving).

           Venti and Wise (1993) examine this hypothesis. Their analysis, which primarily relies on the SIPP,

documents a substantial upward shift in financial asset profiles.54 More recent cohorts have greater wealth at

the same ages as older cohorts, and the difference is roughly equal to accumulated balances in 401(k)s and

IRAs. While these patterns are interesting, it is potentially misleading to ascribe all differences in saving

between cohorts to tax incentives. The same pattern could emerge if, for example, younger cohorts are

wealthier on a lifetime basis.



4.4. Evidence from countries other than the United States

           Although the existing literature has focused primarily on IRAs and 401(k)s, tax-deferred and/or

subsidized savings accounts are not unique to the United States. Other programs include Canadian registered

retirement savings plans, or RRSPs (Burbridge and Davies, 1994), and registered home ownership savings

plans, or RHOSPs (Engelhardt, 1996), British tax-exempt special savings accounts, or TESSAs, and

personal equity plans, or PEPs (Banks and Blundell, 1994), the German Vermögensbildungsgesetz and

Bqusparkassen incentive programs (Börsch-Supan, 1994), the Italian treatment of life insurance policies

(Jappelli and Pagano, 1994), Japanese Maruyu accounts (Ito and Kitamura, 1994), and French individual

savings plans, or PEPs, building society savings accounts, or CELs, and building society savings plans, or

PELs ((Fougère, 1994).

           Unfortunately, there is relatively little evidence on the effectiveness of these policies. A few studies


   54
   Engen, Gale, and Scholz (1996b) identify several problems with the underlying data, and argue that the upward shift
may be overstated.

                                                          77
use techniques similar to those discussed in sections 4.1 and 4.2 to analyze some of these programs; Venti

and Wise (1995) and Milligan (1998) study RRSPs, while Engelhardt (1996) examines RHOSPs. Others

have attempted to deduce the effects of saving incentives from cross-country comparisons.

        Although the generosity of the incentives embodied in tax-favored savings accounts differs

significantly across countries, one cannot reliably infer the saving effects of these programs from simple

cross-country correlations or regressions. If, for example, the political process is more favorable to the

adoption of saving incentives in countries where voters care more about saving, then rates of saving will tend

to be correlated with saving incentives even if these incentives have no effect on behavior.

        A somewhat more subtle approach to international comparisons exploits the fact that different

countries implemented their tax incentives at different points in time. This allows one to examine whether the

saving rates of different countries converged or diverged when incentives were introduced. In this spirit,

Carroll and Summers (1987) compare historical rates of saving for Canada and the United States. They

demonstrate that these rates diverged when Canada expanded its system of Registered Retirement Saving

Plans (RRSPs) during the mid-1970s. While this pattern is interesting, an inference of causality requires a

leap of faith, particularly since there are other possible explanations for the increase in Canadian saving

during this period. Moreover, the adoption of tax incentives in the U.S. did not result in measurable

convergence between the two countries. More recent studies cast doubt on the hypothesis that tax incentive

programs account for relative movements of saving rates in the U.S. and Canada (see Sabelhaus, 1997, and

Burbidge, Fretz, and Veall, 1998).



5. Evidence on other links between taxation and saving

        Even if the interest elasticity of saving is low and households do not alter their behavior very much as

a direct consequence of targeted tax incentives for saving, it might still be possible to influence personal

saving through tax policy. In section 2.3.1, I mentioned that non-neutralities in the tax system may encourage

various kinds of third-party activities that have the potential to affect the level of personal saving.


                                                        78
Specifically, non-neutralities may encourage employers to adopt various kinds of pension plans or to

substitute one kind of plan for another, and may influence the activities of employers in the context of these

plans. The tax system may also create incentives for corporations to save, or for the vendors of tax-favored

financial vehicles to market and otherwise promote their products. In this section, I briefly summarize the

evidence on each of these possibilities.


5.1. The size and scope of the pension system

            Since pensions provide a tax-favored mechanism for compensating employees, tax policy may have

played an important role in stimulating the development of the pension system. To assess the ultimate impact

on personal saving, one must answer two questions. First, to what extent is the size and scope of the pension

system responsive to changes in tax rates? Second, to what degree does pension saving displace other forms

of personal saving? I consider these questions in turn.



5.1.1. Incentives for pension saving

            It is indisputable that there is a substantial tax incentive for pension formation. Ippolito (1986)

estimates that the optimum exploitation of opportunities to defer compensation through pensions can reduce

lifetime tax liabilities by 20 to 40 percent. However, this does not imply that the growth of the pension

system is exclusively, or even primarily attributable to the tax system. Pensions may enhance the

productivity of the work force in a variety of ways. They may bond the workforce against union activity,

voluntary job turnover, or poor job performance.55 Employers may use defined benefit plans to induce a

desired pattern of retirement.56 Mandatory pensions may also provide an effective device for overcoming the

problems with adverse selection that characterize the market for private annuities.57 Thus, it is conceivable


   55
        See e.g. Ippolito (1985,1986), Parsons (1986,1995), Williamson (1992), and Allen, Clark, and McDermed (1993).

   56
      See e.g. Burkhauser (1979,1980), Lazear (1983), Fields and Mitchell (1984), Ippolito (1986), Lazear and Moore
(1988), Kotlikoff and Wise (1990), Stock and Wise (1990), and Quinn, Burkhauser and Myers (1990).

   57
        See Ippolito (1986). Kotlikoff and Spivak (1981) discuss the nature of market failure in private annuity markets.

                                                              79
that an extensive private pension system would exist even in the absence of tax incentives.

        A number of studies provide empirical evidence on the relative importance of tax and non-tax

determinants of pension coverage.58 The central methodological problem in this literature is to identify an

appropriate source of variation in marginal tax rates from which one can reliably infer tax effects. Time

series variation is primarily associated with a handful of significant tax reforms, and it is difficult to separate

tax effects from confounding events. Since pension coverage can affect marginal tax rates, cross-sectional

variation is potentially endogenous. To treat this problem, one must identify valid instrumental variables that

are related to cross-sectional differences in marginal tax rates, but unrelated to the process that determines

pension coverage.

        Reagan and Turner (1995) adopt this approach, relying chiefly on cross-sectional variation in state

income tax rates to identify the tax effect (see also Gentry and Peress, 1994). Their results imply that a one

percentage point increase in marginal tax rates leads to a 0.4 percentage point increase in pension coverage

rates. The validity of this estimate presupposes the exogeneity of the state income tax variables.

Conceivably, variation in tax rates across states could be related to differences in average income (which

could in turn be correlated with the household’s permanent income), or with other factors such as occupation

or industry. Reagan and Turner attempt to control for these factors when explaining pension coverage, but

their measure of permanent income is based on limited information, and their controls for occupation and

industry are coarse.



5.1.2. Do pensions crowd out other personal saving?

        The extent to which pensions displace other forms of personal saving probably depends on the

characteristics of the pension. For our purposes, it is important to distinguish between employer-controlled

pensions that provide the employee with no choice concerning the level of participation, and participant-


   58
      Pertinent references includes Ippolito (1986), Bloom and Freeman (1992), Reagan and Turner (1995), Kruse
(1993), Allen and Clark (1987), Woodbury and Bettinger (1991), Woodbury and Huang (1993), Clark and McDermed
(1993), Feldstein (1994), Gentry and Peress (1994), and Gustman and Steinmeier (1995).

                                                        80
controlled plans (such as 401(k)s) that permit the employee to determine contributions. I have already

discussed the existing evidence on the extent to which contributions to participant-controlled plans crowd out

other personal saving (section 4.2). In this section, I focus on employer-controlled plans.

         The existing literature contains more than a dozen studies that attempt to measure the degree of

substitutability between pensions and other saving. The usual approach is to estimate a cross-sectional

relation between either saving or wealth and some measure of pension coverage. The two earliest studies on

this topic (Cagan, 1965, and Katona, 1965) conclude that pensions actually crowd in other forms of saving.

Cagan rationalizes this finding by arguing that pensions induce workers to recognize the need for retirement

planning; he suggests that individuals may intensify their efforts to provide adequately for retirement because

a pension renders this objective more feasible. Several subsequent studies corroborate the Cagan-Katona

finding (Schoeplein, 1970, Green, 1981, Venti and Wise, 1993, and Bernheim and Scholz, 1993a). More

commonly, investigators have found either no effect, or a small effect (Munnell, 1974, Kotlikoff, 1979,

Blinder, Gordon, and Wise, 1980, King and Dicks-Mireaux, 1982, Diamond and Hausman, 1984, Hubbard,

1986, Wolff, 1988, Samwick, 1995, and Gustman and Steinmeier, 1998). Only a few studies have found

substantial rates of crowding out (Munnell, 1976, Dicks-Mireaux and King, 1984, Avery, Elliehausen, and

Gustafson, 1986, and Gale, 1995), and most of these provide ranges of estimates that include relatively small

effects. There is also some evidence that the rate of displacement rises with education (Bernheim and Scholz,

1993b, and Gale, 1995).

         While there are many methodological concerns that bear on the reliability (both absolutely and

relatively) of these various studies, three issues stand out as particularly salient. The first concerns the

possibility that pension coverage is correlated with underlying tastes for saving. In contrast to the literature

on 401(k)s, no existing study has come to grips with this issue. The direction of the resulting bias is

ambiguous.59 The second issue concerns the measurement of compensation. For the most part, the studies


   59
      Highly motivated savers may self-select into jobs with pension plans. But it is also conceivable that the workers
who are most inclined to save, and who have the least problems with self-discipline, sort themselves into jobs that are
covered by pension plans with the greatest discretion, such as 401(k)s. Those who are interested in saving, but who

                                                           81
listed above control for income, rather than total compensation (which would include the accrual of pension

wealth). If the creation of a pension typically entails a shift in the form of compensation rather than

incremental compensation, then this practice does not yield the appropriate displacement rate. Bernheim and

Scholz (1993a) and Gale (1995) propose different solutions to this problem, and obtain very different results.

The final issue concerns the definition of wealth. Although one can point to a number of exceptions, there is

some tendency (as in the 401(k) literature) to find higher rates of displacement when one uses a broader

measure of wealth. The issues here are similar to those mentioned in section 4.2.2.

          While the extent of crowding out is therefore not a settled issue, one is hard pressed to find

convincing support in any study for the hypothesis that the rate of displacement is dollar-for-dollar. Indeed,

there appears to be a significant likelihood that the true offset is much smaller. The importance of this

finding becomes obvious when one considers that, between 1980 and 1990, the real change in pension assets

exceeded the real change in national wealth by a wide margin (Shoven, 1991). Thus, the effect of tax

incentives on saving through the stimulation (or retardation) of pensions may be substantial, even if the rate

of displacement is relatively high. Using estimates from the available literature, Engen and Gale (1996b)

calculate that, following the replacement of the current income tax with a consumption tax, the reduction in

saving due to changes in pensions could substantially or completely offset any increase in non-pension

saving.



5.2. Employer-controlled pensions vs. participant-controlled pensions

          In evaluating the extent to which 401(k)s contribute to personal saving (section 4.2), I have

abstracted from the degree to which these plans substitute for other pensions. If the rate of substitution is

low, then policies that stimulate 401(k)s will tend to increase saving if and only if 401(k) contributions are

not fully offset by reductions in non-pension saving. In contrast, if the rate of substitution is high, then

policies that stimulate 401(k)s may increase or decrease saving, depending upon whether 401(k)


have problems with self-discipline, may prefer traditional employer-controlled plans.

                                                          82
contributions displace non-pension saving at (respectively) a lower or higher rate than other kinds of

pensions.

        Much has been written about the magnitude and probable causes of the shift from defined benefit to

defined contribution pension plans in general, and to 401(k)s in particular (see e.g. Parsons, 1995, or Papke,

Petersen, and Poterba, 1993, for selective reviews of this literature). The existence of this shift does not,

however, establish that 401(k)s have substituted for more traditional plans, since aggregate trends could in

principle be driven by changes in the composition and organization of economic activity.

        Papke, Petersen, and Poterba (1993) examine data on individual firms, and conclude that wholesale

replacement of existing plans (particularly defined benefit plans) occurs in a minority of cases. While

informative, this evidence does not resolve the central issue, since 401(k)s may displace other pension plans

even if they do not directly replace these plans. For example, firms that adopt 401(k)s as supplementary

plans may be less inclined to increase, and more inclined to decrease, the generosity of other pension plans.

The available evidence also indicates that changes in industrial composition and the structure of firms cannot

fully account for the aggregate shift to defined contribution plans (see Clark and McDermed, 1990, Gustman

and Steinmeier, 1992, and Kruse, 1991). Since the unexplained component of the aggregate shift is large, it

is possible that 401(k)s have substituted for other pension plans to a significant degree.



5.3. Taxation and corporate saving

        Taxation affects corporate saving through two channels. First, an increase in the corporate tax rate

reduces after-tax earnings. Unless corporations adjust dividends or share repurchases, retained earnings must

fall. Second, both personal and corporate taxes may affect payout policy. For example, when the dividend

tax rate rises relative to the effective tax rate for capital gains, corporations may pay smaller dividends.

        There is a substantial body of theoretical and empirical work examining the effects of taxation on

corporate payout and retention decisions. A review of this literature is beyond the scope of the current

chapter; the interested reader should consult Alan Auerbach’s chapter in this Handbook. In this section, I


                                                        83
consider the following related question: is it possible to stimulate total private saving through policies that

encourage greater corporate saving?

        In principle, private saving may be unresponsive to policies that successfully motivate corporations

to save more. The reason is that households own corporations. When a corporation decides to pay dividends

instead of retaining earnings, sophisticated shareholders should understand that the corporation is saving less

on their behalf, and each shareholder should increase personal saving by an offsetting amount to reestablish

his or her optimal life-cycle allocation.

        Greater corporate saving might add to private saving if shareholders were liquidity constrained. In

practice, however, share ownership is concentrated among higher income individuals who are likely to have

ample liquidity. At a minimum, these individuals have the option to borrow against or sell their securities.

Alternatively, shareholders might be irrational or myopic. One version of this view holds that investors suffer

from a “bird-in-the-hand” fallacy: they believe that capital gains are transitory, and that income is more

secure once it is actually received. Another version of this view emphasizes the role of mental accounting:

since dividend checks are cash-in-hand, they may be more spendable than an equivalent capital gain.

Ultimately, the degree of substitutability between corporate saving and personal saving is an empirical

question.

        Early econometric studies of this issue involved the estimation of aggregated reduced form

consumption functions. According to Feldstein (1973), for the U.S., the marginal propensity to consume out

of retained earnings is roughly two-thirds as large as the marginal propensity to consume out of disposable

income (Feldstein and Fane, 1973, obtain similar results for the U.K.). Feldstein concludes that changes in

private saving imperfectly offset changes in corporate saving, at the rate of 67 cents on the dollar. There are,

however, alternative interpretations of Feldstein’s findings. If retained earnings and disposable income have

different stochastic properties (e.g. if the shocks to disposable income are more permanent than the shocks to

retained earnings), then their coefficients in a reduced form consumption function will differ. However, this

implies nothing about the effects of shifting a deterministic dollar (or, for that matter, an income stream with


                                                       84
fixed stochastic properties) between dividends and retained earnings. Feldstein’s reduced-form consumption

function approach also suffers from a variety of standard problems, including the potential endogeneity

and/or imperfect measurement of key variables.

         Poterba (1987, 1991) improves upon Feldstein’s regressions in several respects.60 Most notably, he

uses a variable measuring the tax burden on dividends relative to capital gains as an instrument to treat the

endogeneity of retained earnings.61 To some extent, this also addresses the problem of interpretation

mentioned above, since it yields a direct estimate of the effect on consumption of dollars shifted between

retentions and payouts. Poterba finds that consumption rises significantly in response to tax changes that

disfavor corporate saving. Notably, most of this effect occurs in the form of durable consumption, which is

arguably another form of saving.

         Poterba also examines the response of consumption to involuntary realizations of capital gains

resulting from cash takeover transactions. In the absence of myopia or irrationality, one would expect

shareholders to reinvest all of these gains. Yet Poterba’s aggregate reduced-form consumption function

estimates imply that investors increase consumption by about 60 cents for each dollar realized in such

transactions. Once again, this effect is particularly strong for durable goods. These results appear to be

driven by a limited set of events: personal saving declined sharply during the 1980s while takeover activity

exploded. Since there are many other explanations for the decline in saving, the correlation could be

coincidental.

         Auerbach and Hassett (1991) adopt a much different approach to this same set of issues: they

estimate aggregate consumption Euler equations, and investigate whether changes in consumption are related

to predictable changes in different components of income. The advantage of this approach is that it removes

the informational effects that accompany unexpected changes in income and contaminate estimates of the


   60
      In addition to instrumenting retained earnings, he makes some important adjustments to the underlying data,
distinguishes between durable and non-durable consumption, and estimates specifications in both levels and differences.

   61
    One can criticize this choice of an instrument on the grounds that both tax rates belong in the consumption function
regression.

                                                          85
marginal propensity to consume. Disadvantages include the usual range of objections to aggregate

consumption Euler equations (see section 3.2). Like others, Auerbach and Hassett find that consumption is

sensitive to predictable changes in labor income.62 In contrast, predictable changes in dividends and other

forms of capital income have no effect on consumption. This finding undermines several hypothesis under

which consumption would be sensitive to the division of corporate earnings between retentions and payouts.

For example, it is inconsistent with the view that shareholders are liquidity constrained or more likely to

spend cash-in-hand. It does not, however, rule out the possibility that individuals irrationally capitalize

otherwise equivalent income streams of dividends and retained earnings at different rates, since changes in

consumption would then occur only in response to unexpected changes in payout policy.



5.4. Other activities undertaken by employers

           Aside from encouraging employers to provide various kinds of pensions, tax policy may also induce

employers to engage in other activities that have the potential to influence saving. In some instances, this

effect is indirect: by stimulating pensions, tax policy may also encourage activities that are complementary to

pensions. In other cases, subtle features of the tax code may directly affect the activity in question.

           Employer-based investment and retirement education is an example of an activity that is

complementary to the provision of a pension plan. Tax policies that stimulate pensions in general, and

especially participant-controlled plans, may also stimulate complementary educational initiatives (see

Bernheim and Garrett, 1995, Bayer, Bernheim, and Scholz, 1996, and Employee Benefit Research Institute,

1995). Subtle features of the tax code, such as non-discrimination requirements, may also encourage

employer-based retirement education more directly (in addition to the preceding references, see Garrett,

1995). Generally, the impact of education is not subsumed in estimates of the relation between pensions and

saving, since most of the growth of these offerings post-dates the most commonly used sources of data on

household financial behavior.


  62
       This is sometimes interpreted as evidence of liquidity constraints for those receiving labor income.

                                                              86
        There are a number of reasons to expect that retirement education might have an important effect on

household saving. Various studies document low levels of financial literacy among adult Americans. This

phenomenon is accompanied by an apparently widespread failure to appreciate financial vulnerabilities

(Bernheim, 1995b). Although there is little direct evidence on the impact of educational programs, some

recent studies conclude that employer-based offerings significantly stimulate both voluntary pension

contributions and total household saving (see Bernheim and Garrett, 1995, and Bayer, Bernheim, and Scholz,

1996, Bernheim, 1998, Clark and Schieber, 1998). Since the availability of employer-based retirement

education may be correlated with employees’ preferences, these studies potentially suffer from the usual kinds

of sample selection problems. However, there is some evidence that employers adopt these programs as

remedial measures when employees have low predispositions to save (as indicated, for example, by low

participation and contribution rates prior to adoption). In that case, the available evidence would understate

the effects of educational iterventions.



5.5. Marketing and promotion of financial products

        The expansion of IRA eligibility to all taxpayers in 1981 was accompanied by a great deal of media

fanfare. Perhaps more importantly, the existence of these retirement saving vehicles created profit

opportunities for financial institutions. Although the IRA tax incentive was targeted at households, it

generated considerable impetus for private firms to promote saving through a blend of education and

marketing. Similar phenomena occur in the context other tax-deferred savings instruments, such as long-term

life insurance policies and variable annuities.

        It is natural to wonder whether these promotional activities affect personal saving. Unfortunately,

there is virtually no direct evidence on this issue. There are, however, two particularly interesting anecdotes.

One concerns the introduction and subsequent scaling-back of IRAs, which I have discussed in section 4.1.5.

The other concerns experience with saving promotion in Japan (Central Council for Saving Promotion,

1981). After World War II the Japanese government launched a national campaign to promote saving.


                                                       87
Promotional activities included the organization of monthly seminars that extolled the virtues of saving and

provided workers with financial guidance, the sponsorship of children's banks, the appointment of private

citizens as savings promotion leaders, and the extensive dissemination of literature. While the Japanese rate

of saving rose precipitously over the relevant time period, other factors were also at work, including the

existence of strong tax incentives for saving, as well as various aspects of post-War reconstruction. One can

therefore only speculate about the extent to which the increase in saving was attributable to promotion.



6. Concluding comments

        From the discussion in the preceding sections, it is readily apparent that questions concerning

taxation and saving have stimulated an enormous amount of research since the publication of Sandmo’s

(1985) survey in the original Handbook of Public Economics. This research has led to significant theoretical

advances in our understanding of the positive and normative implications of taxing the returns to saving, and

has produced important contributions to our empirical knowledge of household behavior. Still, the critical

analysis contained in this chapter underscores the limitations and shortcomings of the extant literature.

        As an economist, one cannot review the voluminous literature on taxation and saving without being

somewhat humbled by the enormous difficulty of learning anything useful about even the most basic

empirical questions. Having been handed two grand “experiments” with tax policy during the 1980s (IRAs

and 401(k)s), it would seem that we ought to have learned more, and to have achieved greater consensus, than

we have. In our defense, it can be said that we have done our best with the information at our disposal. As I

have mentioned at various points in this chapter, it is often easy to identify the kinds of data that would have

allowed us to answer the pressing policy questions with much greater confidence. Unfortunately, we have

had to make do with data that is, at best, a caricature of the ideal.

        During the next decade, there will undoubtably be new experiments, and new opportunities to learn

something useful about taxation and saving. The introduction of Roth IRAs in January, 1998 provides one

such opportunity, and I would expect this to generate a flurry of research activity once pertinent data become


                                                        88
available. However, the prospects for significant advances in empirical methodology will be severely limited

unless researchers have access to higher quality data. When one thinks of the budgetary costs of tax

incentives, and of what is at stake in terms of economic growth and efficiency, it seems a shame that ongoing,

comprehensive, microeconomic data collection has been such a low social priority.




                                                     89
References

Aaron, Henry and Alicia Munnell, “Reassessing the Role for Wealth Transfer Taxes,” National Tax Journal
45, 1992, 119-44.

Ainslie, George, "Specious Reward: A Behavioral Theory of Impulsiveness and Impulse Control,"
Psychological Bulletin 82(4), July 1975, 463-496.

Ainslie, George, "A Behavioral Economic Approach to the Defense Mechanisms: Freud's Energy Theory
Revisited," Social Science Information 21, 1982, 735-779.

Ainslie, George, "Behavioral Economics II: Motivated, Involuntary Behavior," Social Science Information
23, 1984, 47-78.

Ainslie, George, Picoeconomics, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992.

Aiyagari, S. Rao, “Optimal Capital Income Taxation with Incomplete Markets, Borrowing Constraints, and
Constant Discounting,” Journal of Political Economy 103(6), 1995, 1158-1175.

Allen, Steven G., and Robert L. Clark, "Pensions and Firm Performance," in Human Resources and the
Performance of the Firm, Industrial Relations Research Association Series, 1987.

Allen, Steven G., Robert L. Clark, and Ann McDermed, "Pension Bonding and Lifetime Jobs," Journal of
Human Resources 28, 1993, 463-481.

Altonji, Joseph G., Fumio Hayashi, and Laurence J. Kotlikoff, “Is the Extended Family Altruistically Linked?
Direct Tests Using Micro Data,” American Economic Review 82, 1992, 1177-98.

Andreoni, James, "Giving with Impure Altruism: Applications to Charity and Ricardian Equivalence,"
Journal of Political Economy 97, 1989, 1447-58.

Andrews, Emily S., "The Growth and Distribution of 401(k) Plans," in J. Turner and D. Beller, eds., Trends
in Pensions 1992, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Labor, 1992.

Atkinson, Anthony, and Agnar Sandmo, “Welfare Implications of the Taxation of Savings,” The Economic
Journal 90, 1980, 529-549.

Attanasio, Orazio P., “The Intertemporal Allocation of Consumption: Theory and Evidence,” Carnegie-
Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 42, 1995, 39-89.

Attanasio, Orazio P., and Martin Browning, “Consumption over the Life Cycle and over the Business Cycle,”
American Economic Review 85(5), 1995, 1118-1137.

Attanasio, Orazio P., and Thomas De Leire, "IRAs and Household Saving Revisited: Some New Evidence,"
Working Paper No. 4900, National Bureau of Economic Research, October 1994.

Attanasio, Orazio P., and Guglielmo Weber, "Consumption Growth, the Interest Rate and Aggregation,"


                                                    90
Review of Economic Studies 60(3), July 1993, 631-649.

Attanasio, Orazio P., and Guglielmo Weber, “Is Consumption Growth Consistent with Intertemporal
Optimization? Evidence from the Consumer Expenditure Survey,” Journal of Political Economy 103(6),
1995, 1121-1157.

Auerbach, Alan J., “The Optimal Taxation of Heterogeneous Capital,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 93,
1979, 589-612.

Auerbach, Alan J., “Tax Reform, Capital Allocation, Efficiency, and Growth,” in Henry J. Aaron and
William G. Gale (eds.), Economic Effects of Fundamental Tax Reform, Brookings Institution: Washington,
D.C., 1996, 29-73.

Auerbach, Alan J., “Taxation and Corporate Financial Policy,” Handbook of Public Economics, 1998,
forthcoming.

Auerbach, Alan J., and Kevin Hassett, “Corporate Saving and Shareholder Consumption,” in B. Douglas
Bernheim and John B. Shoven (eds.), National Saving and Economic Performance, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1991, 75-102.

Auerbach, Alan J., and James R. Hines, “Excess Burden and Optimal Taxation,” Handbook of Public
Economics, 1998, forthcoming.

Auerbach, Alan J., and Laurence J. Kotlikoff, Dynamic Fiscal Policy, New York: Cambridge University
Press, 1987.

Auerbach, Alan J., Laurence J. Kotlikoff, and Jonathan Skinner, “The Efficiency Gains from Dynamic Tax
Reform,” International Economic Review 24, 1983, 81-100.

Avery, Robert B., Gregory E. Elliehausen, and Thomas A. Gustafson, "Pensions and Social Security in
Household Portfolios: Evidence from the 1983 Survey of Consumer Finances," in F. Gerard Adams and
Susan M. Wachter, eds., Savings and Capital Formation, Lexington, MA: Lexington Books, 1986.

Balcer, Yves, and Kenneth Judd, “Effects of Capital Gains Taxation on Life-Cycle Investment and Portfolio
Management,” Journal of Finance, 1987, 743-761.

Banks, James, and Richard Blundell, “Taxation and Personal Saving Incentives in the United Kingdom,” in
James M. Poterba (ed.), Public Policies and Household Saving, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994,
57-80.

Barro, Robert J., “Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?” Journal of Political Economy 82, 1974, 1095-
1117.

Barthold, Thomas A., and Takatoshi Ito, “ Bequest Taxes and Accumulation of Household Wealth: U.S.-
Japan Comparison,” in Takatoshi Ito and Anne O. Krueger (eds.), The Political Economy of Tax Reform,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1992.



                                                   91
Bayer, Patrick J., B. Douglas Bernheim, and J. Karl Scholz, "The Effects of Financial Education in the
Workplace: Evidence from a Survey of Employers," 1996.

Becker, Gary S., “A Theory of Social Interactions,” Journal of Political Economy 82, 1974, 1063-1093.

Benhabib, Jess and Aldo Rustichini, “Optimal Taxes without Commitment,” Journal of Economic Theory
77(2), 1997, 231-259.

Bernheim, B. Douglas, “Ricardian Equivalence: An Evaluation of Theory and Evidence,” National Bureau of
Economic Research, Working Paper No. 2330, 1987.

Bernheim, B. Douglas, “How Strong are Bequest Motives? Evidence Based on Estimates of the Demand for
Life Insurance and Annuities,” Journal of Political Economy 99, 1991, 899-927.

Bernheim, B. Douglas, "Personal Saving, Information, and Economic Literacy: New Directions for Public
Policy," in Tax Policy for Economic Growth in the 1990s, Washington, D.C.: American Council for Capital
Formation, 1994a.

Bernheim, B. Douglas, "Comments and Discussion," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1994b, 152-
166.

Bernheim, B. Douglas, "Comment on Chapters 4 and 5," in David A. Wise, ed., Studies in the Economics of
Aging, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994c.

Bernheim, B. Douglas, "Do Households Appreciate Their Financial Vulnerabilities? An Analysis of Actions,
Perceptions, and Public Policy," Tax Policy and Economic Growth, Washington, D.C.: American Council for
Capital Formation, 1995b, 1-30.

Bernheim, B. Douglas, “Taxation and Saving: A Behavioral Perspective,” Proceedings of the Eighty-Ninth
Annual Conference on Taxation, National Tax Association, 1997a, 28-36.

Bernheim, B. Douglas, "The Merrill Lynch Baby Boom Retirement Index: Update '97," mimeo, 1997b

Bernheim, B. Douglas, “Rethinking Saving Incentives,” in A. Auerbach (ed.), Fiscal Policy: Lessons from
Economic Research, MIT Press: Cambridge, Mass., 1997c, 259-311.

Bernheim, B. Douglas, “Financial Illiteracy, Education, and Retirement Saving,” in Olivia S. Mitchell and
Sylvester J. Schieber (eds.), Living with Defined Contribution Pensions, Philadelphia: University of
Pennsylvania Press, 1998, 38-68.

Bernheim, B. Douglas, Kyle Bagwell, “Is Everything Neutral?” Journal of Political Economy 96(2), 1988,
308-338.

Bernheim, B. Douglas, and Daniel M. Garrett, "The Determinants and Consequences of Financial Education
in the Workplace: Evidence from a Survey of Households," mimeo, Stanford University, 1995.

Bernheim, B. Douglas, and John Karl Scholz, "Private Pensions and Household Saving," mimeo, University


                                                     92
of Wisconsin, 1993a.

Bernheim, B. Douglas, and John Karl Scholz, "Private Saving and Public Policy," Tax Policy and the
Economy 7, 1993b, 73-110.

Bernheim, B. Douglas, and Sergei Severinov, “Bequests as Signals: Explanations for the Equal Division
Puzzle, Unigeniture, and Ricardian non-Equivalence,” mimeo, Stanford University, 1999.

Bernheim, B. Douglas, Andrei Shleifer, and Lawrence H. Summers, “The Strategic Bequest Motive,” Journal
of Political Economy 93(6), 1985, 1045-1076.

Bernheim, B. Douglas, Jonathan Skinner, and Steven Weinberg, “What Accounts for the Variation in
Retirement Wealth Among U.S. Households?” National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No.
6227, October 1997.

Blinder, Alan S., Toward an Economic Theory of Income Distribution, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1974.

Blinder, Alan S., "Distribution Effects and the Aggregate Consumption Function," Journal of Political
Economy 83, 1975, 447-475.

Blinder, Alan S., Roger H. Gordon, and Donald E. Wise, "Reconsidering the Work Disincentive Effects of
Social Security," National Tax Journal 33(4), December 1980, 431-442.

Bloom, David E., and Richard B. Freeman, "The Fall in Private Pension Coverage in the U.S.," NBER
Working Paper no. 3973, 1992.

Börsch-Supan, Axel, “Savings in Germany - Part 1: Incentives,” in James M. Poterba (ed.), Public Policies
and Household Saving, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994, 81-104.

Boskin, Michael J., "Taxation, Saving, and the Rate of Interest," Journal of Political Economy 86, 1978, S3-
S27.

Boskin, Michael J., and Lawrence J. Lau, "Taxation, Social Security and Aggregate Factor Supply in the
United States," mimeo, Stanford University, 1978.

Buck Consultants, Inc., "Current 401(k) Plan Practices: A Survey Report," September 1989.

Bull, N., “When All the Optimal Dynamic Taxes are Zero,” mimeo, Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System, 1993.

Burbidge, John B., and James B. Davies, “Government Incentives and Household Saving in Canada,” in
James M. Poterba (ed.), Public Policies and Household Saving, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994,
1-56.

Burbidge, John B., Deborah Fretz, and Michael R. Veall, “Canadian and American Saving Rates and the Role
of RRSPs,” Canadian Public Policy 24(2), June 1998, 259-63.



                                                    93
Burkhauser, Richard V., "The Pension Acceptance of Older Workers," Journal of Human Resources 14,
1979, 63-72.

Burkhauser, Richard V., "The Early Acceptance of Social Security: An Asset Maximization Approach,"
Industrial and Labor Relations Review 33, July 1980, 484-92.

Burman, Leonard, Joseph Cordes, and Larry Ozanne, "IRAs and National Saving," National Tax Journal 43,
September 1990, 259-284.

Cagan, Phillip, "The Effect of Pension Plans on Aggregate Saving: Evidence from a Sample Survey,"
Occasional Paper 95, National Bureau of Economic Research, 1965.

Campbell, John Y., and N. Gregory Mankiw, “Consumption, Income and Interest Rates: Reinterpreting the
Time Series Evidence,” in Olivier Jean Blanchard and Stanley Fischer (eds.), NBER Macroeconomics
Annual, 1989, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1989, 185-216.

Carroll, Chris, and Lawrence H. Summers, "Why Have Private Savings Rates in the U.S. and Canada
Diverged?" Journal of Monetary Economics 20, September 1987, 249-80.

Central Council for Savings Promotion, Savings and Savings Promotion Movement in Japan, Tokyo: Bank
of Japan, 1981.

Chamley, Christophe, “The Welfare Cost of Capital Income Taxation in a Growing Economy,” Journal of
Political Economy 89, 1981, 468-96.

Chamley, Christophe, “Optimal Taxation of Capital Income in General Equilibrium with Infinite Lives,”
Econometrica 54(3), 1986, 607-622.

Chari, V.V., and Patrick J. Kehoe, “Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy,” Handbook of Macroeconomics,
1999, forthcoming.

Chari, V.V., Lawrence J. Christiano, and Patrick J. Kehoe, “Optimal Fiscal Policy in a Business Cycle
Model,” Journal of Political Economy 102(4), 1994, 617-652.

Clark, Robert L., and Ann McDermed, The Choice of Pension Plans in a Changing Regulatory
Environment, Washington, D.C.: American Enterprise Institute, 1990.

Clark, Robert L., and Sylvester J. Schieber, “Factors Affecting Participation Rates and Contribution Levels in
401(k) Plans,” in Olivia S. Mitchell and Sylvester J. Schieber (eds.), Living with Defined Contribution
Pensions, Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1998, 69-97.

Congressional Budget Office, Baby Boomers in Retirement: An Early Perspective, Washington, D.C.:
Government Printing Office, 1993.

Conlisk, John, “Why Bounded Rationality?” Journal of Economic Literature 34(2), June 1996, pp. 669-700.

Cox, Donald, “Motives for Private Income Transfers,” Journal of Political Economy 95, 1987, 508-46.


                                                     94
Davies, James B., “Uncertain Lifetime, Consumption, and Dissaving in Retirement,” Journal of Political
Economy 89, 1981, 561-577.

Deaton, Angus, Understanding Consumption, Oxford, England: Clarendon Press, 1992.

Diamond, Peter A., “Taxation and Public Production in a Growth Setting,” in Models of Economic Growth,
J.A. Mirrlees and N. H. Stern (eds.), London: Macmillan, 215-234.

Diamond, Peter A. and Jerry A. Hausman, "Individual Retirement and Saving Behavior," Journal of Public
Economics 23, 1984, 81-114.

Dicks-Mireaux, Louis, and Mervyn King, "Pension Wealth and Household Savings: Tests of Robustness,"
Journal of Public Economics 23, 1984, 115-139.

Doyle, Robert J., Jr., and Eric T. Johnson, Readings in Wealth Accumulation Planning, fourth edition, Bryn
Mawr, Pennsylvania: The American College, 1991.

Dynan, Karen E., “How Prudent are Consumers?” Journal of Political Economy 101(6), 1993, 1104-1113.

Elmendorf, Douglas W., “The Effect of Interest-Rate Changes on Household Saving and Consumption: A
Survey,” mimeo, Federal Reserve Board, June 1996.

Employee Benefit Research Institute, "Can We Save Enough to Retire? Participant Education in Defined
Contribution Plans," EBRI Issue Brief, no. 160, April 1995.

Engelhardt, Gary V., “Tax Subsidies and Household Saving: Evidence from Canada,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, November 1996, 1237-68.

Engen, Eric M., "Precautionary Saving and the Structure of Taxation," mimeo, Federal Reserve Board of
Governors, June 1994.

Engen, Eric M., and William G. Gale, "IRAs and Saving in a Stochastic Life-Cycle Model," mimeo,
Brookings Institution, 1993.

Engen, Eric M., and William G. Gale, “Taxation and Saving: The Role of Uncertainty,” mimeo, Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 1996a.

Engen, Eric M., and William G. Gale, “Comprehensive Tax Reform and the Private Pension System,”
mimeo, Federal Reserve Board, May 1996b.

Engen, Eric M., and William G. Gale, "Debt, Taxes, and the Effects of 401(k) Plans on Household Wealth
Accumulation," mimeo, Federal Reserve Board, 1997.

Engen, Eric M., William G. Gale, and John Karl Scholz, "Do Saving Incentives Work?" Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, 1994:1, 85-151.

Engen, Eric M., William G. Gale, and John Karl Scholz, “The Illusory Effects of Saving Incentives on


                                                    95
Saving,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 10(4), 1996a, 113-138.

Engen, Eric M., William G. Gale, and John Karl Scholz, “Effects of Tax-Based Saving Incentives on Saving
and Wealth: A Critical Review of the Literature,” mimeo, 1996b.

Evans, Owen J., “Tax Policy, the Interest Elasticity of Saving, and Capital Accumulation: Numerical
Analysis of Theoretical Models,” American Economic Review 74, June 1983, 398-409.

Feenberg, Daniel R. and Jonathan Skinner, "Sources of IRA Saving," Tax Policy and the Economy 3, 1989,
25-46.

Feldstein, Martin S., “Tax Incentives, Corporate Saving, and Capital Accumulation in the United States,”
Journal of Public Economics 2, 1973, 159-171.

Feldstein, Martin S., "The Welfare Cost of Capital Income Taxation," Journal of Political Economy 86(2),
Part 2, April 1978, S29-51.

Feldstein, Martin S., “The Effect of Marginal Tax Rates on Taxable Income: A Panel Study of the 1986 Tax
Reform Act,” National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper no. 4496, March 1994.

Feldstein, Martin S., and George Fane, “Taxes, Corporate Dividend Policy and Personal Savings: The British
Postwar Experience,” Review of Economics and Statistics 55(4), 1973, 399-411.

Fields, Gary S., and Olivia S. Mitchell, Retirement, Pensions, and Social Security, Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 1984.

Fisher, Irving, The Theory of Interest, London: MacMillan, 1930.

Fougère, Denis, “Public Policies and Household Saving in France,” in James M. Poterba (ed.), Public
Policies and Household Saving, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994, 161-190.

Fullerton, Don, and Diane Lim Rogers, Who Bears the Lifetime Tax Burden? Washington, D.C.: Brookings
Institution, 1993.

Fullerton, Don, and Diane Lim Rogers, “Lifetime Effects of Fundamental Tax Reform,” in Henry J. Aaron
and William G. Gale (eds.), Economic Effects of Fundamental Tax Reform, Brookings Institution:
Washington, D.C., 1996, 321-347.

Furnham, Adrian, and Alan Lewis, The Economic Mind: The Social Psychology of Economic Behavior,
New York: St. Martin's Press, 1986.

Gale, William G., "The Effects of Pensions on Wealth: A Re-evaluation of Theory and Evidence," mimeo,
Brookings Institution, 1995.

Gale, William G., and John Karl Scholz, “Intergenerational Transfers and the Accumulation of Wealth,”
Journal of Economic Perspectives 8, 1994a, 145-160.



                                                    96
Gale, William G., and John Karl Scholz, "IRAs and Household Saving," American Economic Review 84,
December 1994b, 1233-1260.

Garrett, Daniel M., "The Effects of Nondiscrimination Rules on 401(k) Contributions," mimeo, Stanford
University, 1995.

Gentry, William M., and Eric Peress, "Taxes and Fringe Benefits Offered by Employers," National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper No. 4764, June 1994.

Gravelle, Jane G., “Income, Consumption, and Wage Taxation in a Life Cycle Model: Separating Efficiency
from Redistribution,” American Economic Review 81, 1991a, 985-995.

Gravelle, Jane G., "Do Individual Retirement Accounts Increase Savings?" Journal of Economic
Perspectives 5, Spring 1991b, 133-148.

Green, Francis, "The Effect of Occupational Pension Schemes on Saving in the United Kingdom: A Test of
the Life Cycle Hypothesis," The Economic Journal 91, March 1981, 136-144.

Gustman, Alan L., and Thomas L. Steinmeier, "The Stampede Toward Defined Contribution Pension Plans:
Fact or Fiction?" Industrial Relations 31, 1992, 361-369.

Gustman, Alan L., and Thomas L. Steinmeier, "Pension Incentives and Job Mobility," W.E. Upjohn Institute
for Employment Research, 1995.

Gustman, Alan L., and Thomas L. Steinmeier, “Effects of Pensions on Savings: Analysis with Data from the
Health and Retirement Survey,” mimeo, Dartmouth College, March 1998.

Hall, Robert E., "Intertemporal Substitution in Consumption," Journal of Political Economy 96, April 1988,
339-357.

Harberger, Arnold, “Taxation, Resource Allocation and Welfare,” in The Role of Direct and Indirect Taxes
in the Federal Reserve System, Princeton University Press: Princeton, NJ, 1964.

Hayashi, Fumio, “Tests for Liquidity Constraints: A Critical Survey,” National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper No. 1720, October 1985.

Hoch, Stephen J., and George F. Lowenstein, "Time-Inconsistent Preferences and Consumer Self-Control,"
Journal of Consumer Research 17(4), March 1991, 492-507.

Howrey, E. Phillip, and Saul H. Hymans, "The Measurement and Determination of Loanable Funds Saving,"
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1978:2, 655-85.

Hubbard, R. Glenn, "Do IRAs and Keoghs Increase Saving?" National Tax Journal 37, March 1984, 43-54.

Hubbard, R. Glenn, "Pension Wealth and Individual Saving," Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 18(2),
May 1986, 167-178.



                                                   97
Hubbard, R. Glenn, and Kenneth L. Judd, “Liquidity Constraints, Fiscal Policy, and Consumption,”
Brookings Paper on Economic Activity, vol. 1, 1986, 1-51.

Hubbard, R. Glenn, and Jonathan Skinner, "Assessing the Effectiveness of Saving Incentives,” Journal of
Economic Perspectives 10(4), 1996, 73-90.

Hurd, Michael, “Saving of the Elderly and Desired Bequests,” American Economic Review 77, 1987, 298-
312.

Hurd, Michael, “Mortality Risk and Bequests,” Econometrca 57, 1989, 779-814.

Ippolito, Richard A., "The Economic Function of Underfunded Pension Plans," Journal of Law and
Economics 28, 1985, 611-651.

Ippolito, Richard A., Pensions, Economics and Public Policy, Homewood, IL: Dow Jones-Irwin, 1986.

Ito, Takatoshi, and Yukinobu Kitamura, “Public Policies and Household Saving in Japan,” in James M.
Poterba (ed.), Public Policies and Household Saving, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994, 133-160.

Jappelli, Tullio, and Marco Pagano, “Government Incentives and Household Saving in Italy,” in James M.
Poterba (ed.), Public Policies and Household Saving, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994, 105-132.

Johnson, Alfred P., "Individual Retirement Accounts Help Boost Saving in the U.S.," testimony to the
Committee on Finance, U.S. Senate, in Tax Reform Proposals (99-246, part XIII), 1985, 129-149.

Johnson, Craig E., John Diamond, and George R. Zodrow, “Bequests, Saving, and Taxation,” Proceedings of
the Eighty-Ninth Annual Conference on Taxation, National Tax Association, 1997, 37-45.

Joines, Douglas H., and James G. Manegold, "IRA and Saving: Evidence from a Panel of Taxpayers,"
mimeo, University of Southern California, February 1995.

Jones, Larry E., Rodolfo E. Manuelli, and Peter E. Rossi, “Optimal Taxation in Models of Endogenous
Growth,” Journal of Political Economy 101(3), 1993, 485-517.

Jones, Larry E., Rodolfo E. Manuelli, and Peter E. Rossi, “On the Optimal Taxation of Capital Income,”
Journal of Economic Theory 73, 93-117.

Jones, Stephen R. G., The Economics of Conformism, Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1984.

Judd, Kenneth L., “Redistributive Taxation in a Simple Perfect Foresight Model,” Journal of Public
Economics 28, 1985, 59-83.

Judd, Kenneth L., "The Welfare Cost of Factor Taxation in a Perfect-Foresight Model," Journal of Political
Economy 95(4), August 1987, 675-709.

Judd, Kenneth L., “The Optimal Tax Rate for Capital Income is Negative,” National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper No. 6004, April 1997.


                                                    98
Judd, Kenneth L., “Optimal Taxation and Spending in General Competitive Growth Models,” Journal of
Public Economics 71(1), January 1999, 1-25.

Katona, George, Private Pensions and Individual Saving, University of Michigan Press, 1965.

Katona, George, Psychological Economics, Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1975.

King, Mervyn A., and Louis Dicks-Mireaux, "Asset Holdings and the Life Cycle," Economic Journal 92,
1982, 247-267.

Kotlikoff, Laurence J., "Testing the Theory of Social Security and Life Cycle Accumulation," American
Economic Review 69(3), June 1979, 396-410.

Kotlikoff, Laurence J., “Intergenerational Transfers and Savings,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 2,
1988, 41-58.

Kotlikoff, Laurence J., and Avia Spivak, "The Family as an Incomplete Annuities Market," Journal of
Political Economy 89, April 1981, 372-91.

Kotlikoff, Laurence J., and Lawrence H. Summers, “The Role of Intergenerational Transfers in Aggregate
Capital Accumulation,” Journal of Political Economy 89, 1981, 706-732.

Kotlikoff, Laurence J., and David A. Wise, "The Wage Carrot and the Pension Stick: Retirement Benefits and
Labor Force Participation," W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research, 1990.

Kruse, Douglas L., "Pension Substitution in the 1980s: Why the Shift Toward Defined Contribution Pension
Plans?" NBER Working Paper, 1991.

Kurz, Mordecai, “Capital Accumulation and the Characteristics of Private Intergenerational Transfers,”
Economica 51, 1984, 1-22.

Kusko, Andrea, James M. Poterba, and David W. Wilcox, "Tax Preferred Saving Vehicles and Personal
Saving: New Evidence form the Behavior of 12,000 Participants in a 401(k) Plan," mimeo, Federal Reserve
Board of Governors, 1993.

Kusko, Andrea, James M. Poterba, and David W. Wilcox, "Employee Decisions With Respect to 401(k)
Plans: Evidence from Individual Level Data," Working Paper No. 4635, National Bureau of Economic
Research, 1994.

Laibson, David I., “Self-Control and Saving,” mimeo, Harvard University, 1994a.

Laibson, David I., “Mental Accounts, Self-Control, and an Intrapersonal Principal-Agent Problem,” mimeo,
Harvard University, 1994b.

Laibson, David I., “Hyperbolic Discount Functions, Undersaving, and Savings Policy,” National Bureau of
Economic Research, Working Paper No. 5635, 1996.



                                                    99
Laibson, David I., “Comment on ‘Personal Retirement Saving Programs and Asset Accumulation,’” in David
A. Wise (ed.), Studies in the Economics of Aging, NBER and the University of Chicago Press, 1988, 106-
24.

Laibson, David I., Andrea Repetto, and Jeremy Tobacman, “Self-Control and Retirement Savings,”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, no. 1, 1988.

Laitner, John, and F. Thomas Juster, “New Evidence on Altruism: A Study of TIAA-CREF Retirees,”
American Economic Review 86, 1996, 893-908.

Lawrance, Emily C., “Poverty and the Rate of Time Preference: Evidence from Panel Data,” Journal of
Political Economy 99(1), 1991, 54-77.

Lazear, Edward P., "Pensions as Severance Pay," in Zvi Bodie, John Shoven, and David Wise, eds.,
Financial Aspects of the United States Pension System, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1983.

Lazear, Edward P., and Robert Moore, "Pensions and Mobility," in Zvi Bodie, John Shoven, and David Wise,
eds., Pensions in the U.S. Economy, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1988.

Long, James E., "Marginal Tax Rates and IRA Contributions," National Tax Journal 43(2), 143-53.

Lord, William, and Peter Rangazas, “Tax Reform with Altruistic Bequests,” Public Finance 47, 1992, 61-
81.

Lucas, Robert E., Jr., "Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique," in Karl Brunner and Allan H. Meltzer,
The Phillips Curve and Labor Markets, Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, vol. 1,
suppl., Journal of Monetary Economics, 1976.

Maital, Shlomo, "Prometheus Rebound: On Welfare-Improving Constraints," Eastern Economic Journal
12(3), July-September 1986, 337-44.

McGee, M. Kevin, “Alternative Transitions to a Consumption Tax,” National Tax Journal 42, 1989, 155-
166.

Menchik, Paul L., “Primogeniture, Equal Sharing, and the U.S. Distribution of Wealth,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics 94, 1980, 299-316.

Milligan, Kevin S., “Savings and Tax Incentives: Semiparametric Estimation of the Household Savings
Impact of RRSPs,” mimeo, University of Toronto, May 1998.

Modigliani, Franco, “The Role of Intergenerational Transfers and Life Cycle Saving in the Accumulation of
Wealth,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 2, 1988, 15-40.

Modigliani, Franco, and Richard Brumberg, "Utility Analysis and the Consumption Function: An
Interpretation of Cross-Section Data," in K.K. Kurihara, ed., Post Keynsian Economics, New Brunswick, NJ:
Rutgers University Press, 1954.



                                                    100
Munnell, Alicia H., The Effect of Social Security on Personal Saving, Cambridge, MA: Ballinger, 1974.

Munnell, Alicia H., "Private Pensions and Saving: New Evidence," Journal of Political Economy 84(5),
1976, 1013-1032.

Papke, Leslie E., "Participation in and Contributions to 401(k) Plans: Evidence from Plan Data," NBER
Working Paper No. 4199, 1992.

Papke, Leslie, Mitchell Petersen, and James M. Poterba, "Did 401(k) Plans Replace Other Employer
Provided Pensions?" Working Paper No. 4501, National Bureau of Economic Research, October 1993.

Parsons, Donald O., "The Employment Relationship: Job Attachment, Work Effort, and the Nature of
Contracts," in Orley Ashenfelter and Richard Layard, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, vol. II,
Amsterdam: North Holland, 1986.

Parsons, Donald O., "Retirement Age and Retirement Income: The Role of the Firm," mimeo, Ohio State
University, 1995.

Phelps, E.S., and R. A. Pollak, “On Second-best National Saving and Game-equilibrium Growth,” Review of
Economic Studies 35, 1968, 185-199.

Poterba, James M., “Tax Policy and Corporate Saving,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, no. 2,
1987, 455-503.

Poterba, James M., “Dividends, Capital Gains, and the Corporate Veil: Evidence from Britain, Canada, and
the United States,” in B. Douglas Bernheim and John B. Shoven (eds.), National Saving and Economic
Performance, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1991, 49-74.

Poterba, James M., Steven F. Venti, and David A. Wise, "401(k) Plans and Tax-Deferred Saving," NBER
Working Paper No. 4181, 1992.

Poterba, James M., Steven F. Venti, and David A. Wise, "401(k) Plans and Tax-Deferred Saving," in David
A. Wise, Ed., Studies in the Economics of Aging, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994.

Poterba, James M., Steven F. Venti, and David A. Wise, "Do 401(k) Contributions Crowd Out Other
Personal Saving?" Journal of Public Economics 58, 1995, 1-32.

Poterba, James M., Steven F. Venti, and David A. Wise, “How Retirement Saving Programs Increase
Saving," Journal of Economic Perspectives 10(4), 1996a, 91-112.

Poterba, James M., Steven F. Venti, and David A. Wise, “Personal Retirement Saving Programs and Asset
Accumulation: Reconciling the Evidence,” National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 5599,
May 1996b.

Quinn, Joseph F., Richard V. Burkhauser, and Daniel A. Myers, "Passing the Torch: The Influence of
Economic Incentives on Work and Retirement," W.E. Upjohn Institute, 1990.



                                                   101
Rainwater, Lee, Behind Ghetto Walls: Black Families in a Federal Slum, Chicago: Aldine, 1970.

Reagan, Patricia B., and John A. Turner, "The Decline in Marginal Tax Rates During the 1980s Reduced
Pension Coverage," mimeo, Ohio State University, June 1995.

Runkle, David E., “Liquidity Constraints and the Permanent-Income Hypothesis: Evidence from Panel Data,”
Journal of Monetary Economics 27(1), 1991, 73-98.

Sabelhaus, John, “Public Policy and Saving in the United States and Canada,” Canadian Journal of
Economics 30(2), May 1997, 253-75.

Samwick, Andrew A., "The Limited Offset Between Pension Wealth and Other Private Wealth: Implications
of Buffer-Stock Saving," mimeo, Dartmouth College, December 1995.

Sandmo, Agnar, "The Effects of Taxation on Savings and Risk Taking," in Alan Auerbach and Martin
Feldstein, eds., Handbook of Public Economics, vol. I, Amsterdam: North Holland, 1985.

Schelling, Thomas C., "Self-Command in Practice, in Policy, and in a Theory of Rational Choice," American
Economic Review 74(2), May 1984, 1-11.

Schoeplain, Robert N., "The Effect of Pension Plans on Other Retirement Saving," Journal of Finance,
1970, 633-638.

Scitovsky, Tibor, The Joyless Economy, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1976.

Scott, Jason, "The Determinants of Participation in Defined Contribution Pension Plans," mimeo, Stanford
University, February 1994.

Seidman, Laurence S., “Taxes in a Life Cycle Growth Model with Bequests and Inheritances,” American
Economic Review 93, 1983, 437-441.

Seidman, Laurence S., “Conversion to a Consumption Tax: The Transition in a Life-Cycle Growth Model,”
Journal of Political Economy 92, 1984, 247-267.

Shapiro, Matthew D., “The Permanent Income Hypotheses and the Real Interest Rate: Some Evidence from
Panel Data,” Economic Letters 14, 1984, 93-100.

Shefrin, Hersh M., and Richard H. Thaler, "The Behavioral Life-Cycle Hypothesis," Economic Inquiry
26(4), 1988, 609-43.

Shoven, John B., Return on Investment: Pensions are How America Saves, Association of Private Pension
and Welfare Plans: Washington D.C., September 1991.

Simon, Herbert A., “A Behavioral Model of Rational Choice,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 69(1),
February 1995, pp. 99-118.

Skinner, Jonathan, and Daniel Feenberg, "The Impact of the 1986 Tax Reform on Personal Saving," in Joel


                                                   102
Slemrod, ed., Do Taxes Matter? The effect of the 1986 Tax Reform Act on the U.S. Economy, Cambridge,
MIT Press, 1989.

Stack, Carol B., All Our Kin: Strategies for Survival in a Black Community, New York: Harper & Row,
1974.

Starrett, David A., "Effects of Taxes on Saving," in H. Galper, H. Aaron, and J. Pechman, eds., Uneasy
Compromise: Problems of a Hybrid Income-Consumption Tax, Washington, D.C.: The Brookings
Institution, 1988.

Stock, James H., and David A. Wise, "The Pension Inducement to Retire: an Option Value Analysis," in
David A. wise, ed., Issues in the Economics of Aging, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1990.

Strotz, Robert H., “Myopia and Inconsistency in Dynamic Utility Maximization,” Review of Economic
Studies 23, 1955, 165-180.

Summers, Lawrence H., "Taxation and Capital Accumulation in a Life Cycle Growth Model," American
Economic Review 71, September 1981, 533-554.

Summers, Lawrence H., "Summers Replies to Galper and Byce on IRAs," Tax Notes 31(10), 1986, 1014-
1016.

Thaler, Richard H., "Psychology and Savings Policies," American Economic Review 84, May 1994, 186-192.

Thaler, Richard H., and Hersh Shefrin, "An Economic Theory of Self-Control," Journal of Political
Economy 89(2), April 1981, 392-406.

Tomes, Nigel, “The Family, Inheritance, and the Intergenerational Transmission of Inequality,” Journal of
Political Economy 89, 1981, 928-958.

Venti, Steven F., and David A. Wise, "Tax-Deferred Accounts, Constrained Choice, and Estimation of
Individual Saving," Review of Economic Studies 53, 1986, 579-601.

Venti, Steven F., and David A. Wise, "IRAs and Saving," in Martin Feldstein, ed., The Effects of Taxation on
Capital Accumulation, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1987.

Venti, Steven F., and David A. Wise, "The Determinants of IRA Contributions and the Effect of Limit
Changes," in Zvi Bodie, John B. Shoven, and David A. Wise, eds., Pensions and the U.S. Economy, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1988.

Venti, Steven F., and David A. Wise, "Have IRAs Increased U.S. Saving: Evidence from Consumer
Expenditure Surveys," Quarterly Journal of Economic 105, August 1990, 661-698.

Venti, Steven F., and David A. Wise, "The Saving Effect of Tax-Deferred Retirement Accounts: Evidence for
SIPP," in B. Douglas Bernheim and John B. Shoven, eds., National Saving and Economic Performance,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1991.



                                                    103
Venti, Steven F., and David A. Wise, "Government Policy and Personal Retirement Saving," Tax Policy and
the Economy 6, 1992, 1-41.

Venti, Steven F., and David A. Wise, "The Wealth of Cohorts: Retirement Saving and the Changing Assets of
Older Americans," Working Paper No. 4600, National Bureau of Economic Research, December 1993.

Venti, Steven F., and David A. Wise, "Individual Response to Retirement Savings Programs: Results from
U.S. Panel Data," Reicherche Economiche, 1995 (forthcoming).

Venti, Steven F., and David A. Wise, “RRSPs and Saving in Canada,” mimeo, Dartmouth College, December
1995.

Whyte, William F., Street Corner Society, Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1943.

Wilhelm, Mark O., “Bequest Behavior and the Effect of Heirs’ Earnings: Testing the Altruistic Model of
Bequests,” American Economic Review 86, 1996, 874-892.

Williamson, Samuel H., "U.S. and Canadian Pensions Before 1930: A Historical Perspective," in John A.
Turner and Daniel J. Beller, eds., Trends in Pensions 1992, U.S. Department of Labor, Pension and Welfare
Benefits Administration, 1992.

Wolff, Edward N., "Social Security, Pensions and the Life Cycle Accumulation of Wealth: Some Empirical
Tests," Annales D'Economie et de Statistique 9, 1988, 199-226.

Woodbury, Stephen A., and Douglas R. Bettinger, “The Decline of Fringe-Benefit Coverage in the 1980s,” in
Randall W. Eberts and Erica L. Groshen (eds.), Structural Changes in the U.S. Labor Markets: Causes and
Consequences, Armonk, New York: M. E. Sharpe, 1991, 105-138.

Woodbury, Stephen A., and Wei-Jang Huang, The Tax Treatment of Fringe Benefits, Kalamazoo, Michigan:
Upjohn Institute, 1993.

Wright, C., "Saving and the Rate of Interest," in A.C. Harberger and M.J. Bailey, Eds., The Taxation of
Income from Capital, Washington D.C.: Brookings Institution, 1969.

Yotsuzuka, Toshiki, “Ricardian Equivalence in the Presence of Capital Market Imperfections,” Journal of
Monetary Economics, 20(2), 1987, 411-36.

Zeldes, Stephen P., “Consumption and Liquidity Constraints: An Empirical Investigation,” Journal of
Political Economy 94(2), 1989, 305-346.

Zhu, Xiaodong, “Optimal Fiscal Policy in a Stochastic Growth Model,” Journal of Economic Theory 58(2),
1992, 250-289.




                                                    104
