                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         PRIVATIZ[NG R&D: PATENT POLICY AND
                         THE COMMERCIALIZATION OF NATIONAL
                              LABORATORY TECW\TOLOGIES

                                             Adam B. Jaffe
                                              Josh Lerner


                                          Working Paper 7064
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w7064


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 1999


Presented at the NBER Conference "The Patent System and Innovation" funded by the Alfred P. Sloan
Foundation via a grant to the NBER Project on Industrial Technology and Productivity, and by the Harvard
Business School's Division of Research. We thank Alper Afya and especially Petia Topalova for excellent
research assistance. Helpful comments were provided by Linda Cohen, Rose Marie Ham, Sam Petuchoswki,
and participants at the conference. Numerous officials at the DOE and the laboratories assisted in accessing
data and contributed helpful insights, but especial thanks should go to Ray Barnes, Victor Chavez, Paul
Gottlieb, Toni Joseph, Karena MacKinley, Giv Marguth, Ronald Meeks, Jeff Mobley, Bill Shepard, Warren
Siemens, Claire Sink, and Walter Warnick.. Thanks should go as well to Buddy Beck, Clyde Frank, and
Thomas Widmer. We appreciate Linda Cohen's help in accessing CRADA data. All errors are our own. The
views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not reflect those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

©   1999by Adam B. Jaffe and Josh Lerner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
                                                                                          ©
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including notice, is given
to the source.
Privatizing R&D: Patent Policy and the
Commercialization of National Laboratory Technologies
Adam B. Jaffe and Josh Lerner
NBER Working Paper No. 7064
April 1999

                                           ABSTRACT

       Despite their magnitude and potential economic impact, federal R&D expenditures outside
of research universities have been little scrutinized by economists. This paper examines whether the
series of initiatives since 1980 that have sought to encourage the patenting and technology transfer
at the national laboratories have had a significant impact, and how the features of these facilities
affected their success in commercialization. Employing both case studies of and databases about the
U.S. Department of Energy's laboratories, we challenge much of the conventional wisdom. The
policy changes of the 1980s had a substantial impact on the patenting activity by the national
laboratories, which have gradually reached parity in patents per R&D dollar with research
universities. Using citation data, we show that, unlike universities, the quality of the laboratory
patents has remained constant or even increased as their numbers have grown. The cross-sectional
patterns are generally consistent with theoretical suggestions regarding the impact and determinants
of the decision to privatize government functions.


Adam B. Jaffe                                 Josh Lerner
MS 021                                        Harvard Business School
Brandeis University                           Morgan Hall, Room 395
Waltham,MA 02554-9110                         Cambridge, MA 02163
and NBER                                      and NBER
aj affenber.org                               jlerner@hbs.edu
1) Introduction
        The United States government is by far the single largest performer and ft,nder of
research and development in the world. Between 1941 and 1997, the U.S. government
spent $63 trillion (in 1997 dollars) on R&D, just under one-half of the total amount
undertaken in the United States (see Figure 1). In 1993, the government's R&D
expenditures represented about 18% of the total funding of R&D in the major
industrialized countries [National Science Board, 1998].
      These expenditures, despite their magnitude and their potentially profound impact
on productivity and growth, have attracted surprisingly little scrutiny by economists.
While one environment in which federally funded research takes place, the research
university, has been extensively studied,' it accounts for a relatively small percentage of
overall funding. (As Figure 2 depicts, between 1955 and 1997, only 24% of the total
federally funded R&D performed in non-corporate settings took place in academic
institutions.) The majority of these activities took place in laboratories owned by such
agencies as the Departments of Defense and Energy, the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration, and the National Institutes of Health. R&D activities in this arena have
attracted little academic scrutiny.2
         Lending particular urgency to such research is the interest shown by
policymakers, both in the U.S. and abroad, in increasing the role of government-owned
laboratories in the technology commercialization process. Beginning in 1980, a series of
legislative initiatives and executive orders in the U.S. have sought to encourage the
patenting and the licensing of federally owned technologies, as well as the formation of
cooperative arrangements between laboratories and private firms. These challenges have
been particularly pressing at the laboratories devoted to national defense, whose primary
historical mission of designing and testing nuclear weapons has been rendered largely
 obsolete by world events. Similar efforts have been launched in many other nations.



   Examples include Nelson [1959], Jaffe [1989], and Henderson, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg [1998]. See also
 Stephan [19961, and the references cited therein.
 2
    Most of the academic literature has consisted of case studies of particular facilities [two thoughtftil
 examples are Markusen and Oden, 1996, and Ham and Mowery, 19981 and surveys of potential oractual
 users of laboratories [e.g., Bozeman and Crow, 1991, Roessner and Wise, 1993, and Berman, 1997].
       This paper examines whether the statutory changes of the 1980s have had a
significant impact on technology transfer from the national laboratories. We study the
subset of federally funded research and development centers (FFRDCs) owned by the
U.S. Department of Energy (DOE). These include some of the largest R&D laboratories
in the country, such as the Lawrence Livermore, Los Alamos, and Sandia facilities. We
employ a series of databases developed by DOE not hitherto examined by academics to
explore how patenting, the utilization of these patents by industry, and other technology
transfer activities have shifted in response to these legislative changes.
           In addition to examining shifts in the overall level of technology transfer
activities, we also explore how the heterogeneous features of these facilities affect their
success in commercialization. These laboratories differ from each other in at least three
critical respects. First, the quality of the laboratories' technology may differ. This may
partially reflect the nature of the laboratories' missions: those specializing in basic
science or defense-related technologies, for instance, may have fewer technologies ripe
for commercialization. It may also reflect the breadth of the laboratories' activities. In
particular, numerous studies have contended that laboratories that engaged in extensive
diversification outside of their core mission suffered a deterioration in R&D quality. In
addition, some facilities may have had excellent technologies, but may have been unable
to commercialize them due to a lack of understanding about the technology transfer
process.
           Second, the facilities differ in nature of the political problems                       that
commercialization efforts are likely to face. The conditions under which contractors
should be permitted to patent and license federally funded technologies remains highly
controversial.3 Research on privatization suggests the resistance to such changes will
vary with the circumstances of the parties. Across the laboratories, the relationships
between the contractors assigned to run the facilities and the Department of Energy differ


   One example is the 1998 controversy that stemmed from a reexamination proceeding by the U.S. Patent
 and Trademark Office concerning two patents covering low-power radar. One patent had beenawarded to
 a small Alabama company, the other to Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory. Before the patent
 hearing was even held, Alabama Representative Robert "Bud" Cramer requested that investigations of
 Livermore's technology transfer activities be undertaken by three congressional committees. Cramer also
 proposed legislation that would have restricted future collaborations between DOE FFRDCs and the private
 sector.


                                                    2
significantly. Efforts to encourage transfers of knowledge to the private sector are likely
to have elicited mixed reactions, depending on the circumstances of the contractor.
       Finally, the locations of the facilities are highly disparate. Some FFRDCs are
located near population centers with extensive innovative and entrepreneurial activities,
while others are in highly remote areas. An extensive literature has documented the
regional aspects of knowledge spillovers, which might suggest that the ability of
laboratories to have commercial impacts might be quite different.
        The results challenge some of the conventional wisdom about these laboratories,
as reflected in government studies and press accounts. Far from having no impact, the
policy changes of the 1980s appear to have had a substantial impact on the patenting
activity by the national laboratories.      While at the beginning of this period, the
laboratories had considerably fewer patents per R&D dollar than the average university,
today they are about equal. Even more impressive is the evidence from the citations in
other patents, a proxy for their importance. While the recent increase in university
patenting has been accompanied by a substantial decline in the quality of the awards (as
measured by the number of citations they receive), the quality of the laboratory patents
has remained constant or has slightly increased. These results suggest the organizational
structure of the government-owned contractor-operated model used at DOE laboratories
 may be far more credible than critics have suggested.
        The relatively small number of DOE laboratories, combined with limited
 variation over time for each lab, makes it difficult to draw strong conclusions about how
 the different laboratory environments and organizational structures affect the technology
 transfer process. But several findings can be highlighted. First, consistent with claims
 that the diversification led to a degradation of quality of the laboratories' R&D, it appears
 that the greatest commercial activity has derived from laboratories that have remained
 focused. Second, facilities with a turnover of contractors, when pressures from parties
 resistant to exclusive licensing are likely to have been lowest, have had greater success in
 accelerating their rate of commercialization. These effects are present when both patent
 citations and the extent of cooperative research are used as indicators of technology
 transfer.




                                               3
       In addition to exploring an important but little-explored source of R&D, this
                                                                        ownership. While
paper contributes to the literature on transfers from public to private
the underlying activities and the measures of performance are quite different, the results
                                                                      D'Souza and
are consistent with numerous studies of privatized firms [reviewed in
                                                                           have a
Megginson, 199811 that show transfers from public to private ownership to
                                            The results are also consistent with the smaller
significant impact on performance.
literature on the decision to privatize [e.g., López-de-SilafleS, Shleifer, and Vishny,
                                         which political considerations can serve as a
 1997], which emphasizes the extent to
barrier to the transfers of ownership and/or control.
         The plan of this paper is as follows. In Section 2, we provide some background
information on government patent policy         and the national laboratories. Relevant
theoretical literature is summarized in Section 3. Section 4 presents two brief case
                                         construction of the data set is described and the
 studies of particular laboratories. The
 analysis presented in the Section 5. The final section concludes the paper.

 2) Patent Policy and the National Laboratories
      a) Patent Policy and Federally Funded R&D
          A substantial literature discusses federal policies towards the patenting and
 commercialization of the innovations whose development it has funded [Cohen and Noll,
 1996]. Even a casual review of these works, however, makes clear how little the debate
 has changed over the decades. Many advocates have consistently called for government
 to take title to innovations that it funds, in order to insure the greatest diffusion of the
 breakthroughs. Others have argued for a policy of allowing contractors to assume title to
  federally funded inventions, or alternatively allowing the exclusive licensing of these
  discoveries.
         While questions concerning the federal government's right to patent the results of
  the research it funded were the subject of litigation and Congressional debate as early as
  the I 880s, the debate assumed much greater visibility with the onset of World War II.
  The dramatic expansion of federal R&D effort during the War raised questions about the

  4                                                             and reports and four special CommiSSiOnS
      This issue was the topic over forty congressional hearings Administration, 19761. Three historical
  between 1940 and 1975 [U.S. Energy Research and Development
  overviews of the debates are Forman [1957], Neumeyer and Stedman [1971], and Hart [1998].


                                                     4
disposal of the rights to these discoveries. Two reports commissioned by President
Roosevelt reached dramatically different conclusions, and framed the debate that would
follow in the succeeding decades.
        The National Patent Planning Commission, an ad hoc body established shortly
after the Pearl Harbor attack to examine the disposition of the patents developed during
the War, opined:
       It often happens, particularly in new fields, that what is available for
       exploitation by everyone is undertaken by no one. There undoubtedly are
       Government-Owned patents which should be made available to the public
       in commercial form, but which, because they call for a substantial capital
       investment, private manufacturers have been unwilling to commercialize
       under a nonexclusive license [U.S. House of Representatives, 1945, p. 5].
       A second report, completed in 1947 by the Department of Justice, took a very
different tack. Rather, it argued that "innovations financed with public funds should
inure to the benefit of the public, and should not become a purely private monopoly under
which the public may be charged for, or even denied, the use of technologywhich it has
financed" [U.S. Department of Justice, 1947, p. 2]. The report urged the adoption of a
uniform policy forbidding both the granting of patent rights to contractors and exclusive
 licenses to federal technology in all but extraordinary circumstances. Over the ensuing
 30 years, federal patent policy vacillated back and forth between these two views
 [Forman, 1957; Neumeyer and Stedman, 1971].
        Beginning in the 1980s, policy seemed to shift decisively in favor of permitting
 exclusive licenses of publicly-funded research to encourage commercialization. The
 Stevenson-Wydler Technology Innovation Act of 1980 (P.L. 96-480) explicitly made
 technology transfer a mission of all federal laboratories and created a variety of
 institutional structures to facilitate this mission. Among other steps, it required that all
 major federal laboratories establish an Office of Research and Technology Applications
 to undertake technology transfer activities. At about the same time, the Bayh-Dole Act
 allowed academic institutions and non-profit institutions to automatically retain title to
 patents derived from federally funded R&D. The act also explicitly authorized
 government-operated laboratories to grant exclusive licenses on government-owned




                                               5
patents. These two acts were follow by a series of initiatives in the 1982-89 period that
extended and broadened their reach.5
      This wave of legislation did not resolve the debate concerning the extent to which
ownership of government-funded R&D ought to be transferred to private sector entities.
Congressional and agency investigations of inappropriate behavior during the
commercialization process—particularly violation of fairness of opportunity and conflict
of interest regulations during the spin-out and licensing process—continued to be
commonplace. CRADAs and other efforts to work with large companies have remained
controversial. Nonetheless, this series of legislation represented a decisive shift in the
long debate on government patent policy.

    b) The DOE FFRDCs6
       Many of the DOE FFRDCs, also known as national laboratories, had their origins
in the Manhattan Project during World War II. The development of the atomic bomb
required the establishment of a number of specialized facilities, many of which were
located in remote areas due to concerns about safety and security. After the War, these
facilities were placed under the control of outside contractors, some of whom are
universities and some private firms. It was hoped that these Government-Owned-
Contractor-Operated facilities ("GOCOs") would be insulated from political pressures,
 and would be better able to attract and retain talented personnel because they did not have
to conform to civil service rules.
          A series of reports over the past several decades, however, have highlighted the
 limitations of the GOCO model.7 Repeated reports have highlighted the same problems
 concerning the management of the laboratory system: (1) the desired political
 independence has never been achieved, with DOE imposing extensive regulatory

   In 1986, the Federal Technology Transfer Act allowed government-operated facilities to enter into
 cooperative R&D arrangements (CRADAs) with industry (FL. 99-502), as well as to grant outside
 collaborators the title to any invention that resulted. In 1989, the National Competitiveness Technology
 Transfer Act of 1989 (FL. 101-189) extended the 1986 legislation enabling the formation of CRADAs to
 the GOCO facilities.
 6
   This abbreviated history is based in part on Branscomb [19931, U.S. Office of Technology Assessment
 [19931, and U.S. General Accounting Office [1998]. The interested reader is referred to these sources for
 more detailed accounts.
  These critiques date back at least as far as the "Bell Report" prepared by the Office of Management and
 Budget in 1963. Two clear expositions of these problems are found in the "Packard Report" [WhiteHouse
 Science Council, 19831 and the "Galvin Report" [Task Force, 1995].


                                                    6
guidelines that limit the flexibility of contractors; (2) duplication and redundancy across
the laboratories; and (3) unfocused diversification of the facilities into new activities,
particularly after funding for the core nuclear activities declined. As a recent synthesis of
these studies by the U.S. General Accounting Office [1998] noted, "despite many studies
identifying similar deficiencies in the management of DOE's laboratories, fundamental
change remains an elusive goal."

    c) Patent Policy and the DOE FFRDCs
       Prior to 1980, the laboratory contractors were assigned few patents and exclusive
licenses of were rare (see Table i). Although DOE policy began to change after the
legislative changes of the 1980s, a number of accounts [e.g., U.S. Office of Technology
Assessment, 1993] suggest that DOE's response was delayed until the period between
1986   and 1989.

        Many observers also suggest that the implementation at the DOE of the 1980s

reforms   was problematic. Critics have attributed this to two factors. First, the problems
with the laboratory structure in general noted above led to resistance to these reforms.9
Second, the fundamental conflict between the commercial need for clear private property
rights in the form of exclusive licenses and the broader goals of public research seemed
particularly acute at these facilities. In many cases, spin-out firms or cooperative partners
were not able to obtain exclusive licenses to DOE patents, or were only able to do so after
delays of many years. Some licenses were subsequently challenged as violations of
conflicts of interest or fairness of opportunity rules in lawsuits by competitors or in
Congressional hearings [e.g., Markusen and Oden, 1996]. DOE radically scaled back its


  It should be acknowledged that even within the earliest contracts granted by the Manhattan Engineer
District during the War was a recognition that contractors should control non-atomic innovations that were
only tangentially related the government's mission. In practice, however, the government made very little
 use of this right to grant ownership to national laboratory contractors or to license its patents on an
 exclusive basis. [For a discussion, see U.S. Energy Research and Development Administration, 19'76.]
   One illustration is the process through which proposed cooperative agreements with industry were
 evaluated. While in many agencies, laboratory directors were allowed to implement CRADAs with limited
 headquarters oversight or regulatory requirements, DOE introduced a three-part review process. CRADA
 proposals were reviewed at the laboratory level, followed by a centralized screening by the headquarters
 program offices (typically on an annual basis), followed by the negotiation of a contract and a work
 statement (in which laboratory, field office, and program office personnel are all involved). Not
 surprisingly, during the period when DOE was actively seeking new CRADAs, the level of activity was
 lower than in other agencies and the time from inception to signing much longer [U.S. General Accounting
 Office, 1993].


                                                     7
CRADA program in 1995 and 1996 after Republican congressmen questioned whether
they represented "corporate welfare" [Lawler, 1996].
       These difficulties had a negative impact on corporations or venture capitalists'
willingness to invest in these projects. Reviews of technology transfer activities at the
national laboratories have almost universally highlighted the lack of progress in this
regard, particular when contrasted to universities.'0

3) Theoretical Insights
      a) Does Government Patent Policy Matter? -
         Economic theory suggests a variety of reasons for suggesting that public
ownership may have different effects than private ownership:
         • One such framework is suggested by Alchian [1965], who argues that a
            central difference between private and public ownership is the ability to
             reapportion ownership. If a private company is performing less well than its
             peers, and a small number of individuals believe they can create value through
             a shift in management policy, they can (at least hypothetically) rapidly
             assemble a controlling position in the firm and implement those changes.
             Since the shares of government owned firms are not publicly traded, effecting
             these types of changes might be difficult.
         • Second, arguments for the superiority of private ownership relate to the
             difficulty of providing high-powered incentives to and intensive monitoring of
             managers in state-owned firms [Vickers and Yarrow, 1988]. Evidence
             suggests that privatization is often associated with an acceleration of
             managerial turnover [e.g., Barberis, et al., 1996].
         • A third argument, highlighted by Shleifer and Vishny [1994], relates to the
             detrimental effects of political control over economic activity. Politicians are
             unlikely to directly benefit from the profitability of a state-controlled
              enterprise, and may be subject to many pressures from lobbyists and campaign
              contributors to encourage actions that do not maximize an enterprise's value.
              As a result, they may push for choices that are far from the efficient ones. In a
              setting where multiple politicians have control rights and seek to maximize
              their own particular objective functions, the distortions can be particularly
              severe.


 10
    For instance, U.S. Office of Technology Assessment [1993] compares the technology licensing revenues
 of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology to DOE FFRDCs. While MIT in 1996 had less than 12% of
 the collective R&D expenditures of the thirteen leading FFRDCs, it had nearly three times the revenues
 from its licensing activities in 1997 ($21.2 million vs. $7.5 million). It should be noted, however, that
 licensing revenues is a "lagging indicator": much of the licensing revenues may be generated by
 technologies licensed a decade or longer ago.


                                                    8
These claims are generally supported by the recent empirical literature on privatization,
which suggests that shifts from public to private ownership are associated with an
improvement in operations [e.g., Megginson, Nash, and van Randerbough, 1997].
      In the same spirit, it might be contended that assigning the ownership of publicly
funded patents to the government is less efficient than assignments to a private firm.
Providing both control and cash flow rights over intellectual property to a single entity
that is free of political interference should lead to optimal decisions as to how the
technology is commercialized.

    b) What Explains Cross-Sectional Variations?
       In addition to suggesting the general effects of moving property rights into the
private sector, theory also suggests factors that would be likely to affect the differential
success of such a policy shift across different laboratory environments. First, some kinds
of research are inherently more difficult to commercialize.          Laboratories that are
particularly tied to national security issues or devoted to fundamental scientific research
are less likely to have commercialization opportunities. Second, as suggested above,
laboratories that have pursued unfocused diversification efforts may have lower quality
research; this echoes the literature on adverse effects of diversification in the corporate
setting [Lang and Stultz, 1994; Scharfstein and Stein, 1997]. If diversification reduces
research quality, it would lead to less "product" to transfer.
        Organizational factors are also likely to matter. As discussed above, the 1980
Bayh-Dole reforms gave a great degree of flexibility to universities to license and spin
 out new technologies. Many academic institutions exploited these changes by building
 up technology licensing offices and aggressively marketing new technologies
 [Henderson, Jaffe and Trajtenberg, 1998]. FFRDCs whose prime contractors were
 universities may have benefited from this know-how to make their technology transfer
 activities more effective.
       The nature of the contractor and its relationship with the DOE might have had an
 important influence on what Boyko, Shleifer and Vishny [1995] characterize as the
 "depoliticalization process" inherent in transfers from public to private control. It might
 be thought that depoliticization was more difficult at organizations where the prime
 contractor had a long-standing presence at the laboratory. Efforts to encourage exclusive


                                               9
licensing have been highly controversial within the DOE. A particular source of
resistance has been the DOE field offices, where in many cases the staff has questioned
the desirability of senior management's efforts to change technology transfer policies.
(One motivation for these concerns may the loss of control inherent in the delegation of a
great deal of discretion to contractors' technology licensing offices.) A new contractor
typically brings in new staff when he receives an award to run a facility. Afler time,
however, this staff may develop close working relationships with DOE officials in the
local field office. Consequently, resistance to residual efforts to assert control by the
Department staff may be the greatest in a setting where there is a new contractor. This
would be consistent with the evidence concerning the decision to contract out of
municipal services: in settings where municipal unions have greater influence (e.g., when
public employees are not restricted from participating in political activities), there is
much greater resistance to privatizing government services [López-de-Silanes, Shleifer,
and Vishny, 1997].
       Finally, one might expect that geographic location would affect the success of
technology transfer. Recent work has shown that knowledge spillovers tend to be
geographically localized, particularly within geographic areas [Glaeser, et a!., 1992;
Jaffe, Trajtenberg, and Henderson, 1993]. This concentration of knowledge spillovers
has implications for the relative level of technology transfer at the national laboratories
because these facilities are located in very different areas. Some facilities are located far
from any major metropolitan area, while others are nearby a major metropolis. If it is
easier to transfer to nearby firms, the laboratories that are located in remote areas will
have more trouble finding recipients. This disadvantage could be amplified by the
 concentration of venture capital, the primary mechanism for funding for privately held,
 high-technology companies.         Venture organizations are highly geographically
 concentrated, with over half the funds based in California and Massachusetts. [Gompers
 and Lerner, 1999, provide a detailed description.] Furthermore, venture capitalists tend
 to be highly localized in their investment patterns: over half the venture-backed firms
 have a venture investor who serves as a board member based within 60 miles of the firm
 [Lerner, 1995]. Thus, even if laboratories in remote areas with little venture capital




                                             10
activity do generate spillovers to nearby companies, the local firms may be unable to
access the needed financial and other resources to profit from them."

4) Two Case Examples
      We briefly illustrate these challenges through a discussion of two laboratories,
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL) and the Idaho National Engineering
and Environmental Laboratory (INEEL). These facilities are in some respects very
different. The former has DOE's Office of Defense Programs as its primary funder, has
an academic institution as a prime contractor, and is located in the San Francisco Bay
Area. The latter is funded primarily by DOE's Office of Environmental Management,
has a private corporation as the prime contractor, and is located in a remote area of
eastern Idaho. But both facilities have overcome considerable challenges to develop
technology transfer efforts that in many respects represent "best practice" among the
DOE FFRDCs. LLNL and INEEL have led the laboratories in the level of licensing
revenue and spinout companies respectively.

   a) Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
       Lawrence Livermore is one of the three very large DOE FFRDCs that has
historically specialized in nuclear weapons research. LLNL was established in
Livermore, California in 1952. The University of California has operated this facility
from its inception. From the first, LLNL had a strong emphasis not only on the
engineering of thermonuclear weapons, but on related fundamental science. It was an
aggressive user of the newest computational technology: for instance, the first facility at
Lawrence Livermore was a building to house the then-new UNIVAC computer, which
was needed for the complex calculations in the weapons design process. As in other
facilities, there has been a broadening of the laboratory's mission over time into such
areas as non-nuclear energy, biomedicine, and environmental science.
         The evolution of the technology transfer function at the laboratory has similarly
featured both continuity and change. At least since the 1960s, the laboratory has had

 ' Some supporting evidence for this claim is found in Lerner's [1999] analysis of the federal Small
Business Innovation Research program, an award program for small high-technology companies.
 Awardees that were located in regions with substantial venture capital activity did significantly better than
 a matching set of non-awardees. The awards had no effect, however, in regionswithout venture capital
 activity.


                                                      11
strong relationships with the computer and laser industries. Advances to the state-of-the-
art developed at the laboratory were often transferred to private firms or developed by
companies in response to laboratory requests, in order to generate a production-scale
source of equipment, instrumentation, or components for the larger experimental
facilities. In many cases, the prototypes were cooperatively developed by private sector
and laboratory researchers. A significant number of these innovations eventually found
their way into the civilian market. The laboratory's motivation for engaging in this
activity, however, had little to do with concerns about "technology transfer." Rather, the
staff involved the private sector because procuring equipment from outside vendors was
often more efficient than manufacturing the devices at the laboratory. The relationships
with vendors were highly informal. The LLNL made virtually no effort to claim
intellectual property holdings, and in many cases, their partners did not seek to patent the
discoveries either.
       A formal technology transfer office was established at LLNL after the DOE
issued the implementing regulations for the Stevenson-Wydler Act in 1982. The office
was initially modestly funded, with little internal or external visibility. There was a
dramatic increase in activity, however, after the passage of the National Competitiveness
Technology Transfer Act of 1989. In particular, the DOE established a central program
(later known as the Technology Transfer Initiative) primarily to fund CRADAs between
the laboratories and companies. With this influx of funding—in 1994 alone, LLNL
received $55 million for this purpose from the DOE—the technology transfer office (now
known as the Industrial Partnerships and Commercialization, or IPAC, Office) rapidly
increased in size. During this relatively brief era, LLNL collaborated with industry
partners to carry out almost two hundred mostly small, jointly funded projects spanning a
broad spectrum of technology areas. A great deal of effort was devoted to writing
 proposals, attending trade shows, and hosting visiting delegations.
        This period left two important legacies. First, the laboratory established a few
 important relationships, such as with semiconductor manufacturers, that would have
 ongoing importance. Second, an infrastructure was developed to better interact with
 industry: e.g., the ability to fairly quickly enter into agreements, to protect proprietary
 information, and to allocate the intellectual property generated in the agreements. As


                                             12
time progressed, however, laboratory officials felt that such a large number of
partnerships in relatively unfocused technology areas were distracting personnel from the
facility's primary programs.
         In 1995, the U.S. Congress, whose control had just switched to the Republican
Party, dramatically cut funding for the Technology Transfer Initiative. The DOE
followed suit with additional cuts. This triggered a shift at LLNL back to its original
focus on only undertaking industrial partnerships related to its mission. Projects with
outside companies that were only tangentially related to the laboratory's mission were
largely terminated. As a result, LLNL as of November 1998 had a few very large
technology transfer efforts, a vastly reduced number of smaller R&D projects, and a
growing number of licenses. On the one extreme was the CRADA at LLNL and two
other laboratories to produce semiconductors through extreme ultraviolet lithography, to
which Advanced Micro Devices, Intel, and Motorola were contributing $250 million over
three years. At the other extreme were numerous licenses of laboratory technology,
primarily with small high-technology firms. (See Panel A of Table 2 for a summary of
LLNL' s technology transfer activities.)
      Lawrence Livermore's success in licensing relative to the other laboratories had
been facilitated by its strong ties to the University of California, as well as its physical
proximity to the companies and financiers in the Bay Area. The IPAC office frequently
interacted informally with the licensing staff at the University's Office of Technology
Transfer. At the same time, the office faced challenges that their university-based peers
 did not. In particular, the IPAC office did not automatically receive title to patents (as
 universities have since the passage of Bayh-Dole). Rather, the staff had to formally
 request waivers from the DOE on a case-by-case basis, which could be a lengthy process.
 Second, the office faced much greater scrutiny of its actions under fairness of opportunity
 and conflict of interest rules. As a result of this scrutiny, the IPAC extensively publicized
 potential licensing opportunities and took great care to avoid these problems, including
 often encouraging prospective licenses to accept non-exclusive licenses.
        LLNL's licensing activities and revenues rose dramatically in the 1990s. But it
 faced a continuing challenge posed by its diffuse and changing mandate from the U.S.
 Congress. For instance, the directives to the laboratories to transfer technology in a way


                                              13
that benefits the U.S. economy, to insure fairness of opportunity, and to avoid
competition with the private sector were interpreted very differently by various members
of Congress. Anticipating how these concerns would evolve over time, and which
transactions might be seen as problematic in retrospect, was not easy. Compounding this
factor was the fact that as the laboratory's technology transfer effort had become more
visible, it had been increasingly a target for complaints and scrutiny, as the instance
discussed in Footnote 3 illustrates.

   b) Idaho National Engineering and Environmental Laboratory
        Shortly after World War II, the federal government sought an isolated location to
test nuclear reactors. The predecessor to [NEEL, the National Reactor Testing Station,
was established in 1949 on an 890 square mile site in the southeastern Idaho desert that
had been used as a practice bombing range during World War II. Over the years, the
laboratory undertook major research programs seeking to develop prototypes of and to
test reactors for both naval vessels and (until 1961) airplanes. Another important activity
was the reprocessing of the large amounts of uranium generated by these reactors.
Unlike LLNL, which has had only one contractor from its inception, INEEL was
managed by a series of contractors over the years. These included Aerojet Nuclear (a
subsidiary of General Tire) and a consortium including EG&G and Westinghouse
Electric (between 1977 and 1994).
        As the Management and Operation Contract for the laboratory neared completion
in 1994, it became clear that a major emphasis in selecting the next contractor would be a
 commitment to technology transfer activities. IINEEL represented a major employer in
 the State of Idaho. Local politicians had argued that more efforts were needed to soften
 the impacts of employment and funding cutbacks at the laboratory by encouraging the
 creation of spinout firms. The minimal level of technology transfer activity in this period
 can be seen in Panel B of Table 2: for instance, in FY 1992, there were no spinouts and
 the laboratory generated only seven thousand dollars in licensing revenue.12 While
 EG&G rapidly increased its signing of CRADA and licensing agreements in response to

 U INEEL did not experience the same increase in CRADA activity in the late 1980s and the early 1990s
 that LLNL did, because much of the funding for these efforts was provided by DOE's Office of Defense
 Programs. Because INEEL received only very limited funding from Defense Programs, the impact of this
 initiative was much smaller than at LLNL.


                                                  14
these pressures, the new contract was awarded instead to a consortium led by a subsidiary
of the Lockheed Corporation (the company's name was changed to Lockheed Martin in
 1995). Among the participants in the consortium was Thermo Electron Corporation, a
Massachusetts company with a history of spinning out new technology businesses into
publicly traded entities.
       The contract included a variety of features to help insure the technology transfer
activities would be taken seriously. The contractors committed to provide entrepreneurial
training to laboratory researchers who were prospective leaders of spinout firms. Thermo
Electron committed to establish a $10 million venture capital fund to be made available
to finaiice new businesses spinning out from the laboratory. Perhaps most importantly,
Lockheed signed a contract where its reward would be a function of its technology
transfer activity. In particular, Lockheed agreed to forego several millions dollars from
its annual fee for managing the laboratory. Instead, it received a share of fees and
 royalties, which increased with the cumulative amount of payments received over the
 course of the five-year contract. Until the first $1 million of licensing payments was
 received, the firm would receive 20% of the revenue (the remainder being divided
 between the researcher and the federal government). For the next $1 million, Lockheed
                                                                      13
 would receive 30%, and thereafter it would receive 35%
       In order to implement this contract, the new contractor undertook a variety of
 changes to the structure of the technology licensing office as well. Lockheed recruited
 individuals who had held senior business development positions with companies such as
 General Motors and IBM, as well as licensing account executives with private sector
 sales and marketing experience. In addition, the company organized industry focus
 teams, with the responsibility to establish relationships with and market INEEL
 capabilities and technologies to companies in specific industries. As Panel B of Table 2
 indicates, both spinout and licensing activity increased dramatically in response to these
 activities. The increase in spinout activity was particularly noteworthy: in fiscal year
  1997, IINEEL accounted for 7 out of the 19 spinouts from DOE FFRDCs.


                                                                                               research at their
  13
       While universities, who under the Bayh-DoIe Act own the patents from federally funded
 facilities, routinely receive royalties from licensing activities, this provision was a first among FFRDC
 management contracts [U.S. General Accounting Office, 1 996a1.



                                                       15
        At the same time, the implementation of this plan faced unexpected difficulties.
One was the extent of the barriers to spinning out of technologies from 1NEEL.
Laboratory researchers seeking to obtain an exclusive license to a technology they had
worked on faced an exhaustive and slow review process. Even when the entrepreneurs
overcame concerns about fairness and conflict of interest provisions, in some instances
they believed that the laboratory's demands for payments and royalties were excessive,
given the early stage of the technologies. Some felt that the management contract
provided the contractor with incentives to license technologies to large corporations that
could offer larger up-front payments than start-ups.'4 In addition, entrepreneurs faced
barriers raising capital once they had exhausted the seed funds that the small Thermo
Electron fund and other local investors could provide.
        Despite the considerable success of the ]INEEL effort, the future of the effort was
in doubt at the end of 1998. The DOE decided in September 1998 not to renew
Lockheed's contract, but rather to put the contract once again up for bid. While the DOE
review rated Lockheed's technology transfer effort highly, the agency raised concerns
about the contractor's record in worker safety and its failure to undertake an
environmental clean-up project at INEEL for an agreed-upon price. While the DOE
made it clear that it expects the next contractor to be committed to technology transfer,
whether the next contractor will be successful as Lockheed in growing the technology
transfer activities remained uncertain.

5) Statistical Analysis
    a) The Data Set
        A point raised in many assessments of the national laboratory system [e.g., Task
Force, 1995, Section VTI.C.5] is the extreme difficulty in obtaining data, particularly in


   As of the end of FY 1997, Lockheed had received a total of about $130,000 from its share of the
14

royalties, only a few percent of the amount foregone in fees. At the same time, it is important to
acknowledge the dilemma that Lockheed officials faced when considering licensing to prospective start-
ups. In order to assess whether a start-up was the entity with the greatest chance of commercializing an
INEEL technology, the technology transfer officials typically requested that it provide a business plan and
show proof of adequate financing. But in many cases, entrepreneurs found that (particularly in a state with
as little financing of small high-technology firms such as Idaho) that obtaining a license to the technology
was a prerequisite to be considered for financing. Another challenge was the difficulty of identifying
people with the entrepreneurial business talents to complement the laboratory scientists and engineers in a
spin-out.


                                                    16
regard to technology transfer activities. This is at least partially a reflection of the DOE's
complex management structure discussed above. As a result, we have constructed a data
set from a wide variety of sources.
         We constructed a sample of 23 FFRDCs owned by the DOE and active between
1977 and 1997, derived from Burke and Gray [1995115 and U.S. National Science
Foundation [various years]. Two of these commenced operations as FFRDCs during this
period, while six of these were decertified for various reasons during this period.

         i) General Information
         Information collected for each facility included:
         • historical information such as dates of establishment or decertification, and
             identity of contractor over time [Burke and Gray, 1995; U.S. General
             Accounting Office, 1996b; facility web sites; news stories in LEXJSINEXIS].
         • regional characteristics such as the distance to the nearest standard or
             consolidated metropolitan statistical area (SMSA or CMSA), the population
             and education level of that area, and venture capital activity in the state [U.S.
             Bureau of the Census; Venture Economics' Venture Intelligence Database
             (described in Gompers and Lerner, 1999)].
          • overall laboratory budget level and funding sources.16
          • annual R&D expenditures at each FFRDC between 1981 and 1995 [National
              Science Board, 1996; U.S. National Science Foundation, 1998].
          • the number of new CRADAs formed annually between 1991 and 1994 under
              the aegis of three program offices (Defense Programs, Energy Efficiency, and
              Energy Research), and all CRADAs formed in 1995 and 1997.'
          • miscellaneous data about a variety of technology transfer activities [U.S.
              Department of Energy, Office of Defense Programs, 1998; U.S. Department
              of Energy, Office of the General Counsel, 19981.18
          Table 3 provides summary data on these facilities.

'    References   to sources only cited in Section 5(a) are included in the Data Sources" listing, and not in
the main "References" listing.
16
     While the DOE does not prepare an annual yearbook of activities at the laboratories, we obtained
general statistical data on the laboratories' finding levels and sources in three fiscal years—1979. 1988,
and 1995—from two special compilations [U.S. Department of Energy, 1990: U.S. Department of Energy,
 '
Laboratories Operations Board, 1996].
    The sources of the CRADA data are U.S. Department of Energy [1995], Technology Transfer Business
[19981, and U.S. Department of Energy, Office of the General Counsel [1998]. The three program offices
with complete data accounted for 94% of all DOE outputs related to commercial product development in
fiscal year 1992 [U.S. General Accounting Office, 1994, Appendix V, Table 2] and 82% of all CRADAs
between fiscal years 1990 and 1992 [U.S. Office of Technology Assessment, 1993, Table 4-1].




                                                       17
        ii) Measures of Patenting Activity
        The final set of variables measures the number of and citations to patents derived
from laboratory research. This section reviews the difficulties associated with measuring
patenting activity at the FFRDCs, the DOE database that allows us to address these
problems, and the issues associated with the use of the database.
        Patent awards from DOE research are sometimes assigned to the Department; at
other times when waivers are granted, they are assigned to the contractors. There is no
single identifier in the patent application that allows one to identify DOE-funded patents:
e.g., it is difficult to distinguish from the text of a patent assigned to the University of
California whether it was derived from work at the University's Berkeley campus or
Lawrence Livermore. To address this problem, we employ a database compiled by the
DOE's Office of Scientific and Technical Information [1998] of all patents to emerge
from DOE laboratories since 1978. The database, which consists of 6479 U.S. patents
awarded by the end of 1996, contains all patents produced from laboratory-produced
research, regardless of the entity to which the patent is assigned.'9
        The file also has two major drawbacks. First, it contains awards assigned to
entities that have never operated a DOE FFRDC. It is likely that some of these are
patents derived from CRADAS between a laboratory and another entity. Others are
derived from other contractor-operated facilities that are not designated as FFRDCs.
Some of the patents, however, are apparently not derived from DOE-funded research but
are merely in an area of interest to the Department. A second difficulty is that the
database does not provide any direct means to connect the patents to particular FFRDCs.
Most, though not all, of the patents in the database are identified with a contract number
that corresponds to the "Management and Operation" contract at the originating facility at
the time of the patent award. These are identified through a database maintained by


18
   In both cases, the project staff made efforts to employ consistent definitions across the various facilities,
but inconsistencies may remain. Much of the data are only available for the most recent period.
19
    In particular, it contains patents assigned to the contractor who operates a given laboratory. U.S. Patent
and Trademark Office databases (as well as the NBERJCase Western Reserve database discussed below)
identi1' patents assigned to the U.S. government and its agencies. They do not provide, however, any way
to separate patents assigned to firms in their capacity as contractors operating government laboratories from
those derived from the contractor's other research [see Jaffe, Fogarty, and Banks, 1998]. Of the patents we
have included in our analysis, 42% was assigned to non-governmental entities.


                                                      18
DOE's Office of Procurement and Assistance Management 1998] as well as personal
communication with officials of this office.
         The list of DOE patents was then merged with the NBERICase Western Reserve
patent database. This allows us to determine the patent class, application year, and the
address of the inventor for each patent. We also identified all patents that cited these
patents through the end of 1995. Given these ambiguities, we followed the following
procedure:
         • first, every patent whose contract number in the database corresponds to a
              known Management and Operation contract was attributed to that FFR.DC.
         • second, every patent without a contract number whose assignee was the DOE
             and whose primary inventor lived in a SMSA where there was a DOE FFRDC
             was assumed to come from that laboratory.
          • third, every patent without a contract number whose assignee was a laboratory
              contractor, and whose primary inventor lived in a SMSA where there was a
              DOE FFRDC run by that contractor, was assumed to come from that FFRDC.
          • fourth, patents that could not be attributed to a specific FFRDC, but which
              most likely derived from DOE laboratory research, were used for aggregate
              analysis but were not included in the laboratory-specific analyses. These
              include patents with unidentified contract numbers, patents assigned by the
              patent office to DOE with inventors residing in SMSAs with multiple
              laboratories, and patents assigned to contractors with multiple laboratories in a
              given SMSA, with inventors residing in that SMSA.2°
          • all other patents in the database were not used in the analysis below.
 Overall, of the 6479 patents in the DOE database, 3185 were attributed to particular DOE
FFRDCs, 1771 were determined to be laboratory patents but were not attributed to any
 particular facility, and 1523 could not be determined to be derived from laboratory
 research and hence were ignored.2' Our approach undoubtedly both includes some non-
 laboratory patents and excludes some laboratory patents. Overall, we are probably
 undercounting laboratory patents. Many of the 1771 ignored patents have inventors

 20
      The most important example of the latter is the University of California, which operates both the
 Lawrence Livermore and Lawrence Berkeley laboratories in the Bay Area. The patents of these
 laboratories could be distinguished only when the contract number was reported. Approximately 100
 patents assigned to the University. with inventors residing in the Bay Area, did not have contract numbers
 and so could not be attributed to either laboratory.
 2 Because the number of unattributable patents is falling over time—i.e., the probability of successfully
 attributing a patent is greater later in the period—if one ignored these patents, then we would overstate the
 upward trend.


                                                      19
living in a SMSA in which there is a laboratory, but they are assigned to firms other than
the contractor. It is likely that some of these derive from CRADAs, but we have no way
to determine that and so have excluded them.
        Throughout this paper, we date patents by the year of application, since that is
when the research was likely to have occurred and the decision made to apply for the
patent. The DOE patents database contains only those patents awarded through the end
of 1996. Since it typically takes between one and two years to process a patent
application, we seriously undercount applications made in the years after 1993.
         Table 4 shows the patent totals for each of the 23 DOE FFRDCs. Many of the
laboratories had no successful patent applications in 1977. By the end of the period, most
made successful patent applications every year. (Note that four laboratories were
decertified by 1992.) Not surprisingly, a handful of the larger laboratories contribute
most of the patent applications filed in each year.

      b) Analyses of Overall Technology Commercialization Patterns
         As discussed above, the numerous statutory changes in the 1980s were intended
to foster the commercialization of federally funded R&D. If successful, these changes
should have increased the rate of patenting of laboratory discoveries and the utilization of
these inventions by the private sector. To explore this question, we look at the time trend
in patenting and the citations to these patents, as well as other measures.
        Figure 3 shows that the number of successful DOE laboratory patent applications
rose from about 200 in 1981 to over 450 by 1993. (As noted above, the latter number is a
slight underestimate, because some applications will have been granted after 1996.)
Furthermore, this sharp increase in patenting has occurred in the face of declining real
R&D expenditures at the DOE FFRDCs. As shown in the figure, the increase began in
 1988, shortly after the passage of the Federal Technology Transfer Act, and continued
into the mid-1990s.
      To put this increase in the "propensity to patent" in perspective, Figure 4
 compares the patent-to-R&D ratio for the DOE FFRDCs to a similar ratio for
 universities.22 In the early 1980s, patents per dollar of FFRDC R&D were considerably

 22
    Total university research expenditures are from National Science Board [19981. University patent totals
 are from the NBER/Case Western Reserve patents database.


                                                    20
lower than in the universities, despite the fact that two-thirds of the university research
was for basic research, which is presumably less likely to lead to patent awards. (The
comparable figure for all federal FFRDCs is slightly over 40%. The source of these
tabulations is National Science Board [1998].) University patenting rose strongly
through the 1980s, at least partially in response to the Bayh-Dole Act of 1980. But by the
late 1980s, patenting (relative to R&D spending) at the DOE FFRDCs was rising even
faster. By 1993, the two sectors were comparable in terms of patents per R&D dollar.
While the lower share of basic research at the laboratories makes this somewhat of an
unfair comparison, the relative performance of the DOE FFRDCs in the late 1980s and
early 1990s was nonetheless remarkable.23
          It has been shown that the dramatic increase in university patenting in the 1980s
 was accompanied by an equally sharp decline in the quality of those patents, as measured
 by the citations received by those patents relative to all patents with the same
 technological characteristics and award year [Henderson, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg, 1997].
 Before about 1985, university patents on average were much more highly cited than other
 patents. This difference had disappeared by the late 1980s. The increase in university
 patenting appears to have come about largely by "lowering the threshold" for patent
 applications, resulting in many more patents of marginal significance.
           To explore whether similar changes occurred at the DOE FFRDCs, we construct
 the "normalized" citation intensity for each laboratory in each year. To do this, we
 calculate the difference between the actual number of citations received per patent and
 the "reference" citation intensity. The reference citation intensity is the expected number
 of citations per patent that a portfolio of patents with the same technological
 classifications as those of the laboratory would receive, based on the citations received by
 all patents in a given technology class in a given year. This normalized intensity controls
  for differences across technology classes and time in the "propensity to cite," as well as
  for the impact of the truncation imposed by our lack of knowledge of citations that will
  occur after 1995.



  23                                                                                          research spending
       Unlike the declining trend of real R&D expenditures in the DOE FFRDCs, university
  was rising rapidly during this period. Thus, while the laboratories were   "catching   up" in terms of patents
  per dollar of research spending. the absolute number of patents was rising  faster in the university sector.


                                                       21
        We also report in Figure 5 the trend in patenting. Here we employ not the
aggregate count of patents derived from DOE FFRDCs, but rather a normalized series
that controls for the shift in the overall "propensity to patent." In each technology class
and in each year, we compute the ratio of the number of patents derived from the DOE
laboratories to the total number of awards. The changes in this value, which is
normalized to be 1.0 in 1981, are plotted over time. During periods when the overall
number of patent applications is falling, this normalization will make an increase in DOE
patenting appear more dramatic, and vice versa.
       Figure 5 shows a citation pattern in conjunction with increased patenting for
laboratories that is very different from that found for universities. First, note that in
contrast to the university patents, laboratory patents have historically been slightly less
highly cited than other patents.24 It is striking, however, that the laboratory citation
intensity did not decline in conjunction with the large increase in the propensity to patent
after 1987. Whether we look at a simple average across the laboratories or an average
weighted by the number of patents, the trend in citation intensity is upward.25 This trend,
however, is not statistically significant. Thus, the kind of "digging deeper into the barrel"
that characterized the increase in university patenting does not seem to have occurred at
the DOE FFRDCs. While this clearly merits more study, the citation data are consistent
with a process in which the laboratories produced more patents by reorienting their
research towards new areas with greater commercial applicability, in keeping with the
intent of the statutory changes.
         It would also be desirable to look at other indicators of technology transfer.
Unfortunately, we have only extremely limited and inconsistent data on other indicators
of technology transfer, and very few measures, particularly over time, of laboratory

24
    Jaffe, Fogarty, and Banks [1998] examined the citation intensity of patents assigned at issuance to the
U.S. government. As noted above, their analysis excluded patents from the laboratories assigned to the
contractors, but did include other agencies besides DOE. In that paper, the citation "inferiority" of federal
patents was even more pronounced. but also showed some tendency toward reduction in the late 1980s.
    The pattern is also similar if we look only at "non-self-citations." Non-self-citations exclude those
citations in patents that are assigned either to the DOE or to the contractor that operates the laboratory from
which the cited patent originated. The non-self-citation measure is nonnalized" as well, following a
procedure similar to that described above but only using non-self-citations to construct the reference
portfolio. The fact that the normalized non-self-citation pattern over time is so close to the normalized total
citation pattern means that the rate of self-citation to laboratory patents is similar, on average, to the rate of
self-citation for all patents.


                                                       22
policies and behaviors. In Section (d), we explore other measures of technology transfer
in panel and cross-sectional analyses of the laboratories. Before turning to that, however,
we undertake panel data regression analyses using patents and citations.

     c) Regression analyses using patent data
        The regression analysis covers the period from 1981 to 1993 (for the analysis of
patenting) and 1977 to 1993 (for the analysis of patent citations). The first year of the
analysis is determined by the limitations of DOE patent database, as well as by our desire
to use R&D at each FFRDC as an independent variable in the case of the patenting
regressions. The final year of the analysis is determined by the problem of lengthy patent
pendencies discussed above.
        As dependent variables, we employ either the count of patent applications or the
citations per patents at each DOE FFRDC in each year. Both the count of patents and the
citations per patents are normalized to control for differences across technological
classes, as described above. Because we believe that the "patent production function" at
the laboratories will be multiplicative rather than additive—e.g., the policy shifts of the
1980s should have led to a more dramatic absolute increase in patenting at the larger
laboratories—we employ the logarithm of normalized patenting as the dependent
variable.26 We employ both normalized total citations per patent and the normalized ratio
excluding self-citations as dependent variables.
        We employ a variety of independent variables. To capture the shifting regulatory
environment, we employ a dummy variable that denotes whether the annual observation
is from 1987 or after. This is roughly when numerous accounts suggest that there was a
substantial shift in the seriousness with which the DOE took its mandate to implement
technology transfer. Second, we identify the periods when the contractor was changed.
As suggested by the Idaho case study, such changes may provide the stimulus to focus
real effort on objectives such as technology transfer. We arbitrarily hypothesize that the
effect of such changes might be seen from two years before the change through two years



26
    Because some laboratories had no patents in certain years, we add one to the total normalized count of
patents before computing the logarithm of the dependent variable. We do not employ observations in the
citation regressions when laboratories are without any patents.


                                                   23
after. There are a total of fifteen lab-years in the data that fall into such windows, about
8% of the data points used in the regression.
        We also include in the regression a few characteristics of the laboratory or its
environment. First, given the wide variation in the size of the laboratories, it is important
to control for its scale (either R&D spending or total patent awards). We also include a
variety of time-invariant measures. (These are deleted when we employ fixed effects,
i.e., dummy variables for each laboratory.) As discussed above, a strong orientation
towards national security or basic science may lead to less technology commercialization.
We thus include as independent variables the shares of the laboratories' expenditures
classified as national security and basic science-related. (Due to data limitations, we use
1995 values, but these measures appear to be quite constant.) Second, we indicate
whether the contractor was a university, and likely to be more familiar with the transfer
of early-stage technologies, by employing a dummy variable that assumes the value of
unity when this was the case. Third, many reports have claimed that the laboratories'
efforts to diversify away from their traditional areas of expertise have led to poor
performance. To examine this suggestion, we construct from the patent data a measure of
technological "focus": the Herfindahl index of concentration of patenting across
technology classes.27 We include both the measure of focus as well as the change in our
focus measure between the second and first half of the sample period.28
      The first two columns of Table 5 present the patent regression results. The
dramatic increase in patenting associated with the policy shifts of the late 1980s is
apparent. The results also show that patenting is related to R&D in the panel as a whole,
although this relationship is not present in the "within" or time-series dimension. This is
not surprising, given that we know that overall patenting has been rising while R&D has
been falling. Facilities with a greater basic science share have less patenting; the national
 security share also has a negative coefficient, but it is not statistically significant. More
focused laboratories get more patents, all else equal, and those that decreased their focus


27
   The Herfindahi index is the sum of the squared shares of patenting in technology classes. Thus it is
unity for a laboratory whose patents are all in one class, and a small fraction for laboratories whose patents
are distributed across many classes.
28
    We also tried a variety of geographic variables in unreported regressions, but these are consistently
insignificant.


                                                     24
the most have fewer patents.29          These effects are statistically and quantitatively
significant. Consistent with the benefits that Livermore derived from its association with
the University of California's technology transfer offices, facilities run by universities
have almost twice as many patents, ceteris paribus, an effect that is highly statistically
significant.
       For citations, the regressions have low explanatory power; even with laboratory
dummies, the R2 is only .138. The dummy variable indicating that the observation is
from 1987 or thereafter is positive but statistically insignificant. This is consistent with
Figure 5, which showed a slight but uneven upward trend in normalized citations.
Overall, there is no relationship between the level of patenting and the citation intensity.
In the fixed-effects version, there is a significant negative relationship, suggesting that the
"lower threshold" phenomenon is not completely absent. While the effect of "focus" on
citations is insignificant, there is a strong positive effective of the change in focus. That
is, those laboratories whose focus decreased substantially saw a significant decline in
their (normalized) citation intensity. This is true for all citations (column 3), as well as
when self-citations are excluded (column 4). The competition variable has a positive and
significant impact in the first two regressions. The point estimate of the magnitude is
large, implying that patents applied for during the period of competitive pressures get an
additional citation or so relative to what would otherwise be expected. This effect
disappears in the fixed-effects regression, which is not surprising given that the variation
of the competition variable is mostly across laboratories rather than across time. Finally,
we find no statistically significant effect for the national security or basic science share.
Thus, these research focuses reduce the amount of patenting, but do not detectably
diminish the subsequent commercial impact (as measured by citations) of the patents that
are received.

     d) Corroboratory Analyses
        One concern with the analyses above is that the patenting patterns may not reflect
those in technology commercialization more generally. In particular, the cross-sectional


29
   Most of the laboratories decreased their focus between the two sub-periods. Overall, the average
Herfindahi fell from .27 to .15.



                                                25
patterns in patenting and citations to these patents may potentially not provide acomplete
depiction of the relative growth of technology transfer activities at these facilities.
         To address the concern, we undertook a similar regression analysis, but using
another measure of technology commercialization: the number of new CRADAs
approved annually at each laboratory. We used observations between fiscal years 1991
(the first year with a significant number of CRADAs at DOE) and 1997 (with the
exception of 1996, for which we had no data). In order to normalize the data, we
employed in all regressions a dummy variable for each fiscal year. In this way, we hoped
to control for DOE senior management's shifting emphasis on the importance of
CRADAs (as discussed above, this was a major policy focus until the shift in
congressional control to the Republican Party). Otherwise, the independent variables are
the same as in the two leftmost columns of Table 5. Because the relatively small number
of new CRADAs at each facility and year, in the third and forth regressions we instead
employ a Poisson regression, which reflects the ordinal, non-negative nature of the
dependent variable.
         The results of the CRADA regressions are largely consistent with the patent
analyses. Not surprisingly, more CRADA activity at a laboratory is associated with
higher R&D expenditures and a lower share of spending devoted to national security or
basic science. In one of two regressions, a university contractor is associated with more
CRADA activity, which may reflect a greater familiarity with the technology transfer
process. The coefficient on the competition variable is highly positive and significant in
the basic regressions. The effect once again disappears in the fixed-effects regressions.
This reflects the shortness of the panel (if there was contractor turnover during the period
at a given laboratory, it is probable that the effects will be felt over much of the period
under study and be captured in the laboratory dummy variable). The primary difference
from the analyses in Table 5 is that the coefficient measuring laboratory focus is negative
(significantly so in one regression) and the change of focus measure is inconsistent in
 sign.
         In addition to the patent and CRADA data, we obtained data on new licenses
 granted and total license revenues for 13 of the 23 laboratories in 1997. For two of these
 (Fermi and Princeton), the data indicate essentially no activity. These data are shown in


                                            26
Figure 6, along with total citations received in 1995 to all patents owned by the
laboratory.3° Not surprisingly, the largest laboratories dominate these absolute measures:
Lawrence Livermore, Brookhaven, Oak Ridge and Sandia.
        Figure 7 present measures that are not dependent on size. The figure depicts
licenses and license revenue per dollar of R&D, the growth rate in patenting, and the
normalized citations per patent. Here the standouts are much less clear. If we use the
criterion of above-average performance in both the licensing and patenting dimensions,
the winners are Ames, Livermore, Idaho, Oak Ridge, and Savannah River. Los Alamos
and the Stanford Linear Accelerator are relatively poor performers.
         Despite the small number of observations, we ran a few diagnostic regressions
with these data. Each of the indicators shown in Figure 7 was regressed on the change in
the technological focus measure, a competition measure, the national security share, and
a dummy for being in a modestly large metropolitan area.3' In the unreported results, the
coefficient on the competition variable is positive, but never statistically significant. The
change in the focus variable has an effect that is positive for all four indicators, but is
marginally statistically significant only for citation intensity. The national security share
is negative for all four indicators, but not statistically significant.                  Location in a
metropolitan area has no significant effect. These results are at least broadly consistent
with the patent- and CRADA-based measures, and address some of the concerns about
the generality of these measures.

6) Conclusions
         This paper has examined the commercialization of publicly funded research that
is pursued in a little-studied but important environment, the national laboratory. The
empirical and case study analyses suggest that the policy reforms of the 1980s had a
 dramatic and positive effect on technology commercialization: patenting activities
 sharply increased, with little evidence of degradation in patent quality. The effects
 appear to be stronger in settings where the danger of bureaucratic inference was lower,

 30
    The National Renewable Energy Research Laboratory is included in the figure because of its significant
 patenting activity, even though we do not have licensing information.
    For the cross-sectional analysis, the "competition" dummy is set to unity if the laboratory contract has
 ever been subject to competition, even if such competition occurred outside the time period of our analysis.
 The "metropolitan" dummy was set to unity for laboratories near SMSAs or CMSAs with a population of
 one million or more.


                                                     27
such as when there was turnover of contractors. Despite the very different activities and
performance measures here, the results are consistent with the earlier literature on the
impact and determinants of the decision to privatize public sector activities.
       It is important to acknowledge this paper's limitations. First, the data we have
had had to work with is limited.           Ideally, we would have had measures of
commercialization other than patents, citations, and CRADAs over an extended period at
a variety of facilities. Second, national laboratories play a number of roles, of which
producing technology for the commercial sector is only one. We have not attempted to
determine whether commercialization activities had either a detrimental or positive effect
on these other missions.         Third, we have analyzed only the contractor-operated
laboratories at one agency, the U.S. Department of Energy. Comparing the experiences
of facilities operated by different agencies, employing different organizational structures,
and in different countries would all be logical extensions of this work.
       Despite these limitations, this paper raises a variety of implications. We will
highlight two of these. First, it challenges many of the assumptions implicit in earlier
assessments of the national laboratories. The striking improvement in the measures of
commercial activities at the laboratories, especially when compared to the experience of
the universities, stands in contrast to the negative tone in many discussions such as the
"Galvin Report" [Task Force, 1995].           The apparent importance of limiting the
distortionary effects of political interference, while in keeping with the academic works
on privatization, has not been heavily emphasized in many of the government studies.
       More generally, this paper serves to highlight the fertile opportunities at the
intersection between the economics of technological change and organizational
economics. The different ways in which public and private R&D can be organized, and
the implications of these decisions on the rate and direction of technological change, is a
rich area for future research.




                                             28
                                       References

Alchian, Armen, 1965, "Some Economics of Property Rights," Ii Politico, 30, 8 16-829.

Barberis, Nicholas, Maxim Boycko, Andrei Shleifer, and Natalia Tsukanova, 1996, "How
       Does Privatization Work? Evidence from the Russian Shops," Journal of Political
       Economy, 104, 764-790.

Berman, Evan M., 1997, "Cooperative Research and Development Agreements," in Yong
      S. Lee, editor, Technology Transfer and Public Policy, Westport, Connecticut,
      Quorum Books, pp. 159-171.

Boycko, Maxim, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 1995, Privatizing Russia,
       Cambridge, MIT Press.

Bozeman, Barry, and Michael Crow, 1991, "Technology Transfer from U.S. Government
     and University R&D Laboratories," Technovation, 11, 231-246.

Branscomb, Lewis M., 1993, "National Laboratories: The Search for New Missions and
       New Structures," in Lewis M. Branscomb, editor, Empowering Technology:
       Implementing a US. Strategy, Cambridge, MIT Press, pp. 103-13 1.

Cohen, Linda R., and Roger G. Noll, 1996, "The Future of the National Laboratories,"
      Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 93, 12678-12685.

D'Souza, Juliet, and William L. Megginson, 1998, "The Financial and Operating
       Performance of Privatized Firms During the 1990s," Unpublished working paper,
       University of Oklahoma.

Forman, Howard I., 1957, Patents: Their Ownership and Administration by the United
     States Government, New York, Central Book Company.

Glaeser, Edward L., Hedi D. Kallal, José A. Scheinkman, and Andrei Shleifer, 1992,
       "Growth in Cities," Journal of Political Economy, 100, 1126-1152.

Gompers, Paul A., and Josh Lerner, 1999, The Venture Capital Cycle, Cambridge, MITT
     Press, forthcoming.
Ham, Rose Marie, and David C. Mowery, 1998, "Improving the Effectiveness of Public-
       Private R&D Collaboration: Case Studies at a U.S. Weapons Laboratory,"
       Research Policy, 2, 66 1-675.

Hart, David M., 1998, Forged Consensus: Science, Technology and Economic Policy in
       the United States, 192 1-1953, Princeton, Princeton University Press.

Henderson, Rebecca, Adam Jaffe, and Manuel Trajtenberg, 1998, "Universities as a
       Source of Commercial Technology: A Detailed Analysis of University Patenting,
       1965-1988," Review of Economics and Statistics, 80, 199-127.


                                           29
Jaffe, Adam B., 1989, "Real Effects of Academic Research," American Economic
      Review, 76, 98-1001.

Jaffe, Adam B., Michael S. Fogarty, and Bruce A. Banks, 1998, "Evidence from Patents
       and Patent Citations on the Impact of NASA and Other Federal Labs on
       Commercial Innovation," Journal of Industrial Economics, 46, 183-205.

Jaffe, Adam B., Manuel Trajtenberg, and Rebecca Henderson, 1993, "Geographic
       Localization of Knowledge Spillovers as Evidenced by Patent Citations,"
       Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108, 577-598.

Lang, Larry, and René Stultz, 1994, "Tobin's q, Diversification, and Firm Performance,"
      Journal of Political Economy, 102, 1248-1280.

Lawler, Andrew, 1996, "DOE to Industry: So Long, Partner," Science, 274 (October 4)
      24-26.

Lerner, Josh, 1995, "Venture Capitalists and the Oversight of Private Firms," Journal of
       Finance, 50, 301-3 18.

Lerner, Josh, 1999, "The Government as Venture Capitalist: The Long-Run Impact of the
       SBIR Program," Journal of Business, forthcoming.

López-de-Silanes, Florencio, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny, 1997,
       "Privatization in the United States," Rand Journal of Economics, 28, 447-47 1.

Markusen, Ann, and Michael Oden, 1996, "National Laboratories as Business Incubators
      and Region Builders," Journal of Technology Transfer, 21, 93-108.
Megginson, William L., Robert C. Nash, and Mathias van Randerborgh, 1994, "The
     Financial and Operating Performance of Newly Privatized Firms," Journal of
       Finance, 49, 403-452.
National Science Board, 1998, Science and Technology Indicators—1998, Washington,
       Government Printing Office.

Nelson, Richard R., 1959, "The Simple Economics of Basic Scientific Research,"
       Journal of Political Economy, 67, 297-3 06.

Neumeyer, Frederik, and John C. Stedman, 1971, The Employed Inventor in the United
     States: R&D Policies, Law, and Practice, Cambridge, MIT Press.

Roessner, J. David, and Anne Wise, 1993, "Patterns of Industry Interaction with Federal
      Laboratories," Working Paper #93 02, School of Public Policy, Georgia Institute
      of Technology.




                                           30
Scharfstein, David, and Jeremy Stein, 1997, "The Dark Side of Internal Capital Markets:
      Divisional Rent-Seeking and Inefficient Investment," National Bureau of
      Economic Research Working Paper #5969.

Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny, 1994, "Politicians and Firms," Quarterly
      Journal of Economics, 109, 995-1025.
Stephan, Paula, 1996, "The Economics of Science," Journal of Economic Literature, 34,
      1199-1235.

Task Force on Alternative Futures for the Department of Energy National Laboratories,
      1995, Alternative Futures for the Department of Energy National Laboratories,
      Washington, U.S. Department of Energy.

U.S. Department of Justice, 1947, Investigation of Government Patent Practices and
      Policies: Report and Recommendations of the Attorney General to the President,
       Washington, U.S. Government Printing Office.

U.S. Energy Research and Development Administration, 1976, The Patent Policies
      Affecting ERDA Energy Programs, ERDA-76-16, Washington, U.S. Energy
       Research and Development Administration.

U.S. General Accounting Office, 1993, Technology Transfer: Implementation of
       CRADAs at NIST, Army, and DOE, GAO/T-RCED-93-53, Washington, U.S.
       General Accounting Office.

U.S. General Accounting Office, 1996a, Federal Research: Information on Fees for
       Selected Federally Funded Research and Development Centers, GAO/RCED-96-
       3 iFS, Washington, U.S. General Accounting Office.

U.S. General Accounting Office, 1998, Department of Energy: Uncertain Progress in
      Implementing National Laboratoiy Reforms, GAO/RCED-98- 197, Washington,
       U.S. General Accounting Office.

U.S. House of Representatives, 1945, The Second Report of the National Patent Planning
      Commission, Document #22, 79th Congress, 1 Session, January 9.

U.S. Office of Technology Assessment, 1993, Defense Conversion: Redirecting R&D,
      OTA-ITE-5 52, Washington, Government Printing Office.

Vickers, John, and George Yarrow, 1988, Privatization: An Economic Analysis,
       Cambridge, MIT Press.

White House Science Council, Federal Laboratory Review Panel, 1983, Report of the
      Federal Laboratory Review Panel, Washington, White House Science Council.




                                          31
                                  Sources of Figures and Tables32


Figure 1: Data on federal and total R&D between 1960 and 1997 are from National
Science Board [1996, 1998]. Federal R&D data between 1955 and 1969 are from U.S.
National Science Foundation [various years], and are obligations (not actual spending, as
elsewhere in the figure) for each fiscal year (instead of calendar years). Federal R&D for
1953 and 1954 and total R&D between 1953 and 1959 are from U.S. Department of
Commerce, Bureau of the Census [1975]. All data before 1953 are from National
Academy of Sciences [1952]. Data from 1953 and before is less precise than in later
years.

Figure 2: All data between 1960 and 1997 are from National Science Board [1996, 1998].
All data between 1955 and 1959 are from U.S. National Science Foundation [various
years], and are obligations (not actual spending, as elsewhere in the figure) for each fiscal
year (instead of calendar years).

Figure 3: Data on R&D at DOE FFRDCs between fiscal years 1987 and 1993 are from
National Science Board [1998] and between fiscal years 1981 and 1986 are from U.S.
National Science Foundation [1998]. Data on successful patent applications at DOE
FFRDCs are based on a database compiled by the DOE's Office of Scientific and
Technical Information [1998], as described in Section 5(a)(ii) of the paper.

Figure 4: Data on R&D at DOE FFRDCs between fiscal years 1987 and 1993 and
academic R&D between 1981 and 1993 are from National Science Board [1998]. Data
on R&D at DOE FFRDCs between fiscal years 1981 and 1986 are from U.S. National
Science Foundation [1998]. Data on successful patent applications derived from DOE
FFRDCs are based on a database compiled by the DOE's Office of Scientific and
Technical Information [1998], as described in Section 5(a)(ii) of the paper. Data on
successful patent applications derived from universities are based on a tabulation of the
NBER/Case Western Reserve patents database.

Figure 5: Data on successful patent applications derived from DOE FFRDCs are based on
a database compiled by the DOE's Office of Scientific and Technical Information [1998],
as described in Section 5(a)(ii) of the paper. The analysis is restricted to the fifteen
FFRDCs with at least 50 successful patent applications filed between 1977 and 1993 (and
awarded by the end of 1996). Data on citations to the patents and the information used to
normalize patents and citations are based on a tabulation of the NBER!Case Western
Reserve patents database.

Figure 6: Data on new licenses and licensing revenues for DOE FFRDCs in fiscal year
1997 are from U.S. Department of Energy, Office of the General Counsel [1998]. Data on
citations to the DOE FFRDC patents and the information used to normalize citations are
based on a database compiled by the DOE's Office of Scientific and Technical

32 References to sources only cited in this section are included in the "Data Sources" listing, and not in the
main "References" listing.


                                                     32
[1998] and in fiscal years 1997 are from U.S. National Science Foundation (.199j. Data
on successful patent applications derived from DOE FFRDCs are based on a database
compiled by the DOE's Office of Scientific and Technical Information [1998], as
described in Section 5(a)(ii) of the paper. The patent growth rate is the average annual
rate estimated from a regression using observations between 1981 and 1993. Data on
citations to the patents and the information used to normalize patents and citations are
based on a tabulation of the NBERICase Western Reserve patents database.

Table 1: Data on energy agency-funded R&D (which includes spending by the U.S.
Atomic Energy Commission, the U.S. Energy Research and Development
Administration, and the DOE) at DOE FFRDCs between fiscal years 1970 and 1997 and
on total R&D at DOE FFRDCs between fiscal years 1987 and 1995 are from National
Science Board [1996, 1998]. Data on energy agency-funded R&D at DOE FFRDCs
between fiscal years 1955 and 1969 are from U.S. National Science Foundation [various
years], and are obligations (not actual spending, as elsewhere in the table). Data on total
R&D at DOE FFRDCs between fiscal years 1981 and 1986 and in fiscal years 1996 and
1997 are from National Science Foundation [1998].           Data on technology transfer
activities in fiscal year 1997 are from U.S. Department of Energy, Office of the General
Council [1998]. Data on technology transfer activities between fiscal years 1987 and
1996 are from U.S. Department of Commerce, Office of Technology Administration
[various years]. Data on technology transfer activities between fiscal years 1963 and
1976 are from Federal Council for Science and Technology [various years]. No
technology transfer data are available between fiscal years 1977 and 1986. No CRADAs
were signed by DOE FFRDCs prior to fiscal year 1990. Licensing and CRADA data
between fiscal years 1987 and 1996 include some activity by facilities operated by the
DOE. Definitions of various technology transfer activities may be inconsistent across
different years and facilities.

Table 2: The technology transfer data are compiled from U.S. Department of Energy,
Office of Defense Programs [1998], http :Ilwww .ilnI.gov/IPandC/About/ipacAnn. html,
and personal communications with DOE officials. The data series on the two FFRDCs
have been selected to be as comparable as possible, but differences remain. For instance,
the count of 1NEEL licenses only includes those transactions where royalties or fees have
been collected by INEEL by the end of fiscal year 1998.

Table 3: Information on the dates of certification and decertification as a FFRDC, the
contractors who managed the facilities, and the periods for which they were responsible
for the facilities was gathered from Burke and Gray [1995], U.S. General Accounting
Office [1996b], the historical information on many facilities' web sites, and a variety of
news stories in LEXISINEXIS. The Herfindahl index of patent class concentration is


                                            33
computed using patents applications between 1977 and 1995 awarded by the end of 1996,
and is based on a database compiled by the DOE's Office of Scientific and Technical
Information [1998], as described in Section 5(a)(ii) of the paper. The population of the
nearest SMSA or CMSA is from a variety of publications summarizing the 1980 Census
of Population and Housing. The fractions of R&D at each FFRDC in fiscal year 1995
devoted to national security and basic science were from U.S. Department of Energy,
Laboratory Operations Board [1996]. The share of all U.S. venture capital disbursements
in 1988 going to companies in the state (calculated using the number of companies
funded) is based on a special tabulation of Venture Economics' Venture Intelligence
Database. We determine whether the contract for the facility was ever competitively
awarded from U.S. General Accounting Office [1996b]. Data on new licenses and
licensing revenues for DOE FFRDCs in fiscal year 1997 are based on U.S. Department of
Energy, Office of the General Counsel [1998]. Data on R&D at DOE FFRDCs in fiscal
year 1995 are from National Science Board [1998].

Table 4: Data on successful patent applications (awarded by the end of end of 1996)
derived from DOE FFRDCs are based on a database compiled by the DOE's Office of
Scientific and Technical Information [1998], as described in Section 5(a)(ii) of the paper.
Data on citations to the patents are based on a tabulation of the NBER!Case Western
Reserve patents database. The count of CRADAs in fiscal years 1991 through 1994
(which only includes awards made under the aegis of the Defense Programs, Energy
Efficiency, and Energy Research program offices) is from U.S. Department of Energy
[1995]. The fiscal year 1995 and 1997 data, which include all DOE FFRDC CRADAs,
are from Technology Transfer Business [1998] and U.S. Department of Energy, Officeof
the General Counsel [1998] respectively.

Table 5: See sources for Tables 3 and 4. In addition, data on R&D at DOE FFRDCs
between fiscal years 1987 and 1993 are from National Science Board [1998] and between
fiscal years 1981 and 1986 are from U.S. National Science Foundation [1998]. The
information used to normalize patents and citations are based on a tabulation of the
NBERICase Western Reserve patents database.

Table 6: See sources for Tables 3 and 4. In addition, data on R&D at DOE FFRDCs
between fiscal years 1991 and 1995 are from National Science Board [1998] and in fiscal
years 1997 from U.S. National Science Foundation [1998].




                                            34
                    Data Sources [If Not in Main Bibliography]


Burke, Mary V., and Jennifer R. Gray, 1995, "Annotated List of Federally Funded
      Research and Development Centers," http :I/www.nsf gov/sbe/srs/s429 5.

Federal Council for Science and Technology, various years, Annual Report on
       Government Patent Policy (also known as Report on Government Patent Policy),
       Washington, Government Printing Office.

National Academy of Sciences, 1952, Applied Research in the United States,
       Washington, National Academy Press.

National Science Board, 1996, Science and Technology Indicators—1996, Washington,
      Government Printing Office.

Technology Transfer Business, 1998, "Federal Research & Development Laboratories,"
       h/Lww ded t4tnLfcI!.ahLhm1..
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, 1975, Historical Statistics of the
       United States, Washington, Government Printing Office.

U.S. Department of Commerce, Office of Technology Administration, various years,
      Technology Transfer Under the Stevenson-Wydler Innovation Act, Washington,
       Government Printing Office.

U.S. Department of Energy, 1990, Multiprogram Laboratories: 1979 to 1988, A Decade
      of Change, Washington, U.S. Department of Energy.

U.S. Department of Energy, 1995, "List of CRADA Activity," Unpublished tabulation.

U.S. Department of Energy, Laboratory Operations Board, 1996, Strategic Laboratory
      Missions Plan—Phase I, Washington, U.S. Department of Energy.

U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Defense Programs, 1998, "Licensing of Intellectual
       Property at Defense Program Laboratories and Plants in Fiscal Year 1997,"
       Unpublished tabulation.

U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Procurement and Assistance Management, 1998,
      "DOE Procurement and Assistance Data System (PADS) On-Line Database,"
       http://www. pr. doe.gov/pads.html.

U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Scientific and Technical Information, 1998, "DOE
      Patents Database," Unpublished tabulation.




                                            35
U.S. Department of Energy, Office of the General Counsel, 1998, "Technology Transfer
      Activities, Fiscal Years 1997 through 1999," Unpublished tabulation.

U.S. General Accounting Office, 1994, National Laboratories: Are Their R&D Activities
      Related to Commercial Product Development?, GAO/PMED-95-2, Washington,
      U.S. General Accounting Office.

U.S. General Accounting Office, 1996b, Department of Energy: Contract Reform is
      Progressing, but Full Implementation Will Take Years, GAO/RCED-97-18,
       Washington, U.S. General Accounting Office.

U.S. National Science Foundation, various years, Federal Funds for Research and
       Development, Washington, U.S. Government Printing Office.

U.S. National Science Foundation, 1998, "Federal Obligations for Research and
       Development to Federally Funded Research and Development Centers (FFRDCs),
       by Individual FFRDC: Fiscal Years 1980-1997," Unpublished tabulation.




                                         36
                                               Figure 1:
                      Federally Funded and Total U.S. R&D Expenditures, 1941 -1 997

     250




     200




•    150
U)
C'
0)

0
U,

.2 100                                                   .S1penditures
      50




       0
       1941   1946   1951    1956      1961     1966      1971    1976     1981       1986   1991   1996
                                                       Year
                                                Figure 2:
                       Federally Funded R&D by Non-Industrial Performers, 1955-1997

      50.0




      40.0




0     30.0
U,
a.,
II-
0
0     20.0




      10.0




       0.0
         1955   1960        1965        1970        1975       1980        1985       1990   1995
                                                      Year
                                                     Figure 3:
                          Overall Successful Patent Applications and R&D at DOE FFRDCs


     6000                                                                                                       500


                                                                                                                450

     5000
                                                                                                                400
                                                                                                                      I-
                                                                                                                      w
0
                                                                                                                350
0)   4000
0
                                                                                                                300   .
0                                                                                                                     In
                                                                                                                      C
                                                                                                                      0

     3000                                                                                                       250
>-
(V
U
U-                                                                                                              200
C

     2000
                                                                                                                150

                                                        —U—R&D Spending (left scale)
                                                                                                                100
                                                        —*— Patent Applications (right scale)
     1000
                                                                                                                50


        0                                                                                                       0
            1981   1982   1983   1984   1985   1986   1987     1988     1989     1990      1991   1992   1993
                                                      Year
                                                          Figure 4:
                                   Patents per R&D Dollar at DOE FFRDCs and Universities
       0.12


                      —— Laboratories
                      —è—Universities
00
a06
U,
a,
a,
       0.08




       0.06




<      0.04
 C,
 CC




'4-
 (n
 C,
 C.,


U)




       0.00
              1981   1982   1983        1984   1985   1986   1987   1988   1989   1990   1991   1992   1993
                                                             Year
                                                                       Figure 5:
                                                      Patents and Citations Over Time
                                                       (15 FFRDCs with > 50 Patents)
     2.5                                                                                                                      1.5
                      Patents

            --    0 - - Citations per Patent--Simple Average                                                                  1.0
            --       - Citations per Patent--Weighted Average
     2.0                                                                                                                            03
                                                                                                                                    U)
                                                                                                                                    I-
                                                                                                                                    03
                                                                                                                              0.5
                                                                                                                                    C
                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                    4-
U)                                                                                                                                  0)
4-
     1.5
03
4-                                                                                                                            0.0
a-                                                                                                                                  0)

03                                                                                                                                  4-
N                                                                                                                                   C
                                                                                                                                    4)
                                                                                             --
20                                                    I!


            x.
     0.5
                       '   S




            '3.
     0.0
           1981        1982      1983      1984     1985        1986     1987      1988   1989    1990   1991   1992   1993
                                                                         Year
                   Center



                        Accelerator
                   Center
                                 Linear


                         Technology        Stanford

                                     River
                   Laboratories


                                 National Savannah
                   Laboratory
                                       Sandia

                              National

                   Research           Ridge
                                          Oak
                            Energy
                                                           '0
                   Laboratory
                                    Renewable

                              National
                                             National
                    Laboratory        Alamos
                                             Los

                             Engineering
                    Laboratory

                                         National
                              National
                                                 Idaho
                    Laboratory
                                      Livermore
                              National
                                                Lawrence
                    Laboratory
                                      Berkeley

                              National
                                              Lawrence
                    Laboratory

                                     Brookhaven
                              National

'5.   V
          0'5'
                 0 Laboratory         Argonne
                              Ames
                                          Figure 7:
               Size-Adjusted Technology Transfer Indicators Across DOE FFRDCs

     3.5

                                                              •FY 1997 Licenses/FY 1997 R&D
       3
                                                              DFY 1997 Licensing Revenues/FY 1997 R&D
                                                              Patent Growth Rate, 1981-1993
     2.5                                                      D 1995 CitationsE.Y 1995 R&D
(A
Cu
-J
           2


      1.5


           1



      0.5
I
           0


     -0.




           0




                                              *
                                                  Licensing Information Unavailable
Table 1: R&D Spending and Technology Transferat DOE FFRDCs

Fiscal                                     TotalR&D at DOE          DOE Licensing     Invention Disclosures   ExclusiveLicenses   Non-ExclusiveLicences   Active CRADAs
             Energy Agency-Funded
Year            R&D at DOE FFRDCs           FFRDCs (billions     Revenues (millions     from DOE FFRDCs       from DOE FFRDCs        from DOE FFRDCs      at DOE FFRDCs
              (billions of 1995 dollars)      of 1995 dollars)     of 1995dollars)                (number)             (number)                (number)        (number)
1955                                 1.0
1956                                 1.6
1957                                2.0
1958                                2.2
1959                                2.5
1960                                2.7
1961                                2.9
1962                                3.0
1963                                3.2                                                              1,627
1964                                3.7                                                              1,724
1965                                3.6                                                              1,649
1966                                3.4                                                              1,271
1967                                3.5                                                              1,257                   0                      28
1968                                3.6                                                              1,138                    0                     41
1969                                3.5                                                              1,235                    0                     85
1970                                3.4                                                              1,420                    0                    127
1971                                3.2                                                              1,502                    0                     102
1972                                3.2                                                              1,129                    0                     66
1973                                3.3                                                              1,228                    0                     56
1974                                3.1                                                              1,170                    0                     38
1975                                3.4                                                              1,125                    0                      70
1976                                3.5                                                              1,533                    1                     31
1977                                4.5
1978                                4.7
1979                                4.7
1980                                4.5
1981                                4.5                    5.0
1982                                4.2                    4.9
1983                                4.3                    4.8
1984                                4.5                    5.0
1985                                4.8                    5.3
1986                                4.5                    5.1
1987                                4.4                    5.6                  0.4                    857                   14                      23
1988                                4.4                    5.6                  0.7                  1,003                   18                      25
1989                                4.6                    5.5                  1.8                  1,053                   25                      32
1990                                4.4                    5.4                  2.9                  1,335                   30                      58               1
1991                                4.3                    5.2                  3.5                  1,665                   29                      96              43
1992                                4.3                    5.1                  2.5                  1,698                   24                     191             250
1993                                3.7                    4.3                  2.8                  1,443                   30                     378             582
1994                                3.4                    3.7                  3.0                  1588                    37                     470            1094
1995                                3.3                    3.6                  3.5                  1758                    61                     575            1382
1996                                3.1                    3.2                  4.0                   1,886                  82                     662            1677
1997                                3.1                    3.4                  5.5                                          68                     189             749
Table 2: Technology Transfer Activity at Two DOE FFRDCs

Panel A: Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory

Fiscal Year                                      1989     1990     1991   1992   1993   1994   1995    1996    1997
Invention disclosures filed                        141     192      193    270    219    264     205     240    193
                                                   29       68      60     43      92     89     126     130    134
Patent applications filed
Patents received                                            37      44      48     60     75      90     100     71
New patent licenses                                          3       6      8      4      11      28      47      28
                                                           313      462    437    373    575   1,118   1,310   2,067
Licensing revenues (thousands of 1995 dollars)
New CRADAs formed                                                           18     57     60      67      34     37
                                                                                                                  0
Start-ups formed from laboratory technology

Panel B: Idaho National Engineering and Environmental Laboratory

Fiscal Year                                       1992    1993     1994   1995   1996   1997   1998
Patent applications filed                           11      14       24     38     46     57     61
New patent licenses                                          5        9     12     36     23     18
Licensing revenues (thousands of 1995 dollars)       7      16       97     86    207    343    386
Start-ups formed from laboratory technology          0       1        0      5     10      7      5
Table 3: DOE FFRDC Cross-Sectlonai Data

                                                                                                                                               FY1997           FYI997
                                                                           Herfinda                                                    Was        Patent         License
                                                                           h/Index                  F" 1995 F'? 1995         1988 Contract     Licenses      Revenue (in
                                                                   1997        of               Fraction of   Fraction   Share of             per Million   Thousands of
                                                                Liconsin Patent 1980 Population       R&D      of R&D        U.S. Competi-                   Dollars) per
                                Contractor and Status    1997         g Class of Nearest SMSA Devoted         Devoted     Venture    tively     F'? 1997


FFRDC
                                      Changes, 1977      New
                                        through 1998 Licenses
                                                                Revenue Concen-
                                                                   ($M)   trafion
                                                                                   0CMSA (in to National
                                                                                    thousands)    Security
                                                                                                              to Sasjc
                                                                                                              Science     in State
                                                                                                                          0.61%
                                                                                                                                         '
                                                                                                                           Capital Awarded

                                                                                                                                        No
                                                                                                                                                  R&D     of F'? 1997
                                                                                                                                               Spending R&D Spending
Ames                           lowaStateUniversity         5      0.005     0.15           338       0.0%       79.0%
                               Universityof Chicago       13      0.134     0.11         7,102       3.3%       51.8%     1.78%         No
Argonne
                               Westinghouse
Bettis Atomic Power            (decertifled in 1992)                          0.15         2,264    100.0%      0.0%      4.05%        Yes
                                                                                                                                                                            :
                               University consortium
Brookhaven                     (shifted in 1998)          40      1.342       0.11         9,120      5.0%     91.0%      3.75%         No          0.18            6 04
Lawrence Berkeley              University of California   56      0.351       0.11         4,548      0.0%     78.0%     31.51%         No                          152         —
                                                                                                                                                                    376




                                                          -
Lawrence Livermore             University of California   19      2.118       0.08         4,548     61.6%     16.0%     31.51%         No                                      —

Energy Technology              Rockwell International
Engineenng Center              (decertified in 1997)                          0.12         7,478                         31.51%        Yes
FerniiAccelerator              Universityconsortium        0      0.001       0.13         7,102      0.0%    100.0%      1.78%         No          0.00            001 -
Hanford Engineering
Development
                               Westinghouse
                               edecertifid in 1992)
                               .\crojcttnrough iii7;
                                                                              0.38           124                         — 1.84%       Yes

Idaho Engineering and         EG&G through 1994:
Environment                   then Lockheed               16      0.358        0.14          102     12.0%     28,0%       006%        Yes          0.25            570
                              Foundation (first
                              certified in 1989:
Inhalation Toxicology         decertifled in 1996)                             033           454                           037%        Yes
                              General Electric
Knolls Atomic Power           (decertified in 1992)                            0.10          795     100.0%      0.0%      3 75%        No
Los Alamos                    University of California      4     0.379        0.08          454      76.0%     13.0%      0.37%                    0.01            067
                               Monsanto (decertified
Mound                          in 1982)                                        0.09         1,421                          2.21%       Yes
Research                       Institute                                       0.09         1,620     0.0%       2.0%      3.13%       Yes
                               1984, thea Martin
                               Marietta (later
Oak Ridge National Laboratory Lockheed Martin)            38       1.289       0.09          477       5,0%     42,0%      1.78%       Yes          0 16            551 —
Oak Ridge Institute for
Science and Education         University consortium                            022           477       9 0%    64 0%       1.78%        No
Pacific Northwest             Battelle Institute                               0.11          124      13.0%    14.0%       1 84%        No
Princeton Plasma Physics      Princeton University          1          0       051           308       00%    100.0%       3.50%        No          0.02            0.00
                              then Martin Marietta
                              (later Lockheed
Sandia                        Martin)                      59        1.3       0.08          454      77.0%      3,0%      037%        Yea          0.09;            1 98
                              DuPont through 1989;
Savannah River                then Westinghouse             5      0.021       0.17          327      18.5%     0.0% 0.18%             Yes          0.29
                                                                                                                                                                     1.22
Stanford Linear Accelerator   Stanford University           3        0.2       021          4,548      0.0%   100.0% 31 51%             No          0.03
                                                                                                                                                                     1.69
fhon,as Jefferson Accelerator University consortium                            0,20          807       0.0%   100.0%  2,09%            Yea
Table 4: Patent and Citation Data Across DOE FFRDCs

                                                                     Total                              Count of
                                Successful      Successful    Successful Overall                       CRADAs,
                                     Patent          Patent        Patent Citations Overall Fraction FYs 1991
                               Applications,   Applications, Applications,      per of Citations that 1995 and
                                       1977            1993    1977-1995 Patent       are Self-Cites       1997
Laboratory
Ames                                      0               11            91     1.77             0.18          10
                                          0               32           157     1.27             0.19        111
Argonne
Bettis Atomic Power                       9               13           285     2.65             0.23           0
Brookhaven                                6               15           167     2.39              0.09         40
Lawrence Berkeley                         0               14           105     1.38             0.32        140
Lawrence Livermore                       26              103           784     2.44              0.12       237
                                          4                1             46    4.20              0.06           0
Energy Technology
                                          2                1             31    2.16              0.13           0
Fermi
Hanford                                   0                 1             4    0.25              0.00           0
Idaho                                     0               15             88    0.50              0.07         55
Inhalation Toxicology                     0                0              3    3.00              0.00           3
                                           3                1            67    2.00              0.17           0
Knolls
Los Alamos                               11               20           440     2.94              0.13       238
Mound                                      I                5            37     1.43             0.15        NA
Renewable Energy Resear                    1              19           158      1.68             0.09         41
Oak Ridge Lab                              0              37           262      1.50             0.13       238
                                           0                              6     0.17             0.00           1
Oak Ridge Institute
Pacific Northwest                          0              10             73     1.60             0.09         54
Princeton Plasma Physics                   0                4            38     1.16             0.41           4
Sandia                                     0              34           147      0.88              0.05      260
 Savannah River                            1              32            105     0.96              0.15         17
 Stanford Linear Accelerator               1              12             80     2.04              0.19          2
ThomasJefferson                            0                2            11     0.36              0.00          0
 Unattributed                           100               73         1,771      3.47              0.11


Al/DOE                                  165             456          4,956      2.57             0.13      1,451
Table 5: Panel Regression Results—Patents and Citations

                                                                        Dependent Variable:
                                                                                                   Non-Self-        Non-Self-
                                      Logarithm of     Logarithm of       Total Citations per   Citations per    Citations per
                                           Patents1         Patents1                 Patent2         Patent2          Patent2
Independent Variables:                           (1)             (2)                     (3)               (4)            (5)

Logarithm of R&D in Fiscal Year               0.223          -0.139
                                           (.072)             (.190)

Logarithm of Patents1                                                                 -0.532         -0.489            -0.936
                                                                                    **(259)          (.235)          (.305)
                                             0.019            0.172                    1.651           1.365            0.682
 Competition3
                                             (.217)           (.201)                **(796)          *(721)            (.800)

 Focus'4                                      1.471                                   -2.272          -2.855
                                            **(637)                                  (2.309)         (2.092)

Change in 'Focus4                             1.804                                    2.868          2.377
                                               298)                                **(1 168)       **(1 058)

National Security Share of R&D               -0.192                                   -0.847          -0.921
(FY 1995)                                     (.234)                                   (.719)          (.651)

Basic Science Share of R&D                   -1.801                                   -1.489          -1.470
(FY 1995)                                  ***( 288)                                 (1.095)           (.992)

University Contractor                         1.023                                    0.960          0.768
                                           (.172)                                      (.666)         (.603)

Year=1987 or Later                            0.515            0.514                   0.680           0.321            0.526
                                               102)         ***( 085)                 *(372)          (.337)            (.345)

Lab Fixed Effects                          excluded         included               excluded        excluded          included
                                                          significant                                              significant

Number of Observations                          238              238                     244               244            244

R2                                            0.495            0.687                   0.045           0.044            0.138

1. Logarithm of (DOE FFRDC patents+1 )/(weighted average number of all patents by field) (see text for more detail)
2. Normalized for truncation and variation in propensity to cite as described in the text.
3. Dummy equal to unity from 2 years before through 2 years after change in contractor.
4. Herfindahl Index of concentration of patents across technology classes.
   The change is the difference between the second and first half of the sample period.

Standard errors in parentheses:
* next to the standard error denotes coefficients that are statistically significant at the 90% level.
   next to the standard error denotes coefficients that are statistically significant at the 95% level.
    next to the standard error denotes coefficients that are statistically significant at the 99% level.
Table 6: Panel Regression Results—CRADA Formation

                                                                         Specification and
                                                                         Dependent Variable:

                                        OLS          OLS                                         Poisson           Poisson
                                      Logarithm of Logarithm of
                                     New CRADAs New CRADAs                                     New CRADAs New CRADAs
                                            Formed1         Formed1                                 Formed     Formed
Independent Variables:                           (1)              (2)                                   (3)        (4)

Logarithm of R&D in Fiscal Year               0.897           -0.009                                   1.045            0.768
                                               132)            (.202)                               ***( 092)        ***( 195)

                                              0.649           -0.058                                   0.401           -0.232
"Competition2
                                            **(308)            (.343)                               130)                (.166)

"Focus3                                       -1.822                                                   -7.492
                                             (1.120)                                                     853)

Change in "Focus'3                            -0.855                                                       0295
                                             *(479)                                                    (.333)

National Security Share of R&D                -1.430                                                   -1.495
(FY 1995)                                   **(549)                                                  ***( 227)

Basic Science Share of R&D                    -1.680                                                   -0.805
(FY 1995)                                   ***( 558)                                                ***( 252)

University Contractor                          0.694                                                   0.227
                                              *(375)                                                   (.158)

Year Fixed Effects                          included         included                                included         included
                                          significant      significant                             significant      significant

Lab Fixed Effects                          excluded          included                               excluded          included
                                                           significant                                              significant

Number of Observations                            95              104                                        95           104


R2                                             0.744            0.872

Pseudo R2                                                                                                  0.736        0.823

1. Logarithm of (New CRADAs Formed+1) (see text for more detail).
2. Dummy equal to unity from 2 years before through 2 years after change in contractor.
3. Herfindahl Index of concentration of patents across technology classes.
   The change is the difference between the second and first half of the sample period.

Standard errors in parentheses:
* next to the standard error denotes coefficients that are statistically significant at the 90% level.
   next to the standard error denotes coefficients that are statistically significant at the 95% level.
    next to the standard error denotes coefficients that are statistically significant at the 99% level.
