1. Introduction

        Almost three decades have elapsed since I published my National Bureau of Economic

Research monograph [Grossman (1972b)] and Journal of Political Economy paper [Grossman

1972a)] dealing with a theoretical and empirical investigation of the demand for the commodity

“good health.”1 My work was motivated by the fundamental difference between health as an

output and medical care as one of a number of inputs into the production of health and by the

equally important difference between health capital and other forms of human capital.

According to traditional demand theory, each consumer has a utility or preference function that

allows him or her to rank alternative combinations of goods and services purchased in the

market. Consumers are assumed to select that combination that maximizes their utility function

subject to an income or resource constraint: namely, outlays on goods and services cannot

exceed income. While this theory provides a satisfactory explanation of the demand for many

goods and services, students of medical economics have long realized that what consumers

demand when they purchase medical services are not these services per se but rather better

health. Indeed, as early as 1789, Bentham included relief of pain as one of fifteen “simple

pleasures” which exhausted the list of basic arguments in one’s utility function [Bentham

(1931)]. The distinction between health as an output or an object of choice and medical care as

an input had not, however, been exploited in the theoretical and empirical literature prior to

1972.

        My approach to the demand for health has been labeled as the human capital model in

much of the literature on health economics because it draws heavily on human capital theory

[Becker (1964, 1967), Ben-Porath (1967), Mincer (1974)]. According to human capital theory,

increases in a person’s stock of knowledge or human capital raise his productivity in the market
sector of the economy, where he produces money earnings, and in the nonmarket or household

sector, where he produces commodities that enter his utility function. To realize potential gains

in productivity, individuals have an incentive to invest in formal schooling and on-the-job

training. The costs of these investments include direct outlays on market goods and the

opportunity cost of the time that must be withdrawn from competing uses. This framework was

used by Becker (1967) and by Ben-Porath (1967) to develop models that determine the optimal

quantity of investment in human capital at any age. In addition, these models show how the

optimal quantity varies over the life cycle of an individual and among individuals of the same

age.

       Although Mushkin (1962), Becker (1964), and Fuchs (1966) had pointed out that health

capital is one component of the stock of human capital, I was the first person to construct a

model of the demand for health capital itself. If increases in the stock of health simply increased

wage rates, my undertaking would not have been necessary, for one could simply have applied

Becker’s and Ben-Porath’s models to study the decision to invest in health. I argued, however,

that health capital differs from other forms of human capital. In particular, I argued that a

person’s stock of knowledge affects his market and nonmarket productivity, while his stock of

health determines the total amount of time he can spend producing money earnings and

commodities.

       My approach uses the household production function model of consumer behavior

[Becker (1965), Lancaster (1966), Michael and Becker (1973)] to account for the gap between

health as an output and medical care as one of many inputs into its production. This model

draws a sharp distinction between fundamental objects of choice--called commodities--that enter

the utility function and market goods and services. These commodities are Bentham’s (1931)




                                                 2
pleasures that exhaust the basic arguments in the utility function. Consumers produce

commodities with inputs of market goods and services and their own time. For example, they

use sporting equipment and their own time to produce recreation, traveling time and

transportation services to produce visits, and part of their Sundays and church services to

produce “peace of mind.” The concept of a household production function is perfectly

analogous to a firm production function. Each relates a specific output or a vector of outputs to a

set of inputs. Since goods and services are inputs into the production of commodities, the

demand for these goods and services is a derived demand for a factor of production. That is, the

demand for medical care and other health inputs is derived from the basic demand for health.

       There is an important link between the household production theory of consumer

behavior and the theory of investment in human capital. Consumers as investors in their human

capital produce these investments with inputs of their own time, books, teachers’ services, and

computers. Thus, some of the outputs of household production directly enter the utility function,

while other outputs determine earnings or wealth in a life cycle context. Health, on the other

hand, does both.

       In my model, health--defined broadly to include longevity and illness-free days in a given

year--is both demanded and produced by consumers. Health is a choice variable because it is a

source of utility (satisfaction) and because it determines income or wealth levels. That is, health

is demanded by consumers for two reasons. As a consumption commodity, it directly enters

their preference functions, or, put differently, sick days are a source of disutility. As an

investment commodity, it determines the total amount of time available for market and

nonmarket activities. In other words, an increase in the stock of health reduces the amount of

time lost from these activities, and the monetary value of this reduction is an index of the return




                                                  3
to an investment in health.

       Since health capital is one component of human capital, a person inherits an initial stock

of health that depreciates with age--at an increasing rate at least after some stage in the life

cycle--and can be increased by investment. Death occurs when the stock falls below a certain

level, and one of the novel features of the model is that individuals “choose” their length of life.

Gross investments are produced by household production functions that relate an output of health

to such choice variables or health inputs as medical care utilization, diet, exercise, cigarette

smoking, and alcohol consumption. In addition, the production function is affected by the

efficiency or productivity of a given consumer as reflected by his or her personal characteristics.

Efficiency is defined as the amount of health obtained from a given amount of health inputs. For

example, years of formal schooling completed plays a large role in this context.

       Since the most fundamental law in economics is the law of the downward sloping

demand function, the quantity of health demanded should be negatively correlated with its

“shadow price.” I stress that the shadow price of health depends on many other variables besides

the price of medical care. Shifts in these variables alter the optimal amount of health and also

alter the derived demand for gross investment and for health inputs. I show that the shadow

price of health rises with age if the rate of depreciation on the stock of health rises over the life

cycle and falls with education (years of formal schooling completed) if more educated people are

more efficient producers of health. I emphasize the result that, under certain conditions, an

increase in the shadow price may simultaneously reduce the quantity of health demanded and

increase the quantities of health inputs demanded.

       The task in this paper is to outline my 1972 model of the demand for health, to discuss

the theoretical predictions it contains, to review theoretical extensions of the model, and to




                                                   4
survey empirical research that tests the predictions made by the model or studies causality

between years of formal schooling completed and good health. I outline my model in Section 2

of this paper. I include a new interpretation of the condition for death, which is motivated in part

by analyses by Ehrlich and Chuma (1990) and by Ried (1996, 1998). I also address a

fundamental criticism of my framework raised by Ehrlich and Chuma involving an

indeterminacy problem with regard to optimal investment in health. I summarize my pure

investment model in Section 3, my pure consumption model in Section 4, and my empirical

testing of the model in Section 5. While I emphasize my own contributions in these three

sections, I do treat closely related developments that followed my 1972 publications. I keep

derivations to a minimum because these can be found in Grossman (1972a, 1972b).2 In Section

6 I focus on theoretical and empirical extensions and criticisms, other than those raised by

Ehrlich and Chuma and by Ried.

       I conclude in Section 7 with a discussion of studies that investigate alternative

explanations of the positive relationship between years of formal schooling completed and

alternative measures of adult health. While not all this literature is grounded in demand for

health models, it is natural to address it in a paper of this nature because it essentially deals with

complementary relationships between the two most important components of the stock of human

capital. Currently, we still lack comprehensive theoretical models in which the stocks of health

and knowledge are determined simultaneously. I am somewhat disappointed that my 1982 plea

for the development of these models has gone unanswered [Grossman (1982)]. The rich

empirical literature treating interactions between schooling and health underscores the potential

payoffs to this undertaking.




                                                   5
2. Basic model

2.1 Assumptions

        Let the intertemporal utility function of a typical consumer be

                        U = U(φtHt, Zt), t = 0, 1, ... , n,                                     (2-1)

where Ht is the stock of health at age t or in time period t, φt is the service flow per unit stock,

ht = φtHt is total consumption of “health services,” and Zt is consumption of another commodity.

The stock of health in the initial period (H0) is given, but the stock of health at any other age is

endogenous. The length of life as of the planning date (n) also is endogenous. In particular,

death takes place when Ht ≤ Hmin. Therefore, length of life is determined by the quantities of

health capital that maximize utility subject to production and resource constraints.

        By definition, net investment in the stock of health equals gross investment minus

depreciation:

                        Ht+1 - Ht = It - δtHt,                                                  (2-2)


where It is gross investment and δt is the rate of depreciation during the tth period (0 < δt < 1).

The rates of depreciation are exogenous but depend on age. Consumers produce gross

investment in health and the other commodities in the utility function according to a set of

household production functions:

                        It = It(Mt, THt; E)                                                     (2-3)

                        Zt = Zt(Xt, Tt; E).                                                     (2-4)

        In these equations Mt is a vector of inputs (goods) purchased in the market that contribute

to gross investment in health, Xt is a similar vector of goods inputs that contribute to the

production of Zt, THt and Tt are time inputs, and E is the consumer’s stock of knowledge or

human capital exclusive of health capital. This latter stock is assumed to be exogenous or


                                                     6
predetermined. The semicolon before it highlights the difference between this variable and the

endogenous goods and time inputs. In effect, I am examining the consumer's behavior after he

has acquired the optimal stock of this capital.3 Following Michael (1972, 1973) and Michael and

Becker (1973), I assume that an increase in knowledge capital raises the efficiency of the

production process in the nonmarket or household sector, just as an increase in technology raises

the efficiency of the production process in the market sector. I also assume that all production

functions are linear homogenous in the endogenous market goods and own time inputs.

       In much of my modeling, I treat the vectors of goods inputs, Mt and Xt, as scalars and

associate the market goods input in the gross investment production function with medical care.

Clearly this is an oversimplification because many other market goods and services influence

health. Examples include housing, diet, recreation, cigarette smoking, and excessive alcohol use.

The latter two inputs have negative marginal products in the production of health. They are

purchased because they are inputs into the production of other commodities such as “smoking

pleasure” that yield positive utility. In completing the model I will rule out this and other types

of joint production, although I consider joint production in some detail in Grossman (1972b, pp.

74-83). I also will associate the market goods input in the health production function with

medical care, although the reader should keep in mind that the model would retain its structure if

the primary health input purchased in the market was something other than medical care. This is

important because of evidence that medical care may be an unimportant determinant of health in

developed countries [see Evans and Stoddart (Chapter 2 in this Handbook)] and because Zweifel

and Breyer (1997) use the lack of a positive relationship between correlates of good health and

medical care in micro data to criticize my approach.

       Both market goods and own time are scarce resources. The goods budget constraint


                                                 7
equates the present value of outlays on goods to the present value of earnings income over the

life cycle plus initial assets (discounted property income):

                             n
                                 Pt M t + Q t X t     n
                                                          Wt TWt
                            ∑
                            t =0     (1 + r ) t
                                                  = ∑
                                                    t = 0 (1 + r )
                                                                   t
                                                                     + A0 .                           (2-5)


Here Pt and Qt are the prices of Mt and Xt, Wt is the hourly wage rate, TWt is hours of work, A0

is initial assets, and r is the market rate of interest. The time constraint requires that Ω, the total

amount of time available in any period, must be exhausted by all possible uses:

                           TWt + THt + Tt + TLt = Ω,                                                  (2-6)

where TLt is time lost from market and nonmarket activities due to illness and injury.

        Equation (2-6) modifies the time budget constraint in Becker’s (1965) allocation of time

model. If sick time were not added to market and nonmarket time, total time would not be

exhausted by all possible uses. I assume that sick time is inversely related to the stock of health;

that is ∂TLt/∂Ht < 0. If Ω is measured in hours (Ω = 8,760 hours or 365 days times 24 hours per

day if the year is the relevant period) and if φt is defined as the flow of healthy time per unit of

Ht, ht equals the total number of healthy hours in a given year. Then one can write

                           TLt = Ω - ht.                                                              (2-7)

From now on, I assume that the variable ht in the utility function coincides with healthy hours.4

        By substituting for hours of work (TWt) from equation (6) into equation (5), one obtains

the single “full wealth” constraint:

                        Pt M t + Q t X t + Wt (TL t + TH t + Tt )                 Wt Ω
                ∑                                                        ∑ (1 + r)
                  n                                                           n

                                                                  =                          + A 0.   (2-8)
                 t =0
                                          (1 + r) t                       t =0
                                                                                         t




Full wealth, which is given by the right-hand side of equation (2-8), equals initial assets plus the

discounted value of the earnings an individual would obtain if he spent all of his time at work.


                                                             8
Part of this wealth is spent on market goods, part of it is spent on nonmarket production, and part

of it is lost due to illness. The equilibrium quantities of Ht and Zt can now be found by

maximizing the utility function given by equation (2-1) subject to the constraints given by

equations (2-2), (2-3), and (2-8). Since the inherited stock of health and the rates of depreciation

are given, the optimal quantities of gross investment determine the optimal quantities of health

capital.



2.2. Equilibrium conditions

           First-order optimality conditions for gross investment in period t-1 are5

   π t −1         Wt G t      (1 − δ t ) Wt +1 G t + 1      (1 − δ t )L (1 − δ n −1 ) Wn G n
          t −1
               =            +               t +1
                                                       +L +                                  +
(1 + r )         (1 + r ) t
                                   (1 + r )                            (1 + r ) n

                  Uh t                                   Uh n
                       G t + L (1 − δ t )L (1 − δ n −1 )      Gn                                 (2-9)
                   λ                                      λ



                                     Pt −1             Wt −1
                   π t −1 =                    =                   .                             (2-10)
                              ∂I t −1 / ∂M t −1 ∂I t −1 / ∂TH t −1

The new symbols in these equations are: Uht = ∂U/∂ht, the marginal utility of healthy time; λ, the

marginal utility of wealth; Gt = ∂ht/∂Ht = -(∂TLt/∂Ht), the marginal product of the stock of health

in the production of healthy time; and πt-1, the marginal cost of gross investment in health in

period t-1.

           Equation (2-9) states that the present value of the marginal cost of gross investment in

health in period t-1 must equal the present value of marginal benefits. Discounted marginal

benefits at age t equal




                                                                 9
                            Wt          Uh t 
                        Gt            +
                                          λ 
                                                ,
                            (1 + r)
                                     t




where Gt is the marginal product of health capital--the increase in the amount of healthy time

caused by a one-unit increase in the stock of health. Two monetary magnitudes are necessary to

convert this marginal product into value terms because consumers desire health for two reasons.

The discounted wage rate measures the monetary value of a one-unit increase in the total amount

of time available for market and nonmarket activities, and the term Uht/λ measures the

discounted monetary value of the increase in utility due to a one-unit increase in healthy time.

Thus, the sum of these two terms measures the discounted marginal value to consumers of the

output produced by health capital.

        Condition (2-9) holds for any capital asset, not just for health capital. The marginal cost

as of the current period, obtained by multiplying both sides of the equation by (1 + r)t-1, must be

equated to the discounted flows of marginal benefits in the future. This is true for the asset of

health capital by labeling the marginal costs and benefits of this particular asset in the

appropriate manner. As I will show presently, most of the effects of variations in exogenous

variables can be traced out as shifting the marginal costs and marginal benefits of the asset.

        While equation (2-9) determines the optimal amount of gross investment in period t-1,

equation (2-10) shows the condition for minimizing the cost of producing a given quantity of

gross investment. Total cost is minimized when the increase in gross investment from spending

an additional dollar on medical care equals the increase in total cost from spending an additional

dollar on time. Since the gross investment production function is homogenous of degree one in

the two endogenous inputs and since the prices of medical care and time are independent of the

level of these inputs, the average cost of gross investment is constant and equal to the marginal

cost.


                                                    10
        To examine the forces that affect the demand for health and gross investment, it is useful

to convert equation (2-9) into an equation that determines the optimal stock of health in period t.

If gross investment in period t is positive, a condition similar to (2-9) holds for its optimal value.

From these two first-order conditions

                                   Uh              
                        G t  Wt + ( t ) (1 + r ) t  = π t −1 (r − ~
                                                                    π t −1 + δ t ),             (2-11)
                                    λ              

where ~
      π t −1 is the percentage rate of change in marginal cost between period t-1 and period t.6

Equation (2-11) implies that the undiscounted value of the marginal product of the optimal stock

                                                                                 ~ + δ ). The latter
of health capital at any age must equal the supply price of capital, π t −1 (r − π t −1 t


contains interest, depreciation, and capital gains components and may be interpreted as the rental

price or user cost of health capital.

        Equation (2-11) fully determines the optimal quantity at time t of a capital good that can

be bought and sold in a perfect market. The stock of health capital, like the stock of knowledge

capital, cannot be sold because it is imbedded in the investor. This means that gross investment

cannot be nonnegative. Although sales of capital are ruled out, provided gross investment is

positive, there exists a user cost of capital that in equilibrium must equal the value of the

marginal product of the stock. In Grossman [(1972a, p. 230), (1972b, pp. 6-7)], I provide an

intuitive interpretation of this result by showing that exchanges over time in the stock of health

by an individual substitute for exchanges in the capital market.



2.3. Optimal length of life7

          So far I have essentially reproduced the analysis of equilibrium conditions in my 1972

National Bureau of Economic Research monograph and Journal of Political Economy article. A




                                                        11
perceptive reader may have noted that an explicit condition determining length of life is absent.

The discounted marginal benefits of an investment in health in period 0 are summed from

periods 1 through n, so that the consumer is alive in period n and dead in period n+1.8 This

means that Hn+1 is equal to or less than Hmin, the death stock, while Hn and Ht (t < n) exceed Hmin.

But how do we know that the optimal quantities of the stock of health guarantee this outcome?

Put differently, length of life is supposed to be an endogenous variable in the model, yet

discounted income and expenditure flows in the full wealth constraint and discounted marginal

benefits in the first-order conditions appear to be summed over a fixed n.

       I was bothered by the above while I was developing my model. As of the date of its

publication, I was not convinced that length of life was in fact being determined by the model.

There is a footnote in my Journal of Political Economy article [Grossman (1972a), footnote 7, p.

228] and in my National Bureau of Economic Research monograph [Grossman (1972b), footnote

9, p. 4] in which I impose the constraints that Hn+1 ≤ Hmin. and Hn > Hmin. 9 Surely, it is wrong to

impose these constraints in a maximization problem in which length of life is endogenous.

       My publications on the demand for health were outgrowths of my 1970 Columbia

University Ph.D. dissertation. While I was writing my dissertation, my friend and fellow Ph.D.

candidate, Gilbert R. Ghez, pointed out that the determination of optimal length of life could be

viewed as an iterative process. I learned a great deal from him, and I often spent a long time

working through the implications of his comments.10 It has taken me almost thirty years to work

through his comment on the iterative determination of length of life. I abandoned this effort

many years ago but returned to it when I read Ried’s (1996, 1998 ) reformulation of the selection

of the optimal stock of health and length of life as a discrete time optimal control problem. Ried

writes (1998, p. 389): “Since [the problem] is a free terminal time problem, one may suspect that




                                                 12
a condition for the optimal length of the planning horizon is missing in the set of necessary

conditions…. However, unlike the analogous continuous time problem, the discrete time version

fails to provide such an equation. Rather, the optimal final period...has to be determined through

the analysis of a sequence of fixed terminal time problems with the terminal time varying over a

plausible domain.” This is the same observation that Ghez made. I offer a proof below. I do not

rely on Ried’s solution. Instead, I offer a much more simple proof which has a very different

implication than the one offered by Ried.

       A few preliminaries are in order. First, I assume that the rate of depreciation on the stock

of health (δt) rises with age. As we shall see in more detail later on, this implies that the optimal

stock falls with age. Second, I assume that optimal gross investment in health is positive except

                                                                     Uh t
in the very last year of life. Third, I define Vt as Wt +                 (1 + r) t . Hence, Vt is the
                                                                      λ

undiscounted marginal value of the output produced by health capital in period t. Finally, since

the output produced by health capital has a finite upper limit of 8,760 hours in a year, I assume

that the marginal product of the stock of health (Gt) diminishes as the stock increases

(∂Gt/∂Ht < 0).

       Consider the maximization problem outlined in Section 2.1 except that the planning

horizon is exogenous. That is, an individual is alive in period n and dead in period n+1. Write

the first-order conditions for the optimal stocks of health compactly as

                        Vt G t = π t −1 (r − ~
                                             π t −1 + δ t ), t < n                                       (2-12)

                       VnGn = πn-1(r + 1).                                                               (2-13)

Note that equation (2-13) follows from the condition for optimal gross investment in period n-1.

An investment in that period yields returns in one period only (period n) since the individual dies

after period n. Put differently, the person behaves as if the rate of depreciation on the stock of


                                                          13
health is equal to 1 in period n.

       I also will make use of the first-order conditions for gross investment in health in periods

0 and n:

                                V1G1 d 2 V2 G 2         d VG
                        π0 =           +           + K + n n nn                               (2-14)
                               (1 + r ) (1 + r ) 2
                                                         (1 + r )

                       In = 0.                                                                (2-15)

In equation (2-14), dt is the increase in the stock of health in period t caused by an increase in

gross investment in period 0:

                                                 t −1
                        d1 = 1, d t (t > 1) = ∏ (1 − δ j ).
                                                 j=1



Obviously, gross investment in period n is 0 because the individual will not be alive in period

n+1 to collect the returns.

       In order for death to take place in period n+1, Hn+1 ≤ Hmin. Since In = 0,

                       Hn+1 = (1 - δn)Hn.                                                     (2-16)

Hence, for the solution (death after period n) to be fully consistent

                       Hn+1 = (1 - δn)Hn ≤ Hmin.                                              (2-17)

Suppose that condition (2-17) is violated. That is, suppose maximization for a fixed number of

periods equal to n results in a stock in period n+1 that exceeds the death stock. Then lifetime

utility should be re-maximized under the assumption that the individual will be alive in period

n+1 but dead in period n+2. As a first approximation, the set of first-order conditions for Ht

(t < n) defined by equation (2-12) still must hold so that the stock in each of these periods is not

affected when the horizon is lengthened by 1 period.11 But the condition for the stock in period n

becomes

                        Vn* G *n = π n −1 (r − ~
                                               π n −1 + δ n ),                                (2-18)


                                                           14
where asterisks are used because the stock of health in period n when the horizon is n+1 is not

equal to the stock when the horizon is n (see below). Moreover,

                         Vn*+1G *n +1 = πn(r + 1)                                              (2-19)

                        In+1 = 0                                                               (2-20)

                        Hn+2 = (1 - δn+1) H *n +1                                              (2-21)

If the stock defined by equation (2-21) is less than or equal to Hmin, death takes place in period

n+2. If Hn+2 is greater than Hmin, the consumer re-maximizes lifetime utility under the

assumption that death takes place in period n+3 (the horizon ends in period n+2).

         I have just described an iterative process for the selection of optimal length of life. In

words, the process amounts to maximizing lifetime utility for a fixed horizon, checking to see

whether the stock in the period after the horizon ends (the terminal stock) is less than or equal to

the death stock (Hmin), and adding one period to the horizon and re-maximizing the utility

function if the terminal stock exceeds the death stock.12 I want to make several comments on

this process and its implications. Compare the condition for the optimal stock of health in period

n when the horizon lasts through period n [equation (2-13)] with the condition for the optimal

stock in the same period when the horizon lasts through period n+1 [equation (2-18)]. The

supply price of health capital is smaller in the latter case because δn < 1. 13 Hence, the

undiscounted value of the marginal product of health capital in period n when the horizon is

n+1 (Vn*G *n ) must be smaller than the undiscounted value of the marginal product of health

capital in period n when the horizon is n (VnGn). In turn, due to diminishing marginal

productivity, the stock of health in period n must rise when the horizon is extended by one period

(H *n > H n ). 14

         When the individual lives for n+1 years, the first-order condition for gross investment in


                                                    15
period 0 is

                             V1G1 d 2 V2 G 2 K d n Vn*G *n d n (1 − δ n )Vn*+1G *n +1 .
                       π0 =         +           + +           +                              (2-22)
                            (1 + r ) (1 + r ) 2     (1 + r) n     (1 + r ) n +1

Note that the discounted marginal benefits of an investment in period 0 are the same whether the

person dies in period n+1 or in period n+2 [compare the right-hand sides of equations (2-14) and

(2-22)] since the marginal cost of an investment in period 0 does not depend on the length of the

horizon. This may seem strange because one term is added to discounted marginal benefits of an

investment in period 0 or in any other period when the horizon is extended by one period--the

discounted marginal benefit in period n+1. This term, however, is exactly offset by the reduction

in the discounted marginal benefit in period n. The same offset occurs in the discounted

marginal benefits of investments in every other period except for periods n-1 and n.

       A proof of the last proposition is as follows. The first n-1 terms on the right-hand sides

of equations (2-14) and (2-22) are the same. From equations (2-13), (2-18), and (2-19),

                                    Vn G n (r − ~
                                                π n−1 + δ n )
                       Vn* G *n =
                                            (1 + r )

                       Vn*+1G *n +1 = Vn G n (1 + ~
                                                  π n −1 ).

Hence, the sum of the last two terms on the right-hand side of equation (2-22) equals the last

term on the right-hand side of equation (2-14):15

                       d n Vn* G *n d n (1 − δ n )Vn*+1G *n +1 d n Vn G n .
                                   +                          =                              (2-23)
                        (1 + r) n          (1 + r ) n +1        (1 + r ) n

       Using the last result, one can fully describe the algorithm for the selection of optimal

length of life. Maximize the lifetime utility function for a fixed horizon. Check to see whether

the terminal stock is less than or equal to the death stock. If the terminal stock exceeds the death

stock, add one period to the horizon and redo the maximization. The resulting values of the



                                                        16
stock of health must be the same in every period except for periods n and n+1. The stock of

health must be larger in these two periods when the horizon equals n+1 than when the horizon

equals n. The stock in period t depends on gross investment in period t-1, with gross investment

in previous periods held constant. Therefore, gross investment is larger in periods n-1 and n but

the same in every other period when the horizon is increased by one year. A rise in the rate of

depreciation with age guarantees finite life since for some j16

                        Hn+j = (1- δn+j-1)Hn+j-1 ≤ Hmin.

        I have just addressed a major criticism of my model made by Ehrlich and Chuma (1990).

They argue that my analysis does not determine length of life because it “...does not develop the

required terminal (transversality) conditions needed to assure the consistency of any solutions for

the life cycle path of health capital and longevity [Ehrlich and Chuma (1990), p. 762].” I have

just shown that length of life is determined as the outcome of an iterative process in which

lifetime utility functions with alternative horizons are maximized. Since the continuous time

optimal control techniques employed by Ehrlich and Chuma are not my fields of expertise, I

invite the reader to study their paper and make up his or her own mind on this issue.

        As I indicated at the beginning of this subsection, Ried (1996, 1998) offers the same

general description of the selection of length of life as an iterative process. He proposes a

solution using extremely complicated discrete time optimal control techniques. Again, I leave

the reader to evaluate Ried’s solution. But I do want to challenge his conclusion that

“...sufficiently small perturbations of the trajectories of the exogenous variables will not alter the

length of the individual’s planning horizon....[T]he uniqueness assumption [about length of life]

ensures that the planning horizon may be treated as fixed in comparative dynamic analysis....

Given a fixed length of the individual’s life, it is obvious that the mortality aspect is entirely left




                                                   17
out of the picture. Thus, the impact of parametric changes upon individual health is confined to

the quality of life which implies the analysis to deal [sic] with a pure morbidity effect (p. 389).”

        In my view it is somewhat unsatisfactory to begin with a model in which length of life is

endogenous but to end up with a result in which length of life does not depend on any of the

exogenous variables in the model. This certainly is not an implication of my analysis of the

determination of optimal length of life. In general, differences in such exogenous variables as

the rate of depreciation, initial assets, and the marginal cost of investing in health across

consumers of the same age will lead to differences in the optimal length of life.17

        To be concrete, consider two consumers: a and b. Person a faces a higher rate of

depreciation in each period than person b. The two consumers are the same in all other respects.

Suppose that it is optimal for person a to live for n years (to die in year n+1). Ried argues that

person b also lives for n years because both he and person a use equation (2-13) to determine the

optimal stock of health in period n. That equation is independent of the rate of depreciation in

period n. Hence, the stock of health in period n is the same for each consumer. For person a, we

have

                          H an +1 = (1 − δ an )H an ≤ H min ,

where the superscript a denotes values of variables for person a. But for person b,

                          H bn +1 = (1 − δ bn )H an .

Since δ bn < δ an , there is no guarantee that H bn +1 ≤ H min . If H bn +1 > H min , person b will be alive in

period n+1. He will then use equation (2-18), rather than equation (2-13), to pick his optimal

stock in period n. In this case person b will have a larger optimal stock in period n than person a

and will have a longer length of life.

        Along the same lines parametric differences in the marginal cost of investment in health



                                                            18
(differences in the marginal cost across people of the same age), differences in initial assets, and

parametric differences in wage rates cause length of life to vary among individuals. In general,

any variable that raises the optimal stock of health in each period of life also tends to prolong

length of life.18 Thus, if health is not an inferior commodity, an increase in initial assets or a

reduction in the marginal cost of investing in health induces a longer optimal life. Persons with

higher wage rates have more wealth; taken by itself, this prolongs life. But the relative price of

health (the price of ht relative to the price of Zt) may rise as the wage rate rises. If this occurs

and the resulting substitution effect outweighs the wealth effect, length of life may fall.

          According to Ried, death occurs if Hn+1 < Hmin rather than if Hn+1 ≤ Hmin. The latter

condition is the one that I employ, but that does not seem to account for the difference between

my analysis and his analysis. Ried’s only justification of his result is in the context of a dynamic

model of labor supply. He assumes that a non-negativity constraint is binding in some period

and concludes that marginal changes in any exogenous variable will fail to bring about positive

supply.

          Ried’s conclusion does not appear to be correct. To see this in the most simple manner,

consider a static model of the supply of labor, and suppose that the marginal rate of substitution

between leisure time and consumption evaluated at zero hours of work is greater than or equal to

the market wage rate at the initial wage. Hence, no hours are supplied to the market. Now

suppose that the wage rate rises. If the marginal rate of substitution at zero hours equaled the old

wage, hours of work will rise above zero. If the marginal rate of substitution at zero hours

exceeded the old wage, hours could still rise above zero if the marginal rate of substitution at

zero hours is smaller than the new wage. By the same reasoning, while not every parametric

reduction in the rate of depreciation on the stock of health will increase optimal length of life




                                                  19
(see footnote 18), some reductions surely will do so. I stand by my statement that it is somewhat

unsatisfactory to begin with a model in which length of life is endogenous and end up with a

result in which length of life does not depend on any of the exogenous variables in the model.



2.4. “Bang-bang” equilibrium

       Ehrlich and Chuma assert that my “key assumption that health investment is produced

through a constant-returns-to-scale...technology introduces a type of indeterminacy (‘bang-

bang’) problem with respect to optimal investment and health maintenance choices. ...[This

limitation defies] a systematic resolution of the choice of both (their italics) optimal health paths

and longevity. ...Later contributions to the literature spawned by Grossman...suffer in various

degrees from these shortcomings. ...Under the linear production process assumed by Grossman,

the marginal cost of investment would be constant, and no interior equilibrium for investment

would generally exist (1990, p. 762, p. 764, and p. 768).”19

       Ried (1998) addresses this criticism by noting that an infinite rate of investment is not

consistent with equilibrium. Because Ehrlich and Chuma’s criticism appears to be so damaging

and Ried’s treatment of it is brief and not convincing, I want to deal with it before proceeding to

examine responses of health, gross investment, and health inputs to evolutionary (life-cycle) and

parametric variations in key exogenous variables. Ehrlich and Chuma’s point is as follows.

Suppose that the rate of depreciation on the stock of health is equal to zero at every age, suppose

that the marginal cost of gross investment in health does not depend on the amount of

investment, and suppose that none of the other exogenous variables in the model is a function of

age.20 Then the stock of health is constant over time (net investment is zero). Any discrepancy

between the initial stock and the optimal stock is erased in the initial period. In a continuous




                                                 20
time model, this means an infinite rate of investment to close the gap followed by no investment

after that. If the rate of depreciation is positive and constant, the discrepancy between the initial

and optimal stock is still eliminated in the initial period. After that, gross investment is positive,

constant, and equal to total depreciation; while net investment is zero.

       To avoid the “bang-bang” equilibrium (an infinite rate of investment to eliminate the

discrepancy between the initial and the desired stock followed by no investment if the rate of

depreciation is zero), Ehrlich and Chuma assume that the production function of gross

investment in health exhibits diminishing returns to scale. Thus, the marginal cost of gross or net

investment is a positive function of the amount of investment. Given this, there is an incentive to

reach the desired stock gradually rather than instantaneously since the cost of gradual adjustment

is smaller than the cost of instantaneous adjustment.

       The introduction of diminishing returns to scale greatly complicates the model because

the marginal cost of gross investment and its percentage rate of change over time become

endogenous variables that depend on the quantity of investment and its rate of change. In

Section 6, I show that the structural demand function for the stock of health at age t in a model

with costs of adjustment is one in which Ht depends on the stock at age t+1 and the stock at age

t-1. The solution of this second-order difference equation results in a reduced form demand

function in which the stock at age t depends on all past and future values of the exogenous

variables. This makes theoretical and econometric analysis very difficult.

       Are the modifications introduced by Ehrlich and Chuma really necessary? In my view

the answer is no. The focus of my theoretical and empirical work and that of others who have

adopted my framework [Cropper (1977), Muurinen (1982), Wagstaff (1986)] certainly is not on

discrepancies between the inherited or initial stock and the desired stock. I am willing to assume




                                                  21
that consumers reach their desired stocks instantaneously in order to get sharp predictions that

are subject to empirical testing. Gross investment is positive (but net investment is zero) if the

rate of depreciation is positive but constant in my model. In the Ehrlich-Chuma model, net

investment can be positive in this situation. In either model, consumers choose an infinite life.

In either model life is finite and the stock of health varies over the life cycle if the rate of

depreciation is a positive function of age. In my model positive net investment during certain

stages of the life cycle is not ruled out. For example, the rate of depreciation might be

negatively correlated with age at early stages of the life cycle. The stock of health would be

rising and net investment would be positive during this stage of the life cycle.

        More fundamentally, Ehrlich and Chuma introduce rising marginal cost of investment to

remove an indeterminacy that really does not exist. In Figure 1 of their paper (p. 768), they plot

the marginal cost of an investment in health as of age t and the discounted marginal benefits of

this investment as functions of the quantity of investment. The discounted marginal benefit

function is independent of the rate of investment. Therefore, no interior equilibrium exists for

investment unless the marginal cost function slopes upward. This is the basis of their claim that

my model does not determine optimal investment because marginal cost does not depend on

investment.

        Why, however, is the discounted marginal benefit function independent of the amount of

investment? In a personal communication, Ehrlich informed me that this is because the marginal

product of the stock of health at age t does not depend on the amount of investment at age t.

Surely that is correct. But an increase in It raises the stock of health in all future periods. Since

the marginal product of health capital diminishes as the stock rises, discounted marginal benefits

must fall. Hence, the discounted marginal benefit function slopes downward, and an interior




                                                   22
equilibrium for gross investment in period t clearly is possible even if the marginal cost of gross

investment is constant.

       Since discounted marginal benefits are positive when gross investment is zero, the

discounted marginal benefit function intersects the vertical axis.21 Thus corner solutions for

gross investment are not ruled out in my model. One such solution occurs if the rate of

depreciation on the stock of health equals zero in every period. Given positive rates of

depreciation, corner solutions still are possible in periods other than the last period of life

because the marginal cost of gross investment could exceed discounted marginal benefits for all

positive quantities of investment. I explicitly rule out corner solutions when depreciation rates

are positive, and Ried and other persons who have used my model also rule them out. Corner

solutions are possible in the Ehrlich-Chuma model if the marginal cost function of gross

investment intersects the vertical axis. Ehrlich and Chuma rule out corners by assuming that the

marginal cost function passes through the origin.

       To summarize, unlike Ried, I conclude that exogenous variations in the marginal cost and

marginal benefit of an investment in health cause optimal length of life to vary. Unlike Ehrlich

and Chuma, I conclude that my 1972 model provides a simple but logically consistent

framework for studying optimal health paths and longevity. At the same time I want to

recognize the value of Ried’s emphasis on the determination of optimal length of life as the

outcome of an iterative process in a discrete time model. I also want to recognize the value of

Ehrlich and Chuma’s model in cases when there are good reasons to assume that the marginal

cost of investment in health is not constant.



2.5. Special cases




                                                  23
        Equation (2-11) determines the optimal stock of health in any period other than the last

period of life. A slightly different form of that equation emerges if both sides are divided by the

marginal cost of gross investment:

                        γt + at = r − ~
                                      π t −1 + δ t .                                            (2-24)

Here γt ≡ WtGt/πt-1 defines the marginal monetary return on an investment in health and

at ≡ [(Uht/λ)(1 + r)tGt]/πt-1 defines the psychic rate of return.22 In equilibrium, the total rate of

return to an investment in health must equal the user cost of capital in terms of the price of gross

investment. The latter variable is defined as the sum of the real-own rate of interest and the rate

of depreciation and may be termed the opportunity cost of health capital.

        In Sections 3 and 4, equation (2-24) is used to study the responses of the stock of health,

gross investment in health, and health inputs to variations in exogenous variables. Instead of

doing this in the context of the general model developed so far, I deal with two special cases: a

pure investment model and a pure consumption model. In the former model the psychic rate of

return is zero, while in the latter the monetary rate of return is zero. There are two reasons for

taking this approach. One involves an appeal to simplicity. It is difficult to obtain sharp

predictions concerning the effects of changes in exogenous variables in a mixed model in which

the stock of health yields both investment and consumption benefits. The second is that most

treatments of investments in knowledge or human capital other than health capital assume that

monetary returns are large relative to psychic returns. Indeed, Lazear (1977) estimates that the

psychic returns from attending school are negative. Clearly, it is unreasonable to assume that

health is a source of disutility, and most discussions of investments in infant, child, and

adolescent health [see Currie (Chapter 23 in this Handbook)] stress the consumption benefits of

these investments. Nevertheless, I stress the pure investment model because it generates



                                                       24
powerful predictions from simple analyses and because the consumption aspects of the demand

for health can be incorporated into empirical estimation without much loss in generality.



3. Pure investment model

        If healthy time did not enter the utility function directly or if the marginal utility of

healthy time were equal to zero, health would be solely an investment commodity. The optimal

amount of Ht (t < n) could then be found by equating the marginal monetary rate of return on an

investment in health to the opportunity cost of capital:

                        Wt G t
                               ≡ γt = r − ~
                                          π t −1 + δ t .                                        (3-1)
                        π t −1

Similarly, the optimal stock of health in the last period of life would be determined by

                        Wn G n
                                ≡ γ n = r + 1.                                                  (3-2)
                         π n −1

        Figure 1 illustrates the determination of the optimal stock of health capital at age t. The

demand curve MEC shows the relationship between the stock of health and the rate of return on

an investment or the marginal efficiency of health capital. The supply curve S shows the

relationship between the stock of health and the cost of capital. Since the real-own rate of

interest (r − ~
              π t−1 ) and the rate of depreciation are independent of the stock, the supply curve is

infinitely elastic. Provided the MEC schedule slopes downward, the equilibrium stock is given

by H *t , where the supply and demand functions intersect.

        The wage rate and the marginal cost of gross investment do not depend on the stock of

health. Therefore, the MEC schedule would be negatively inclined if and only if the marginal

product of health capital (Gt) diminishes as the stock increases. I have already assumed

diminishing marginal productivity in Section 2 and have justified this assumption because the


                                                       25
output produced by health capital has a finite upper limit of 8,760 hours in a year. Figure 2

shows a plausible relationship between the stock of health and the amount of healthy time. This

relationship may be termed a production function of healthy time. The slope of the curve in the

figure at any point gives the marginal product of health capital. The amount of healthy time

equals zero at the death stock, Hmin. Beyond that stock, healthy time increases at a decreasing

rate and eventually approaches its upper asymptote as the stock becomes large.

       Equations (3-1) and (3-2) and Figure 1 enable one to study the responses of the stock of

health and gross investment to variations in exogenous variables. As indicated in Section 2, two

types of variations are examined: evolutionary (differences across time for the same consumer)

and parametric (differences across consumers of the same age). In particular I consider

evolutionary increases in the rate of depreciation on the stock of health with age and parametric

variations in the rate of depreciation, the wage rate, and the stock of knowledge or human

capital exclusive of health capital (E).



3.1. Depreciation rate effects

       Consider the effect of an increase in the rate of depreciation on the stock of health (δt)

with age. I have already shown in Section 2 that this factor causes the stock of health to fall with

age and produces finite life. Graphically, the supply function in Figure 1 shifts upward over time

or with age, and the optimal stock in each period is lower than in the previous period.

       To quantify the magnitude of percentage rate of decrease in the stock of health over the

life cycle, assume that the wage rate and the marginal cost of gross investment in health do not

depend on age so that ~
                      π t −1 = 0. Differentiate equation (3-1) with respect to age to obtain23

                        ~              ~
                        H t = −s t ε t δt .                                                  (3-3)



                                                 26
In this equation, the tilde notation denotes a percentage time or age derivative

~     dH t 1 ,     
H t =          etc. , and the new symbols are st = δt/(r + δt), the share of the depreciation rate
       dt H t      

                                                ∂ lnH t          ∂ lnHt ,
in the cost of health capital; and ε t = −                    =−          the elasticity of the MEC
                                             ∂ l n (r + δ t )     ∂lnγ

schedule.

        Provided the rate of depreciation rises over the life cycle, the stock of health falls with

age. The life cycle profile of gross investment does not, however, simply mirror that of health

capital. The reason is that a rise in the rate of depreciation not only reduces the amount of health

capital demanded by consumers but also reduces the amount of capital supplied to them by a

given amount of gross investment. If the change in supply exceeds the change in demand,

individuals have an incentive to close the gap by increasing gross investment. On the other hand,

if the change in demand exceeds the change in supply, gross investment falls over the life cycle.

        To begin to see why gross investment does not necessarily fall over the life cycle, first

consider the behavior of one component of gross investment, total depreciation (Dt = δtHt), as

the rate of depreciation rises over the life cycle. Assume that the percentage rate of increase in
                                    ~
the rate of depreciation with age ( δ t ) and the elasticity of the MEC schedule (εt) are constant.

Then

                        ~     ~            >       < 1.
                        D t = δ (1 − s t ε) 0 as ε
                                           <       > st

From the last equation, total depreciation increases with age as long as the elasticity of the MEC

schedule is less than the reciprocal of the share of the depreciation rate in the cost of health

capital. A sufficient condition for this to occur is that ε is smaller than one.




                                                     27
                  ~
        If εt and δt are constant, the percentage change in gross investment with age is given by

                             ~                      ~           ~
                        ~ δ (1 − s t ε)(δ t − s t ε δ ) + s 2t ε δ 2 .
                        It =                       ~                                             (3-4)
                                      (δ t − s t ε δ )

                                                                                             ~
Since health capital cannot be sold, gross investment cannot be negative. Therefore, δ t ≥ − H t or

             ~                                                              ~
δ t ≥ −s t ε δ. Provided gross investment is positive, the term δ t − s t ε δ in the numerator and

denominator of equation (3-4) must be positive. Thus, a sufficient condition for gross
                                                                                        ~
investment to be positively correlated with the depreciation rate is ε < 1/st. Clearly, It is positive

if ε < 1.

        The important conclusion is reached that, if the elasticity of the MEC schedule is less

than one, gross investment and the depreciation rate are positively correlated over the life cycle,

while gross investment and the stock of health are negatively correlated. In fact, the relationship

between the amount of healthy time and the stock of health suggests that ε is smaller than one. A

general equation for the healthy time production function illustrated by Figure 2 is

                        h t = 8,760 − BH −t C ,                                                  (3-5)

where B and C are positive constants. The corresponding MEC schedule is

                        l n γt   = l n BC − (C + 1) l n H t + l n W + l n π.                     (3-6)

The elasticity of this schedule is ε = 1/(1 + C) < 1 since C > 0.

        Observe that with the depreciation rate held constant, increases in gross investment

increase the stock of health and the amount of healthy time. But the preceding discussion

indicates that because the depreciation rate rises with age it is likely that unhealthy (old) people

will make larger gross investments in health than healthy (young) people. This means that sick

time (TLt) will be positively correlated with the market good or medical care input (Mt) and with



                                                          28
the own time input (THt) in the gross investment production function over the life cycle.

       The framework used to analyze life cycle variations in depreciation rates can easily be

used to examine the impacts of variations in these rates among persons of the same age.

Assume, for example, a uniform percentage shift in δt across persons so that the depreciation rate

                                         ~
function can be written as δ t = δ 0e xp( δt ), where δ0 differs among consumers. It is clear that

such a shift has the same kind of effects as an increase in δt with age. That is, persons of a given

age who face relatively high depreciation rates would simultaneously reduce their demand for

health but increase their demand for gross investment if ε < 1.



3.2. Market and Nonmarket Efficiency

       Persons who face the same cost of health capital would demand the same amount of

health only if the determinants of the rate of return on an investment were held constant.

Changes in the value of the marginal product of health capital and the marginal cost of gross

investment shift the MEC schedule and, therefore, alter the quantity of health capital demanded

even if the cost of capital does not change. The consumer’s wage rate and his or her stock of

knowledge or human capital other than health capital are the two key shifters of the MEC

schedule.24

       Since the value of the marginal product of health capital equals WG, an increase in the

wage rate (W) raises the monetary equivalent of the marginal product of a given stock. Put

differently, the higher a person’s wage rate the greater is the value to him of an increase in

healthy time. A consumer’s wage rate measures his market efficiency or the rate at which he can

convert hours of work into money earnings. Hence, the wage is positively correlated with the

benefits of a reduction in lost time from the production of money earnings due to illness.



                                                  29
Moreover, a high wage induces an individual to substitute market goods for his own time in the

production of commodities. This substitution continues until in equilibrium the monetary value

of the marginal product of consumption time equals the wage rate. Thus, the benefits from a

reduction in time lost from nonmarket production are also positively correlated with the wage.

       If an upward shift in the wage rate had no effect on the marginal cost of gross investment,

a 1 percent increase in the wage would increase the rate of return (γ) associated with a fixed

stock of capital by 1 percent. In fact this is not the case because own time is an input in the gross

investment production function. If K is the fraction of the total cost of gross investment

accounted for by time, a 1 percent rise in W would increase marginal cost (π) by K percent.

After one nets out the correlation between W and π, the percentage growth in γ would equal

1 - K, which exceeds zero as long as gross investment is not produced entirely by time. Hence,

the quantity of health capital demanded rises as the wage rate rises as shown in the formula for

the wage elasticity of capital:

                       eHW = (1 - K)ε.                                               (3-7)

       Although the wage rate and the demand for health or gross investment are positively

related, W has no effect on the amount of gross investment supplied by a given input of medical

care. Therefore, the demand for medical care rises with the wage. If medical care and own time

are employed in fixed proportions in the gross investment production function, the wage

elasticity of M equals the wage elasticity of H. On the other hand, given a positive elasticity of

substitution in production (σp) between M and TH, M increases more rapidly than H because

consumers have an incentive to substitute medical care for their relatively more expensive own

time. This substitution is reflected in the formula for the wage elasticity of medical care:

                       eMW = Kσp + (1 - K)ε.                                         (3-8)



                                                 30
       The preceding analysis can be modified to accommodate situations in which the money

price of medical care is zero for all practical purposes because it is fully financed by health

insurance or by the government, and care is rationed by waiting and travel time. Suppose that q

hours are required to obtain one unit of medical care, so that the price of care is Wq. In

addition, suppose that there are three endogenous inputs in the gross investment production

function: M, TH, and a market good (X) whose acquisition does not require time. Interpret K as

the share of the cost of gross investment accounted for by M and TH. Then equation (3-7) still

holds, and an increase in W causes H to increase. Equation (3-8) becomes

                       eMW = (1 - K)(ε - σMX),                                                (3-9)

where σMX is the partial elasticity of substitution in production between M and the third input, X.

If these two inputs are net substitutes in production, σMX is positive. Then

                              >       >
                       e MW     0 as ε σ MX .
                              <       <

In this modified model the wage elasticity of medical care could be negative or zero. This case

is relevant in interpreting some of the empirical evidence to be discussed later.

       As indicated in Section 2, I follow Michael (1972, 1973) and Becker and Michael (1973)

by assuming that an increase in knowledge capital or human capital other than health capital (E)

raises the efficiency of the production process in the nonmarket or household sector, just as an

increase in technology raises the efficiency of the production process in the market sector. I

focus on education or years of formal schooling completed as the most important determinant of

the stock of human capital. The gross investment production function and the production

function of the commodity Z are linear homogenous in their endogenous inputs [see equations

(2-3) and (2-4)]. Therefore, an increase in the exogenous or predetermined stock of human

capital can raise output only if it raises the marginal products of the endogenous inputs.


                                                 31
       Suppose that a one unit increase in E raises the marginal products of M and TH in the

gross investment production function by the same percentage (ρH). This is the Hicks- or factor-

neutrality assumption applied to an increase in technology in the nonmarket sector. Given

factor-neutrality, there is no incentive to substitute medical care for own time as the stock of

human capital rises.

       Because an increase in E raises the marginal products of the health inputs, it reduces the

quantity of these inputs required to produce a given amount of gross investment. Hence, with no

change in input prices, the marginal or average cost of gross investment falls. In fact, if a

circumflex over a variable denotes a percentage change per unit change in E, one easily shows

                       πˆ = − ρ H .                                                             (3-10)

With the wage rate held constant, an increase in E would raise the marginal efficiency of a given

stock of health. This causes the MEC schedule in Figure 1 to shift upward and raises the optimal

stock of health.

       The percentage increase in the amount of health capital demanded for a one unit increase

in E is given by

                       Ĥ = ρ H ε .                                                             (3-11)

Since ρH indicates the percentage increase in gross investment supplied by a one unit increase in

E, shifts in this variable would not alter the demand for medical care or own time if ρH equaled

Ĥ . For example, a person with 10 years of formal schooling might demand 3 percent more

health than a person with 9 years of formal schooling. If the medical care and own time inputs

were held constant, the former individual’s one extra year of schooling might supply him with 3

percent more health. Given this condition, both persons would demand the same amounts of M

and TH. As this example illustrates, any effect of a change in E on the demand for medical care


                                                 32
or time reflects a positive or negative differential between Ĥ and ρH:

                              ^
                        M̂ = TH = ρ H (ε − 1).                                                  (3-12)

Equation (3-12) suggests that the more educated would demand more health but less medical

care if the elasticity of the MEC schedule were less than one. These patterns are opposite to

those that would be expected in comparing the health and medical care utilization of older and

younger consumers.



4. Pure consumption model

       If the cost of health capital were large relative to the monetary rate of return on an

investment in health and if ~
                            π t −1 = 0, all t, then equation (2-11) or (2-24) could be approximated

by

                        Uh t G t UH t π(r + δ t ) .
                                =    =                                                          (4-1)
                          λ       λ    (1 + r ) t

Equation (4-1) indicates that the monetary equivalent of the marginal utility of health capital

must equal the discounted user cost of Ht.25 It can be used to highlight the differences between

the age, wage, or schooling effect in a pure consumption model and the corresponding effect in a

pure investment model. In the following analysis, I assume that the marginal rate of substitution

between Ht and Ht+1 depends only on Ht and Ht+1 and that the marginal rate of substitution

between Ht and Zt depends only on Ht and Zt. I also assume that one plus the market rate of

interest is equal to one plus rate of time preference for the present (the ratio of the marginal

utility of Ht to the marginal utility of Ht+1 when these two stocks are equal minus one). Some of

these assumptions are relaxed, and a more detailed analysis is presented in Grossman (1972b,

Chapter III).



                                                 33
       With regard to age-related depreciation rate effects, the elasticity of substitution in

consumption between Ht and Ht+1 replaces the elasticity of the MEC schedule in equations (3-3)

and (3-4). The quantity of health capital demanded still falls over the life cycle in response to an

increase in the rate of depreciation. Gross investment and health inputs rise with age if the

elasticity of substitution between present and future health is less than one.

       Since health enters the utility function, health is positively related to wealth in the

consumption model provided it is a superior good. That is, an increase in wealth with no change

in the wage rate or the marginal cost of gross investment causes the quantity of health capital

demanded to rise. This effect is absent from the investment model because the marginal

efficiency of health capital and the market rate of interest do not depend on wealth.26 Parametric

wage variations across persons of the same age induce wealth effects on the demand for health.

Suppose that we abstract from these effects by holding the level of utility or real wealth constant.

Then the wage elasticity of health is given by

                       eHW = - (1- θ)(K - KZ)σHZ,                                                (4-2)

where θ is the share of health in wealth, Kz is the share of total cost of Z accounted for by time,

and σHZ is the positive elasticity of substitution in consumption between H and Z.27 Hence,

                              <       >
                       e HW     0 as K K Z .
                              >       <

       The sign of the wage elasticity is ambiguous because an increase in the wage rate raises

the marginal cost of gross investment in health and the marginal cost of Z. If time costs were

relatively more important in the production of health than in the production of Z, the relative

price of health would rise with the wage rate, which would reduce the quantity of health

demanded. The reverse would occur if Z were more time intensive than health. The ambiguity

of the wage effect here is in sharp contrast to the situation in the investment model. In that


                                                 34
model, the wage rate would be positively correlated with health as long as K were less than one.

       Instead of examining a wage effect that holds utility constant, Wagstaff (1986) and

Zweifel and Breyer (1997) examine a wage effect that holds the marginal utility of wealth

constant. This analysis is feasible only if the current period utility function, Ψ(H, Z), is strictly

concave:

                        ΨHH < 0, ΨZZ < 0, ΨHH ΨZZ − ΨHZ
                                                     2
                                                        > 0.

With the marginal utility of wealth (λ) held constant, the actual change in health caused by a one

percent increase in the wage rate is given by

                         ∂H    KΨH ΨZZ − K Z ΨZ ΨHZ .
                             =                                                                 (4-3)
                        ∂lnW     ΨHH ΨZZ − ΨHZ2




Equation (4-3) is negative if ΨHZ ≥ 0. The sign of the wage effect is, however, ambiguous if

ΨHZ < 0.28

       The human capital parameter in the consumption demand function for health is

                        Ĥ = ρη H + (ρ H − ρ Z )(1 − θ)σ HZ ,                                  (4-4)

where ρZ is the percentage increase in the marginal product of the Z commodity’s goods or time

input caused by a one unit increase in E (the negative of the percentage reduction in the marginal

or average cost of Z), ηH is the wealth elasticity of demand for health, and ρ = θρH + (1 - θ)ρZ is

the percentage increase in real wealth as E rises with money full wealth and the wage rate held

constant. The first term on the right-hand side of equation (4-4) reflects the wealth effect and the

second term reflects the substitution effect. If E’s productivity effect in the gross investment

production function is the same as in the Z production function, then ρH = ρZ and Ĥ reflects the

wealth effect alone. In this case, a shift in human capital, measured by years of formal schooling

completed or education is “commodity-neutral,” to use the term coined by Michael (1972, 1973).


                                                     35
If ρH > ρZ, E is “biased” toward health, its relative price falls, and the wealth and substitution

effects both operate in the same direction. Consequently, an increase in E definitely increases

the demand for health. If ρH < ρZ, E is biased away from health, its relative price rises, and the

wealth and substitution effects operate in opposite directions.

        The human capital parameter in the consumption demand curve for medical care is

                        M̂ = ρ(ηH − 1) + (ρ H − ρ Z )[(1 − θ)σ HZ − 1].                        (4-5)

If shifts in E are commodity-neutral, medical care and education are negatively correlated unless

ηH ≥ 1. If on the other hand, there is a bias in favor of health, these two variables will still tend

to be negatively correlated unless the wealth and price elasticities both exceed one.29

        The preceding discussion reveals that the analysis of variations in nonmarket productivity

in the consumption model differs in two important respects from the corresponding analysis in

the investment model. In the first place, wealth effects are not relevant in the investment model,

as has already been indicated. Of course, health would have a positive wealth elasticity in the

investment model if wealthier people faced lower rates of interest. But the analysis of shifts in

education assumes money wealth is fixed. Thus, one could not rationalize the positive

relationship between education and health in terms of an association between wealth and the

interest rate.

        In the second place, if the investment framework were utilized, then whether or not a

shift in human capital is commodity-neutral would be irrelevant in assessing its impact on the

demand for health. As long as the rate of interest were independent of education, H and E would

be positively correlated.30 Put differently, if individuals could always receive, say, a 5 percent

real rate of return on savings deposited in a savings account, then a shift in education would

create a gap between the cost of capital and the marginal efficiency of a given stock.



                                                    36
       Muurinen (1982) and Van Doorslaer (1987) assume that an increase in education lowers

the rate of depreciation on the stock of health rather than raising productivity in the gross

investment production function. This is a less general assumption than the one that I have made

since it rules out schooling effects in the production of nondurable household commodities. In

the pure investment model, predictions are very similar whether schooling raises productivity or

lowers the rate of depreciation.31 In the pure consumption model the assumption made by

Muurinen and Van Doorslaer is difficult to distinguish from the alternative assumption that ρZ is

zero. Interactions between schooling and the lagged stock of health in the demand function for

current health arise given costs of adjustment in the Muurinen-Van Doorslaer model. These are

discussed in Section 6.



5. Empirical testing

       In Grossman (1972b, Chapter IV), I present an empirical formulation of the pure

investment model, including a detailed outline of the structure and reduced form of that model. I

stress the estimation of the investment model rather than the consumption model because the

former model generates powerful predictions from simple analysis and less innocuous

assumptions. For example, if one uses the investment model, he or she does not have to know

whether health is relatively time-intensive to predict the effect of an increase in the wage rate on

the demand for health. Also, he or she does not have to know whether education is commodity-

neutral to assess the sign of the correlation between health and schooling. Moreover, the

responsiveness of the quantity of health demanded to changes in its shadow price and the

behavior of gross investment depend essentially on a single parameter--the elasticity of the MEC

schedule. In the consumption model, on the other hand, three parameters are relevant--the




                                                 37
elasticity of substitution in consumption between present and future health, the wealth elasticity

of demand for health, and the elasticity of substitution in consumption between health and the Z

commodity. Finally, while good health may be a source of utility, it clearly is a source of

earnings. The following formulation is oriented toward the investment model, yet I also offer

two tests to distinguish the investment model from the consumption model.



5.1. Structure and reduced form

       With the production function of healthy time given by equation (3-5), I make use of three

basic structural equations (intercepts are suppressed):

                       ln H t = ε ln Wt − ε ln π t − ε ln δ t                                          (5-1)

                                         ~
                       ln δ t = ln δ 0 + δ t                                                           (5-2)

                                                 ~
                       ln I t ≡ ln H t + ln (1 + H t / δ t ) = ρ H E + (1 − K ) ln M t + K ln TH t .   (5-3)

Equation (5-1) is the demand function for the stock of health and is obtained by solving equation

(3-6) for ln Ht. The equation contains the assumption that the real-own rate of interest is equal

to zero. Equation (5-2) is the depreciation rate function. Equation (5-3) contains the identity that

gross investment equals net investment plus depreciation and assumes that the gross investment

production function is a member of the Cobb-Douglas class.

       These three equations and the least-cost equilibrium condition that the ratio of the

marginal product of medical care to the marginal product of time must equal the ratio of the price

of medical care to the wage rate generate the following reduced form demand curves for health

and medical care:
                                                                             ~
                       ln H t = (1 − K )ε ln Wt − (1 − K )ε ln Pt + ρ H εE − δ εt − ε ln δ 0           (5-4)




                                                       38
                        ln M t = [(1 − K )ε + K ] ln Wt − [(1 − K )ε + K ] ln Pt + ρ H (ε − 1)E
                                  ~                                      ~
                                + δ (1 − ε) t + (1 − ε) ln δ 0 + ln (1 + H t / δ t ).             (5-5)
                                                        ~
If the absolute value of the rate of net disinvestment (H t ) were small relative to the rate of

depreciation, the last term on the right-hand side of equation (5-5) could be ignored.32 Then

equations (5-4) and (5-5) would express the two main endogenous variables in the system as

functions of four variables that are treated as exogenous within the context of this model--the

wage rate, the price of medical care, the stock of human capital, and age--and one variable that is

unobserved--the rate of depreciation in the initial period. With age subscripts suppressed the

estimating equations become

                        ln H = B W ln W + B P ln P + B E E + B t t + u 1                          (5-6)

                        ln M = B WM ln W + B PM ln P + B EM E + B tM t + u 2 ,                    (5-7)

where BW = (1 - K)ε, etcetera, u1 = - ε ln δ0 and u2 = (1 - ε) ln δ0. The investment model

predicts BW > 0, BP < 0, BE > 0, Bt < 0, BWM > 0, and BPM < 0. In addition, if ε < 1, BEM < 0 and

BtM > 0.

       The variables u1 and u2 represent disturbance terms in the reduced form equations. These

terms are present because depreciation rates vary among people of the same age, and such

variations cannot be measured empirically. Provided ln δ0 were not correlated with the

independent variables in (5-6) and (5-7), u1 and u2 would not be correlated with these variables.

Therefore, the equations could be estimated by ordinary least squares.

       The assumption that the real-own rate of interest equals zero can be justified by noting

that wage rates rise with age, at least during most stages of the life cycle. If the wage is growing
                                 ~               ~                                        ~
at a constant percentage rate of W , then ~
                                          π t = KW, all t. So the assumption implies r = KW. By




                                                      39
                                                             ~
eliminating the real rate of interest and postulating that − H t is small relative to δt, ln H and ln

M are made linear functions of age. If these assumptions are dropped, the age effect becomes

nonlinear.

       Since the gross investment production function is a member of the Cobb-Douglas class,

the elasticity of substitution in production between medical care and own time (σp) is equal to

one, and the share of medical care in the total cost of gross investment or the elasticity of gross

investment with respect to medical care, (1 - K), is constant. If σp were not equal to one, the

term K in the wage and price elasticities of demand for medical care would be multiplied by this

value rather than by one. The wage and price parameters would not be constant if σp were

constant but not equal to one, because K would depend on W and P. The linear age, price, and

wage effects in equations (5-6) and (5-7) are first-order approximations to the true effects.

       I have indicated that years of formal schooling completed is the most important

determinant of the stock of human capital and employ schooling as a proxy for this stock in the

empirical analysis described in Section 5.2. In reality the amount of human capital acquired by

attending school also depends on such variables as the mental ability of the student and the

quality of the school that he or she attends. If these omitted variables are positively correlated

with schooling and uncorrelated with the other regressors in the demand function for health, the

schooling coefficient is biased upwards. These biases are more difficult to sign if, for example,

mental ability and school quality are correlated with the wage rate.33

       There are two empirical procedures for assessing whether the investment model gives a

more adequate representation of people’s behavior than the consumption model. In the first

place, the wage would have a positive effect on the demand for health in the investment model as

long as K were less than one. On the other hand, it would have a positive effect in the



                                                  40
consumption model only if health were relatively goods-intensive (K < KZ). So, if the computed

wage elasticity turns out to be positive, then the larger its value the more likely it is that the

investment model is preferable to the consumption model. Of course, provided the production of

health were relatively time intensive, the wage elasticity would be negative in the consumption

model. In this case, a positive and statistically significant estimate of BW would lead to a

rejection of the consumption model.

        In the second place, health has a zero wealth elasticity in the investment model but a

positive wealth elasticity in the consumption model provided it is a superior good. This suggests

that wealth should be added to the set of regressors in the demand functions for health and

medical care. Computed wealth elasticities that do not differ significantly from zero would tend

to support the investment model.34

        In addition to estimating demand functions for health and medical care, one could also fit

the gross investment function given by equation (5-3). This would facilitate a direct test of the

hypothesis that the more educated are more efficient producers of health. The production

function contains two unobserved variables: gross investment and the own time input. Since,
           ~
however, − H t has been assumed to be small relative to δt, one could fit35

                                                ~
                        ln H = α ln M + ρ H E − δ t − ln δ 0 .                                  (5-8)

        The difficulty with the above procedure is that it requires a good estimate of the

production function. Unfortunately, equation (5-8) cannot be fitted by ordinary least squares

(OLS) because ln M and ln δ0, the disturbance term, are bound to be correlated. From the

demand function for medical care

                        Covariance (ln M, ln δ0) = (1 - ε)Variance (ln δ0).

Given ε < 1, ln M and ln δ0 would be positively correlated. Since an increase in the rate of


                                                    41
depreciation lowers the quantity of health capital, the coefficient of medical care would be biased

downward. The same bias exists if there are unmeasured determinants of efficiency in the

production of gross investments in health.

       The biases inherent in ordinary least squares estimates of health production functions

were first emphasized by Auster et al. (1969). They have been considered in much more detail

in the context of infant health by Rosenzweig and Schultz (1983, 1988, 1991), Corman et al.

(1987), Grossman and Joyce (1990), and Joyce (1994). Consistent estimates of the production

function can be obtained by two-stage least squares (TSLS). In the present context, wealth, the

wage rates, and the price of medical care serve as instruments for medical care. The usefulness

of this procedure rests, however, on the validity of the overidentification restrictions and the

degree to which the instruments explain a significant percentage of the variation in medical care

[Bound et al. (1995), Staiger and Stock (1997)]. The TSLS technique is especially problematic

when the partial effects of several health inputs are desired and when measures of some of these

inputs are absent. In this situation the overidentification restrictions may not hold because

wealth and input prices are likely to be correlated with the missing inputs.

       In my monograph on the demand for health, I argued that “a production function taken by

itself tells nothing about producer or consumer behavior, although it does have implications for

behavior, which operate on the demand curves for health and medical care. Thus, they serve to

rationalize the forces at work in the reduced form and give the variables that enter the equations

economic significance. Because the reduced form parameters can be used to explain consumer

choices and because they can be obtained by conventional statistical techniques, their

interpretation should be pushed as far as possible. Only then should one resort to a direct

estimate of the production function [Grossman (1972b), p. 44].” The reader should keep this




                                                 42
position in mind in evaluating my discussion of the criticism of my model raised by Zweifel and

Breyer (1997) in Section 6.



5.2. Data and results

       I fitted the equations formulated in Section 5.1 to a nationally representative 1963 United

States survey conducted by the National Opinion Research Center and the Center for Health

Administration Studies of the University of Chicago. I measured the stock of health by

individuals’ self-evaluation of their health status. I measured healthy time, the output produced

by health capital, either by the complement of the number of restricted-activity days due to

illness or injury or the number of work-loss days due to illness or injury. I measured medical

care by personal medical expenditures on doctors, dentists, hospital care, prescribed and

nonprescribed drugs, nonmedical practitioners, and medical appliances. I had no data on the

actual quantities of specific types of services, for example the number of physician visits.

Similarly, I had no data on the prices of these services. Thus, I was forced to assume that the

price of medical care (P) in the reduced form demand functions either does not vary among

consumers or is not correlated with the other regressors in the demand functions. Neither

assumption is likely to be correct in light of the well known moral hazard effect of private health

insurance.36 The main independent variables in the regressions were the age of the individual,

the number of years of formal schooling he or she completed, his or her weekly wage rate, and

family income (a proxy for wealth).

       The most important regression results in the demand functions are as follows. Education

and the wage rate have positive and statistically significant coefficients in the health demand

function, regardless of the particular measure of health employed. An increase in age




                                                43
simultaneously reduces health and increases medical expenditures. Both effects are significant.

The signs of the age, wage, and schooling coefficients in the health demand function and the sign

of the age coefficient in the medical care demand function are consistent with the predictions

contained in the pure investment model.

        In the demand function for medical care the wage coefficient is negative but not

significant, while the schooling coefficient is positive but not significant. The sign of the wage

coefficient is not consistent with the pure investment model, and the sign of the schooling

coefficient is not consistent with the version of the investment model in which the elasticity of

the MEC schedule is less than one. In Grossman (1972b, Appendix D), I show that random

measurement error in the wage rate and a positive correlation between the wage and unmeasured

determinants of nonmarket efficiency create biases that may explain these results. Other

explanations are possible. For example, the wage elasticity of medical care is not necessarily

positive in the investment model if waiting and travel time are required to obtain this care [see

equation (3-9)]. Schooling is likely to be positively correlated with the generosity of health

insurance coverage leading to an upward bias in its estimated effect.

        When the production function is estimated by ordinary least squares, the elasticities of the

three measures of health with respect to medical care are all negative. Presumably, this reflects

the strong positive relation between medical care and the depreciation rate. Estimation of the

production function by two-stage least squares reverses the sign of the medical care elasticity in

most cases. The results, however, are sensitive to whether or not family income is included in

the production function as a proxy for missing inputs.

        The most surprising finding is that healthy time has a negative family income elasticity.

If the consumption aspects of health were at all relevant, a literal interpretation of this result is




                                                  44
that health is an inferior commodity. That explanation is, however, not consistent with the

positive and significant income elasticity of demand for medical care. I offer an alternative

explanation based on joint production. Such health inputs as cigarettes, alcohol, and rich food

have negative marginal products. If their income elasticities exceeded the income elasticities of

the beneficial health inputs, the marginal cost of gross investment in health would be positively

correlated with income. This explanation can account for the positive income elasticity of

demand for medical care. Given its assumptions, higher income persons simultaneously reduce

their demand for health and increase their demand for medical care if the elasticity of the MEC

schedule is less than one.

       I emphasized in Section 2 that parametric changes in variables that increase healthy time

also prolong length of life. Therefore, I also examine variations in age-adjusted mortality rates

across states of the United States in 1960. I find a close agreement between mortality and sick

time regression coefficients. Increases in schooling or the wage rate lower mortality, while

increases in family income raise it.

6. Extensions

       In this section I deal with criticisms and empirical and theoretical extensions of my

framework. I begin with empirical testing with cross-sectional data by Wagstaff (1986),

Erbsland et al. (1995), and Stratmann (forthcoming) in Section 6.1. I pay particular attention to

Wagstaff’s study because it serves as the basis of a criticism of my approach by Zweifel and

Breyer (1997), which I also address in Section 6.1. I turn to empirical extensions with

longitudinal data by Van Doorslaer (1987) and Wagstaff (1993) in Section 6.2. These studies

introduce costs of adjustment, although in a rather ad hoc manner. I consider theoretical

developments by Cropper (1977), Muurinen (1982), Dardanoni and Wagstaff (1987, 1990),




                                                45
Selden (1993), Chang (1996), and Liljas (1998) in Section 6.3. With the exception of

Muurinen’s work, these developments all pertain to uncertainty.



6.1. Empirical extensions with cross-sectional data

       Wagstaff (1986) uses the 1976 Danish Welfare Survey to estimate a multiple indicator

version of the structure and reduced form of my demand for health model. He performs a

principal components analysis of nineteen measures of non-chronic health problems to obtain

four health indicators that reflect physical mobility, mental health, respiratory health, and

presence of pain. He then uses these four variables as indicators of the unobserved stock of

health. His estimation technique is the so-called MIMIC (multiple indicators-multiple causes)

model developed by Jöreskog (1973) and Goldberger (1974) and employs the maximum

likelihood procedure contained in Jöreskog and Sörbom (1981). His contribution is unique

because it accounts for the multidimensional nature of good health both at the conceptual level

and at the empirical level.

       Aside from the MIMIC methodology, there are two principal differences between my

work and Wagstaff’s work. First, the structural equation that I obtain is the production function.

On the other hand, the structural equation that he obtains is a conditional output demand

function. This expresses the quantity demanded of a health input, such as medical care, as a

function of health output, input prices, and exogenous variables in the production function such

as schooling and age. In the context of the structure that I specified in Section 5.1, the

conditional output demand function is obtained by solving equation (5-3) for medical care as a

function of health, the own time input, schooling, age, and the rate of depreciation in the initial

period and then using the cost-minimization condition to replace the own time input with the




                                                 46
wage rate and the price of medical care. Since an increase in the quantity of health demanded

increases the demand for health inputs, the coefficient of health in the conditional demand

function is positive.

       Second, Wagstaff utilizes a Frisch (1964) demand function for health in discussing and

attempting to estimate the pure consumption model. This is a demand function in which the

marginal utility of lifetime wealth is held constant when the effects of variables that alter the

marginal cost of investment in health are evaluated. I utilized it briefly in treating wage effects

in the pure consumption model in Section 4 but did not stress it either theoretically or

empirically. The marginal utility of lifetime wealth is not observed but can be replaced by initial

assets and the sum of lifetime wage rates. Since the data are cross-sectional, initial assets and

wage rates over the life cycle are not observed. Wagstaff predicts the missing measures by

regressing current assets and the current wage on age, the square of age, and age-invariant

socioeconomic characteristics.

       Three health inputs are contained in the data: the number of physician visits during the

eight months prior to the survey, the number of weeks spent in a hospital during the same period,

and the number of complaints for which physician-prescribed or self-prescribed medicines were

being taken at the time of the interview. To keep my discussion of the results manageable, I will

focus on the reduced form and conditional demand functions for physician visits and on the

demand function for health. The reader should keep in mind that the latent variable health

obtained from the MIMIC procedure is a positive correlate of good health. Good health is the

dependent variable in the reduced form demand function for health and one of the right-hand

side variables in the conditional demand function for physician visits.

       Wagstaff estimates his model with and without initial assets and the sum of lifetime wage




                                                 47
rates. He terms the former a pure investment model and the latter a pure consumption model.

Before discussing the results, one conceptual issue should be noted. Wagstaff indicates that

medical inputs in Denmark are heavily subsidized and that almost all of the total cost of gross

investment is accounted for by the cost of the own time input. He then argues that the wage

coefficient should equal zero in the pure investment demand function since K, the share of the

total cost of gross investment accounted for by time, is equal to one. He also argues that the

coefficient of the wage in the demand function for medical care should equal one [see the

relevant coefficients in equations (5-4) and (5-5).]

        Neither of the preceding propositions is necessarily correct. In Section 3 I developed a

model in which the price of medical care is zero, but travel and waiting time (q hours to make

one physician visit) are required to obtain medical care as well as to produce health. I also

assumed three endogenous inputs in the health production function: M, TH, and a market good

whose acquisition does not require time. I then showed that the wage elasticity of health is

positive, while the wage elasticity of medical care is indeterminate in sign [see equations (3-8)

and equations (3-9), both of which hold q constant]. If there are only two inputs and no time

required to obtain medical care, the wage elasticities of health and medical care are zero. The

latter elasticity is zero because the marginal product of medical care would be driven to zero if

its price is zero for a given wage rate. An increase in the wage rate induces no further

substitution in production. With travel and waiting time, the marginal product of care is positive,

but the price of medical care relative to the price of the own time input (Wq/W) does not depend

on W.

        An additional complication is that Wagstaff includes a proxy for Wq--the respondent’s

wage multiplied by the time required to travel to his or her physician--in the demand function for




                                                 48
medical care. He asserts that the coefficient of the logarithm of this variable should equal the

coefficient of the logarithm of the wage in the demand function for medical care in a model in

which the price of medical care is not zero. This is not correct because the logarithm of W is

held constant. Hence increases in Wq are due solely to increases in q. As q rises, H falls and M

falls because the price of M relative to the price of TH [(P + Wq)/W] rises.37

          In Wagstaff’s estimate of the reduced form of the pure investment model, the wage rate,

years of formal schooling completed, and age all have the correct signs and all three variables are

significant in the demand function for health. In the demand function for physician visits the

schooling variable has a negative and significant coefficient. This finding differs from mine and

is in accord with the predictions of the pure investment model. The age coefficient is positive

and significant at the 10 percent level on a one-tailed test but not at the 5 percent level.38 The

wage coefficient, however, is negative and not significant. The last finding is consistent with the

three-input model outlined above and is not necessarily evidence against the investment model.

          The time cost variable has the correct negative sign in the demand function for physician

visits, but it is not significant. Wagstaff, however, includes the number of physicians per capita

in the respondent’s county of residence in the same equation. This variable has a positive effect

on visits, is likely to be negatively related to travel time, and may capture part of the travel time

effect.

          Wagstaff concludes the discussion of the results of estimating the reduced form of the

investment model as follows: “Broadly speaking...the coefficients are similar to those reported

by Grossman and are consistent with the model’s structural parameters being of the expected

sign. One would seem justified, therefore, in using the...data for exploring the implications of

using structural equation methods in this context (p. 214).” When this is done, the coefficient of




                                                  49
good health in the conditional demand function for physician visits has the wrong sign. It is

negative and very significant.

       This last finding is used by Zweifel and Breyer (1997) to dismiss my model of the

demand for health. They write: “Unfortunately, empirical evidence consistently fails to confirm

this crucial prediction [that the partial correlation between good health and medical care should

be positive]. When health status is introduced as a latent variable through the use of

simultaneous indicators, all components of medical care distinguished exhibit a very definite and

highly significant negative (their italics) partial relationship with health....The notion that

expenditure on medical care constitutes a demand derived from an underlying demand for health

cannot be upheld because health status and demand for medical care are negatively rather than

positively related (p. 60 and p. 62).”

       Note, however, that biases arise if the conditional demand function is estimated with

health treated as exogenous for the same reason that biases arise if the production function is

estimated by ordinary least squares. In particular, the depreciation rate in the initial period (the

disturbance term in the equation) is positively correlated with medical care and negatively

correlated with health. Hence, the coefficient of health is biased downward in the conditional

medical care demand function, and this coefficient could well be negative. The conditional

demand function is much more difficult to estimate by two-stage least squares than the

production function because no exogenous variables are omitted from it in the investment model.

Input prices cannot be used to identify this equation because they are relevant regressors in it.

Only wealth and the prices of inputs used to produce commodities other than health are omitted

from the conditional demand function in the consumption model or in a mixed investment-

consumption model. Measures of the latter variables typically are not available.




                                                  50
       In his multiple indicator model, Wagstaff does not treat the latent health variable as

endogenous when he obtains the conditional demand function. He is careful to point out that the

bias that I have just outlined can explain his result. He also argues that absence of measures of

some inputs may account for his finding. He states: “The identification of medical care with

market inputs in the health investment production function might be argued to be a source of

potential error. If non-medical inputs are important inputs in the production of health--as clearly

they are--one might argue that the results stem from a failure to estimate a system (his italics) of

structural demand equations for health inputs (p. 226).” Although I am biased, in my view these

considerations go a long way toward refuting the Zweifel-Breyer critique.

       As I indicated above, Wagstaff estimates a reduced form demand function for health in

the context of what he terms a pure consumption model as well as in the context of a pure

investment model. He does this by including initial assets and the lifetime wage variable in the

demand functions as proxies for the marginal utility of wealth. Strictly speaking, however, this

is not a pure consumption model. It simply accommodates the consumption motive as well as

the investment motive for demanding health. Wagstaff proposes but does not stress one test to

distinguish the investment model from the consumption model. If the marginal utility of health

does not depend on the quantity of the Z-commodity in the current period utility function, the

wage effect should be negative in the demand function for health. Empirically, the current wage

coefficient remains positive and significant when initial assets and the lifetime wage are

introduced as regressors in this equation. As I noted in Section 4, this result also is consistent

with a pure consumption model in which the marginal utility of H is negatively related to Z.

       The initial assets and lifetime wage coefficients are highly significant. As Wagstaff

indicates, these variables are highly correlated with schooling, the current wage, and other




                                                 51
variables in the demand function for health since both are predicted from these variables. These

intercorrelations are so high that the schooling coefficient becomes negative and significant in

the consumption demand function. Wagstaff stresses that these results must be interpreted with

caution.

       Zweifel and Breyer (1997) have a confusing and incorrect discussion of theoretical and

empirical results on wage effects. They claim that their discussion, which forms part of the

critique of my model, is based on Wagstaff’s study. In the demand function for health, they

indicate that the lifetime wage effect is negative in the pure consumption model and positive in

the pure investment model. If the current wage is held constant, both statements are wrong.

There is no lifetime wage effect in the investment model and a positive effect in the consumption

model provided that health is a superior commodity.39 If their statements pertain to the current

wage effect, the sign is positive in the investment model and indeterminate in the consumption

model whether utility or the marginal utility of wealth is held constant.

       Zweifel and Breyer’s (1997) discussion of schooling effects can be characterized in the

same manner as their discussion of wage effects. They claim that the consumption model

predicts a positive schooling effect in the demand function for health and a negative effect in the

demand function for medical care. This is not entirely consistent with the analysis in Section 4.

They use Wagstaff’s (1986) result that schooling has a positive coefficient in the conditional

demand function for physician visits as evidence against my approach. But as Wagstaff and I

have stressed, estimates of that equation are badly biased because health is not treated as

endogenous.

       A final criticism made by Zweifel and Breyer is that the wage rate does not adequately

measure the monetary value of an increase in healthy time due to informal sick leave




                                                52
arrangements and private and social insurance that fund earnings losses due to illness. They do

not reconcile this point with the positive effects of the wage rate on various health measures in

my study and in Wagstaff’s study. In addition, sick leave and insurance plans typically finance

less than 100 percent of the loss in earnings. More importantly, they ignore my argument that

“...‘the inconvenience costs of illness’ are positively correlated with the wage rate....The

complexity of a particular job and the amount of responsibility it entails certainly are positively

related to the wage. Thus, when an individual with a high wage becomes ill, tasks that only he

can perform accumulate. These increase the intensity of his work load and give him an incentive

to avoid illness by demanding more health capital [Grossman (1972b), pp. 69-70].”

       Erbsland et al. (1995) provide another example of the application of the MIMIC

procedure to the estimation of a demand for health model. Their database is the 1986 West

German Socio-economic Panel. The degree of handicap, self-rated health, the duration of sick

time, and the number of chronic conditions, all as reported by the individual, serve as four

indicators of the unobserved stock of health. In the reduced form demand function for health,

schooling has a positive and significant coefficient, while age has a negative and significant

coefficient. In the reduced form demand function for visits to general practitioners, the age

effect is positive and significant, while the schooling effect is negative and significant. These

results are consistent with predictions made by the investment model. The latent variable health,

which is treated as exogenous, has a negative and very significant coefficient in the conditional

demand function for physician visits. This is the same finding reported by Wagstaff (1986).

       In my 1972 study [Grossman (1972b)], I showed that the sign of the correlation between

medical care and health can be reversed if medical care is treated as endogenous in the

estimation of health production functions. Stratmann (forthcoming) gives much more recent




                                                 53
evidence in support of the same proposition. Using the 1989 U.S. National Health Interview

Survey, he estimates production functions in which the number of work-loss days due to illness

in the past two weeks serves as the health measure and a dichotomous indicator for a doctor visit

in the past two weeks serves as the measure of medical care. In a partial attempt to control for

reverse causality from poor health to more medical care, he obtains separate production functions

for persons with influenza, persons with impairments, and persons with chronic asthma.

       In single equation tobit models, persons who had a doctor visit had significantly more

work-loss than persons who did not have a visit for each of the three conditions. In simultaneous

equations probit-tobit models in which the probability of a doctor visit is endogenous, persons

who had a doctor visit had significantly less work-loss. The tobit coefficient in the simultaneous

equations model implies that the marginal effect of a doctor visit is a 2.7 day reduction in work

loss in the case of influenza.40 The corresponding reductions for impairments and chronic

asthma are 2.9 days and 6.9 days, respectively.



6.2. Empirical extensions with longitudinal data

       Van Doorslaer (1987) and Wagstaff (1993) fit dynamic demand for health models to

longitudinal data. These efforts potentially are very useful because they allow one to take

account of the effects of unmeasured variables such as the rate of depreciation and of reverse

causality from health at early stages in the life cycle to the amount of formal schooling

completed (see Section 7 for more details). In addition, one can relax the assumption that there

are no costs of adjustment, so that the lagged stock of health becomes a relevant determinant of

the current stock of health.

       Van Doorslaer (1987) employs the 1984 Netherlands Health Interview Survey. While




                                                  54
this is a cross-sectional survey, respondents were asked to evaluate their health in 1979 as well as

in 1984. Both measures are ten-point scales, where the lowest category is very poor health and

the highest category is very good health.

       Van Doorslaer uses the identity that the current stock of health equals the undepreciated

component of the past stock plus gross investment:

                       Ht = (1 - δt-1)Ht-1 + It-1.                                           (6-1)

He assumes that gross investment is a function of personal background variables (schooling, age,

income, and gender). Thus, he regresses health in 1984 on these variables and on health in 1979.

To test Muurinen’s (1982) hypothesis that schooling lowers the rate of depreciation (see Section

4.2), he allows for an interaction between this variable and health in 1979 in some of the

estimated models.

       Van Doorslaer’s main finding is that schooling has a positive and significant coefficient

in the regression explaining health in 1984, with health in 1979 held constant. The regressions in

which schooling, past health, and an interaction between the two are entered as regressors are

plagued by multicollinearity. They do not allow one to distinguish Muurinen’s hypothesis from

the hypothesis that schooling raises efficiency in the production of health.

       Wagstaff (1993) uses the Danish Health Study, which followed respondents over a period

of 12 months beginning in October 1982. As in his 1986 study, a MIMIC model is estimated.

Three health measures are used as indicators of the unobserved stock of health capital in 1982

(past stock) and 1983 (current stock). These are a dichotomous indicator of the presence of a

health limitation, physician-assessed health of the respondent as reported by the respondent, and

self-assessed health.41 Both of the assessment variables have five-point scales. Unlike his 1986

study, Wagstaff also treats gross investment in health as a latent variable. There are six health




                                                     55
care utilization indicators of gross investment: the number of consultations with a general

practitioner over the year, the number of consultations with a specialist over the year, the number

of days as an inpatient in a hospital over the year, the number of sessions with a physiotherapist

over the year, the number of hospital outpatient visits over the year, and the number of hospital

emergency room visits during the year.

        Wagstaff explicitly assumes partial adjustment instead of instantaneous adjustment. He

also assumes that the reduced form demand for health equation is linear rather than log-linear.

He argues that this makes it compatible with the linear nature of the net investment identity (net

investment equals gross investment minus depreciation). The desired stock in period t is a linear

function of age, schooling, family income, and gender. A fraction (µ) of the gap between the

actual and the desired stock is closed each period. Hence the lagged stock enters the reduced

form demand function with a coefficient equal to 1 - µ. Solving equation (6-1) for gross

investment in period t-1 and replacing Ht by its demand function, Wagstaff obtains a demand

function for It-1 that depends on the same variables as those in the demand function for Ht. The

coefficient of each sociodemographic variable in the demand function for Ht is the same as the

corresponding coefficient in the demand function for It-1. The coefficient on the lagged stock in

the latter demand function equals - (µ - δt-1). By estimating the model with cross-equation

constraints, µ and δt-1 are identified.

        Wagstaff emphasizes that the same variables enter his conditional demand function for

It-1 in his cost-of-adjustment model as those that enter the conditional demand function for It-1 in

my instantaneous adjustment model. The interpretation of the parameters, however, differs. In

my case, the contemporaneous health stock has a positive coefficient, whereas in his case the

coefficient is negative if µ exceeds δt-1. In my case, the coefficient of schooling, for example, is



                                                 56
equal to the negative of the schooling coefficient in the production function. In his case, it

equals the coefficient of schooling in the demand function for Ht.

       To allow for the possibility that the rate of depreciation varies with age, Wagstaff fits the

model separately for adults under the age of forty-one and for adults greater than or equal to this

age. For each age group, schooling has a positive and significant effect on current health with

past health held constant. The coefficient of Ht-1 in the demand function for It-1 is negative,

suggesting costs of adjustment and also suggesting that µ exceeds δt-1. The implied value of the

rate of depreciation is, however, larger in the sample of younger adults than in the sample of

older adults. Moreover, in the latter sample, the estimated rate of depreciation is negative.

These implausible findings may be traced to the inordinate demands on the data attributed to the

MIMIC methodology with two latent variables and cross-equation constraints.

       Some conceptual issues can be raised in evaluating the two studies just discussed.

Wagstaff (1993) estimates input demand functions which include availability measures as

proxies for travel and waiting time (for example, the per capita number of general practitioners in

the individual’s district in the demand function for the number of consultations with general

practitioners). Yet he excludes these variables from the demand functions for Ht and It-1. This is

not justified. In addition, Wagstaff implies that the gross investment production function is

linear in its inputs, which violates the cost-minimization conditions.

       More fundamentally, both Van Doorslaer (1987) and Wagstaff (1993) provide ad hoc

cost-of-adjustment models. I now show that a rigorous development of such a model contains

somewhat different demand functions than the ones that they estimate. To simplify, I assume

that the pure investment model is valid, ignore complications with cost-of-adjustment models

studied by Ehrlich and Chuma (1990), and fix the wage rate at $1. I also make use of the exact




                                                 57
form of the first-order condition for Ht in a discrete time model (see footnote 12):

                                  Gt = (1 + r)πt-1 - (1 - δt)πt.                                                        (6-2)

Note that πt-1 is the marginal cost of gross investment in health. Since marginal cost rises as the

quantity of investment rises in a model with costs of adjustment, the marginal cost of investment

exceeds the average cost of investment. Also to simplify and to keep the system linear, I assume

that Gt is a linear function of Ht and that πt-1 is a linear function of It-1 and Pt-1 (the price of the

single market input used in the gross investment production function):

                                  Gt = ϕ - αHt                                                                          (6-3)

                                  πt-1 = Pt-1 + It-1.                                                                   (6-4)

          Given this model, the optimal stock of health in period t is

                                          ϕ (1 + r )         (1 + r )          (1 − δ t )      (1 − δ t )
                                  Ht =      −        Pt −1 −          I t −1 +            Pt +            It .          (6-5)
                                          α    α                α                 α               α

Since I t −1 = H t − (1 − δ t −1 )H t −1 and I t (1 − δ t ) = (1 − δ t )H t +1 − (1 − δ t ) 2 H t ,

                               ϕ (1 + r )         (1 + r )(1 − δ t −1 )          (1 − δ t )          (1 − δ t )
                        Ht =     −        Pt −1 +                       H t −1 +            H t +1 +            Pt ,    (6-6)
                               D   D                       D                        D                   D

where D = α + (1 + r) + (1 - δt)2. Alternatively, substitute equation (6-6) into the definition of It-1

to obtain

                      ϕ (1 + r)         (1 − δ t −1 )[α + (1 − δ t ) 2 ]          (1 − δ t )          (1 − δ t )
           I t −1 =     −       Pt −1 −                                  H t −1 +            H t +1 +            Pt .   (6-7)
                      D    D                           D                             D                   D

          Equation (6-6) is the demand for health function obtained by Van Doorslaer (1987) and

Wagstaff (1993). Their estimates are biased because the stock of health in period t depends on

the stock of health in period t+1 as well as on the stock of health in period t-1 in a model with

costs of adjustment. Equation (6-7) is the gross investment demand function obtained by

Wagstaff. His estimate is biased because gross investment in period t-1 depends on the stock of



                                                                    58
health in period t+1 as well as on the stock of health in period t-1. Note that this equation and

equation (6-6) also depend on measured and unmeasured determinants of market and nonmarket

efficiency in periods t - 1 and t.

        The second-order difference equations given by (6-6) and (6-7) can be solved to express

Ht or It-1 as functions of current, past, and future values of all the exogenous variables. Similarly,

Ht-1 and Ht+1 depend on this set of exogenous variables. Since one of the members of this set is

the disturbance term in (6-6) or (6-7), the lagged and future stocks are correlated with the

regression disturbance. Consequently, biases arise if either equation is estimated by ordinary

least squares. Consistent estimates can be obtained by fitting the equations by two-stage least

squares with past and future values of the exogenous serving as instruments for the one-period

lead and the one-period lag of the stock.42 Note that consistent estimates cannot be obtained by

the application of ordinary least squares to a first-difference model or to a fixed-effects model.

Lagged and future health do not drop out of these models and are correlated with the time-

varying component of the disturbance term.

        I conclude that cost-of-adjustment models require at least three data points (three

observations on each individual) to estimate. Calculated parameters of this model are biased if

they are obtained by ordinary least squares. There is an added complication that arises even if all

the necessary data are available because the procedure that I have outlined assumes that

individuals have perfect information about the future values of the exogenous variables. This

may or may not be the case.43 While the two studies that I have reviewed are provocative, they

do not contain enough information to compare instantaneous-adjustment models to cost-of-

adjustment models.




                                                 59
6.3. Theoretical extensions

       Muurinen (1982) examines comparative static age, schooling, and wealth effects in the

context of a mixed investment-consumption model with perfect certainty. This approach is more

general than mine because it incorporates both the investment motive and the consumption

motive for demanding health. In deriving formulas for the effects of increases in age and

schooling on the optimal quantities of health capital and medical care, Muurinen assumes that

the undiscounted monetary value of the marginal utility of healthy time in period t, given by

(Uht/λ)(1 + r)t, is constant for all t. If mt is the marginal cost of the Z commodity and Ut is its

marginal utility, the undiscounted monetary value of the marginal utility of healthy time also is

given by (Uht/Ut)mt. Hence, Muurinen is assuming that the marginal rate of substitution between

healthy time and the Z commodity is constant or that the two commodities are perfect substitutes.

Clearly, this is a very restrictive assumption.44

       In my formal development of the demand for health, I ruled out uncertainty. Surely that

is not realistic. I briefly indicated that one could introduce this phenomenon by assuming that a

given consumer faces a probability distribution of depreciation rates in every period. I

speculated, but did not prove, that consumers might have incentive to hold excess stock of health

in relatively desirable “states of the world” (outcomes with relatively low depreciation rates) in

order to reduce the loss associated with an unfavorable outcome. In these relatively desirable

states, the marginal monetary return on an investment in health might be smaller than the

opportunity cost of capital in a pure investment model [Grossman (1972b), pp. 19-21].

       Beginning with Cropper (1977), a number of persons formally have introduced

uncertainty into my pure investment model. Cropper assumes that illness occurs in a given

period if the stock of health falls below a critical sickness level, which is random. Income is zero




                                                    60
in the illness state. An increase in the stock of health lowers the probability of this state.

Cropper further assumes that savings are not possible (all income takes the form of earnings) and

that consumers are risk-neutral in the sense that their objective is to maximize the expected

discounted value of lifetime wealth.45

       In my view, Cropper’s main result is that consumers with higher incomes or wealth levels

will maintain higher stocks of health than poorer persons. While this may appear to be a

different result than that contained in my pure investment model with perfect certainty, it is not

for two reasons. First, an increase in the stock of health lowers the probability of illness but has

no impact on earnings in non-illness states. Hence the marginal benefit of an increase in the

stock is given by the reduction in the probability of illness multiplied by the difference between

income and gross investment outlays. With these outlays held constant, an increase in income

raises the marginal benefit and the marginal rate of return on an investment.46 Therefore, this

wealth or income effect is analogous to the wage effect in my pure investment model with

perfect certainty. Second, consider a pure investment model with perfect certainty, positive

initial assets but no possibility to save or borrow in financial markets. In this model, investment

in health is the only mechanism to increase future consumption. An increase in initial assets will

increase the optimal stock of health provided future consumption has a positive wealth elasticity.

       Later treatments of uncertainty in the context of demand for health models have assumed

risk-averse behavior, so that an expected utility function that exhibits diminishing marginal

utility of present and future consumption is maximized. Dardanoni and Wagstaff (1987), Selden

(1993), and Chang (1996) all employ two-period models in which the current period utility

function depends only on current consumption. Uncertainty in the second period arises because

the earnings-generating function in that period contains a random variable. This function is




                                                  61
Y2 = Wh2(H2, R) = F(H2, R), where Y2 is earnings in period two, h2 is the amount of healthy time

in that period, H2 is the stock of health, and R is the random term. Clearly, F1 > 0 and F11 < 0,

where F1 and F11 are the first and second derivatives of H2 in the earnings function. The second

derivative is negative because of my assumption that the marginal product of the stock of health

in the production of healthy time falls as the stock rises. An increase in R raises earnings

(F2 > 0). In addition to income or earnings from health, income is available from savings at a

fixed rate of return.

        Given uncertainty, risk-averse individuals make larger investments in health than they

would in its absence. Indeed, the expected marginal rate of return is smaller than the rate with

perfect certainty. This essentially confirms a result that I anticipated in the brief discussion of

uncertainty in my monograph.

        The main impact of the introduction of uncertainty is that the quantities of health capital

and gross investment depend on initial assets, with the wage rate held constant. The direction of

these effects, however, is ambiguous because it depends on the way in which risk is specified.

Dardanoni and Wagstaff (1987) adopt a multiplicative specification in which the earnings

function is Y2 = RH2. They show that an increase in initial assets raises the optimal quantities of

health and medical care if the utility function exhibits decreasing absolute risk aversion.47

Selden (1993) adopts a linear specification in which the earnings function is Y2 = F(H2 + R) and

∂ 2 Y2 / ∂ (H 2 + R ) 2 < 0. He reaches the opposite conclusion: health and medical care fall as assets

rise given declining absolute risk aversion.

        Chang (1996) generalizes the specification of risk. He shows that the sign of the asset

effect depends on the sign of the second-order cross partial derivative in the earnings function

(F12). If F12 is positive and F11 is zero, the asset effect is positive. This is the case considered by



                                                  62
Dardanoni and Wagstaff. In my view it is not realistic because it assumes that the marginal

product of the stock of health in the production of healthy time is constant. Given the more

realistic case in which F11 is negative, the asset effect is negative if F12 is negative (Selden’s

case) and indeterminate in sign if F12 is positive.48

       Dardanoni and Wagstaff (1990) introduce uncertainty into pure consumption models of

the demand for health. Their study is a static one-period model. The utility function depends on

the consumption of a composite commodity and health. Health is given by H = R + I(M, R),

where R is a random variable and I(M, R) denotes the health production function. They consider

two models: one in which H = R + M and one in which H = RM. In the first model an increase

in the variance of R with the mean held constant increases the quantity of medical care

demanded under plausible assumptions about the utility function (superiority of the composite

consumption good and non-increasing absolute risk aversion with regard to that good). In the

second model the same effect is more difficult to sign, although it is positive if an increase in R

leads to a reduction in M and an increase in the composite good and if the utility function

exhibits non-increasing relative risk aversion with regard to the composite good.49

       Liljas (1998) considers uncertainty in the context of a multiperiod mixed investment-

consumption model. Uncertainty takes the form of a random variable that affects the stock of

health in period t in an additive fashion. He shows that the stock of health is larger in the

stochastic case than in the certainty case. Presumably, this result pertains to the expected stock

of health in period t. The actual stock should be smaller than the stock with certainty given a

negative shock. Social insurance that funds part of the loss in income due to illness lowers the

optimal stock. Private insurance that also funds part of this loss will not necessarily lower the

stock further and may actually increase it if the cost of this insurance falls as the stock rises.




                                                  63
        To summarize, compared to a model with perfect certainty, the expected value of the

stock of health is larger and the optimal quantities of gross investment and health inputs also are

larger in a model with uncertainty. In a pure investment model an increase in initial assets can

cause health and medical care to change, but the direction of these effects is ambiguous. Under

reasonable assumptions, an increase in the variance of risk raises optimal medical care in a pure

consumption model.

        How valuable are these results? With the exception of the ambiguity of the asset effect,

they are not very surprising. The variance of risk is extremely difficult to measure. I am not

aware of empirical studies that have attempted to include this variable in a demand for health

framework. The possibility that the asset effect can be nonzero in a pure investment model

provides an alternative explanation of Wagstaff’s (1986) finding that an increase in proxies for

initial assets and lifetime earnings raise health. None of the studies has taken my suggestion to

treat uncertainty in terms of a probability distribution of depreciation rates in a given period.

This could be done by writing the stock of health in period t as

                          H t = H t −1 − δt −1 H t −1 + I t −1 + R t −1 ,                               (6-8)

where δ t−1 is the mean depreciation rate and R t −1 = ( δt −1 − δ t −1 )H t −1 . I leave it to the reader to

explore the implications of this formulation.



7. Health and Schooling

        An extensive review of the literature conducted by Grossman and Kaestner (1997)

suggests that years of formal schooling completed is the most important correlate of good health.

This finding emerges whether health levels are measured by mortality rates, morbidity rates, self-

evaluation of health status, or physiological indicators of health, and whether the units of



                                                              64
observation are individuals or groups. The studies also suggest that schooling is a more

important correlate of health than occupation or income, the two other components of

socioeconomic status. This is particularly true when one controls for reverse causality from poor

health to low income. Of course, schooling is a causal determinant of occupation and income, so

that the gross effect of schooling on health may reflect in part its impact on socioeconomic

status. The studies reviewed, however, indicate that a significant portion of the gross schooling

effect cannot be traced to the relationship between schooling and income or occupation.

       In a broad sense, the observed positive correlation between health and schooling may be

explained in one of three ways. The first argues that there is a causal relationship that runs from

increases in schooling to increases in health. The second holds that the direction of causality

runs from better health to more schooling. The third argues that no causal relationship is implied

by the correlation; instead, differences in one or more “third variables,” such as physical and

mental ability and parental characteristics, affect both health and schooling in the same

direction.

       It should be noted that these three explanations are not mutually exclusive and can be

used to rationalize an observed correlation between any two variables. But from a public policy

perspective, it is important to distinguish among them and to obtain quantitative estimates of

their relative magnitudes. Suppose that a stated goal of public policy is to improve the level of

health of the population or of certain groups in the population. Given this goal and given the

high correlation between health and schooling, it might appear that one method of

implementation would be to increase government outlays on schooling. In fact, Auster et al.

(1969) suggest that the rate of return on increases in health via higher schooling outlays far

exceeds the rate of return on increases in health via higher medical care outlays. This argument




                                                 65
assumes that the correlation between health and schooling reflects only the effect of schooling on

health. If, however, the causal relationship was the reverse, or if the third-variable hypothesis

was relevant, then increased outlays on schooling would not accomplish the goal of improved

health.

          Causality from schooling to health results when more educated persons are more efficient

producers of health. This efficiency effect can take two forms. Productive efficiency pertains to

a situation in which the more educated obtain a larger health output from given amounts of

endogenous (choice) inputs. This is the effect that I have emphasized throughout this paper.

Allocative efficiency, discussed in detail by Kenkel (Chapter 38 in this Handbook), pertains to a

situation in which schooling increases information about the true effects of the inputs on health.

For example, the more educated may have more knowledge about the harmful effects of cigarette

smoking or about what constitutes an appropriate diet. Allocative efficiency will improve health

to the extent that it leads to the selection of a better input mix.

          Causality from schooling to health also results when education changes tastes or

preferences in a manner that favors health relative to certain other commodities. In some cases

the taste hypothesis cannot be distinguished from allocative hypothesis, particularly when

knowledge of health effects has been available for some time. But in a situation in which the

new information becomes available, the allocative efficiency hypothesis predicts a more rapid

response by the more educated.

          Alternatively, the direction of causality may run from better health to more schooling

because healthier students may be more efficient producers of additions to the stock of

knowledge (or human capital) via formal schooling. Furthermore, this causal path may have

long lasting effects if past health is an input into current health status. Thus, even for non-




                                                   66
students, a positive relationship between health and schooling may reflect reverse causality in the

absence of controls for past health.

       The “third-variable” explanation is particularly relevant if one thinks that a large

unexplained variation in health remains after controlling for schooling and other determinants.

Studies summarized by Grossman and Kaestner (1997) and results in the related field of

investment in human capital and the determinants of earnings [for example, Mincer (1974)],

indicate that the percentage of the variation in health explained by schooling is much smaller

than the percentage of the variation in earnings explained by schooling. Yet it also is intuitive

that health and illness have larger random components than earnings. The third-variable

explanation is relevant only if the unaccounted factors which affect health are correlated with

schooling. Note that both the reverse causality explanation and the third-variable explanation

indicate that the observed relationship between current health and schooling reflects an omitted

variable. In the case of reverse causality, the omitted variable is identified as past or endowed

health. In econometric terminology, both explanations fall under the general rubric of biases due

to unobserved heterogeneity among individuals.

       Kaestner and I [Grossman and Kaestner (1997)] conclude from our extensive review of

the literature that schooling does in fact have a causal impact on good health. In drawing this

conclusion, we are sensitive to the difficulties of establishing causality in the social sciences

where natural experiments rarely can be performed. Our affirmative answer is based on the

numerous studies in the U.S. and developing countries that we have summarized. These studies

employ a variety of adult, child, and infant health measures, many different estimation

techniques, and controls for a host of third variables.

       I leave it up to the reader to evaluate this conclusion after reading the Grossman-Kaestner




                                                 67
paper and the studies therein. I also urge the reader to consult my study dealing with the

correlation between health and schooling [Grossman (1975)] because I sketch out a framework

in which there are complementary relationships between schooling and health--the principal

components of the stock of human capital--at various stages in the life cycle. The empirical

evidence that Kaestner and I report on causality from schooling to health as well as on causality

from health to schooling underscores the potential payoffs to the formal development of a model

in which the stocks of health and knowledge are determined simultaneously.

       In the remainder of this section, I want to address one challenge of the conclusion that the

role of schooling is causal: the time preference hypothesis first proposed by Fuchs (1982). Fuchs

argues that persons who are more future oriented (who have a high degree of time preference for

the future) attend school for longer periods of time and make larger investments in health. Thus,

the effect of schooling on health is biased if one fails to control for time preference.

       The time preference hypothesis is analogous to the hypothesis that the positive effect of

schooling on earnings is biased upward by the omission of ability. In each case a well-

established relationship between schooling and an outcome (earnings or health) is challenged

because a hard-to-measure variable (ability or time preference) has been omitted. Much ink has

been spilled on this issue in the human capital literature. Attempts to include proxies for ability

in earnings functions have resulted in very modest reductions in the schooling coefficient [for

example, Griliches and Mason (1972), Hause (1972)]. Proponents of the ability hypothesis have

attributed the modest reductions to measurement error in these proxies [for example, Goldberger

(1974)]. More recent efforts have sought instruments that are correlated with schooling but not

correlated with ability [for example, Angrist and Krueger (1991)]. These efforts have produced

the somewhat surprising finding that the schooling coefficient increases when the instrumental




                                                  68
variables procedure is employed. A cynic might conclude that the way to destroy any empirical

regularity is to attribute it to an unmeasured variable, especially if the theory with regard to the

relevance of this variable is not well developed.50

       Nevertheless, the time preference hypothesis is important because it is related to recent

and potentially very rich theoretical models in which preferences are endogenous [Becker and

Murphy (1988), Becker (1996), Becker and Mulligan (1997)]. Differences in time preference

among individuals will not generate differences in investments in human capital unless certain

other conditions are met. One condition is that the ability to finance these investments by

borrowing is limited, so that they must be funded to some extent by foregoing current

consumption. Even if the capital market is perfect, the returns on an investment in schooling

depend on hours of work if schooling raises market productivity by a larger percentage than it

raises nonmarket productivity. Individuals who are more future oriented desire relatively more

leisure at older ages. Therefore, they work more at younger ages and have a higher discounted

marginal benefit on a given investment than persons who are more present oriented. If health

enters the utility function, persons who discount the future less heavily will have higher health

levels during most stages of the life cycle. Hence, a positive relationship between schooling and

health does not necessarily imply causality.

       Since the conditions that generate causal effects of time preference on schooling and

health are plausible, attempts to control for time preference in estimating the schooling

coefficient in a health outcome equation are valuable. Fuchs (1982) measures time preference in

a telephone survey by asking respondents questions in which they chose between a sum of

money now and a larger sum in the future. He includes an index of time preference in a multiple

regression in which health status is the dependent variable and schooling is one of the




                                                  69
independent variables. Fuchs is not able to demonstrate that the schooling effect is due to time

preference. The latter variable has a negative regression coefficient, but it is not statistically

significant. When time preference and schooling are entered simultaneously, the latter

dominates the former. These results must be regarded as preliminary because they are based on

one small sample of adults on Long Island and on exploratory measures of time preference.

          Farrell and Fuchs (1982) explore the time preference hypothesis in the context of

cigarette smoking using interviews conducted in 1979 by the Stanford Heart Disease Prevention

Program in four small agricultural cities in California. They examine the smoking behavior of

white non-Hispanics who were not students at the time of the survey, had completed 12 to 18

years of schooling, and were at least 24 years old. The presence of retrospective information on

cigarette smoking at ages 17 and 24 allows them to relate smoking at these two ages to years of

formal schooling completed by 1979 for cohorts who reached age 17 before and after the

widespread diffusion of information concerning the harmful effects of cigarette smoking on

health.

          Farrell and Fuchs find that the negative relationship between schooling and smoking,

which rises in absolute value for cohorts born after 1953, does not increase between the ages of

17 and 24. Since the individuals were all in the same school grade at age 17, the additional

schooling obtained between that age and age 24 cannot be the cause of differential smoking

behavior at age 24, according to the authors. Based on these results, Farrell and Fuchs reject the

hypothesis that schooling is a causal factor in smoking behavior in favor of the view that a third

variable causes both. Since the strong negative relationship between schooling and smoking

developed only after the spread of information concerning the harmful effects of smoking, they

argue that the same mechanism may generate the schooling-health relationship.




                                                  70
       A different interpretation of the Farrell and Fuchs finding emerges if one assumes that

consumers are farsighted. The current consumption of cigarettes leads to more illness and less

time for work in the future. The cost of this lost time is higher for persons with higher wage

rates who have made larger investments in human capital. Thus, the costs of smoking in high

school are greater for persons who plan to make larger investments in human capital.

       Berger and Leigh (1989) have developed an extremely useful methodology for

disentangling the schooling effect from the time preference effect. Their methodology amounts

to treating schooling as an endogenous variable in the health equation and estimating the

equation by a variant of two-stage least squares. If the instrumental variables used to predict

schooling in the first stage are uncorrelated with time preference, this technique yields an

unbiased estimate of the schooling coefficient. Since the framework generates a recursive model

with correlated errors, exogenous variables that are unique to the health equation are not used to

predict schooling.

       Berger and Leigh apply their methodology to two data sets: the first National Health and

Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES I) and the National Longitudinal Survey of Young

Men (NLS). In NHANES I, health is measured by blood pressure, and separate equations are

obtained for persons aged 20 through 40 and over age 40 in the period 1971 through 1975. The

schooling equation is identified by ancestry and by average real per capita income and average

real per capita expenditures on education in the state in which an individual resided from the year

of birth to age 6. These variables enter the schooling equation but are excluded from the health

equation. In the NLS, health is measured by a dichotomous variable that identifies men who in

1976 reported that health limited or prevented them from working and alternatively by a

dichotomous variable that identifies the presence of a functional health limitation. The men in




                                                71
the sample were between the ages of 24 and 34 in 1976, had left school by that year, and

reported no health limitations in 1966 (the first year of the survey). The schooling equation is

identified by IQ, Knowledge of Work test scores, and parents' schooling.

       Results from the NLS show that the schooling coefficient rises in absolute value when

predicted schooling replaces actual schooling, and when health is measured by work limitation.

When health is measured by functional limitation, the two-stage least squares schooling

coefficient is approximately equal to the ordinary least squares coefficient, although the latter is

estimated with more precision. For persons aged 20 through 40 in NHANES I, schooling has a

larger impact on blood pressure in absolute value in the two-stage regressions. For persons over

age 40, however, the predicted value of schooling has a positive and insignificant regression

coefficient. Except for the last finding, these results are inconsistent with the time preference

hypothesis and consistent with the hypothesis that schooling causes health.

       In another application of the same methodology, Leigh and Dhir (1997) focus on the

relationship between schooling and health among persons ages 65 and over in the 1986 wave of

the Panel Survey of Income Dynamics (PSID). Health is measured by a disability index

comprised of answers to six activities of daily living and by a measure of exercise frequency.

Responses to questions asked in 1972 concerning the ability to delay gratification are used to

form an index of time preference. Instruments for schooling include parents’ schooling, parents’

income, and state of residence in childhood. The schooling variable is associated with better

health and more exercise whether it is treated as exogenous or endogenous.

       Sander (1995a, 1995b) has applied the methodology developed by Berger and Leigh to

the relationship between schooling and cigarette smoking studied by Farrell and Fuchs (1982).

His data consist of the 1986-1991 waives of the National Opinion Research Center's General




                                                 72
Social Survey. In the first paper the outcome is the probability of quitting smoking, while in the

second the outcome is the probability of smoking. Separate probit equations are obtained for

men and women ages 25 and older. Instruments for schooling include father's schooling,

mother's schooling, rural residence at age 16, region of residence at age 16, and number of

siblings.

        In general schooling has a negative effect on smoking participation and a positive effect

on the probability of quitting smoking. These results are not sensitive to the use of predicted as

opposed to actual schooling in the probit regressions. Moreover, the application of the Wu-

Hausman endogeneity test [Wu (1973), Hausman (1978)] in the quit equation suggest that

schooling is exogenous in this equation. Thus, Sander's results, like Berger and Leigh's and

Leigh and Dhir’s results, are inconsistent with the time preference hypothesis.

        The aforementioned conclusion rests on the assumption that the instruments used to

predict schooling in the first stage are uncorrelated with time preference. The validity of this

assumption is most plausible in the case of measures such as real per capita income and real per

capita outlays on education in the state in which an individual resided from birth to age 6 (used

by Berger and Leigh in NHANES I), state of residence in childhood (used by Leigh and Dhir in

the PSID) and rural residence at age 16 and region of residence at that age (used by Sander). The

validity of the assumption is less plausible in the case of measures such as parents' schooling

(used by Sander and by Berger and Leigh in the NLS and by Leigh and Dhir in the PSID) and

parents’ income (used by Leigh and Dhir in the PSID).

        Given this and the inherent difficulty in Fuchs's (1982) and Leigh and Dhir’s (1997)

attempts to measure time preference directly, definitive evidence with regard to the time

preference hypothesis still is lacking. Moreover, Sander (1995a, 1995b) presents national data




                                                 73
showing a much larger downward trend in the probability of smoking and a much larger upward

trend in the probability of quitting smoking between 1966 and 1987 as the level of education

rises. Since information concerning the harmful effects of smoking was widespread by the early

1980s, these results are not consistent with an allocative efficiency argument that the more

educated are better able to process new information.

       Becker and Murphy's (1988) theoretical model of rational addiction predicts that persons

who discount the future heavily are more likely to participate in such addictive behaviors as

cigarette smoking. Becker et al. (1991) show that the higher educated people are more

responsive to changes in the harmful future consequences of the consumption of addictive goods

because they are more future oriented. Thus, the trends just cited are consistent with a negative

relationship between schooling and the rate of time preference for the present.

       Proponents of the time preference hypothesis assume that a reduction in the rate of time

preference for the present causes years of formal schooling to rise. On the other hand, Becker

and Mulligan (1997) argue that causality may run in the opposite direction: namely, an increase

in schooling may cause the rate of time preference for the present to fall (may cause the rate of

time preference for the future to rise). In most models of optimal consumption over the life

cycle, consumers maximize a lifetime utility function defined as the discounted sum or present

value of utility in each period or at each age. The discount factor (β) is given by β = 1/(1 + g),

where g is the rate of time preference for the present. Becker and Mulligan point out that the

present value of utility is higher the smaller is the rate of time preference for the present. Hence,

consumers have incentives to make investments that lower the rate of time preference for the

present.

       Becker and Mulligan then show that the marginal costs of investments that lower time




                                                 74
preference fall and the marginal benefits rise as income or wealth rises. Marginal benefits also

are greater when the length of life is greater. Hence, the equilibrium rate of time preference falls

as the level of education rises because education raises income and life expectancy. Moreover,

the more educated may be more efficient in making investments that lower the rate of time

preference for the present--a form of productive efficiency not associated with health production.

To quote Becker and Mulligan: “Schooling also determines...[investments in time preference]

partly through the study of history and other subjects, for schooling focuses students' attention on

the future. Schooling can communicate images of the situations and difficulties of adult life,

which are the future of childhood and adolescence. In addition, through repeated practice at

problem solving, schooling helps children learn the art of scenario simulation. Thus, educated

people should be more productive at reducing the remoteness of future pleasures (pp. 735-736 ).”

       Becker and Mulligan's argument amounts to a third causal mechanism in addition to

productive and allocative efficiency in health production via which schooling can cause health.

Econometrically, the difference between their model and Fuchs’s model can be specified as

follows:

                       H = α1Y + α2E + α3g                                                    (7-1)

                       p = α4Y + α5E                                                          (7-2)

                       E = α6g                                                                (7-3)

                       Y = α7E.                                                               (7-4)

In this system H is health, Y is permanent income, E is years of formal schooling completed, g is

time preference for the present, and the disturbance terms are suppressed. The first equation is a

demand for health function in which the coefficient of E reflects productive or allocative

efficiency or both. Fuchs assumes that α5 is zero. Hence, the coefficient of E in the first



                                                 75
equation is biased if g is omitted.

       In one version of their model, Becker and Mulligan assume that α6 is zero, although in a

more general formulation they allow this coefficient to be nonzero. Given that α6 is zero, and

substituting the second equation into the first, one obtains

                       H = (α1 + α4α3)Y + (α2 + α5α3)E.                                        (7-5)

The coefficient of Y in the last equation reflects both the direct effect of income on health (α1)

and the indirect effect of income on health through time preference (α4α3). Similarly, the

coefficient of E reflects both the direct efficiency effect (α2) and the indirect effect of schooling

on health through time preference (α5α3).

       Suppose that the direct efficiency effect of schooling (α2) is zero. In Fuchs’s model, if

health is regressed on income and schooling as represented by solving equation (7-3) for g, the

expected value of the schooling coefficient is α3/α6. This coefficient reflects causality from time

preference to schooling. In Becker and Mulligan’s model the schooling coefficient is α3α5. This

coefficient reflects causality from schooling to time preference. The equation that expresses

income as a function of schooling stresses that schooling has indirect effects on health via

income. Becker and Mulligan would include health as a determinant of time preference in the

second equation because health lowers mortality, raises future utility levels, and increases

incentives to make investments that lower the rate of time preference.

       Becker and Mulligan’s model appears to contain useful insights in considering

intergenerational relationships between parents and children. For example, parents can raise

their children's future health, including their adulthood health, by making them more future

oriented. Note that years of formal schooling completed is a time-invariant variable beyond

approximately age 30, while adult health is not time invariant. Thus, parents probably have a


                                                  76
more important direct impact on the former than the latter. By making investments that raise

their offsprings' schooling, parents also induce them to make investments that lower their rate of

time preference for the present and therefore raise their adult health.

       Becker and Mulligan suggest a more definitive and concrete way to measure time

preference and incorporate it into estimates of health demand functions than those that have been

attempted to date. They point out that the natural logarithm of the ratio of consumption between

consecutive time periods (ln L) is approximately equal to σ[ln (1 + r) - ln (1 + g)], where σ is

the intertemporal elasticity of substitution in consumption, r is the market rate of interest, and g

is the rate of time preference for the present. If σ and r do not vary among individuals, variations

in ln L capture variations in time preference. With panel data, ln L can be included as a

regressor in the health demand function Since Becker and Mulligan stress the endogeneity of

time preference and its dependence on schooling, simultaneous equations techniques appear to

be required. Identification of this model will not be easy, but success in this area has the

potential to greatly inform public policy.

       To illustrate the last point, suppose that most of the effect of schooling on health operates

through time preference. Then school-based programs to promote health knowledge in areas

characterized by low levels of income and education may have much smaller payoffs than

programs that encourage the investments in time preference made by the more educated. Indeed,

in an ever-changing world in which new information constantly becomes available, general

interventions that encourage future-oriented behavior may have much larger rates of return in the

long run than specific interventions designed, for example, to discourage cigarette smoking,

alcohol abuse, or the use of illegal drugs.

       There appear to be important interactions between Becker and Mulligan's theory of the



                                                 77
endogenous determination of time preference and Becker and Murphy's (1988) theory of rational

addiction. Such addictive behaviors as cigarette smoking, excessive alcohol use, and the

consumption of illegal drugs have demonstrated adverse health effects. Increased consumption

of these goods raise present utility but lower future utility. According to Becker and Mulligan

(1997, p. 744), “Since a decline in future utility reduces the benefits from a lower discount on

future utilities, greater consumption of harmful substances would lead to higher rates of time

preference by discouraging investments in lowering these rates...” This is the converse of

Becker and Murphy's result that people who discount the future more heavily are more likely to

become addicted. Thus, “...harmful addictions induce even rational persons to discount the

future more heavily, which in turn may lead them to become more addicted (Becker and

Mulligan 1997, p. 744).”

       It is well known that cigarette smoking and excessive alcohol abuse begin early in life

[for example, Grossman et al. (1993)]. Moreover, bandwagon or peer effects are much more

important in the case of youth smoking or alcohol consumption than in the case of adult smoking

or alcohol consumption. The two-way causality between addiction and time preference and the

importance of peer pressure explain why parents who care about the welfare of their children

have large incentives to make investments that make their children more future oriented. These

forces may also account for the relatively large impact of schooling on health with health

knowledge held constant reported by Kenkel (1991).

        Some parents may ignore or be unaware of the benefits of investments in time

preference. Given society's concern with the welfare of its children, subsidies to school-based

programs that make children more future oriented may be warranted. But much more research

dealing with the determinants of time preference and its relationship with schooling and health is




                                                78
required before these programs can be formulated and implemented in a cost-effective manner.

8. Conclusions

       Most of the chapters in this Handbook focus on various aspects of the markets for

medical care services and health insurance. This focus is required to understand the

determinants of prices, quantities, and expenditures in these markets. The main message of my

paper is that a very different theoretical paradigm is required to understand the determinants of

health outcomes. I have tried to convince the reader that the human capital model of the demand

for health provides the framework to conduct investigations of these outcomes. The model

emphasizes the difference between health as an output and medical care as one of many inputs

into the production of health and the equally important difference between health capital and

other forms of human capital. It provides a theoretical framework for making predictions about

the impacts of many variables on health and an empirical framework for testing these

predictions.

       Future theoretical efforts will be especially useful if they consider the joint determination

of health and schooling and the interactions between these two variables and time preference for

the present. A model in which both the stock of health and the stock of knowledge (schooling)

are endogenous does not necessarily generate causality between the two. Individuals, however,

typically stop investing in schooling at relatively young ages but rarely stop investing in health.

I have a “hunch” that a dynamic model that takes account of these patterns will generate effects

of an endogenously determined schooling variable on health in the health demand function if

schooling has a causal impact on productive efficiency or time preference.

       Future empirical efforts will be especially useful if they employ longitudinal databases

with a variety of health outputs, health inputs, and direct and indirect (for example, the rate of




                                                 79
growth in total consumption) measures of time preference at three or more different ages. This is

the type of data required to implement the cost-of-adjustment model outlined in Section 6. It

also is the type of data required to distinguish between the productive and allocative efficiency

effects of schooling and to fit demand for health models in which medical care is not necessarily

the primary health input. Finally, it is the type of data to fully sort out the hypothesis that

schooling causes health from the competing hypothesis that time preference causes both using

methods outlined in Section 7.

       These research efforts will not be easy, but their potential payoffs are substantial.

Medical care markets in most countries are subject to large amounts of government intervention,

regulation, and subsidization. I have emphasized the basic proposition that consumers demand

health rather than medical care. Thus, one way to evaluate policy initiatives aimed at medical

care is to consider their impacts on health outcomes in the context of a cost-benefit analysis of

programs that influence a variety of health inputs. If this undertaking is to be successful, it must

draw on refined estimates of the parameters of health production functions, output demand

functions for health, and input demand functions for health inputs.




                                                  80
Footnotes

        I am indebted to Robert Kaestner, Sara Markowitz, Tomas Philipson, and Walter Ried for

helpful comments.

        1
            My monograph was the final publication in the Occasional Paper Series of the National

Bureau of Economic Research. It is somewhat ironic that the publication of a study dealing with

the demand for health marked the death of the series.
        2
            Grossman (1972b) is out of print but available in most libraries.
        3
            Equations (2-3) and (2-4) assume that E does not vary over the life cycle. In Grossman

(1972b, pp. 28-30), I consider the impacts of exogenous variations in this stock with age.
        4
            Clearly this is a simplification. No distinction is made between the quality and the

quantity of healthy time. If the stock of health yielded other services besides healthy time, φt

would be a vector of service flows. These services might or might not be perfect substitutes in

the utility function.
        5
            An increase in gross investment in period t-1 increases the stock of health in all future

periods. These increases are equal to

                   ∂H t         ∂H t +1                  ∂H
                           = 1,         = (1 − δ t ), K , n = (1 − δ t )(1 − δ t +1 )...(1 − δ n −1 ).
                   ∂I t −1      ∂I t −1                  ∂I t −1

        6
            Equation (2-11) assumes δ t ~
                                        π t −1 ≅ 0.

        7
            First-time readers of this chapter can skip Sections 2.3 and 2.4. The material in the

remaining sections does not depend on them.
        8
            Since the initial period is period 0, a consumer who is alive in year n and dead in year

n+1 lives for n+1 years.
        9
            Actually, I assert that I am assuming Hn ≤ Hmin. That is incorrect because Hn > Hmin if



                                                             81
the consumer is alive in period n. The corrected footnote should read: “The constraints are

imposed that Hn+1 ≤ Hmin and Hn > Hmin.”
          10
               Readers seeking a definitive and path-breaking treatment of the allocation of goods and

time over the life cycle, should consult Ghez’s pioneering monograph on this topic with Becker

[Ghez and Becker (1975)]. In the late 1970s and 1980s, there was a tremendous growth in the

literature on life-cycle labor supply and consumption demand using the concept of demand

functions that hold the marginal utility of wealth constant. All this literature can be traced to

Ghez’s treatment of the topic.
          11
               This is a first approximation because it assumes that that λ does not change when the

horizon is extended by one period. Consider the standard intertemporally separable lifetime

utility function in which the current period utility function, ψ(ht, Zt), is strictly concave. With full

wealth constant, an increase in the horizon causes λ to rise. But full wealth increases by

Wn+1Ω/(1 + r)n+1, which causes λ to decline. I assume that these two effects exactly offset each

other. This assumption is not necessary in the pure investment model described in Sections 2.5

and 3 because Vt does not depend on λ in that model.

          12
               If H n ≤ H min , the utility function is re-maximized after shortening the horizon by 1

period.
          13
               It may appear that the supply price of capital given by the right-hand side of equation

(2-18) is smaller than the one given by the right-hand side of equation (2-13) as long as

1 - δn > − ~
           π n − 1 . But equation (2-18) is based on the assumption δ n ~
                                                                        π n −1 ≅ 0. The exact form of

(2-18) is

                            Vn* G *n = π n −1 (r + 1) − (1 − δ n )π n .



                                                              82
The difference between the right-hand side of this equation and the right-hand side of equation

(2-13) is - (1 - δn)πn < 0.

        14
             While G *n is smaller than Gn, it is not clear whether Vn* is smaller than Vn. The last

term can be written

                                        Uh n
                          Vn = Wn +          mt ,
                                        Un

where Un is the marginal utility of Zn and mn is the marginal cost of producing Zn. The wage rate

in period n (Wn) and mn are not affected when the length of the horizon is increased from n to

n+1. In equilibrium,

                                 π n −1 (1 + r)      
                                                − Wn 
                          Uh n         Gn
                               =                     
                          Un               mn        
                                                    

and

                               π n −1 (r + 1) − π n (1 − δ n )      
                              *                *
                                                                − Wn 
                          Uh                 Gn
                             = n
                                                                     .
                                                                    
                              *
                          U   n                   mn
                                                                   

Suppose that

                                      π (r + 1) − π n (1 − δ n ) 
                          G *n = G n  n −1                       .
                                           π n −1 ( r + 1)       

     Uh *n Uh n
Then   *
          =     and Vn* = Vn . In this case there is no incentive to substitute healthy time for
     Un     Un

the other commodity in the utility function in period n when the horizon is increased by one

period. In other cases this type of substitution will occur. If it does occur, I assume that the




                                                        83
lifetime utility function is separable over time so that the marginal rate of substitution between h

and Z in periods other than period n is not affected. Note the distinction between Hn+1 and H *n+1 .

The former stock is the one associated with an n period horizon and In = 0. The latter stock is the

one associated with an n+1 horizon and In > 0. Clearly, H *n +1 > H n +1 .

        15
             In deriving equation (2-23) I use the approximation that δ n ~
                                                                          π n −1 ≅ 0. If the exact form

of equation (2-18) is employed (see footnote 13), the approximation is not necessary.

        16
             If Wn+1 = Wn and πn = πn-1, then H *n +1 (the optimal stock when the horizon is n+1) = Hn

(the optimal stock when the horizon is n). Hence,

                          Hn+2 = (1 - δn+1)Hn

                          Hn+1 = (1 - δn)Hn.

Since δn+1 > δn, Hn+2 could be smaller than or equal to Hmin, while at the same time Hn could

exceed Hmin. Note that one addition to the algorithm described is required. Return to the case

when maximization for a fixed number of periods equal to n results in a stock in period n+1 that

is smaller than or equal to the death stock. The consumer should behave as if the rate of

depreciation on the stock of health is equal to 1 in period n and consult equation (2-13) to

determine In-1 and Hn. Suppose instead that he behaves as if the rate of depreciation is the actual

rate in period n (δn < 1). This is the same rate used by the consumer who dies in period n+2.

Denote I*n −1 as the quantity of gross investment that results from using equation (2-18) to select

the optimal stock in period n. Under the alternative decision rule, the stock in period n+1 could

exceed the death stock. The difference in the stock in period n+1 that results from these two

alternative decision rules is




                                                    84
                            H *n +1 − H n +1 = I*n −1 + δ n −1 (I n −1 − I*n −1 ),

where I assume that In (gross investment in period n when death takes place in period n+2)

equals In-1 (gross investment in period n-1 when death takes place in period n+1). This

difference falls as I*n −1 falls. In turn, I*n −1 falls as δn rises with rates of depreciation in all other

periods held constant.
          17
               Technically, I am dealing with parametric differences in exogenous variables

(differences in exogenous variables across consumers) as opposed to evolutionary differences in

exogenous variables (differences in exogenous variables across time for the same consumer).

This distinction goes back to Ghez and Becker (1975) and is explored in detail by MaCurdy

(1981).
          18
               Consider two people who face the same rate of depreciation in each period. Person b

has higher initial assets than person a and picks a larger stock in each period. Suppose that

person a dies after period n. Hence,

                            H an +1 = (1 − δ n )H an ≤ H min .

Suppose that person b, like person a, invests nothing in period n. Then

                            H bn +1 = (1 − δ n )H bn .

Clearly, H bn +1 > H an +1 since H bn > H an . But both people could die in period n+1 if H an +1 < H min .

This is a necessary, but not a sufficient, condition. For this reason, I use the term “tends” in the

text. This ambiguity is removed if the condition for death is defined by Hn+1 = Hmin. That

definition is, however, unsatisfactory because the rate of depreciation in period n does not

guarantee that it is satisfied. That is, death takes place in n+1 if δ n ≥ (H n − H min ) / H n .

          19
               For an earlier criticism of my model along the same lines, see Usher (1975).



                                                                  85
        20
             In addition, I assume that the market rate of interest is equal to the rate of time

preference for the present. See Section 4 for a definition of time preference.
        21
             This follows because

                           ∂h t + j       ∂h t + j ∂H t + j ,
                                      =
                            ∂I t          ∂H t + j ∂I t

or

                           ∂h t + j
                                      = G t + j (1 − δ t +1 )(1 − δ t + 2 )L (1 − δ t + j−1 ) = G t + jd t + j .
                            ∂I t

Clearly, dt+j is positive and finite when It equals zero. Moreover Gt+j is positive and finite when

It equals zero as long as Ht+j is positive and finite.
        22
             The corresponding condition for the optimal stock in the last period of life, period n, is

                          γn + an = r + 1.
        23
             As Ghez and Becker (1975) point out, none of the variables in a discrete time model

are differentiable functions of time. Equation (3-3) and other equations involving time or age

derivatives are approximations that hold exactly in a continuous time model.
        24
             In this section I deal with uniform shifts in variables that influence the rate of return

across persons of the same age. I also assume that these variables do not vary over the life cycle.

Finally, I deal with the partial effect of an increase in the wage rate or an increase in knowledge

capital, measured by the number of years of formal schooling completed, on the demand for

health and health inputs. For a more general treatment, see Grossman (1972b, pp. 28-30).
        25
             Solving equation (4-1) for the monetary equivalent of the marginal utility of healthy

time, one obtains




                                                                    86
                         Uh t π(r + δ t ) / G t .
                             =
                          λ      (1 + r ) t

Given diminishing marginal productivity of health capital, the undiscounted price of a healthy

hour, π(r + δt)/Gt, would be positively correlated with H or h even if π were constant. Therefore,

the consumption demand curve would be influenced by scale effects. To emphasize the main

issues at stake in the consumption model, I ignore these effects essentially by assuming that Gt is

constant. The analysis would not be greatly altered if they were introduced.
       26
            For a different conclusion, see Ehrlich and Chuma (1990). They argue that wealth

effects are present in the investment model given rising marginal cost of investment in health and

endogenous length of life.
       27
            I assume that the elasticity of substitution in consumption between Ht and Zt is the

same in every period and that the elasticity of substitution between Ht and Zj (t ≠ j) does not

depend on t or j. The corresponding equation for the wage elasticity of medical care is

                         eMW = Kσp - (1 - θ)(K - KZ)σHZ.
       28
            I assume that ΨzΨHZ > ΨHΨZZ so that the pure wealth effect is positive and a reduction

in λ raises health. When ΨHZ is negative, this condition does not guarantee that equation (4-3) is

negative because KZ could exceed K.
       29
            The term (1 - θ)σHZ in equation (4-4) or equation (4-5) is the compensated or utility-

constant price elasticity of demand for health.
       30
            I relax the assumption that all persons face the same market rate of interest in Section

7.
       31
            If an increase in schooling lowers the rate of depreciation at every age by the same




                                                    87
percentage, it is equivalent to a uniform percentage shift in this rate considered briefly in Section

3.3 and in more detail in Grossman (1972b, p. 19 and p. 90). The only difference between this

model and the productivity model is that a value of the elasticity of the MEC schedule smaller

than one is a sufficient, but not a necessary, condition for medical care to fall as schooling rises.
                                 ~
        32
             Recall that δ t > − H t since gross investment must be positive. Given that the real rate

of interest is zero
                            ~
                          − Ht        dδ
                               = εδ 2t t .
                           δt          dt

Since ε is likely to be smaller than one and the square of the rate of depreciation is small for

                                                                    ~
modest rates of depreciation, δt is likely to be much larger than − H t .

        33
             See Section 7 for a detailed analysis of biases in the regression coefficient of schooling

due to the omission of other variables.
        34
             Health would have a positive wealth elasticity in the investment model for people who

are not in the labor force. For such individuals, an increase in wealth would raise the ratio of

market goods to consumption time, the marginal product of consumption time, and its shadow

price. Hence, the monetary rate of return on an investment in health would rise. Since my

empirical work is limited to members of the labor force, a pure increase in wealth would not

change the shadow price of their time.
        35
             In my monograph, I argue that a one percent increase in medical care would be

accompanied by a one percent increase in own time if factor prices do not vary as more and more

health is produced. Therefore, the regression coefficient α in equation (5-8) would reflect the

sum of the output elasticities of medical care and own time. Given constant returns to scale, the




                                                    88
true value of α should be unity [Grossman (1972b), p. 43]. This analysis becomes much more

complicated once joint production is introduced [see Grossman (1972b), Chapter VI and the brief

discussion of joint production below].
       36
            See Zweifel and Manning (Chapter 9 in this Handbook) for a review of the literature

dealing with the effect of health insurance on the demand for medical care.
       37
            The complete specification involves regressing H on W and q and regressing M on W

and q, where it is understood that all variables are in logarithms. In the three input model in

which the money price of medical care is zero, the coefficients of q are negative in both

equations. The coefficient of W is positive in the health equation and ambiguous in sign in the

medical care equation.
       38
            A one-tailed test is appropriate since the alternative hypothesis is that the age

coefficient is positive. The age coefficient is positive and significant at all conventional levels in

the demand functions for hospital stays and medicines.
       39
            Joint production could account for a negative lifetime wage effect, but Zweifel and

Breyer do not consider this phenomenon.
       40
            Stratmann identifies his model with instruments reflecting the price of visiting a

physician which differs according to the type of health insurance carried by individuals. The

specific measures are Medicaid coverage, private insurance coverage, membership in a Health

Maintenance Organization, and whether or not the employer paid the health insurance premium.
       41
            The health limitation variable for 1982 is based on responses during October,

November, and December of that year. The corresponding variable for 1983 is based on

responses during the months of January through September. It is not clear which month is used




                                                   89
for the self- and physician-rated health measures. I assume that the 1982 measures come from

the October 1982 survey and the 1983 measure comes from the September 1983 survey.
        42
             The minimum requirements for instruments are measures of Pt+1 and Pt-2. The one-

period lead of the price has no impact on Ht with Ht+1 held constant. Similarly, the two-period

lag of the price has no impact on Ht with Ht-1 held constant.
        43
             The same issue arises in estimating the rational addiction model of consumer behavior.

For a detailed discussion, see Becker et al. (1994).
        44
             Ried (1998) also develops a framework for examining the impacts of changes in

exogenous variables in the context of a mixed investment-consumption model. He uses Frisch

(1964) demand curves to decompose the total effect into an effect that holds the marginal utility

of wealth constant and an effect attributable to a change in the marginal utility of wealth. He

obtains few, if any, unambiguous predictions. I leave it to the reader to evaluate this

contribution.
        45
             Cropper begins with a model in which consumers are risk-averse, but the rate of

depreciation on the stock of health does not depend on age. She introduces risk-neutrality when

she allows the rate of depreciation to depend on age.
        46
             Cropper assumes that gross investment in health is produced only with medical care,

but the above result holds as long as the share of the own time input in the total cost of gross

investment is less than one.
        47
             A utility function U = U(C) exhibits decreasing absolute risk aversion if - UCC/UC falls

as C rises.
        48
             Chang provides more results by assuming that the earnings function depends only on




                                                   90
“post-shock health,” f(H2, R). The finding that the sign of the asset effect is ambiguous holds in

his formulation.
       49
            Garber and Phelps (1997), Meltzer (1997), and Picone et al. (1998) also introduce

uncertainty into a pure consumption model of the demand for health. I do not discuss the first

two studies because they focus on cost-effectiveness analysis. I do not discuss the last one

because it emphasizes the behavior of individuals in their retirement years.
       50
            See Grossman and Kaestner (1997) for a model in which ability should be omitted

from the reduced form earnings function even though it enters the structural production function

and has a causal impact on schooling.




                                                 91
References

Angrist, J.D. and A.B. Krueger (1991), “Does compulsory school attendance affect schooling

and earnings?”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 106:979-1014.

Auster, R., I. Leveson and D. Sarachek (1969), “The production of health: An exploratory

study”, Journal of Human Resources 4:411-436.

Becker, G.S. (1964), Human Capital (Columbia University Press for the National Bureau of

Economic Research, New York).

Becker, G.S. (1965), “A theory of the allocation of time”, Economic Journal 75:493-517.

Becker, G.S. (1967), Human Capital and the Personal Distribution of Income: An Analytical

Approach (University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan). Also available in: G.S. Becker

(1993), Human Capital, Third Edition (University of Chicago Press) 102-158.

Becker, G.S. (1996), Accounting for Tastes (Harvard University Press, Cambridge,

Massachusetts).

Becker, G.S., M. Grossman and K.M. Murphy (1991), “Rational addiction and the effect of price

on consumption”, American Economic Review 81:237-241.

Becker, G.S., M. Grossman and K.M. Murphy (1994), “An empirical analysis of cigarette

addiction”, American Economic Review 84:396-418.

Becker, G.S. and C.B. Mulligan (1997), “The endogenous determination of time preference”,

Quarterly Journal of Economics 112:729-758.

Becker, G.S. and K.M. Murphy (1988), “A theory of rational addiction”, Journal of Political

Economy 96:675-700.

Ben-Porath, Y. (1967), “The production of human capital and the life cycle of earnings”, Journal

of Political Economy 75:353-367.




                                               92
Bentham, J. (1931), Principles of Legislation (Harcourt, Brace and Co., New York).

Berger, M.C. and J. P. Leigh (1989), “Schooling, self-selection, and health”, Journal of Human

Resources 24:433-455.

Bound, J., D.M. Jaeger and R.M. Baker (1995), “Problems with instrumental variables

estimation when the correlation between the instruments and the endogenous explanatory

variable is weak”, Journal of the American Statistical Association 90:443-450.

Chang, F.-R. (1996), “Uncertainty and investment in health” , Journal of Health Economics

15:369-376.

Corman, H., T.J. Joyce and M. Grossman (1987), “Birth outcome production functions in the

U.S.”, Journal of Human Resources 22:339-360.

Cropper, M.L. (1977), “Health, investment in health, and occupational choice”, Journal of

Political Economy 85:273-1294.

Currie, J. (forthcoming), “Child health”, chapter 23 in this volume.

Dardanoni, V. and A. Wagstaff (1987), “Uncertainty, inequalities in health and the demand for

health”, Journal of Health Economics 6:283-290.

Dardanoni, V. and A. Wagstaff (1990), “Uncertainty and the demand for medical care”, Journal

of Health Economics 9:23-38.

Ehrlich, I. and H. Chuma (1990), “A model of the demand for longevity and the value of life

extensions”, Journal of Political Economy 98:761-782.

Erbsland, M., W. Ried and V. Ulrich (1995), “Health, health care, and the environment.

Econometric evidence from German micro data”, Health Economics 4:169-182.

Evans, R.G. and G.L. Stoddart, “Determinants of the health of populations”, chapter 2 in this

volume.




                                                93
Farrell, P. and V.R. Fuchs (1982), “Schooling and health: The cigarette connection”, Journal of

Health Economics 1:217-230.

Frisch, R. (1964), “Dynamic utility”, Econometrica 32:418-424.

Fuchs, V.R. (1966), “The contribution of health services to the American economy”, Milbank

Memorial Fund Quarterly 44:65-102.

Fuchs, V.R. (1982), “Time preference and health: An exploratory study”, in: V.R. Fuchs, ed.,

Economic Aspects of Health (University of Chicago Press for the National Bureau of Economic

Research, Chicago) 93-120.

Garber, A.M. and C.E. Phelps (1997), “Economic foundations of cost-effectiveness analysis”,

Journal of Health Economics 16:1-31.

Ghez, G.R. and G.S. Becker (1975), The Allocation of Time and Goods Over the Life Cycle

(Columbia University Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research, New York).

Goldberger, A.S. (1974), “Unobservable variables in econometrics”, in: P. Zarembreka, ed.,

Frontiers in Econometrics (Academic Press, New York) 193-213.

Griliches, Z. and W.M. Mason (1972), “Education, income, and ability”, Journal of Political

Economy 80:S74-S103.

Grossman, M. (1972a), “On the concept of health capital and the demand for health”, Journal of

Political Economy 80:223-255.

Grossman, M. (1972b), The Demand for Health: A Theoretical and Empirical Investigation

(Columbia University Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research, New York).

Grossman, M. (1975), “The correlation between health and schooling”, in: N.E. Terleckyj, ed.,

Household Production and Consumption (Columbia University Press for the National Bureau of

Economic Research, New York) 147-211.




                                               94
Grossman, M. (1982), “The demand for health after a decade”, Journal of Health Economics 1:1-

3.

Grossman, M. and T. J. Joyce (1990), “Unobservables, pregnancy resolutions, and birth weight

production functions in New York City”, Journal of Political Economy 98:983-1007.

Grossman, M. and R. Kaestner (1997), “Effects of education on health”, in: J.R. Behrman and N.

Stacey, eds., The Social Benefits of Education (University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor,

Michigan) 69-123.

Grossman, M., J.L. Sindelar, J. Mullahy and R. Anderson (1993), “Policy watch: Alcohol and

cigarette taxes”, Journal of Economic Perspectives 7:211-222.

Hause, J.C. (1972), “Earnings profile: Ability and schooling”, Journal of Political Economy

80:S108-S138.

Hausman, J.A. (1978), “Specification tests in econometrics”, Econometrica 46:1251-1271.

Jöreskog, K.G. (1973), “A general method for estimating a linear structural equations system”,

in: A.S. Goldberger and O.D. Duncan, eds., Structural Equations Models in the Social Sciences

(Seminar Press, New York) 85-112.

Jöreskog, K.G. and D. Sörbom (1981), LISREL: Analysis of Linear Structural Relationships by

the Method of Maximum Likelihood (International Educational Services, Chicago).

Joyce, T.J. (1994), “Self-selection, prenatal care, and birthweight among blacks, whites, and

Hispanics in New York City”, Journal of Human Resources 29:762-794.

Kenkel, D.S. (1991), “Health behavior, health knowledge, and schooling”, Journal of Political

Economy 99:287-305.

Kenkel, D.S. (forthcoming), “Prevention”, chapter 38 in this volume.

Lancaster, K.J. (1966), “A new approach to consumer theory”, Journal of Political Economy 74:




                                               95
32-157.

Lazear, E. (1977), “Education: Consumption or production?”, Journal of Political Economy

85:569-597.

Leigh, J.P. and R. Dhir (1997), “Schooling and frailty among seniors”, Economics of Education

Review 16:45-57.

Liljas, B. (1998), “The demand for health with uncertainty and insurance”, Journal of Health

Economics 17:153-170.

MaCurdy, T.E. (1981), “An empirical model of labor supply in a life-cycle setting”, Journal of

Political Economy 89:059-1085.

Meltzer, D. (1997), “Accounting for future costs in medical cost-effectiveness analysis” , Journal

of Health Economics 16:33-64.

Michael, R.T. (1972), The Effect of Education on Efficiency in Consumption (Columbia

University Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research, New York).

Michael, R.T. (1973), “Education in nonmarket production”, Journal of Political Economy

81:306-327.

Michael, R.T. and G.S. Becker (1973), “On the new theory of consumer behavior”, Swedish

Economic Journal 75:378-396.

Mincer, J. (1974), Schooling, Experience, and Earnings (Columbia University Press for the

National Bureau of Economic Research, New York).

Mushkin, S.J. (1962), “Health as an investment”, Journal of Political Economy 70,

supplement:129-157.

Muurinen, J. (1982), “Demand for health: A generalised Grossman model”, Journal of Health

Economics 1:5-28.




                                               96
Picone, G., M.U. Echeverria and R.M. Wilson (1998), “The effect of uncertainty on the demand

for medical care, health capital and wealth” , Journal of Health Economics 17:171-186.

Ried, M. (1996), “Willingness to pay and cost of illness for changes in health capital

depreciation”, Health Economics 5:447-468.

Ried, M. (1998), “Comparative dynamic analysis of the full Grossman model”, Journal of Health

Economics 17:383-426.

Rosenzweig, M.R. and T.P. Schultz (1983), “Estimating a household production function:

Heterogeneity, the demand for health inputs, and their effects on birth weight”, Journal of

Political Economy 91:723-746.

Rosenzweig, M.R. and T.P. Schultz (1988), “The stability of household production technology:

A replication”, Journal of Human Resources 23:535-549.

Rosenzweig, M.R. and T.P. Schultz (1991), “Who receives medical care? Income, implicit

prices, and the distribution of medical services among pregnant women in the United States”,

Journal of Human Resources 26:473-508.

Sander, W. (1995a), “Schooling and quitting smoking”, Review of Economics and Statistics

77:191-199.

Sander, W. (1995b), “Schooling and smoking”, Economics of Education Review 14:23-33.

Selden, T.M. (1993), “Uncertainty and health care spending by the poor: The human capital

model revisited”, Journal of Health Economics 12:109-115.

Staiger, D. and J.A. Stock (1997), “Instrumental variables regression with weak instruments”,

Econometrica 65:557-586.

Stratmann, T. (forthcoming), “What do medical services buy? Effects of doctor visits on work

day loss” , Eastern Economic Journal.




                                                97
Usher, D. (1975), “Comments on the correlation between health and schooling”, in: N.E.

Terleckyj, ed., Household Production and Consumption (Columbia University Press for the

National Bureau of Economic Research, New York) 212-220.

Van Doorslaer, E.K.A., (1987), Health, Knowledge and the Demand for Medical Care (Assen,

Maastricht, the Netherlands).

Wagstaff, A. (1986), “The demand for health: Some new empirical evidence”, Journal of Health

Economics 5:195-233.

Wagstaff, A. (1993), “The demand for health: An empirical reformulation of the Grossman

model”, Health Economics 2:189-198.

Wu, D.-M. (1973), “Alternative tests of independence between stochastic regressors and

disturbances”, Econometrica 41:733-750.

Zweifel, P. and F. Breyer (1997), Health Economics (Oxford University Press, New York)

Zweifel, P. and W.G. Manning (forthcoming), “Demand for services as a function of price to

consumer”, chapter 9 in this volume.




                                              98
γt,r − ~
       π t −1 + δ t     MEC




   r* − ~
        π *t −1 + δ*t                      S




                         H *t                  Ht

                                Figure 1
  ht

8,760




        Hmin              Ht



               Figure 2
