                            Do Higher Salaries Buy Better Teachers?

                         by Eric A. Hanushek, John F. Kain, and Steven G. Rivkin

        Do higher salaries raise the quality of teaching? Many influential reports and proposals advocate

substantial salary increases as a means of attracting and retaining more talented teachers in the public

schools and of encouraging harder work by current teachers. Salary policies have also been cited as

important for offsetting changes in demands outside of schools and for dealing with the potentially

unattractive working conditions often identified in central city schools.

        The empirical evidence on the link between teacher quality and pay is, however, decidedly mixed—

raising doubts that there is a strong relationship between the two. Direct analyses of student achievement,

for example, provide limited evidence of any systematic relationship. Two explanations have emerged in

response to this evidence. On the one hand, some argue that the true relationship between teacher quality

and salaries is quite strong, but methodological and data problems have impeded the identification of salary

effects. Others take a less sanguine position, arguing that the evidence captures accurately the weak

performance incentives in the public schools that lead administrators to make hiring and retention decisions

that are not strongly linked with teacher quality.1 The evidence is quite strong on one point: teacher quality

is an important determinant of achievement (e.g., Rivkin, Hanushek, and Kain 1998).

        There are four main methodological problems that impede the estimation of the true relationship

between teacher quality and salaries. Perhaps the most important is the difficulty of measuring teacher

quality, because both direct measures of teacher characteristics and indirect measures based on student

performance have proved problematic. Secondly, understanding the effects of salary policies requires

distinguishing between shifts in salary schedules and movements along a given schedule (with, for example,

increases in teacher experience), but this has proved generally difficult to do in past empirical work.


   1
    Loeb and Page (1998) emphasize the difficulty of identifying salary effects, and argue that
methodological problems lead to inconsistent estimates of the relationship between quality and pay. On the
other side, Ballou and Podgursky (1997) provide evidence that school administrators do not hire the best
teaching candidates, thereby weakening the link between quality and pay.
Thirdly, because of tenure arrangements and the reluctance of schools to hire older teachers, the teacher

labor market is far from fluid, and the entire recent history of pay levels in addition to current pay influence

the composition of teachers. Finally, the likely existence of compensating differentials for different working

conditions complicates the interpretation of observed salary differentials across districts and states.

        This paper employs a unique matched panel data set of teachers and students in Texas in an effort

to understand more fully the dynamics of the teacher labor market and the true impact of salaries on teacher

quality. The multiple cohorts of students and teachers, complete with repeated student achievement

measures and teacher test scores, are particularly useful for addressing the key methodological issues.

        The empirical analysis is divided into two interrelated parts. In part one, we study the relationship

among mobility, district pay and other district characteristics by investigating the determinants of

transitions both between and out of Texas public schools. The pattern of teacher transitions provides strong

evidence that teachers prefer particular student characteristics and somewhat weaker evidence that salaries

affect transitions, particularly when compensating factors are taken into account. Nevertheless, because it

is quite difficult to isolate the labor supply relationships from demand side influences, the transition results

are not clear estimates of the causal link between pay, student demographics and the supply of teachers.

        In part two we examine the relationship between teacher quality and pay. The finding that mobility

is partially related to pay suggests that teachers respond to pay differences, but the crucial question is

whether districts select higher quality teachers when the applicant pool expands. Currently little is known

about selection rules of schools and how they interact with teacher supply. We utilize two separate

approaches in an effort to identify fundamental features of the quality/salary relationship. First, we estimate

the relationship between teacher test scores and starting salaries for four cohorts of new teachers using

district fixed effects. This methodology has the advantage that past salary levels are not relevant to the

quality of first year teachers but the disadvantage that teacher test scores may not be a good measure of

quality. Second, we directly estimate the relationship between student achievement and district salary

                                                       -2-
schedules using both district and student fixed effects and controlling for student demographics.

Importantly, we concentrate on differences among salary schedules as distinct from movements along given

schedules. Overall, the results provide little support for the hypothesis that pay is an important determinant

of teacher quality. This finding is consistent with previous work on Texas schools that finds the majority of

variation in education quality exists within rather than between schools and therefore cannot be closely

linked with pay and other district or school wide factors.



Salaries and the Supply of Teacher Quality

         The standard microeconomic framework for analyzing teacher supply and salaries would began

with individual labor supply decisions and aggregate these up to a market supply function. The supply of

labor to district d within a geographical area j can be characterized by:

                                        qdjS = f ( wd , WCd , A j , O j )


where qS is the supply of teacher quality for district d in area j; wd and WCd are wages and working

conditions, respectively, in district d; and Aj and Oj are amenities and other employment opportunities,

respectively, in area j.

         The other half of the market, by simple analogy to the theory of the firm, has schools making

maximizing decisions such as:

                                           max ∑ Pdi subject to
                                                    i




                                Pdi = g(qd , X d , Fdi )      [production function]



                                Bd = wd (qd ) + px X d         [budget constraint]




                                                        -3-
where GP is aggregate performance in district d across its students, i; X includes all other purchased

inputs to schooling; F is the family and peer inputs for district d; B is the district’s budget constraint; and

px is the price of purchased inputs. Solving this maximization problem would provide the demand by

district d for teacher quality as a function of wages and a host of other factors.

                                     qdD = g ( wdj ,...)     [teacher demand]


        Unfortunately, both anecdotal and empirical evidence raise doubts about the conception of schools

as classic outcome maximizers. First, there are serious questions about the objective function of schools,

i.e., what is being maximized. A benign form of this is typified by Brown and Saks (1973), who posit that

schools have preferences not only for average achievement but also for the distribution of achievement. A

less benign form would be a bureaucratic model (such as Niskanen 1971, 1975; Blais and Dion 1991)

which has school personnel maximizing budget or some other aspects of organization or resources, where

student achievement is not the primary focus. Second, the existence of state regulations or union contracts

with restrictive conditions could inhibit the optimization approach of schools. State teacher certification

requirements, tenure, salary profiles that differ from marginal productivity, and restrictions on other inputs

such as binding maximum class sizes are each examples of factors that could bound schools away from the

optimum. Third, at a basic level school decision makers may not fully understand the production function

and the effectiveness of different inputs. Consequently, rather than thinking of the labor demand functions

that would come out of a structure that optimizes aggregate achievement, it may be better to think of a

selection rule for teachers that combines various elements of the objectives of teachers and schools, of

districts’ ability to judge teacher quality, and of the characteristics of the local labor market.

        Regardless of whether schools act to maximize achievement or pursue other objectives, it is quite

difficult to identify separately the labor supply and demand (or selection) functions. Though we attempt to




                                                       -4-
draw inferences about supply responses from the observed pattern of teacher transitions, ultimately it is the

combination of supply and demand that determines the link between quality and pay.

          To fix the interpretation of the subsequent empirical work, we discuss briefly the most common

issues that arise in the investigation of teacher labor markets, and outline the approach used in this analysis.

Equation (1) describes the framework within which we examine these supply and demand side factors:

(1)                        qd* = h( wd* , Hd , WCd , Aj , O j , Ldj )


where H captures district hiring and retention practices and L captures worker skills and preferences and an

asterisk indicates the observed outcomes of teacher quality and wage decisions.

Teacher quality (q). Fundamental to all discussions of teacher labor markets and teacher salary policies is

the absence of clean measures of teacher quality. Available evidence indicates that direct measures of

teacher quality, based on schooling, experience, college attended or even teacher test scores account for

little of the variation in classroom performance (Hanushek 1997). This is not to say that these measures

have no explanatory power, and Ferguson (1991) and Ehrenberg and Brewer (1994) both find that

measured performance on teacher tests and college selectivity are systematically related to student

achievement, with test scores having the strongest link.2

          An alternative strategy uses information on student achievement itself as an indirect measure of

teacher quality. The finding that teacher salaries have a significant impact on student achievement would

imply that they have a significant effect on teacher quality. This strategy has great appeal, because it

circumvents the problem of identifying the specific teacher characteristics that measure quality. However,




      2
     The evidence suggests that test scores provide more information about teacher quality than either
college selectivity or highest degree earned. Test scores have been used to measure the quality of people
training to be teachers (Weaver 1983; Manski 1987; Murnane et al, 1991; Hanushek and Pace 1995;
Strauss 1998). Such test measures are frequently related to state requirements for teacher certification and
even for entry into teacher training programs (see Strauss 1998).

                                                      -5-
use of student achievement measures introduces a separate set of issues, and the inconclusive evidence on

the effects of salaries on achievement is often attributed to shortcomings of data and methodology.3

        In this paper we use both teacher test scores and student achievement to identify the relationship

between quality and salaries. Two certification tests are taken by the majority of new elementary school

teachers, and these tests are used as direct measures of quality. In the analysis of student achievement, the

availability of repeated test score observations permits the use of fixed effects models that control for

unobserved differences in the rate at which students acquire skills, and the large amount of information on

schools can be used to control for school influences on achievement other than salaries.

Salaries (wd). A fundamentally important issue in the consideration of teacher labor markets is which

salary differences to look at and how they should be interpreted.4 At any point in time, teacher wages will

vary within a district. These wage differences reflect different components of teacher salary contracts

involving experience, graduate education levels, and a variety of other factors. Observing these wage

differences provides information about movements along a supply schedule, but it does not provide

information about what would happen if the entire salary schedule were shifted. Much of the analysis of

achievement effects of salaries, for example, has considered differences in wages along a salary schedule or

combined movements along schedules with changes in the overall salary structure (Hanushek 1997), while

much of the policy debate focuses on the level of the entire salary schedule.5 A related consideration


   3
    Loeb and Page (1998) emphasize the issue of compensating differentials; Betts (1996), Grogger (1996)
and Hanushek, Rivkin and Taylor (1996) point to specification error introduced by omitted variables
biases; and Card and Krueger (1997) focus on the appropriate measure of achievement.
   4
    Fringe benefits are an important and growing share of compensation, and differences in the generosity
of benefits is certainly not perfectly correlated with salary differences. Unfortunately, we, like all past
researchers, do not have information on fringe benefits.
   5
    There has also been a substantial amount of discussion about the use of teacher pay as a direct
incentive for better performance by individual teachers. See Cohen and Murnane (1986) and Hanushek et al
(1994) for discussions of merit pay. There is little evidence of systematic variation in salaries based on
performance in Texas schools, although a number of districts are moving in that direction.

                                                      -6-
involves intertemporal issues in the measurement of salaries. Rigidities in the teacher labor market mean

that the history of salaries along with expectations for the future rather than just the current salary

influence the existing stock of teachers. This is a particular problem for analyses that identify teacher

salary effects by inter-temporal changes in salaries within states or districts, because past salaries

undoubtably affect the current composition of teachers.6

        By constructing annual salary schedules for single years of experience in each district over only

teachers who do not have a graduate degree, we can isolate the effects of both cross-sectional and inter-

temporal variations in overall salary levels.7 Importantly, in the analysis of teacher test scores, we restrict

the sample to new teachers thereby circumventing the difficulty of aggregating across the time path of

district salary structures (cf. Murnane et al., 1991). The analysis of student achievement does use

contemporaneous salaries, and the fixed effect specifications are identified on the basis of changes in salary

over a short period of time. We perform a detailed sensitivity analysis in an effort to identify potential

problems introduced by the use of panel data.

Hiring and Retention Policies (Hd). While the relationship between salaries and employment is observed,

it is not possible to infer a priori that the relationship is a “supply function” for teachers. Rather district

hiring and retention practices are an important element in the labor market for teachers. This issue, made

forcefully in a set of recent analyses (Ballou and Podgursky 1995, 1997 and Ballou 1996), is very

important because it frames the interpretation of movements observed in the market. For example, the

observation that retention and salaries are negatively related (controlling for all compensating differentials)




   6
    Both Card and Krueger (1992) and Loeb and Page (1998) use state panels to identify the effects of
salaries.
   7
    We generally evaluate salary schedules at entry. Subsequently investigation shows that the results are
not affected by considering salary differences for more experienced teachers. We have not investigated the
possibility that salary increments for master’s degrees vary systematically across districts.

                                                       -7-
is consistent with a positively sloped supply curve and a positive relationship between salaries and the

probability that districts will not rehire teachers.

        The fact that districts may not hire and retain the best teachers does not eliminate the usefulness of

studying the relationship between student achievement and salaries. It merely changes the interpretation to

acknowledge that the results are conditional on personnel practices. However, to make inferences about

salary effects on teacher labor markets, we must assume that the level or the rate of change of teacher

salaries are not systematically related to the efficiency of personnel decisions. If this assumption is violated,

a finding that salaries and achievement are positively related could simply result from high salaried districts

having better administrators and not from any impact of salaries on the supply of teacher quality.

        In this paper we use district fixed effects and other sample restrictions to remove any time invariant

differences in hiring and retention procedures, such as those caused by differences in teacher

representation.8 In addition, we include indicator variables for newly hired principals and superintendents in

order to control for any systematic differences in hiring practices that accompany the change in

administrators.

Alternative Earnings Opportunities and Amenities(Oj ,Aj ). It is long established that one must account for

differences in alternative opportunities for teachers. This is clearest in consideration of differential

competition for specific teachers, say math and science teachers versus those in other specialities (e.g.,

Kershaw and McKean 1962; Zarkin 1985; Murnane et al., 1991). It also comes into play in terms of

consideration of the set of districts that form the relevant decision set. If areas differ by prices or amenities

or if labor markets are geographically confined, the salaries must be considered in comparison to the

relevant set. This point, made by Chambers (1977) and Ferguson (1991), provides information on the



   8
    Hoxby (1996) finds that the relationship between achievement and resources varies by district
unionization status. In Texas, collective bargaining by teachers is prohibited by law, but this does not
eliminate concerns about differential productivity across districts.

                                                       -8-
specification of the wage and compensation comparisons. Important elements of the overall market factors

are also highlighted in Flyer and Rosen (1997) and Boardman, Darling-Hammond, and Mullin (1982).

        The empirical evidence supports the belief that alternative earnings opportunities affect teacher

labor supply. In a series of papers, Dolton and van der Klaauw (forthcoming) and van der Klaaw (1997)

investigate the impact of alternative opportunities on teacher transitions. They find evidence that

opportunity wages affect the probabilities of both entry and exit. These results are consistent with earlier

work by Murnane and Olsen (1989, 1990), which found that opportunity wages affected duration in

teaching in both Michigan and North Carolina.

        In this paper, differences in alternative wage opportunities are addressed in two different ways.

First, a series of region and community type dummy variables that control for any geographic variation

across Texas in the wage structure are included in the empirical specifications. Second, the inclusions of

student and district fixed effects effectively removes any time invariant differences in opportunity wages.

Working Conditions (WCd). Much has been made of the fact that there is more to a teaching job than just

the overall salary or compensation levels. Some of the earliest work considered how teacher preferences

might affect the selection of schools (Greenberg and McCall 1974; Murnane 1981). More generally,

teachers might be willing to take lower salaries to obtain better conditions in their schools, a proposition

first found in Antos and Rosen (1975) and subsequently pursued in a variety of other analyses (e.g., Baugh

and Stone 1982). Some have interpreted the push for lower class sizes by teachers as reflecting an element

of teacher compensation, as opposed to an educational policy designed to improve student achievement (cf.

Grissmer and Kirby 1992).

        If differences in working conditions are not accounted for and they are correlated with salaries,

estimates of the relationship between achievement and salaries will confound salary influences with those of

other factors that affect teacher labor supply. For example, if salaries are higher in urban districts and

teachers prefer suburban districts, estimates of teacher salary effects on achievement confound the impacts

                                                      -9-
of salary and community type unless adequate controls for community type are included. Loeb and Page

(1998) argue that the failure to account for differences in working and labor market conditions explains

why many studies fail to identify the true relationship between achievement and salaries.

        A central element of the empirical analysis here is the description of movements of teachers across

different types of schools and student populations in order to study the preferences of teachers and the form

in which compensating wage differentials are played out. Four measures of student characteristics that may

affect teacher labor supply are included: district percent low income, percent Black, percent Hispanic, and

average student achievement score. These characteristics capture both temporal and cross-sectional

differences in specifications that do not include district fixed effects, and changes over time in

specifications that include fixed effects.

Worker Skills and Preferences (Ldj). The discussions of alternative earnings opportunities and working

conditions focused on differences in opportunities and constraints that teachers face, but it is also possible

that worker productivity and preferences may vary geographically. For example, consider the case in which

average skills of college graduates are higher in region 1 than region 2 and teachers are drawn from the

same place in each region’s skill distribution. In this case relative teacher salaries would be identical, but

average teacher quality would be higher in region 1. A second example concerns preferences. Even if

average skills, working conditions and relative wages are identical in two regions, one region may have

higher quality teachers than another if there are differences in the value placed on the occupation of teacher.

A third possibility arises if there are regional differences in the share of workers who teach.

        The complications introduced by differences in skills and preferences may be substantial in cross-

sectional studies that make use of national data sets and in panel data sets with a number of years between

observations. In the Texas data, however, removing regional means should capture differences in worker

characteristics in specifications that do not include district fixed effects, and the fixed effects should

account for any differences in worker characteristics that are significantly related to teacher salaries.

                                                       -10-
The Texas Database

        The ability to understand the character and outcomes of teacher labor market activities derives

from the unique data base developed under the UTD Texas Schools Project, an undertaking conceived of

and directed by John Kain. Working with the Texas Education Agency (TEA), this project has combined

different data sources to compile matched panel data sets on students and teachers. The samples contain

entire cohorts of Texas students and the universe of teachers in each year. While the data do not provide

linkages of individual students and specific teachers, they do allow matching of students and teachers by

school and grade for each year.

        The Public Education Information Management System, TEA’s state-wide educational data base,

reports key demographic data including race, ethnicity and gender for both students and teachers as well as

student eligibility for a subsidized lunch. It also contains detailed annual information on teacher

experience, salary, education, class size, grade, population served and subject. Importantly, this data base

can be merged with information on both student and teacher achievement. Beginning in 1993, the Texas

Assessment of Academic Skills (TAAS) was administered each spring to eligible students enrolled in

grades three through eight.9 These criterion referenced tests, which evaluate student mastery of grade-

specific subject matter, are merged with the student and teacher information. We concentrate on reading

and mathematics performance, subjects that are examined in all grades.10



   9
     Many special education students are exempted from the tests, as are other students for whom the test
would not be educationally appropriate. In each year roughly 15 percent of students do not take the tests,
either because of an exemption or because of repeated absences on testing days. We exclude participants in
bilingual or special education programs from the achievement analysis. For an explicit analysis of the
achievement of special education students, see Hanushek, Kain, and Rivkin (1998).
   10
     Reading and math tests each contain approximately 50 questions, although the number of questions
and average percent correctly answered varies across time and grades. We transform all test results into
standardized scores with a mean of zero and variance equal to one. The bottom one percent of test scores
and the top and bottom one percent of test score gains across years are trimmed from the sample in order to
reduce measurement error.

                                                     -11-
        New teachers in Texas must take and eventually pass teacher certification tests. The majority of

elementary school teachers examined in this study write two specific tests: the elementary school

comprehensive test and the professional development test. Each is a criterion referenced test that focuses on

pedagogy. We have transformed the scores into percentile measures to indicate better the location of school

average teacher quality in the overall quality distribution.

        Empirical salary schedules are constructed for each school district using the teacher microdata for

the years 1993 to 1996. Emphasis on district schedules reflects our interest in the effects of shifts in salary

schedules. Each district’s constructed salary schedule corresponds to the median salary of primary school

teachers for the first ten single years of experience for all regular teachers without advanced degrees. The

detailed panel data for each district and for individual teachers permit an unusual opportunity to address

concerns about measurement error.11,12




   11
     The cells for graduate degrees and for years of experience above ten become too thin in many districts
to provide reliable salary information. We first employ median salaries because of concerns about coding
errors leading to extreme values in salary. Further, we examined each district that experienced nominal
median salary decreases either over time at any level of experience or across higher experience categories in
any given year. We excluded individual teachers whose salary observations appeared to be unreflective of
base salaries, but, if it was not possible to detect obvious errors, the district/experience/year cell was coded
as missing. There was also substantial error in the teacher experience variable, exemplified by
inconsistencies in reported experience for individual teachers over time. If a single year did not conform to
an otherwise consistent string for an individual teacher, reported experience for that year was changed.
Otherwise, reported experience was left unchanged. Error was also introduced by inconsistencies in district
adjustments for part time teachers, and obvious mistakes were corrected.
   12
      The salary information excludes a variety of special pay provisions for individual teachers. Districts
offer a variety of individual extra pay opportunities, generally involving extra duties. Over 85 percent of
the observed teachers receive no extra pay, and the median for those receiving it is approximately $1,000.
(Given the errors in reporting the salary data, however, our base pay measure may well include some
portion of extra pay). While we do not address these issues here, it is possible that some districts regularly
and openly reward individual teachers or groups of teachers through extra pay channels. In such a case,
extra pay may provide additional incentives affecting labor market behavior. For 90 percent of all districts,
less than a quarter of all teachers receive any extra pay. Nonetheless, for 3½ percent of the Texas districts,
over half of the teachers receive some extra pay.

                                                      -12-
Teacher Mobility, Salaries and Student Demographics

        While teacher quality is known to be a primary determinant of student achievement, the leverage

that a school district has to improve the stock and performance of its teachers through compensation, class

size and other non-pecuniary job characteristics is surprisingly unclear. In a competitive achievement-

maximizing system, the collection of compensation, resources, alternative employment opportunities and

district amenities would interact to determine the allocation of teachers, and districts with the most to offer

among competing schools would get the best teachers. But, available evidence raises questions about the

quality of teacher selection, suggesting that the actual distribution of teacher quality reflects the variation in

hiring and retention policies as well as ability to pay and to provide other amenities.13 We begin with an

analysis of the patterns of teacher moves in order to sort out the relative attractiveness of different districts.

Transitions Between and Within Districts (1993-96)

        A primary goal of our mobility analyses is sorting out the separate influences of salary and other

determinants of job attractiveness. Teachers are observed moving within districts, between districts, and out

of Texas public schools entirely annually between 1993 and 1996. Importantly, we have information about

salaries and student characteristics for both the sending and receiving schools for each transition.

        Similar to job turnover patterns for the labor market as a whole, transitions differ sharply by

teacher experience. Table 1 indicates that mobility is much higher among probationary teachers (0-2 years

of experience), who are almost twice as likely as prime age teachers (11-30 years experience) to exit Texas

public schools and over four times as likely to switch districts. As expected, mobility picks up again as

teachers near retirement age, and almost one fourth of teachers with over thirty years of experience leave




   13
     For example, Ballou (1996) demonstrates that schools do not systematically choose applicants with
the strongest academic backgrounds or cognitive abilities. Murnane et al. (1991) describes the high
variance in the information obtained about applicants and in the selection procedures of districts.

                                                       -13-
the Texas public schools each year. Overall 79 percent of teachers remain in the same school, 14 percent

exit Texas public schools,14 4 percent change schools within districts, and 3 percent



Table 1. Year-to-year Transitions of Teachers by Experience, 1993-1996


                                     Percent of Teachers Who


                                   change
                                   schools
   Teacher                                                         exit Texas
                 remain in         within           switch                         Number of
  Experience                                                         public
                same school         same           districts                        teachers
                                                                    schools
                                   district



   0-2 years       71.2              5.0             5.8             18.0               73,261

   3-5 years       75.1              4.8             4.1             15.9               55,072

  6-10 years       79.2              4.6             2.8             13.5               60,831

  11-30 years      84.0              3.9             1.4             10.8           166,487

   >30 years       72.8              2.4             0.4             24.4               7,207

        All        79.1              4.3             2.9             13.7           376,078




switch districts each year. This mobility is somewhat higher than national averages which indicate that 86

percent of all teachers remained in the same school, while only 6.6 percent left teaching between 1994 and

1995 (U.S. Department of Education, 1997). Part of the discrepancy is explicable. Our calculations for

exiting from Texas public schools include people leaving teaching plus people teaching either in private




   14
     While we observe all teacher movements within Texas public schools, any teacher entering a private
school or leaving the state for public schools elsewhere is combined with teachers leaving the profession
entirely.

                                                    -14-
schools or outside of the state. The national patterns of mobility across experience categories do follow a

similar pattern to that in Texas.

        The pattern of moves tends to contradict the conventional wisdom that large urban districts are the

proving ground for teachers, who move to suburban jobs when possible. Table 2, restricted to those

changing districts, provides only weak support of the belief that teachers commonly leave urban districts

for suburban positions. Among teachers in large urban districts, the majority of those switching




                                                    -15-
Table 2. Destination Community Type for Teachers Changing Districts, by Origin Community Type and Teacher Experience Level




                                           % of Teachers Who Move to                                                 Change in share
    Origin Community                                                                                                  of teachers by
                                                                                  Number Teachers   Percent of All
    Type and Teacher                                                                                                 community type
                                                                                    Changing          Teachers
        Experience                                                                                                     1993-1996
                                                                                     Districts
                                Rural      Large Urban   Small Urban   Suburban



I. All Teachers
Rural                           63.4             4.6        7.8          24.2         4,529              3.6              -0.8

Large Urban                     20.8             11.6       9.6          58.0         1,359              1.9              0.8

Small Urban                     28.8             10.6       12.8         47.8         1,184              2.4              -0.2

Suburban                        24.4             12.9       12.3         50.5         3,786              2.7              0.0


II. Probationary Teachers (0-2 yrs experience)


Rural                           58.5             5.3        8.1          28.1         1,803              8.0              -1.7

Large Urban                     16.4             11.2       10.6         61.7          517               3.8              2.1

Small Urban                     25.3             11.8       13.2         49.7          509               5.2              -0.9

Suburban                        21.0             14.5       11.7         52.8         1,450              5.3              0.5




                                                                       -16-
districts does relocate to suburban schools, but overall less than two percent of teachers in large urban

districts move across districts in each year. The absolute number moving into urban districts is only

slightly smaller than the number moving out.15

              The bottom panel of Table 2 shows that a very similar pattern of movement holds for the

subsample of probationary teachers, where again the net outflow from urban districts is small. Overall,

probationary urban teachers are only one percentage point less likely to remain in the same school as

probationary suburban teachers (71 versus 72 percent), and this is an identical gap to that for teachers of

all experience levels. Two significant differences between new teachers starting in urban and starting in

suburban districts do exist: Probationary urban teachers are roughly 3.5 percentage points more likely to

exit teaching than teachers in suburban districts (not shown), while probationary suburban teachers are

somewhat more likely simply to switch schools within districts.

              Movement from rural districts follows a very distinct pattern. The majority of movers goes to a

different rural district. Significantly fewer rural teachers move to urban districts than is the case for

teachers initially in urban or suburban districts.

              These aggregate transition rates among community types provide no information on the actual

changes in salary and student composition. Tables 3, 4 and 5 report in increasing detail the relationship

between pre-move and post-move salaries and student characteristics for teachers who switch schools and

districts. Each table concentrates on how the average of specific characteristics (C) change with a move

from district d to district d', calculated as


(2)        ∆ Cd ,d ' = ( Ctd ' − Ctd )




      15
     During this period the share of Texas teachers in urban districts increased, implying that the small net
outflow of teachers from urban districts is not simply a reflection of changes in the distribution of teaching
positions across community types.

                                                         -17-
where year t is the first year in the new district.

        The salary changes are computed by single years of experience. For example, the salary change for

a moving teacher with four years of experience equals the district average salary of 5th year teachers in the

new district minus the district average salary of 5th year teachers in the old district, both calculated in the

year of the change. Because consistent salary schedule information is only available for teachers with ten or

fewer years of experience, all teachers with more experience are excluded from these tables. (Roughly

three-fourths of teachers switching districts have less than 10 years of experience).

        Table 3 reports change in salaries and district average student demographic characteristics by

experience and gender. The top panel indicates that on average probationary teachers who move improve

their salaries relative to what they would have earned in the initial district. Men gain 1.4 percent in salary

with a move, while women gain half that amount.16 The average salary gain declines with experience, and

the difference is statistically insignificant for more experienced teachers.17 The gain averaged across all

movers with less than ten years of experience is 0.4 percent of annual salary at the time of the move.

        Because compensating differentials could conceal the true change in salary holding other factors

constant, we attempt to control for other determinants of teacher labor supply. Log salary at each

experience level is regressed on 19 region dummies, 3 community type dummies, the district average




   16
     Because women are more likely to be married or have children than men of the same age, the smaller
gains of women may reflect the fact that more transitions are precipitated by family considerations.
However, we have no information on reason for moving or family status.
   17
    We present the analysis in terms of teacher experience, but tenure within the district may also have
separate implications for salary and other factors that affect satisfaction and mobility.

                                                      -18-
Table 3. Average Change in Salary and Student Characteristics for Teachers Changing Districts, by Gender and Experience


                                              men                                        women                               all

                          0-2 years         3-5 years    6-9 years           0-2 years    3-5 years    6-9 years           0-9 years
                         experience        experience   experience          experience   experience   experience          experience

log base year              0.014             0.009       -0.003               0.007       -0.002       -0.002               0.004
salary                    (0.004)           (0.005)      (0.007)             (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.002)             (0.001)

Salary                     0.013             0.020       -0.002               0.007        0.004       -0.002               0.006
Residual                  (0.003)           (0.004)      (0.006)             (0.001)      (0.002)      (0.002)             (0.001)

District Average Student Characteristics

 Average Test              0.064            0.074        0.036               0.087        0.092        0.075               0.080
 Score                     (0.01)           (0.02)       (0.02)              (0.01)       (0.01)       (0.01)              (0.00)

 % Hispanic                -6.0              -6.2         -2.3                -5.2         -5.3         -4.2                -5.0
                           (1.0)             (1.5)        (1.8)               (0.4)        (0.6)        (0.6)               (0.3)

 % Black                   -5.0              -2.2          0.5                -2.8         -2.9         -2.9                -2.6
                           (0.6)             (0.9)        (1.1)               (0.3)        (0.4)        (0.4)               (0.2)

 % Subsidized              -6.0              -5.3         -2.4                -7.3         -2.4         -6.1                -6.6
 Lunch                     (0.9)             (1.5)        (1.7)               (0.4)        (0.6)        (0.6)               (0.3)




                                                                     -19-
achievement score, and the district average percentages of Black, Hispanic and low income students,18 The

residuals from these regressions provide salary measures adjusted for differences in working conditions,

amenities and local labor markets.

        Consistent with the existence of compensating differentials, the second row of Table 3 shows that

adjusted salaries increase by 50 percent more than raw salaries on average, though there is substantial

variation in the pattern of results across experience and gender. Not surprisingly, the strongest support for

presence of compensating differentials comes from teachers who move among urban and suburban districts.

Table 4 shows that teachers who move from large urban to suburban schools experience average raw

salary decreases of .65 percent but average adjusted salary increases of 1.4 percent.19 Similarly, the

residual salary increase is three times as large as the raw salary increase for teachers who switch among

suburban districts.

        In contrast to the small changes in salary, the bottom panel of Table 3 provides strong evidence

that teachers systematically favor higher achieving, non-minority, non-low income students. The findings

for achievement are the clearest and most consistent across gender and experience categories, showing that

the district average achievement rises by roughly .08 standard deviations for the average mover. The

percentages Black, Hispanic and eligible for a subsidized lunch also decline for movers, though there is

more variation across experience categories.

        Similar to the pattern for salaries, Table 4 reveals dramatic changes in district average student

characteristics for teachers who move from urban to suburban districts, including a 0.35 standard



   18
     The achievement score is the average of math and reading scores. These regressions explain about 60
percent of the raw variance in log salaries, and the district student characteristics are significantly related to
salaries. Standard errors in the tables have not been adjusted for the fact that these are residuals.
   19
    The residual salaries control for interregional price differences but not for intraregional differences
such as commonly observed housing price gradients. Thus, these estimates quite likely understate the fully
compensated differences in salary.

                                                      -20-
Table 4. Average Change in Salary and in District and Campus Student Characteristics for Teachers with 0-9 Years of Experience who
Change Districts, by Community Type of Origin and Destination District


                                                                                       Average Student Characteristics
      Origin            Destination                                                       % eligible
    Community           Community                                            test
                                             log base       residual                    for subsidized
      Type                Type                                              score                          % Black       % Hispanic
                                              salary         salary                          lunch

    1. District Average Characteristics

   Large Urban           Suburban           -0.0065          0.014           0.35           -23.9           -15.1          -18.8
                                            (0.0024)        (0.002)         (0.01)          (0.9)           (0.6)          (0.9)

     Suburban            Suburban            0.0021          0.006           0.12           -9.5            -4.1           -7.0
                                            (0.0019)        (0.002)         (0.01)          (0.6)           (0.4)          (0.6)

    2. Campus Average Characteristics

   Large Urban           Suburban                                            0.34           -24.3           -15.5          -19.0
                                                                            (0.02)          (1.3)           (1.3)          (1.4)

   Large Urban          Large Urban                                          0.13           -9.6            -3.4           -5.3
                       (same district)                                      (0.01)          (0.7)           (0.8)          (0.8)




                                                                  -21-
deviation rise in average achievement. Perhaps more surprising, teachers who move among suburban

districts also experience similar, albeit smaller, changes in student characteristics than found in the urban-

suburban moves: district average achievement rises by more than one tenth of a standard deviation, and the

percentages Black, Hispanic and eligible for a subsidized lunch all decline.

        The bottom panel of Table 4 calculates the changes in campus average student characteristics

rather than district averages. There is little evidence in the first row of the panel that teachers who move

from urban to suburban districts experience larger changes than the differential between district averages.

In other words, urban-suburban movers appear to retain their same relative position in the two districts. On

the other hand, teachers who move within urban districts experience a substantial increase in average

achievement and a decline in percent minority and percent eligible for a subsidized lunch.

        Distinct differences appear in the transition patterns of Black and Hispanic teachers. Table 5

reveals that Black teachers tend to move to schools with higher Black enrollment shares than the schools

they left, regardless of whether they change districts or not. In addition, the change in average test scores is

much smaller for Black and Hispanic Teachers. On the other hand, the average change in percent Hispanic

experienced by Hispanic teachers is quite similar in direction and magnitude to the changes experienced by

teachers as a whole.20

        It is important to recognize that the changes in salaries and student demographics reflect both

teacher preferences and district hiring and retention decisions. Because some teacher transitions result from

involuntary job separations, these figures likely understate teacher preferences for both higher salaries and

specific student characteristics.




   20
    We look at annual changes, but Kain and Singleton (1996) show that these moving patterns
accumulate and interact with new hiring to produce significant differences in teacher characteristics for
Black and white students, even across campuses within individual districts.

                                                      -22-
Table 5. Average Change in Salary and in District and Campus Student Characteristics for Black
and Hispanic Teachers with 0-9 Years of Experience who Change Campuses

                                Average Student Characteristics
                                  % eligible                                          Number of
 Race/ethnicity
                                      for                                              teachers
  of teacher         test
                                  subsidized       % Black           % Hispanic        moving
                    score
                                    lunch

1. Between Districts Moves

Blacks             -0.01             -1.3              5.8              -5.0             254
                   (0.03)            (1.9)            (2.5)             (1.9)

Hispanics           0.02             -4.9              0.2              -5.5            1,207
                   (0.01)            (0.8)            (0.5)             (0.9)

2. Within Districts Moves

Blacks              0.01             -4.0              3.8              -6.0             464
                   (0.02)            (1.1)            (1.6)             (1.4)

Hispanics           0.03             -5.3             -0.7              -2.8            1,360
                   (0.01)            (0.6)            (0.4)             (0.5)




         To summarize the effects on students, Table 6 reports simple school average transition rates at

different points in the distribution of student and district characteristics. The table shows that teachers in

schools in the top quartile of real salaries are 3 percentage points less likely to exit the public schools and

almost 1 percentage point less likely to switch districts than teachers in the bottom quartile schools.

Teachers in the top salary quartile are also somewhat less likely to switch schools within districts.

         The most dramatic differences in school transition rates are related to student achievement.

Teacher transition rates for schools in the bottom achievement quartile are much higher than those in the

top quartile. Over 25 percent of teachers in the bottom quartile schools leave each year, while in the top

quartile schools less than 20 percent leave. The largest difference is in the probability of exiting public

schools entirely. These differences imply that the lowest achieving students are more likely to


                                                      -23-
Table 6. School Average Transition Rates by Distribution of Residual Teacher Salary and
Student Demographic Characteristics (data weighted by number of teachers in school)

                                   Probability
                                                              Probability                Probability
                                     teachers
                                                               teachers                   teachers
       quartile of                move to new
                                                              move to new                exit public
       distribution                   school
                                                                district                   schools
                                 (within district)
Residual Salary
     1st                              5.0%                       3.3%                      16.7%
     2nd                              4.6%                       3.2%                      14.7%
     3rd                              4.9%                       2.8%                      14.2%
     4th                              4.2%                       2.5%                      13.7%
Average test score
     1st                              4.4%                       3.4%                      17.4%
     2nd                              3.8%                       3.6%                      15.0%
     3rd                              3.2%                       3.0%                      14.1%
     4th                              3.3%                       2.5%                      12.7%
% elig for free lunch
     1st                              3.8%                       2.3%                      12.8%
     2nd                              3.0%                       3.3%                      14.7%
     3rd                              3.4%                       3.7%                      15.0%
     4th                              4.7%                       3.0%                      16.6%
% Black
     1st                              3.4%                       3.6%                      16.2%
     2nd                              3.7%                       2.7%                      13.4%
     3rd                              3.6%                       2.8%                      13.6%
     4th                              4.1%                       3.3%                      15.8%
% Hispanic
     1st                              3.3%                       3.1%                      14.1%
     2nd                              3.8%                       3.1%                      14.3%
     3rd                              3.5%                       3.2%                      14.7%
     4th                              4.3%                       3.1%                      16.5%



Note: The quartile divisions are calculated using the number of teachers as weights for the size of each
school. Differences in average class sizes imply that these weights do not exactly capture enrollment
differences, but data on enrollment were not available for all schools in all years.




                                                     -24-
have teachers new to the school and to the profession, and evidence from Texas strongly suggests that this

will adversely affect achievement (Rivkin, Hanushek, and Kain, 1998).

Transition Regressions

        The previous descriptive information on moves does not take into account the joint effects of the

various influences. Table 7 presents reduced form estimates for linear models of the probability of leaving

a district (either switching districts or exiting from the Texas public schools) as a function of the combined

teacher and district characteristics.21 Separate estimates are computed by experience categories in order to

allow for differences in preferences, family circumstances and job security. The direct salary effects are

strongest for younger teachers: a 10 percent increase in salary is associated with a 2 percent decrease in

the probability of leaving the district for probationary teachers and 1 percent decrease for teachers with 3 to

5 years of experience.

        The multivariate analysis roughly follows the previously presented descriptive tables. Higher

average student achievement significantly reduces the probability of moving or exiting Texas public

schools at all levels of experience. Non-minority teachers are more likely to move the higher are the Black

and Hispanic enrollment shares, although the only significant effects are related to percent Black students

for younger teachers. Exactly the opposite is true for Black and Hispanic teachers, who are less likely to

move the higher are these minority enrollment shares. There is little evidence of an independent effect of

percent eligible for a subsidized lunch. Finally, (not shown) there is little or no evidence that the

probability of moving is systematically related to average class size in any




   21
     Note that these regressions expand the focus to include teachers who exit Texas public schools in
addition to those who switch schools. In each year, more teachers exit than switch schools. All
specifications other than those that include district fixed effects include region, community type and year
dummies, school enrollment and average class size (measured for the available grades), number of
campuses in a district, and teacher gender, race/ethnicity, experience and experience squared. The district
fixed effect specifications drop the region and community type dummy variables.

                                                      -25-
Table 7. Effects of District Base Salary and Student Characteristics on Probability of Leaving
Current Campus, by Teacher Experience (Linear probability models with no district fixed effects;      t-
statistics in parentheses)

                                                           teacher experience
                           0-2 yrs         3-5 yrs              6-10 yrs      11-30 yrs   >30 years


    log base year           -0.19           -0.11                -0.01          -0.03       0.16
    salary                 [-3.89]         [-2.18]              [-0.18]        [-0.75]     [0.91]

Campus Average Student Characteristics

    Test Score             -0.036          -0.037               -0.041         -0.031      -0.051
                           [-3.58]         [-3.27]              [-4.01]        [-3.95]     [-2.31]

    % eligible for          0.00            -0.03                0.00           0.04        0.01
    subsidized lunch       [0.09]          [-1.09]              [0.16]         [1.24]      [0.15]

    % Black                 0.13            0.09                 0.03           0.01        -0.09
                           [4.75]          [3.30]               [0.98]         [0.52]      [-1.54]

    % Hispanic              0.03            0.05                 -0.01          -0.03       -0.09
                           [1.01]          [1.36]               [-0.22]        [-0.67]     [-1.27]

Interactions with Race/ethnicity of Teacher

    Black *                 -0.26           -0.17                -0.10          -0.08       0.08
    % Black                [-8.24]         [-4.68]              [-2.92]        [-3.68]     [1.29]

    Black *                 -0.14           -0.04                -0.05          -0.06       0.10
    % Hispanic             [-3.68]         [-0.88]              [-1.88]        [-4.08]     [1.46]

    Hispanic *              -0.15           -0.04                -0.05          -0.06       0.10
    % Black                [-3.40]         [-0.86]              [-0.77]        [-2.21]     [1.96]

    Hispanic *              -0.12           -0.09                -0.07          -0.07       0.07
    % Hispanic             [-3.82]         [-2.79]              [-2.72]        [-2.92]     [0.68]

    observations           12,140          9.062                12,121         27,846      1,142




                                                    -26-
specification, raising doubt about the frequently hypothesized impact of smaller classes on teacher

decisions.22

        To consider unobserved district factors, we re-estimate the models with district fixed-effects that

remove the influence of any time invariant district factors. Table 8 shows that the magnitudes of the

coefficients on percent Black and percent Hispanic actually increase, suggesting that teachers respond more

strongly to changes in student demographics. The inclusion of fixed effects also raises the magnitude and

significance of the coefficient on eligibility for a subsidized lunch, but the direction of the effect is

inconsistent with a labor supply story in which teachers prefer districts with higher income children. More

likely, the negative relationship for subsidized lunch reflects institutional changes at schools related to

Texas school finance reform efforts. Schools with less wealthy student populations experienced revenue

increases during this period, money which may have been used to make teaching more attractive (in ways

not measured here).

        In contrast to the other variables and the findings of Murnane et al (1996), the significant salary

coefficients disappear once district fixed effects are included. It could be that the true impact of salaries is

quite small. Alternatively, there could be insufficient salary variations across time, or the effects of hiring

and retention policies could cancel out the labor supply response to higher salaries. For example, districts

that raise salaries may also introduce more rigorous hiring and retention criteria, or they may experience an

unobserved worsening of working conditions. Overall, the pattern of salary changes




   22
     Multinomial logit estimates (shown in Appendix Table A1) indicate that teacher salary is much more
strongly related to the probability of switching districts (relative to remaining) than to the probability of
exiting the Texas public schools. The pattern of transitions related to the percent of students who are Black,
including the interactions with teacher race/ethnicity, are similar to those of the earlier tables, while the
percent eligible for a subsidized lunch is positively related to the probability of switching districts.


                                                       -27-
Table 8. Effects of District Base Salary and Student Characteristics on Probability of Leaving
Current Campus, by Teacher Experience (Linear probability models with district fixed effects, t-
statistics in parentheses)

                                                           teacher experience
                           0-2 yrs         3-5 yrs              6-10 yrs      11-30 yrs   >30 years


    log base year           0.06            -0.03                -0.06          0.00        0.35
    salary                 [0.73]          [-0.22]              [-0.44]        [0.04]      [0.60]

Campus Average Student Characteristics

    Test Score             -0.030          -0.029               -0.036         -0.026      -0.056
                           [-2.56]         [-2.72]              [-3.09]        [-2.88]     [-2.48]

    % eligible for          -0.06           -0.07                -0.05          0.00        -0.05
    subsidized lunch       [-2.59]         [-2.87]              [-1.95]        [-0.20]     [-0.60]

    % Black                 0.20            0.16                 0.12           0.06        -0.09
                           [7.68]          [5.74]               [5.12]         [4.15]      [-1.05]

    % Hispanic              0.10            0.12                 0.09           0.04        -0.05
                           [3.44]          [3.55]               [3.32]         [1.72]      [-0.51]

Interactions with Race/ethnicity of Teacher

    Black *                 -0.26           -0.18                -0.10          -0.06       0.12
    % Black                [-7.86]         [-4.95]              [-3.34]        [-3.24]     [1.68]

    Black *                 -0.14           -0.03                -0.06          -0.05      -0.09
    % Hispanic             [-3.64]         [-0.74]              [-2.21]        [-4.50]     [1.12]

    Hispanic *              -0.16           -0.07                -0.09          -0.07       0.28
    % Black                [-3.79]         [-1.52]              [-1.50]        [-2.27]     [1.25]

    Hispanic *             -0.12           -0.08                -0.07          -0.07       -0.02
    % Hispanic             [-4.51]         [-2.88]             [-2.90]         [-4.28]     [-0.15]

Observations               57,921          42,579              56,058         126,320      5,474




                                                    -28-
suggests that salaries affect choices, though it is not possible to identify the precise size of the labor supply

response.

Teacher Salaries, Mobility and Student Achievement

        From a policy point of view, the most important question remains: Given district hiring practices,

would an increase in salaries raise achievement?

        Salaries may affect teacher quality in a number of ways. First, an increase in salaries likely

enlarges the pool of applicants, but, even an expansion that raises average quality does not guarantee a

positive relationship between teacher quality and salaries. The resulting change in quality depends crucially

on both the hiring practices of districts and the decisions of teachers about retirement and exiting. Second,

higher salaries might raise achievement by raising the effort of current teachers. For example, salary

negotiations may explicitly link higher salaries with an expansion of responsibilities, or teachers may

simply work harder in order to raise the likelihood of retaining their now more desirable job (in an

efficiency wage sense). In the latter case, one would expect untenured teachers to have the strongest

response in terms of effort. Tenure is not as prevalent or as strong in Texas as in other states, and there is

substantial variation across districts in the degree of job security. However, teachers with less than three

years of experience unambiguously enjoy the least amount of job security, and any effects on effort should

be strongest on this group.

        Two approaches used to estimate the link between teacher quality and pay are presented in turn.

First, we consider the effects of starting salary on explicit measures of quality, the district average

certification test scores for new teachers. Second, we examine the direct effects of salary on student

achievement, controlling for student and other school characteristics.




                                                      -29-
Teacher test scores and pay

             Estimates of the relationship between two teacher certification test scores and district starting

salaries rely on the sample of new teachers in the years 1993 to 1996.23 These scores come from the two

main elementary school components of the Examination for the Certification of Educators in Texas

(EXCET). Both the Professional Development and Comprehensive tests are administered to the majority of

new entrants into Texas elementary schools. Roughly two-thirds have valid scores for both examinations.24

Both tests concentrate on knowledge of pedagogy (while subject matter tests are administered primarily to

secondary school teachers). We have transformed the reported scores into percentile scores, though other

transformations including z scores produce virtually identical results. Percentile scores have the advantage

of reflecting directly the location that districts draw teachers from in the test score distribution.

             Equation 3 describes the empirical model that forms the basis of our analysis,

(3)        AdjScoredt = Saldt β + Sdt λ + Rd α R + Cd α C + Yt α Y + ε dt

where AdjScore is a district test-year-adjusted average score on the professional development or

comprehensive test;25 Saldt is the level of starting salary for district d in year t; S is a vector of district

average student demographic characteristics including percent eligible for a free or reduced price lunch,

percent Black, percent Hispanic, and student test score; R is a vector of 19 region dummies; C is a vector




      23
      We thank the State Board of Educator Certification for providing us with the data on the teacher
certification tests.
      24
     A very small percentage (less than .1%) scored less than random and were dropped. We are
investigating the reasons for missing scores, though the data suggest that the test files are missing
information for specific districts in some years.
      25
      The adjusted scores are generated as residuals from a first stage that simply removes year effects for
the date the test was taken. Anecdotal evidence as well as descriptive statistics for raw test scores suggests
that scores tend to rise the longer the specific test instrument is in use and fall at the time a new test is
introduced. The residual scores are aggregated by district and year to produce district- specific average test
scores for each year.

                                                          -30-
of three community types (large city, small city and suburban); Y is a vector of three year dummies; $, 8,

and the "’s are parameters to be estimated; and , is a random error.

        Table 9 presents eight specifications of the estimated effects of starting salary on the two test

scores. The specifications differ along three dimensions: 1) whether student demographic characteristics are

included; 2) whether district fixed effects are included; and 3) whether the regressions are weighted by the

number of teachers in each district. The largest district is dropped because its inclusion dramatically altered

the coefficients in the weighted regressions.

        The results show little relationship between salary and either test score. None of the sixteen

coefficients are statistically significant at any conventional level, and the same pattern (not shown) is

produced if the percent who fail the test is used in place of average score. Perhaps the most striking aspect

of Table 9 is the dramatic difference between weighted and unweighted results. Specifications that weight

observations on the basis of the number of new teachers with valid tests in a district tend at least to produce

positive point estimates, although none are statistically different from zero.

        The different patterns for weighted and unweighted estimates suggest that the link between test

score and salary differs by district size. This conjecture is confirmed by Table 10, which reports estimated

effects of teacher salary by district size. Average teacher test scores are positively related to starting

salaries only in districts that hire at least seven new teachers (the top quartile on the basis of new teachers

hired), and the relationship is quite significant for the professional development test. The coefficient

magnitude of 46.1 suggests that a ten percent increase in starting salary increases district average test score

by 5 percentiles. It should be noted that the professional development test appears to be far more difficult

than the comprehensive test, as the failure rate is almost three times as high.




                                                      -31-
Table 9. Estimated effects of starting salary on the quality of first year teachers as measured by the
district average score on the Professional Development Test and the Elementary School
Comprehensive Test (t-statistics in parentheses)

 I. Weighted
  Professional Development               0.08            4.80                    14.00            13.00

                                         (0.02)          (1.23)                  (1.44)           1.34)


   Comprehensive                         -0.57           3.88                     1.67            1.14

                                        (-0.16)          (1.04)                  (0.19)           (0.13)



 II. Not Weighted
  Professional Development               -5.80           -4.77                   -23.20       -24.00
                                        (-0.99)       (-0.78)                    (-1.49)      (-1.55)



   Comprehensive                         -4.99           -4.39                   -22.50       -23.10
                                        (-0.91)       (-0.77)                    (-1.60)      (-1.64)



 district fixed effects                   no              no                      yes              yes
 student demographics                     no              yes                      no              yes




Note: Estimates are based on 2,336 observations for the Professional Development test and 2,373
observations for the Comprehensive test.




                                                  -32-
Table 10. Estimated effects of starting salary on the quality of first year teachers as measured by the
district average score on the Professional Development Test and the Elementary School
Comprehensive Test, by quartile of district number of teachers hired (unweighted estimates with
district fixed effects and student demographics; t-statistics in parentheses)

                                                        Number of first year teachers hired
                                              1                 2-3                4-6                >7

  Professional Development                 -90.5               -28.4              -27.7              46.1
                                           (-1.16)            (-0.74)            (-0.48)            (3.34)

   Comprehensive                           -70.2               -6.6               -16.9              15.9
                                           (-0.95)            (-0.18)            (-0.37)            (1.22)


 Observations
    Professional Development                525                780                 372                679
    Comprehensive                           525                786                 371                695




        One interpretation of these results is that larger districts make better use of the enlarged applicant

pool generated by higher salaries. The interpretation is clouded, however, because preliminary regressions

show no evidence that these Excet scores are positively related to mathematics

or reading achievement for students in the Texas public schools.26 Large districts appear to use more

objective criteria in their hiring practices despite the fact that these tests do not seem to be very informative

about quality. In any event, the fact that other districts do not exhibit a preference for higher scores does




   26
      This preliminary work did not, for example, explore the possibility that test scores have different
meanings for Black and White teachers, as suggested by Murnane et al. (1991). Future work will consider
such possibilities. Ferguson(1991) found that district aggregate TECAT scores were positively related to
district average student achievement in Texas during the late 1980s. TECAT tested subject matter
knowledge, while EXCET tests mainly pedagogy. It may be possible in this analysis to explore different
subsets of EXCET data to obtain measures more content related.

                                                      -33-
not imply bad hiring practices; rather it could simply be the appropriate response to information that is not

strongly related to true quality.

Student Achievement and Pay

             The weak relationship between the teacher tests and student achievement gains reaffirms the

difficulty of measuring quality on the basis of an observable teacher characteristic. Our preferred

alternative concentrates directly on student performance measures. We use the matched panels of students

and teachers to investigate the impact of teacher salaries on mathematics and reading achievement in 4th

and 5th grade.27 An important element is disentangling any effects on achievement of teacher turnover per

se from effects that work through changes in the quality of new teachers or in effort. Equation 4 describes

the empirical model that forms the basis of our analysis,

(4)        ∆ Aigst = Saldt β + S gst λ + X iδ + γ i + ε igst

where )Aigst is the change in achievement28 for student i in grade g in school s in year t; Sal is the empirical

measure of median district salary for teachers of a specific experience and education category; S is a vector

of school and teacher characteristics; X is a vector of individual and family background characteristics; C

is a vector of community type and region dummy variables; and $,8, *, and 0 are achievement parameters.

The error includes constant individual specific factors, (i, plus a time varying component, ,igst. The family



      27
     All students and teachers who participate in special or bilingual education are dropped from the
analysis.
      28
     Change in achievement in grade g is calculated as the difference between the test score in the spring of
grade g and the test score in the spring of grade g-1. The underlying value-added model conditions current
achievement on a prior measure of achievement and on intervening inputs. This formulation, which we
apply in a simple difference form for standardized achievement scores in equation (4), eliminates any fixed
individual differences in the level of achievement, effectively accounting for the entire history of school and
family inputs that affect the level of achievement in grade t-1. It also handles variations in ability to the
extent that they affect levels of performance. It does not, however, deal with any unmeasured conditions
that might affect the rate of learning gain.


                                                         -34-
characteristics include information on race, ethnicity, gender, and eligibility for free or reduced price

lunches. Teacher and school characteristics other than salary are computed separately for each grade and

subject, and they include the average class size for regular students, the percentage of teachers grouped into

seven experience categories, the percentage of teachers in five transition categories determined by status in

the previous year,29 and three measures of student demographic composition (percentage Black, percentage

Hispanic, and percentage eligible for a subsidized lunch). The analysis focuses on the effects of the level of

a district’s salary schedule, as measured by the log of starting teacher salary. Individual teacher

movements along the district’s salary schedule are separately analyzed through inclusion of teacher

experience and teacher graduate training, the primary determinants of position within the district’s salary

structure. Descriptive characteristics are reported in Appendix Table A2.

        In the case of teacher salaries, communities that opt for higher pay scales may have other

unobserved attributes that are positively related to achievement. For example, higher paying communities

may have better computer facilities, better school administrators, better public services outside of

education, or a community environment more conducive to learning. Each of these factors could introduce a

positive bias to the estimate of teacher salary effects on achievement. On the other hand, communities with

higher pay scales may have other, unobserved characteristics that tend to reduce teacher quality.

Differences in housing or transportation costs, alternative job opportunities, and poorer working conditions

are three types of factors that could introduce a negative bias on the estimate of teacher salary effects. We

include twenty region dummies, three community type dummies, and the various school characteristics to

account for the influence of such other factors on teacher labor markets, although it remains possible that

important factors might not be captured by these variables.




   29
      Included categories are: same campus but different grade, new campus but same district, different
district and not in Texas public schools (with same campus and grade as the omitted category).

                                                      -35-
              Fortunately, the repeated test scores available in the Texas data offer promise for correcting

problems of omitted variables bias by including individual fixed effects into equation (4).30 The individual

fixed effect estimator can be written as deviations (symbolized by the dot) from each student’s mean of all

variables, as in Equation (5). In this formulation, all time invariant individual, family, and community

factors that might contaminate the estimates of teacher salary effects are eliminated.

(5)        ∆ Aigst . = Saldt .β + S gst .λ + ε igst .

In addition, restricting the samples to students who remain in the same schools for the fourth and fifth

grades eliminates the possibility that changes in school quality that accompany a student’s change of school

contaminate the teacher salary coefficients.31

              The advantages of student fixed effects come at a cost, because all cross-sectional variation in

salary is eliminated and the effects of salary are identified from changes over time in individual district

salary levels. If year-to-year starting salary changes are not reflective of changes in expected career

earnings either because of noise, differences in salary growth across experience categories, or other factors,

the fixed effect estimates may be downwardly biased by measurement error. It is also possible that salary

changes are correlated with other changes in or local labor markets schools that affect achievement. In this

case the direction of the bias is not known a priori. We use a number of specification tests to examine the

importance of these potential problems.




      30
     District fixed effects are an alternative to fully controlling for unobserved student and school factors.
Preliminary work showed that the pattern of district fixed effect estimates is quite similar to that of student
fixed effects.
      31
     This sample restriction accounts for school fixed effects in a computationally tractable way without
having to add school dummy variables to the specifications. Because individual fixed effects are removed,
the results should generalize to all students.

                                                          -36-
Table 11. Effects of District Base Salary and Teacher Characteristics on 4th and 5th Grade Achievement Gains
(Huber-White adjusted t-statistics in parentheses)

                                         4th Grade                            5th Grade                          4th and 5th Grade
Math
base year salary                -0.18 -0.19           -.0.20       -0.03      -0.04        -0.04         0.68           0.66           0.62
                              [-2.07] [-2.15]        [-2.35]      [-0.44]    [-0.58]      [-0.65]       [2.17]         [2.09]         [1.96]
% 0 yr experience                      -0.08           0.00                   -0.11        -0.11                       -0.02           0.04
                                      [-2.15]        [-0.08]                 [-5.13]      [-4.33]                     [-0.32]         [0.59]
% 1 yr experience                       0.01           0.02                   -0.05        -0.05                        0.02           0.03
                                       [0.19]         [0.62]                 [-2.14]      [-2.12]                      [0.46]         [0.55]
% in another district                                 -0.06                                 0.03                                       0.02
previous year                                        [-1.06]                               [0.97]                                     [0.26]
% did not teach                                       -0.11                                 0.00                                      -0.08
previous year                                        [-2.82]                              [-0.25]                                    [-1.57]

Reading
base year salary                0.07      0.06         0.05        0.00        0.00         0.00         0.79           0.79           0.80
                               [1.03]    [0.90]       [0.85]      [0.12]      [0.09]      [-0.09]       [3.23]         [3.24]         [3.22]
% 0 yr experience                        -0.08         0.00                   -0.04        -0.04                        0.00           0.02
                                        [-2.15]      [-0.08]                 [-2.96]      [-1.96]                     [-0.02]         [0.45]
% 1 year experience                       0.01         0.02                   -0.03        -0.02                        0.00           0.00
                                         [0.19]       [0.62]                 [-1.66]      [-1.52]                      [0.00]        [-0.03]
% in another dist.                                    -0.06                                -0.01                                       0.07
previous year                                        [-1.06]                              [-0.60]                                     [1.50]
% did not teach previous                              -0.11                                -0.02                                      -0.02
year                                                 [-2.82]                              [-1.28]                                    [-0.62]

student fixed effects         no          no           no           no         no           no           yes           yes            yes
school nonmovers              no          no           no           no         no           no           yes           yes            yes

observations - math                     156,924                             472,142                                   92,526
observations - reading                  156,391                             470,846                                   92,452
Results of Achievement Estimation
         Table 11 reports the estimated effects of teacher salary on 4th and 5th grade math and reading

achievement. The basic OLS estimates for 4th and 5th grade show little or no evidence that teacher salary has

a significant effect on achievement. Regardless of whether controls for experience and turnover are included

in the specification, none of the salary coefficients is positive and statistically significant at any conventional

level.

         The inclusion of student fixed effects in the final three columns, however, produces a dramatic change

in the estimated effect of salaries. All fixed effect salary coefficients are positive and significant, and the results

are remarkably similar for both reading and math. In both cases there is little evidence that reducing turnover

is an important mechanism through which salaries improve performance. The reading coefficient is invariant

to the presence of controls for experience and turnover while the inclusion of these controls decreases the math

coefficient by less than 10 percent. Therefore the fixed effect estimates suggest that salaries work either by

raising the quality of recent hires or by encouraging current teachers to improve their performance.

         Because of the problems of using short panels of data in this context, however, we undertake a series

of specification tests in order to learn more about the causal link that underlies the observed association

between changes in achievement and changes in starting salaries. First, year-to-year changes in starting salaries

are likely to be noisy measures of changes over time in a district’s salary structure. Viewed from a

measurement error perspective, this could attenuate the estimates of the contribution of salary differences to

achievement. To address this possibility, we use second year salaries as an instrument for first year salaries.

This IV approach should reduce any bias caused by misreporting and by changes in starting salaries that are

uncorrelated with changes at other points of the experience distribution.32




   32
     Preliminary work showed similar fixed effect estimates using 5th year salaries in place of starting
salaries.

                                                         -38-
Table 12. IV Estimated Effects of Starting Teacher Salary on 4th and 5th Grade Math and Reading
Test Score Gains (no controls for experience or turnover, Huber-White adjusted t-statistics in parentheses)



                                     4th Grade         5th Grade         4th and 5th
                                                                            Grade
Math                                    -0.21               0                1.71
                                       [-2.02]            [0.07]            [4.26]

Reading                                 -0.01             -0.01              1.11
                                       [-0.18]           [-0.26]            [3.54]



student fixed effects                    no                no                yes
school nonmovers                         no                no                yes



Note: District salary for second year teachers is used as an instrument for salary of first year teachers. Estimates based
on 88,372 students for math and 88,287 for reading.




          The IV results in Table 12 provide evidence consistent with the notion that changes in starting salaries

are a noisy measure of changes in the overall salary structure. The math coefficient in the fixed effect model

increases by a factor of 2.5, while the reading coefficient increases by roughly 50 percent. The coefficients

imply that a 10 percent increase in starting salaries would raise math achievement by .17 standard deviations

and reading achievement by .11 standard deviations. These magnitudes are somewhat larger than the estimated

class size effects (per dollar of expenditure) obtained with the same data (Rivkin, Hanushek and Kain 1998).

          The IV results strengthen the finding that changes in achievement are positively related to changes in

salaries, but the question remains whether this relationship captures a causal effect. Evidence that the reduction

of teacher turnover makes little or no contribution to the link between salaries and achievement raises some

doubts about the underpinnings of the salary/achievement relationship, because it is the reduction of turnover

that is thought to be the most likely path through which high salaries improve teacher quality.



                                                          -39-
         We performed a series of specification checks in order to test the robustness of the results. First, we

examined a number of possible confounding factors by including measures of the percentage of children

classified in special education33, enrollment, and indicator variables for new superintendents and new principals.

These additional factors, while often statistically significant, had little effect on the salary coefficients. We also

used measures of state aid to the district (both current and lagged) as instrumental variables in an effort to

identify the link between salaries and teacher quality through changes in revenue that were unrelated to changes

in student composition within districts. Unfortunately, the first stage explanatory power was very low, and

these IV estimates proved to be uninformative.

         More telling, we divided the sample up by the percentage of teachers who were not in the district in

the previous year and the percentage of probationary status teachers (0-2 years experience). If salaries were

increasing achievement primarily by improving the quality of new hires, the relationship between achievement

and salaries should be strongest in schools that recently hired new teachers. Similarly, if salaries were

increasing achievement primarily by providing incentives for improved teaching, it should be the case that the

relationship between achievement and salaries is strongest in schools with a higher percentage of probationary

teachers.

         The results in the top panel of Table 13, remarkably similar for math and reading, are inconsistent with

both hypotheses. The largest and most significant salary effects are found in the sample of schools with no

turnover and with no probationary teachers. This pattern and the magnitude of the estimates are




   33
     Hanushek, Kain and Rivkin (1998) find that achievement for non-special education students is
positively related to the special education classification rate. While the precise mechanism for this effect is
unclear, the positive interaction result is robust to a variety of specifications and estimation approaches.

                                                        -40-
Table 13. IV Estimated Effects of District Salary on 4th and 5th Grade Math and Reading Achievement,
by Presence of Probationary Teachers and Existence of Teacher Turnover and by Controls for Region
by Year Interactions (no controls for experience or turnover, Huber-White adjusted t-statistics in parentheses)


                     All                years with at least one                   years with teacher
                                         probationary teacher                          turnover

                                       0          1            2             0            1            2
1. No Region/Year Interactions

Math                1.71              2.44       0.50         0.82          2.26         1.64        1.11
                   [4.26]            [4.87]     [0.48]       [1.02]        [3.53]       [2.49]      [1.34]

Reading             1.11              1.29       0.48         1.12          1.60         1.10        0.76
                   [3.54]            [2.99]     [0.67]       [1.95]        [3.23]       [2.10]      [1.24]

2. Includes Region/Year Interactions

Math                1.24              1.73       1.73         -0.16         2.30         0.87        0.73
                   [2.39]            [2.56]     [1.44]       [-0.16]       [3.33]       [0.96]      [0.70]

Reading             0.76              0.75       1.14         0.80          1.57         0.73        0.04
                   [1.91]            [1.33]     [1.35]       [1.13]        [2.55]       [1.08]      [0.05]

Individual fixed effects               yes       yes          yes           yes          yes           yes
School nonmovers                       yes       yes          yes           yes          yes           yes

Observations
  Math                               44,492     15,130       28,750        26,807      35,693       25,872
  Reading                            42,767     14,687       30,833        26,848      35,608       25,831




virtually unchanged by the inclusion of measures of experience and turnover in the regressions, implying they

are not driven by differences in turnover rates. The results are also very similar if starting salaries are not

instrumented by 2nd year salaries. Overall, these estimates suggest that if teacher salary raises achievement,

it does so primarily by causing existing teachers to improve their performance following a salary increase. The

explanations that are consistent with the estimates are very different than those that normally dominate



                                                      -41-
discussions of teacher salary effects, even by teacher organizations. Moreover, the finding that year-to-year

changes in salaries had no significant effect on teacher transitions for any experience category suggested that

the signal contained in such changes might be overwhelmed by the noise, but only the fixed effect achievement

specifications that are identified by year-to-year changes produce a strong pattern of salary effects.

        An alternative explanation for the results in Table 13 is that the observed relationship between

achievement and salaries confounds any salary effect with the influence of unobserved factors that also affect

achievement. In order to examine one aspect of this possibility, region-by-year interactions are included in the

fixed effects specifications. These dummy variables capture any systematic differences across regions in the

change in test score gains. The inclusion of region dummies substantially reduces the magnitude of the salary

coefficients, though the above pattern of estimates is largely preserved. The salary coefficient for all schools

falls from 1.71 to 1.24 for the math specifications and from 1.11 to 0.76 for the reading specifications, roughly

a 30 percent decline in both. In contrast, the class size estimate (not shown) remains virtually unchanged by

the inclusion of the region dummies. Moreover, the inclusion of the region dummies reduces dramatically the

estimated effects for the sample of schools with two years of probationary teachers or two years in which there

is turnover.

        The sensitivity of the salary coefficients to the region dummies suggests that omitted variables bias

may be a serious problem with these panel data estimates of teacher salary effects on achievement. It is likely

that other determinants of achievement that vary within rather than merely between regions may also be

correlated with changes in the structure of salaries and that the observed relationship between achievement and

salaries does not capture a strong causal link between salaries and the quality of teachers in a district.




                                                      -42-
Conclusions

        There is no question that teachers exert a tremendous impact on academic performance, but the

question of how to ensure high quality teaching remains largely unanswered. Our previous analysis of

achievement (Rivkin, Hanushek, and Kain 1998) indicated that teacher quality explained a substantial portion

of the variation in student achievement. However, it also showed that observable teacher characteristics

including education and experience explained little of the variation in teacher quality. More importantly, that

analysis provides strong evidence that most if not virtually all of the variation in teacher quality occurred within

schools (and thus within school districts), suggesting that school and district-wide factors such as compensation

could play a minor role at most.

        Nevertheless, the question of whether schools effectively buy better teachers is an important question

for education policy. It is also a difficult question to answer. Interpreting the observed reactions of teachers

to variations in salaries is complicated, because the outcomes combine the influences of teacher supply, teacher

demand, and teacher hiring and retention policies of districts. Moreover, because of variations in the

attractiveness of different teaching jobs and the complexity of the relationship between current and past salaries

and the current composition of teachers, contemporaneous salaries are unlikely to capture fully variations

across districts in their attractiveness. Finally, it is very difficult to measure teacher quality directly. For all

of these reasons, we used a number of different approaches to gain a greater understanding of the link between

pay, teacher quality and student performance.

        The first component of this analysis looks at mobility across schools and districts and at exiting from

Texas public schools. Though it is not possible to identify structural supply elasticities, the evidence strongly

suggests that teachers prefer certain types of students over others. Except for Black teachers, the typical Texas

teacher appears to favor higher achieving, nonminority students. Black teachers on the other hand, while

favoring higher achievement students, systematically move toward schools with higher concentrations of Black



                                                       -43-
students. Net salaries adjusted for compensating differentials also appear to influence mobility and exiting,

but to a lesser extent than characteristics of students.

        The second empirical component investigates how shifts in the teacher salary scale are related to

teacher quality and student achievement. Evidence from the analysis of teacher test scores suggests that larger

districts make use of teacher certification test results in hiring teachers. While perhaps not a surprise that

larger districts would tend to use more objective criteria such as test scores, the evidence suggests that these

particular tests are not strongly related to student achievement. Thus we preliminarily conclude that their

expanded use in the hiring process is unlikely to improve the quality of the teaching staff.

        The second portion of the analysis of teacher quality examined the relationship between student test

scores and district salaries. Estimation of typical value-added models of student math and reading performance

for cohorts of 4th and 5th grade students yield no consistent relationships with district salaries. On the other

hand, when student fixed effects are included in models of achievement growth and the sample is restricted to

students who did not switch schools, salaries appear to have a significant positive effect on both math and

reading test scores.

        These results would appear to suggest that the included covariates in the achievement models do not

capture fully all factors that contribute to compensating differentials, suppressing an underlying quality

influence of salaries. However, specification checks raise doubts that the fixed effect estimates capture the true

relationship between achievement and salaries. First, there is little evidence that higher salaries raise

achievement by reducing turnover. Second, divisions of the sampled schools on the basis of teacher turnover

and of teacher experience reveal that the strongest effects of salary are found in schools with no teacher

turnover and no probationary teachers. Taken literally, this implies that salaries raise achievement primarily

by increasing the work effort of experienced teachers, many of whom enjoy tenure protection, rather than by

raising the quality of new hires, by retaining better teachers, or by raising the efforts of young teachers who

lack job security. This pathway is not what typically underlies most salary discussions. Third, the inclusion

                                                      -44-
of region dummies into the fixed effect specifications substantially reduced the magnitude of the salary

coefficients, suggesting that the coefficients capture the influences of unobserved factors that change along with

salaries.

            The pattern of results is perplexing, but the overall analysis suggests that as currently employed, salary

policies do not appear to offer much promise for improvement in student performance. Factors other than

salaries appear to play a much more important role in determining the desirability of specific districts. More

importantly, the earlier finding that the variation in teacher quality within schools appears to be much larger

than any between school variation suggests that districts should focus on other ways to improve the quality of

teaching and academic achievement.




                                                      References


Antos, Joseph R., and Sherwin Rosen. "Discrimination in the market for teachers." Journal of Econometrics
2 (May 1975): 123-50.

Ballou, Dale. "Do public schools hire the best applicants?" Quarterly Journal of Economics 111, no. 1
(February 1996): 97-133.

Ballou, Dale, and Michael Podgursky. "Recruiting smarter teachers." Journal of Human Resources 30, no.
2 (Spring 1995): 326-38.

---. Teacher pay and teacher quality. Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research, 1997.

Baugh, William H., and Joe A. Stone. "Mobility and wage equibration in the educator labor market."
Economics of Education Review 2, no. 3 (Summer 1982): 253-74. N.

Betts, Julian R. "Is there a link between school inputs and earnings? Fresh scrutiny of an old literature." In
Does money matter? The effect of school resources on student achievement and adult success, edited by Gary
Burtless, 141-91. Washington, DC: Brookings, 1996.

Blais, André, and Stéphane Dion, eds. The budget-maximizing bureaucrat: Appraisals and evidence.
Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1991.



                                                          -45-
Boardman, Anthony E., Linda Darling-Hammond, and Stephen P. Mullin. "A framework for the analysis of
teachers' demand and supply." Economics of Education Review 2, no. 2 (Spring 1982): 127-55.

Boe, Erling E., and Dorothy M. Gilford, eds. Teacher supply, demand and quality. Washington, D.C.:
National Academy Press, 1992.

Brewer, Dominic J. "Career paths and quit decisions: Evidence from teaching." Journal of Labor Economics
14, no. 2 (April 1996): 313-39.

Brown, Byron W., and Daniel H. Saks. "The production and distribution of cognitive skills within schools."
Journal of Political Economy 83, no. 3 (June 1975): 571-93.

Card, David, and Alan B. Krueger. "Does school quality matter? Returns to education and the characteristics
of public schools in the United States." Journal of Political Economy 100, no. 1 (February 1992): 1-40.

---. "School resources and student outcomes: An overview of the literature and new evidence from North and
South Carolina." Journal of Economic Perspectives 10, no. 4 (Fall 1996): 31-50.

Carnegie Forum on Education and the Economy. A nation prepared: Teachers for the 21st century. : Carnegie
Forum on Education and the Economy, 1986.

Chambers, Jay G. "The impact of collective bargaining for teachers on resource allocation in public school
districts." Journal of Urban Economics 4, no. 3 (July 1977): 324-39.

Cohen, David K., and Richard J. Murnane. "Merit pay and the evaluation problem: Understanding why most
merit pay plans fail and a few survive." Harvard Educational Review 56, no. 1 (February 1986): 1-17.

Darling-Hammond, Linda. Doing what matters most: Investing in quality teaching. New York: National
Commission on Teaching and America's Future, 1997.

Dolton, Peter, and Wilbert van der Klaauw. "Leaving teaching in the UK: A duration analysis." The Economic
Journal 105 (March 1995): 431-44.

---. "The turnover of teachers: A competing risks explanation." Review of Economics and Statistics
(forthcoming).

Ferguson, Ronald. "Paying for public education: New evidence on how and why money matters." Harvard
Journal on Legislation 28, no. 2 (Summer 1991): 465-98.

Ferguson, Ronald F. "Paying for Public Education: New Evidence on How and Why Money Matters." Harvard
Journal on Legislation 28, no. 2 (Summer 1991): 465-98.

Flyer, Fredrick, and Sherwin Rosen. "The new economics of teachers and education." Journal of Labor
Economics 15, no. 1 (part 2) (January 1997): 104-39.

Gilford, Dorothy M., and Ellen Tenenbaum, eds. Precollege science and mathematics teachers: monitoring
supply, demand and quality. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press, 1990.
Goertz, Margaret E., Ruth B. Ekstrom, and Richard J. Coley. The impact of state policy on entrance into the
teaching procession: Final report. : Educational Testing Service, 1984.

Greenberg, David, and John McCall. "Teacher mobility and allocation." Journal of Human Resources 9, no.
4 (Fall 1974): 480-502.

Grissmer, David W., and Sheila Nataraj Kirby. Patterns of attrition among indiana teachers, 1965-1987.
Santa Monica: RAND, 1992.

Gritz, R. Mark, and Neil D. Theobald. "The effects of school district spending priorities on length of stay in
teaching." Journal of Human Resources 31, no. 3 (Summer 1996): 477-512.

Grogger, Jeffrey T. "Does school quality explain the recent black/white wage trend?" Journal of Labor
Economics 14, no. 2 (April 1996): 231-53.

Hanushek, Eric A. "Assessing the effects of school resources on student performance: An update." Educational
Evaluation and Policy Analysis 19, no. 2 (Summer 1997): 141-64.

Hanushek, Eric A., John F. Kain, and Steven G. Rivkin. "Does special education raise academic achievement
for students with disabilities?". National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 6690, 1998.

Hanushek, Eric A., and Richard R. Pace. "Who chooses to teach (and why)?" Economics of Education Review
14, no. 2 (June 1995): 101-17.

Hanushek, Eric A., Steven G. Rivkin, and Lori L. Taylor. "Aggregation and the estimated effects of school
resources." Review of Economics and Statistics 78, no. 4 (November 1996): 611-27.

Hanushek, Eric A. with others. Making schools work: Improving performance and controlling costs.
Washington, DC: Brookings Institution, 1994.

Hoxby, Caroline Minter. "How teachers' unions affect education production." Quarterly Journal of Economics
111, no. 3 (August 1996): 671-718.

Kain, John F., and Daniel M. O'Brien. "A longitudinal assessment of reading achievement evidence from the
Harvard/UTD Texas schools project". Paper presented at the Green Center Conference, "Achieving Universal
Literacy," University of Texas at Dallas, April 2-4, 1998.

Kain, John F., and Kraig Singleton. "Equality of Educational Opportunity revisited." New England Economic
Review (May/June 1996): 87-111.

Kershaw, Joseph A., and Roland N. McKean. Teacher shortages and salary schedules. NY: McGraw-Hill,
1962.

Kirby, Sheila Nataraj, David W. Grissmer, and Lisa Hudson. New and returning teachers in Indiana: sources
of supply. Santa Monica: RAND, 1991.

Loeb, Susanna, and Marianne Page. "Examining the link between wages and quality in the teacher workforce".
(mimeo), Department of Economics, University of California, Davis, 1998.
Manski, Charles F. "Academic ability, earnings, and the decision to become a teacher: Evidence from the
National Longitudinal Study of the High School Class of 1972." In Public sector payrolls, edited by David
A. Wise, 291-312. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1987.

Muranane, Richard J., and Randall Olsen. "The effects of salaries and opportunity costs on length of stay in
teaching: Evidence from Michigan." Review of Economics and Statistics 71, no. 2 (May 1989): 347-52.

---. "The effects of salaries and opportunity costs on length of stay in teaching: Evidence from North Carolina."
Journal of Human Resources 25, no. 1 (Winter 1990): 106-24.

Murnane, Richard J. "Teacher mobility revisited." Journal of Human Resources 16, no. 1 (Winter 1981): 3-19.

---. "Staffing the nation's schools with skilled teachers." In Improving America's schools: The role of
incentives, edited by Eric A. Hanushek and Dale W. Jorgenson, 241-58. Washington, DC: National Academy
Press, 1996.

Murnane, Richard J., Judith D. Singer, John B. Willett, James J. Kemple, and Randall J. Olsen. Who will
teach? Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1991.

Niskanen, William A. Bureaucracy and Representative Government. Chicago: Aldine-Atherton, 1971.

---. "Bureaucrats and politicians." Journal of Law and Economics 18, no. 3 (1975): 617-44.

Rivkin, Steven G., Eric A. Hanushek, and John F. Kain. Teachers, schools, and academic achievement.
National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 6691 1998.

Rumberger, Russell W. "The impact of salary differentials on teacher shortages and turnover: The case of
mathematics and science teachers." Economics of Education Review 6, no. 4 (1987): 389-99.

Strauss, Robert P. Public school teachers in Pennsylvania: Demand and supply through school year 2000.
Carnegie-Mellon University (mimeo), 1993.

---. "Teacher preparation and selction in Pennsylvania: Ensuring high performance classroom teachers for the
21st century". (mimeo) Heinz School of Public Policy and Management, Carnegie-Mellon University, 1998.

van der Klaauw, Wilbert. "The supply and early careers of teachers". (mimeo), New York University, 1997.

Weaver, W. Timothy. America's teacher quality problem: Alternatives for reform. New York: Praeger, 1983.

Zarkin, Gary A. "Occupational choice: An application to the market for public school teachers." Quarterly
Journal of Economics 100, no. 2 (May 1985): 409-46.
Appendix Table A1. Multinomial Logit Estimated Effects of Teacher Salary and Student
Demographic Characteristics on the Probabilities that Teachers switch School Districts or
Exit Teaching (t statistics in parentheses, remaining in the same district is the numeraire)

                                                        teacher experience
                                  0-2 yrs       3-5 yrs      6-10 yrs      11-30 yrs      >30 years

Switch Districts

    log base year                  -1.80         -2.00          -1.70         -1.48             -2.96
    salary                        [-5.26]       [-4.32]        [-3.52]       [-3.26]           [-0.66]

Campus Average Student Characteristics

    Test Score                     -0.07         -0.40          -0.11         -0.16             -1.68
                                  [-0.92]       [-3.84]        [-0.97]       [-1.43]           [-2.05]

    % elig. for                    0.46          -0.08          0.27           0.39             0.49
    subs lunch                    [2.87]        [-0.38]        [1.15]         [1.81]           [0.29]

    % Black                        1.05           0.86          0.86           0.91             -1.01
                                  [6.51]         [3.78]        [3.47]         [3.69]           [-0.49]

    % Hispanic                      0.13          0.50          0.29           0.22             -0.77
                                   [0.76]        [2.17]        [1.14]         [0.91]           [-0.37]
Interactions with Race/ethnicity of Teacher
     Black *                       -2.81         -1.58          -2.01         -2.22             4.22
     % Black                      [-7.02]       [-2.77]        [-3.87]       [-5.25]           [0.59]

    Black *                        -1.32         -0.06          -0.49         -1.59             3.04
    % Hispanic                    [-2.94]       [-0.11]        [-0.96]       [-3.58]           [0.38]

    Hispanic *                     -1.35         -1.04          -0.87          0.01             -1.22
    % Black                       [-3.20]       [-1.78]        [-1.22]        [0.02]           [-0.22]

    Hispanic *                     -1.15         -1.10          -0.71         -0.80             -1.77
    % Hispanic                    [-5.40]       [-4.17]        [-2.15]       [-2.66]           [-0.76]
Table A1 (continued)




Exit Teaching

    log base year                 -0.75        -0.29     0.30      -0.13     0.92
    salary                       [-3.44]      [-1.09]   [1.20]    [-0.72]   [1.36]

Campus Average Student Characteristics

    Test Score                    -0.24        -0.19     -0.35     -0.31     -0.27
                                 [-5.22]      [-3.26]   [-6.35]   [-7.71]   [-2.04]

    % elig. for                   -0.14        -0.19     0.00      0.42      0.04
    subs lunch                   [-1.47]      [-3.26]   [-6.35]   [5.26]    [0.15]

    % Black                       0.59         0.43      0.08      0.05      -0.52
                                 [5.86]       [3.37]    [0.68]    [0.56]    [-1.52]

    % Hispanic                      0.20       0.22      -0.14     -0.30     -0.49
                                   [1.94]     [1.71]    [-1.15]   [-3.33]   [-1.56]
Interactions with Race/ethnicity of Teacher
     Black *                       -1.20       -1.05     -0.58     -0.58     0.45
     % Black                      [-5.99]     [-4.05]   [-2.56]   [-4.32]   [1.20]

    Black *                       -0.71        -0.30     -0.38     -0.47     0.57
    % Hispanic                   [-3.04]      [-1.06]   [-1.53]   [-3.39]   [1.64]

    Hispanic *                    -0.58        0.02      -0.19     -0.84     2.25
    % Black                      [-2.14]      [0.06]    [-0.54]   [-2.99]   [1.57]

    Hispanic *                    -0.42        -0.29     -0.47     -0.61     0.49
    % Hispanic                   [-2.85]      [-1.62]   [-2.78]   [-5.00]   [0.80]
Appendix Table A2. Descriptive Statistics — Means and Standard Deviations
                                                      4th Grade       5th Grade
Achievement Gains
    Math                                                -0.02            0.01
                                                        (0.65)          (0.59)
    Reading                                             -0.03            0.01
                                                        (0.67)          (0.63)
Log District Salary
    0 yrs experience                                     10.00          10.00
                                                        (0.11)          (0.10)
Teacher Experience Distribution
    % 0 years                                             6.2            5.7
    %1 year                                               5.8            5.8
    % 2 years                                             5.1            5.6
    % 3-4 years                                          11.7            10.8
    % 5-9 years                                          21.4            19.7
    % 10-19 years                                        30.9            31.0
    % 21-30 years                                        16.4            18.6
    % > 30 years                                          2.5            2.8
Teacher Transition Distribution from Prior Year
    % same campus & grade                                67.6            66.8
    % same campus, different grade                       12.8            11.6
    % different campus, same district                     4.2            5.6
    % different district                                  3.6            3.3
    % not in Texas public schools                        11.7            12.7
Student Demographic Characteristics
    % Black                                              14.1            14.0
                                                        (20.4)          (20.4)
    % Hispanic                                           31.0            31.0
                                                        (30.0)          (30.2)
    % Eligible for subsidized lunch                      46.8            46.7
                                                        (27.1)          (27.0)
