                                    Introduction
     Which tier of government should be responsible for particular taxing and spending
decisions? From Philadelphia to Maastricht, this question has vexed constitution designers.
Yet still the issues are unresolved. Witness the recent debate in the U.S. over whether the
States or Federal government should take responsibility for welfare policy. footnote In
Europe, the principal of subsidiarity dictates that functions should be decentralized where
possible, without any clearly defined criteria for centralization to be desirable.
     This paper takes a fresh look at the trade off between centralized and decentralized
provision of local public goods. Our analysis differs from much of the existing literature in
emphasizing the importance of the politics of decision making for the decision to centralize.
Centralization requires a system of governance that balances regional interests. Accordingly,
the decision making unit typically incorporates a legislature consisting of representatives
from each member district. The behavior of such legislatures will be a key determinant of the
performance of centralized systems. Legislatures that produce minimum winning coalitions
expose members of federations to the risk of expropriation. More universalistic legislatures
offer insurance against this. However, they are open to manipulation as citizens use the
political process to exploit the budgetary externality that centralization creates. While
influential commentators, such as Inman and Rubinfeld (1997a) and (1997b), have stressed
their importance for the performance of federal systems, such issues have yet to be formally
incorporated into models of fiscal federalism. Here we develop an analysis which integrates
them with the more traditional concerns, emphasized in the seminal work of Oates (1972), of
achieving the right balance between respecting heterogeneous tastes and internalizing
externalities.
     The existing literature has typically modelled a centralized system as one in which public
spending is financed by general taxation and all districts receive a uniform level of the local
public good. By contrast, a decentralized system is one in which local public goods are
financed by local taxation and each district is free to choose its own level. The drawback
with a decentralized system is that it produces public good levels which reflect only local
benefits and hence results in underprovision when such goods provide significant benefits to
the larger community. Centralized decision making, on the other hand, produces a “one size
fits all” outcome, which is insufficiently sensitive to local needs. Such logic underpins
Oates’ (1972) celebrated Decentralization Theorem stating that, in the absence of spillovers,
decentralization is preferable. When spillovers are present, the appropriate level of
government depends on a weighing of the benefits of internalizing externalities with the
costs of uniformity.
     The point of departure for this paper is to model a centralized system as one in which
public spending is financed by general taxation, but districts can receive different levels of
local public goods. The usual assumption of uniform provision of local public goods like
roads, parks and airports, seems very hard to justify empirically. Using this model, decision
making by benevolent governments would make centralization an attractive option — a
planner charged with choosing public good levels will respect the preferences of citizens at
the district level, while optimally accounting for cross-border externalities. If there is a case
for decentralization, therefore, it stems from political economy considerations.
     Our analysis assumes that, in a decentralized system, local public goods are selected by
locally elected representatives, while in a centralized system policy choices are made by a
central legislature consisting of elected representatives from each district. In specifying the
behavior of the legislature, we draw on the political science literature on distributive
policy-making. footnote We adopt a simple parametric specification which allows us to go
between the two polar cases studied in this literature. These are the “minimum winning
coalition” view that distributive policies will be obtained by a coalition of representatives of
the smallest size (for example, Buchanan and Tullock (1962), Riker (1962), Ferejohn,
Fiorina and McKelvey (1987) and Baron and Ferejohn (1989)) and the “universalism” view
that representatives will develop a norm of reciprocity so that every district will receive its
share (for example, Weingast (1979) and Weingast, Shepsle and Johnsen (1981)). In
modelling the election of representatives we draw on recent work on the citizen-candidate
model of representative democracy (Osborne and Slivinsky (1996), Besley and Coate
(1997)), particularly the extension to legislative elections developed in Coate (1997).
     There is a significant body of work on the economics of federal systems. The older
literature, particularly that stemming from Tiebout (1956), is well reviewed in Rubinfeld
(1987). This focused on whether a set of competing jurisdictions would provide an efficient
allocation of pure local public goods. This approach paid little attention to the potential role
for more centralized forms of government. This omission was remedied in Oates (1972) who
developed an analysis of impure local public goods (i.e. those with spillovers) under the
assumption that centralization would imply uniform expenditures.
     More recently a number of papers have studied political economy questions concerning
centralized and decentralized systems. Bolton and Roland (1997) ask the positive question of
when would we expect a federation to break up. Again, they work with the assumption that
provision is uniform under centralization. footnote They assume exogenously given
efficiency gains from centralization so that their trade-off is then principally between reaping
the benefits of these against the ability to tailor policies to individual districts’ tastes. Alesina
and Spoalare (1997) consider the optimal and equilibrium number of districts in a model that
trades off scale economies against preference diversity. Persson and Tabellini (1994) ask
whether a more centralized system of government will tend to lead to a larger government
sector. Like us, they model policy choices under centralization as emerging from a
legislature consisting of representatives from each district. However, they do not consider
elections to such a legislature. Ellingsen (1998) considers the positive and normative
economics of centralization of a pure public good. footnote The median voter of the larger
community created by centralization selects policy. If the districts are identical, then
centralization is attractive since there is scope for cost sharing and cross-district free-rider
problems are eliminated. However, heterogeneity undermines the case for centralization.
     Our exercise is also in the spirit of Persson and Tabellini (1996a,b) which contrasts risk
sharing by centralized and decentralized governments. They focus on the trade-off between
improved risk sharing under centralization with the increased moral hazard due to regions
taking on more risk. They also consider how different federal constitutions shape regional
transfers in political equilibrium and which type of constitutional arrangement performs
better.
     Finally, there is the independent work of Lockwood (1998). Like us, he is critical of the
assumption that centralization implies uniformity in public spending across districts and
develops a political economy analysis of decentralization versus centralization of public
good provision. He also assumes that a centralized system forms policy in a legislature
comprising of elected representatives from each district. Unlike us, he specifies an extensive
form bargaining game for the legislature which predicts that spillovers affect the nature of
the legislative outcome. However, in contrast to this paper, he assumes that the local public
good in each district is discrete and that citizens are homogeneous. The latter assumption
makes legislative elections straightforward. Overall, Lockwood’s focus is complementary
  with ours, paying greater attention to legislative processes and less attention to election
  outcomes.
      The remainder of the paper is as organized as follows. Section 2 outlines the framework
  for our analysis. Section 3 provides a brief review of Oates’ analysis and demonstrates a
  version of his Decentralization Theorem. Section 4 presents our political economy analysis,
  while sections 5 and 6 develop its implications for the choice between decentralization and
  centralization in identical and non-identical districts. Section 7 discusses possible alternative
  modeling assumptions and concluding remarks appear in section 8.

                                          The Model

The Economic Environment
      The economy is divided into 2 geographically distinct districts indexed by i 5 á1, 2â.
  Each district has a continuum of citizens with a mass of unity. There are 3 goods in the
  economy, a single private good, x, and two local public goods, g 1 and g 2 , each one
  associated with a particular district. Each citizen is endowed with an “income” of y units of
  the private good. To produce one unit of either of the public goods, requires p units of the
  private good.
      Each citizen in district i is characterized by a public good preference parameter V. The
  preferences of a type V citizen in district i are
                                  Ý1 ? VÞ ln x + VßÝ1 ? UÞ ln g i + U ln g ?i à.
  The term U 5 ß0, 1/2à indexes the degree of spillovers; when U = 0 citizens care only about
  the public good in their own district, while when U = 1/2 they care equally about the public
  goods in both districts. While spillovers are the same for all citizens, those with higher V’s
  value public goods more highly.
       The range of possible preference types is ß0, Và where V < 1. The distribution of citizens
  across types in district i is described by the cumulative distribution function G i ÝVÞ. The
  median type in each district i is denoted by m i and the mean type by m i . We assume
  throughout that G i ÝVÞ is increasing on ß0, Và, and that 2m i < V. The latter condition is needed
  for interior solutions to exist below.

Decentralized and Centralized Systems
       Under a decentralized system, the level of public good in each district is chosen by the
  government of that district and public expenditures are financed by a uniform head tax on
  local residents. Thus, if district i chooses a public good level g i , each citizen in district i pays
  a tax of pg i . Under a centralized system, the levels of both public goods are determined by a
  government that represents both districts, with spending being financed by a uniform head
  tax on all citizens. Thus, public goods levels Ýg 1 , g 2 Þ, result in a head tax of
   p
   2
     Ýg 1 + g 2 Þ. footnote

                                    Oates’ Analysis
      To provide some background for our analysis, it will be useful to briefly review Oates’
  (1972) famous treatment of the relative merits of decentralization and centralization in our
  framework. Oates supposes that, in a decentralized system, each district’s policy is chosen
  independently by a planner whose objective is to maximize average utility in the district.
              Accordingly, we look for a pair of expenditure levels Ýg d1 , g d2 Þ which satisfy
                         g di = arg max
                                     g
                                        áÝ1 ? m i Þ lnÝy ? pg i Þ + m i ßÝ1 ? UÞ ln g i + U ln g d?i àâ, i 5 á1, 2â.
                                       i


              Taking the first order conditions and solving, yields:
                                                                   m 1 Ý1 ? UÞy m 2 Ý1 ? UÞy
                                              Ýg d1 , g d2 Þ = Ý               ,             Þ.
                                                                   Ý1 ? m 1 UÞp Ý1 ? m 2 UÞp
              Thus, each district i devotes a proportion m i Ý1 ? UÞ/Ý1 ? m i UÞ of its income to the provision
              of local public goods, a proportion which is decreasing in the degree of spillovers.
                  In a centralized system, Oates supposes that policy is chosen by a planner whose
              objective is to maximize average utility but assumes that a common level of public goods is
              chosen for both districts. The latter, denoted g c , satisfies
                                  g c = arg max
                                             g
                                                áÝ2 ? Ým 1 + m 2 ÞÞ lnÝy ? pgÞ + ßm 1 + m 2 à ln gâ.

              Taking the first order condition and solving, yields
                                                                       Ým 1 + m 2 Þy
                                                             gc =                    .
                                                                            2p
              In this instance, the proportion of the economy’s income spent on public goods depends on
              the average valuation of public goods in the society as a whole — Ým 1 + m 2 Þ/2. This
              proportion is independent of the extent of spillovers.
                  To compare the public goods levels in the two regimes, observe that with spillovers, the
              average level of public goods in a decentralized system is less than under a centralized
              system. This can be seen by noting that the average levels are equal at U = 0 and
              remembering that public goods expenditure is decreasing in U under decentralization. Thus
              decentralization induces free-riding and lower levels of public spending.
                  The above analysis implies that aggregate welfare under decentralization is given by:
                             2
                                               ? miÞ                               m i Ý1 ? UÞy       m Ý1 ? UÞy
                   W =
                     d
                           >áÝ1 ? m i Þ ln yÝ1
                                            1 ? miU
                                                               + m i ßÝ1 ? UÞ ln
                                                                                   Ý1 ? m i UÞp
                                                                                                + U ln ?i
                                                                                                      Ý1 ? m ?i UÞp
                                                                                                                    àâ,
                            i=1
                                                                                                                          #
              while aggregate welfare under centralization is given by:
                                                                      Ým 1 + m 2 Þ                     Ým 1 + m 2 Þy
                          W c = Ý2 ? Ým 1 + m 2 ÞÞ ln yÝ1 ?                        Þ + ßm 1 + m 2 à ln               .    #
                                                                           2                                2p
              Two facts are readily established. First, aggregate welfare under centralization is
              independent of U, while welfare under decentralization is decreasing in U. Second, when
              U = 0 aggregate welfare under decentralization exceeds that under centralization except
              when m 1 = m 2 , in which case, the two welfare levels are the same. We thus have:
Proposition (i) If the average valuation of public goods is the same in the two districts Ým 1 = m 2 Þ and
                      spillovers are present (U > 0), a centralized system is welfare superior to a
                      decentralized system. If there are no spillovers (U = 0), the two systems generate the
                      same level of welfare.
               (ii) If m 1 ® m 2 , either a decentralized system is welfare superior for all values of U or there
                         exists a critical value of U, strictly greater than 0, such that a centralized system is
           welfare superior if and only if U exceeds this critical level.
      This result suggests that the choice between a decentralized and a centralized system
  should reflect a trade-off between spillovers and taste heterogeneity. With no spillovers and
  identical districts, a decentralized system is superior - a result often referred to as Oates’
  Decentralization Theorem. With spillovers and identical districts, a centralized system is
  preferred. With spillovers and non-identical districts, the issue can only be resolved by
  comparing the magnitude of the two effects.
      The trade-off identified by Oates relies on the assumption that provision under
  centralization is uniform. If the two districts are not identical, aggregate welfare could be
  enhanced by providing each district with a different level of local public goods. Thus, if the
  planner could offer the districts different levels of the public good, centralization would
  produce a policy outcome that was responsive to taste heterogeneity. Thus centralization
  could deliver the benefits of internalizing spillovers without generating any of the costs
  identified by Oates. footnote Hence, since the reason for imposing the uniformity constraint
  seems obscure, Oates’ analysis becomes suspect as a basis for issuing policy
  recommendations.

                         A Political Economy Analysis

Policy Determination Under Decentralization
         Under decentralization, a single representative is elected to choose policy in each
  district. Following the citizen candidate approach, this representative is a citizen from the
  district in question. Accordingly, representatives are characterized by their public good
  preferences V. There is no commitment, so that these preferences determine their policy
  choices if they win office.
         The policy determination process has two stages. First, elections determine which
  citizens are selected to represent the two districts. Second, policies are chosen
  simultaneously by the elected representative in each district. Working backwards, let the
  types of the representatives in districts 1 and 2 be V 1 and V 2 . Then the policy outcome
  Ýg D1 ÝV 1 Þ, g D2 ÝV 2 ÞÞ satisfies
     g Di ÝV i Þ = arg max
                        gi
                           áÝ1 ? V i Þ lnÝy ? pg i Þ + V i ßÝ1 ? UÞ ln g i + U ln g D?i ÝV ?i Þàâ for i 5 á1, 2â.

  Solving this yields
                                                             V 1 Ý1 ? UÞy V 2 Ý1 ? UÞy
                            Ýg D1 ÝV 1 Þ, g D2 ÝV 2 ÞÞ = Ý               ,             Þ.                           #
                                                             Ý1 ? V 1 UÞp Ý1 ? V 2 UÞp
  Thus each district spends a fraction of its income on public goods which is decreasing in the
  level of spillovers and increasing in V i .
      If the representatives in districts 1 and 2 are V 1 and V 2 , a citizen of type V in district i will
  enjoy a payoff
                     Ý1 ? VÞ lnßy ? pg Di ÝV i Þà + VßÝ1 ? UÞ ln g Di ÝV i Þ + U ln g D?i ÝV ?i Þà                  #
  These preferences over types determine voting decisions. A pair of representative types
  ÝV D1 , V D2 Þ is majority preferred under decentralization if, in each district i, a majority of
  citizens prefer the type of their representative to any other type V 5 ß0, Và, given the other
  district’s representative type V D?i .
                    We assume that if a majority preferred pair of representative types exists, the elected
              representatives in the two districts will be of these types. There are two possible
              justifications. First, there is an equilibrium of the citizen-candidate model in which a
              candidate of the majority preferred type from each district runs and is elected
              unopposed. footnote Second, if in each district, two Downsian parties compete for office by
              selecting candidates, equilibrium will involve both parties in each district selecting
              candidates of the majority preferred type. Given our assumption, a pair of public goods
              levels Ýg 1 , g 2 Þ is a policy outcome under decentralization if there exists a pair of
              representative types ÝV D1 , V D2 Þ which is majority preferred under decentralization such that
              Ýg 1 , g 2 Þ = Ýg D1 ÝV D1 Þ, g D2 ÝV D2 ÞÞ.
                    The optimal type of representative for a citizen of type V in district i maximizes
              Ý1 ? VÞ lnßy ? pg Di ÝV i Þà + VÝ1 ? UÞ ln g Di ÝV i Þ. Since a type V candidate chooses the public
              good level which solves this problem, each citizen prefers a candidate of his own type.
              Citizens’ preferences over types are single-peaked footnote implying that a pair of
              representative types is majority preferred under decentralization if and only if it is a median
              pair i.e., ÝV D1 , V D2 Þ = Ým 1 , m 2 Þ. We have therefore established:
Proposition There is a unique policy outcome under decentralization given by
                                                           m Ý1 ? UÞy m 2 Ý1 ? UÞy
                                           Ýg 1 , g 2 Þ = Ý 1          ,             Þ.
                                                           Ý1 ? m 1 UÞp Ý1 ? m 2 UÞp
                  This has a conventional flavor since local public good provision respects the median
              taste within a district. This is well known for pure local public goods (U = 0Þ, and has served
              as the workhorse predictive model for local public finance — see Rubinfeld (1987). It also
              holds in our model when U > 0. footnote

          Policy Determination under Centralization
                  The policy determination process under centralization also has an election and a policy
              selection stage. Citizens from each district are elected to serve in a legislature. We use a
              reduced form model of how this legislature makes policy that captures (parametrically) the
              main competing theories of distributive policy making. The latter fall into two main
              categories. Minimum winning coalition theories predict that distributive policies will be
              obtained by a coalition of representatives of the smallest size necessary to pass the
              legislation. Thus, a coalition of 51% of the representatives will form to propose a bill
              distributing benefits to their districts which will pass by the slimmest of margins. The
              theories are much less clear in predicting who will form the winning coalition and suggest
              that there could be a stochastic element in this.
                  The uncertainty about coalition membership motivates the universalism model.
              Representatives may prefer a less random outcome to the “feast or famine” implied by the
              minimum winning coalition theory. Accordingly, members of a decisive coalition may
              allocate benefits to those outside on the understanding that non-members would behave
              similarly if political power were allocated differently. Thus, a “norm of reciprocity” will
              emerge under which representatives behave more cooperatively.
                  Our reduced form model supposes that power in the legislature is randomly allocated to
              one of the representatives, with each district’s representative equally likely to be selected.
              This captures the randomness inherent in the identity of the decisive coalition. The
              representative with power chooses public good levels in accordance with a “norm”
              represented by a parameter W 5 ß1/2, 1à. If district i’s representative holds power, he chooses
              a pair of public goods that maximize W times his own utility plus Ý1 ? WÞ times the other
district’s representative’s utility. Thus, higher values of W correspond to a less cooperative
legislature, i.e., one in which the norm of reciprocity is weaker.
    This formulation implies that, if the legislature is of type W and the representatives are of
types V 1 and V 2 , the policy outcome will be Ýg 11 ÝV 1 , V 2 ; WÞ, g 12 ÝV 1 , V 2 ; WÞÞ with probability 1/2
and Ýg 21 ÝV 1 , V 2 ; WÞ, g 22 ÝV 1 , V 2 ; WÞÞ with probability 1/2 where Ýg i1 , g i2 Þ solves
                                                    p
                 max W 6 áÝ1 ? V i Þ lnÝy ?           Ýg + g ?i ÞÞ + V i ßÝ1 ? UÞ ln g i + U ln g ?i àâ +
                Ýg i ,g ?i Þ                        2 i

                                                     p
                Ý1 ? WÞ 6 áÝ1 ? V ?i Þ lnÝy ?          Ýg + g ?i ÞÞ + V ?i ßÝ1 ? UÞ ln g ?i + U ln g i àâ.
                                                     2 i
It is easily checked that
                                  2ßWV 1 Ý1 ? UÞ + Ý1 ? WÞV 2 Uày 2ßWV 1 U + Ý1 ? WÞV 2 Ý1 ? UÞày
            Ýg 11 , g 12 Þ = Ý                   p               ,               p                Þ,                       #

and,
                                  2ßÝ1 ? WÞV 1 Ý1 ? UÞ + WV 2 Uày 2ßÝ1 ? WÞV 1 U + WV 2 Ý1 ? UÞày
            Ýg 21 , g 22 Þ = Ý                   p               ,               p                Þ.                       #

    The case of W = 1, is akin to the prediction of the minimum winning coalition literature;
the policy package maximizes the joint utility of a coalition of the smallest possible size and
the composition of the minimum winning coalition is unknown ex ante. With W = 1/2, the
policy outcome maximizes the joint utility of the representatives, which is more in line with
the literature on universalistic legislative norms. footnote Moving between the two extremes
yields hybrid outcomes where benefits are concentrated inside a minimum winning coalition
with some partial reflection of preferences outside.
    Turning to the election stage, if the representative types are V 1 and V 2 , a citizen of type V
in district i obtains an expected utility level of
                                                    pÝg k1 + g k2 Þ
                     1
                     2         > áÝ1 ? VÞ lnÝy ?          2
                                                                    Þ + VßÝ1 ? UÞ ln g ki + U ln g k?i àâ.                 #
                          k5á1,2â

A pair of representative types ÝV D1 , V D2 Þ is majority preferred under centralization if, in each
district i, a majority of citizens prefer the type of their representative to any other type
V 5 ß0, Và, given the other district’s representative type V D?i . Again, we assume that when a
majority preferred pair of representative types exists, the elected representatives in the two
districts will be of these types. footnote Thus, a policy outcome under centralization consists
of a pair of public goods pairs áÝg i1 , g i2 Þâ i5á1,2â that would be generated by a pair of majority
preferred representative types ÝV D1 , V D2 Þ; i.e., such that Ýg i1 , g i2 Þ = Ýg i1 ÝV D1 , V D2 ; WÞ, g i2 ÝV D1 , V D2 ; WÞÞ
for i 5 á1, 2â.
     Under decentralization, public goods levels are only a function of the type elected in the
district providing that good. As ( ref: a ) and ( ref: b ) show, under centralization, the public
goods level now depends on the type of the legislator in both districts. This can generate an
incentive for citizens in each district to delegate policy making strategically to a
representative with different tastes in order to affect the policy outcome when their district
does not hold power. This reasoning is key to understanding voters’ preferences over
representative types.
     It is straightforward to show that a pair of representative types ÝV D1 , V D2 Þ is majority
  preferred under centralization if and only if in each district i the median type prefers V Di to
  any other type V 5 ß0, Và, given the other district’s representative type V D?i . footnote We can
  exploit this observation in the following way. First, for i 5 á1, 2â define U i ÝV 1 , V 2 , m i Þ to be
  the expected payoff received by the median voter in district i, when the representative types
  are ÝV 1 , V 2 Þ; that is,
                                                              pÝg k1 + g k2 Þ
        U i ÝV 1 , V 2 , m i Þ = 1
                                 2    > áÝ1 ? m i Þ lnÝy ?          2
                                                                              Þ + m i ßÝ1 ? UÞ ln g ki + U ln g k?i àâ.
                                     k5á1,2â

  Then, ÝV D1 , V D2 Þ is majority preferred under centralization if and only if ÝV D1 , V D2 Þ is a Nash
  equilibrium of the two player game in which each player has strategy set ß0, Và and player
  i 5 á1, 2â has payoff function U i ÝV 1 , V 2 , m i Þ. Thus, even though the outcome is supported by
  a game in which candidates run for office in each district, it is as if the two median voters get
  to choose the type of policy maker who is elected.
      The district i median citizen will try to manipulate V i so that he obtains something close
  to his preferred policy outcome anticipating the subsequent working of the legislature.
  However, since he only has one degree of freedom, V i , and two objectives Ýg 1 , g 2 Þ, this
  instrument is rather blunt. Raising V i leads to an increase in both districts’ public goods,
  irrespective of which district’s representative holds political power. However, it also raises
  taxes. This trade-off can be illustrated by differentiating U i with respect to V i . Using ( ref: a )
  and ( ref: b ), we obtain:

                    /U 1 = m 1 y ß WÝ1 ? UÞ 2 + WU 2 + Ý1 ? WÞÝ1 ? UÞ 2 + Ý1 ? WÞU 2 à
                    /V 1     p         g 11         g 12           g 21       g 22
                               Ý1 ? m 1 Þy      W        1?W
                           ?                ß          +        à,
                                   2          y ? T1     y ? T2
  and
                    /U 2 = m 2 y ß WÝ1 ? UÞ 2 + WU 2 + Ý1 ? WÞÝ1 ? UÞ 2 + Ý1 ? WÞU 2 à
                    /V 2     p         g 22         g 21           g 12       g 11
                               Ý1 ? m 2 Þy      W        1?W
                           ?                ß          +        à,
                                   2          y ? T2     y ? T1
  where T i = pßg i1 + g i2 à/2 for i 5 á1, 2â. The first term in these equations (which is positive)
  represents the marginal benefits of raising the representative’s type, while the second (which
  is negative) reflects the marginal costs.
      It is readily demonstrated that //VU21 < 0 and that //VU22 < 0, so that each player’s payoff
                                            2                   2

                                                    1                     2
  is a strictly concave function of his strategy. Since each player’s strategy set is compact and
  convex, a pure strategy equilibrium of the game exists. Equilibria can either be interior
  where V Di 5 Ý0, VÞ, or extremal where for some district j, V Dj = 0 or V. Interior equilibria are
  characterized by the first order conditions /U   1
                                                /V 1
                                                     = /U  2
                                                        /V 2
                                                             = 0. It is also easy to show that
   /2U1                        /2U2
  /V 1 /V 2
              < 0 and that    /V 2 /V 1
                                          < 0, implying that types are strategic substitutes.

 Decentralization vs Centralization: Identical Districts

Majority Preferred Types and Policy Outcomes
             A pair of representative types ÝV D1 , V D2 Þ is symmetric if V D1 = V D2 . With identical districts,
         there is a unique symmetric pair of majority preferred types under centralization. To simplify
         the statement of this, define:
                                           UÝ1?UÞßW 2 +Ý1?WÞ 2 à+ßU 2 +Ý1?UÞ 2 àWÝ1?WÞ
                                           UÝ1?UÞßW 2 +Ý1?WÞ 2 à+ßU 3 +Ý1?UÞ 3 à2WÝ1?WÞ
                                                                                          if ÝU, WÞ ® Ý0, 1Þ
                           aÝU, WÞ =
                                           1                                              if ÝU, WÞ = Ý0, 1Þ.

         It is easy to verify that a ² 1 and that a is increasing in U with aÝ0, WÞ = 1/2 for all W < 1
         and aÝ1/2, WÞ = 1 for all W. In addition, a is increasing in W for U > 0 and satisfies
         aÝU, 1Þ = 1 and aÝU, 1/2Þ = 1/2ßU 2 + Ý1 ? UÞ 2 à for all U. We now have:
Lemma Suppose that m 1 = m 2 = m. Then, a symmetric pair of representative types ÝV D1 , V D2 Þ is majority
             preferred under centralization if and only if
                                         V D1 = V D2 =         m          .
                                                       m + Ý1 ? mÞaÝU, WÞ

             This result makes the incentive for strategic delegation transparent, with each district
         desiring a representative with preferences above the median, except in the special case of
         either maximal spillovers ÝU = 1/2Þ or a non-cooperative legislature ÝW = 1Þ. The
         divergence from the median preference is greater, the smaller are the spillovers and the more
         cooperative is the legislature. The maximal divergence from the median preference occurs
         when there are no spillovers ÝU = 0Þ and the legislature is fully cooperative ÝW = 1/2Þ.
             To develop some intuition for this, consider first the case where W = 1. In this case,
         district i’s representative only affects the outcome when he holds political power, in which
         case he selects the policy outcome which maximizes his own utility. To maximize the
         median voter’s utility then requires having a representative just like himself. Next consider
         the case where W = 1/2 and U = 0. In this case, when district i’s representative holds
         political power, he is compelled by legislative norms to take into account the preferences of
         the other representative. Accordingly, he does not exploit the budgetary externality as much
         as the median voter would like. Thus, the median voter elects a higher type. footnote As
         spillovers increase, putting in a higher type leads to more public good for both districts,
         dampening the incentive to put in a higher type. The intermediate cases of W 5 Ý1/2, 1Þ
         display the same pattern as the cooperative case. The median voters in each district desire
         candidates of higher types when spillovers are low but their incentive to overstate their
         preferences is dampened as spillovers increase.
             The impact of changing W on equilibrium types is more subtle. In the case of zero
         spillovers, the type of each district’s representative has no effect on the level of the public
         good received by the other district. As W increases, the amount of the public good each
         representative selects for his district when he holds political power increases, while the
         amount he selects for the other district decreases. Thus, when his district’s representative
         holds political power, the median voter’s incentive to have a higher type is dampened, but
         when the other district’s representative holds power the impact is reversed. These two effects
         turn out to offset each other which explains why when U = 0, the equilibrium type is the
         same for all W < 1. With positive spillovers, the same two effects are present. However, there
         is an additional consideration since putting in a higher type also increases the amount of the
         public good received by the other district. This occurs irrespective of which district’s
         representative holds power. Increasing W magnifies this effect to a greater extent when the
         median voter’s own representative holds power and hence the net impact is to dampen the
              incentive to put in a higher type.
                  A policy outcome under centralization is symmetric if g 11 = g 22 and g 12 = g 21 . Using
              Lemma 1, we have the following:
    Lemma Suppose that m 1 = m 2 = m. Then, the unique symmetric policy outcome under centralization is
                 given by
                                         2mßWÝ1 ? UÞ + Ý1 ? WÞUày 2mßWU + Ý1 ? WÞÝ1 ? UÞày
                     Ýg ii , g i?i Þ = Ý                         ,                         Þ i 5 á1, 2â.
                                          ßm + Ý1 ? mÞaÝU, WÞàp    ßm + Ý1 ? mÞaÝU, WÞàp
              It is useful to distinguish between the average level of public goods and the divergence
              between the level received by the district holding power and the other district. The average
              level of public goods is given by
                                             g ii + g i?i            my
                                                          =                       .
                                                  2         ßm + Ý1 ? mÞaÝU, WÞàp
              The smaller the level of spillovers, the greater the overspending relative to the median’s
              desired level of my/p. Spending is also higher in more cooperative legislatures. In addition,
              average spending on public goods is at least as large under centralization as it is under
              decentralization — this inequality holds strictly except when U = 0 or W = 1. The advantage
              gained by the district holding power in political equilibrium is given by
                                                               Ý2W ? 1ÞÝ1 ? 2UÞ2my
                                             g ii ? g i?i =                         .
                                                              ßm + Ý1 ? mÞaÝU, WÞàp
              This is increasing in W and zero only when W = 1/2 or U = 1/2.

          Welfare Comparisons
                  Proposition 2 implies that aggregate welfare in a decentralized regime is given by:
                                                                yÝ1 ? mÞ        mÝ1 ? UÞy
                                   W d ÝUÞ = 2áÝ1 ? mÞ ln                + m ln           â,
                                                                 1 ? mU         Ý1 ? mUÞp
              while under a centralized regime, if the policy outcome is symmetric, Lemma 2 implies that
              aggregate welfare is given by
                               W c ÝU, WÞ = 2Ý1 ? mÞ ln yÝ1 ?     m       Þ
                                                             m + Ý1 ? mÞa
                                                        2mJy                  2mKy
                                            + mßln                  + ln                 à,
                                                   ßm + Ý1 ? mÞaàp       ßm + Ý1 ? mÞaàp
              where J = ßWÝ1 ? UÞ + Ý1 ? WÞUà and K = ßWU + Ý1 ? WÞÝ1 ? UÞà. We begin the comparisons
              with the case in which there is no bias in the political system stemming from a difference
              between the preferences of the median citizen and the average citizen; i.e., m = m. In this
              case, under decentralization, we get exactly the prediction of Oates’ analysis. The following
              four facts about welfare in this case are readily established. First, as noted in the discussion
              of Oates’ analysis, aggregate welfare under decentralization is decreasing in U. Second, for
              all W, aggregate welfare under centralization is increasing in U. Third, for all U < 1/2,
              aggregate welfare under centralization is decreasing in W. Finally, W c Ý1/2, WÞ = W d Ý0Þ for all
              W. Putting these together, we obtain:
Proposition Suppose that in each district the average valuation of public goods equals the median valuation
                   Ým i = m i Þ, that m 1 = m 2 , and that the policy outcome under centralization is
          symmetric. Then, whatever the degree of non-cooperativeness of the legislature, there
          exists a critical value of U, strictly greater than 0 and strictly smaller than 1/2, such
          that a centralized system is welfare superior if and only if U exceeds this critical level.
          Moreover, this critical level depends positively on the degree of non-cooperativeness of
          the legislature as measured by W.
This result implies that decentralization is welfare superior for small spillovers, while
centralization is better when spillovers are large. The result differs sharply from the
conclusions of Oates’ analysis, which suggests that centralization is always desirable when
districts are identical.
     Decentralization is favored with small spillovers due to the budgetary externality created
by common financing of expenditures. Without spillovers, citizens prefer a high level of the
local public good in their own district and none in the other. In a cooperative legislature
(W = 1/2), the representative with power (more generally, the decisive coalition) does not
exploit this externality. However, the voters respond by delegating decision making
strategically to representatives that favor public spending, resulting in excessive public
spending from a social viewpoint. In a less than fully cooperative legislature (W > 1/2), the
representative who holds power exploits this by overproviding public goods to his own
district and underproviding them to the other. The random allocation of decision power
creates political risk which further lowers aggregate welfare.
     The preference for centralization with high spillovers is due to two things. First, the free
rider problem between the districts under decentralization is worsened. Second, high
spillovers lead citizens to prefer more equitable spending on public goods and hence lessen
the conflict of interest between districts. For a more cooperative legislature, this is
manifested in representatives with tastes for public spending closer to those of the average
citizen which generates lower levels of public spending. When the legislature behaves
non-cooperatively, the decisive representative chooses to provide local public goods for both
districts. In the extreme case, when U = 1/2 the interests of citizens from different districts of
the same taste are perfectly aligned and the degree of cooperativeness of the legislature does
not affect the performance of centralization.
     The Proposition assumes that the median and mean preference for public spending are
the same. footnote It is straightforward to show that the case for centralization when
spillovers are high holds provided the median valuation is no larger than the mean; i.e.,
W c Ý1/2, WÞ > W d Ý0Þ for all W when m ² m. In addition, the case for decentralization when
spillovers are low holds irrespective of the relationship between the median and the mean
when the legislature behaves non-cooperatively (i.e., W = 1). However, if the legislature is
cooperative (W = 1/2) and the mean preference is sufficiently above the median, then it is
possible for centralization to dominate even if there are no spillovers. This is because, absent
spillovers, the political process under decentralization would tend to under-provide public
goods relative to the welfare optimum. In this case, the budgetary externality under
centralization becomes a virtue and allows an increased level of public goods. Thus
centralization becomes preferred for reasons other than regulating spillovers. footnote
     The effects at work in this section stem purely from the political consequences of
centralization. In the background is the common financing of spending under centralization
which generates a budgetary externality in spending decisions. With small spillovers, there is
a conflict of interest between citizens resident in different districts which undermines the
performance of the centralized system. Larger spillovers soften the conflict of interest
between citizens and centralization performs better irrespective of legislative norms.
                   Decentralization vs Centralization: Non-identical
                                       Districts
                   We now consider non-identical districts, assuming throughout that m 1 < m 2 .
               Characterizing strategic delegation incentives and the consequences for political equilibrium
               is more complicated in this instance. The two extreme cases (W = 1 and W = 1/2) can be
               solved analytically. The intermediate cases will be investigated via simulations.

           Majority Preferred Types and Policy Outcomes
           The Non-cooperative Legislature
                   The case in which the legislature is non-cooperative (W = 1Þ is straightforward. There is
               no incentive for strategic delegation — district i’s representative only has an impact on the
               policy outcome when he has the power to decide and hence the median voter is content to
               choose someone with his own tastes. Thus, we have
Proposition Suppose that W = 1. Then, a pair of representative types ÝV D1 , V D2 Þ is majority preferred under
                   centralization if and only if ÝV D1 , V D2 Þ = Ým 1 , m 2 Þ. Accordingly, there is a unique policy
                   outcome under centralization given by
                                                            2m i Ý1 ? UÞy 2m i Uy
                                         Ýg i1 , g i2 Þ = Ý        p       , p Þ, i 5 á1, 2â.

           The Cooperative Legislature
                   To state the solution in this case, define
                                                                 Ý1 ? UÞ 2          U2
                                                     J1 =                    +               ,
                                                               Ý1 ? UÞ + U/Y   U + Ý1 ? UÞ/Y
               and,
                                                                   Ý1 ? UÞ 2         U2
                                                      J2 =                    +              .
                                                                 Ý1 ? UÞ + UY   U + Ý1 ? UÞY

               where Y =    Ý1?m 2 Þm 1 ßU 3 +Ý1?UÞ 3 à?Ý1?m 1 Þm 2 UÝ1?UÞ
                            Ý1?m 1 Þm 2 ßU 3 +Ý1?UÞ 3 à?Ý1?m 2 Þm 1 UÝ1?UÞ
                                                                             . In addition, define å
                                                                                                   U as the solution to

                                               ßå
                                                U 3 + Ý1 ? å
                                                           UÞ 3 à   Ý1 ? m 1 Þm 2
                                                   å     å        =               .
                                                   UÝ1 ? UÞ         Ý1 ? m 2 Þm 1
               It is straightforward to show that å
                                                  U 5 Ý0, 1/2Þ. Observe that J i = 1 when U = 0 and J i < 1
               when U 5 Ý0, UÞ for i = 1, 2. In addition, J < J when U 5 Ý0, å
                               å
                                                                              1     UÞ. footnote We now have:
                                                                                     2

     Lemma Suppose that W = 1/2. Then, there exists a unique pair of representative types ÝV D1 , V D2 Þ which is
                  majority preferred under centralization. When U < å              U
                            D     D
                         ÝV 1 , V 2 Þ = Ý                 m 1
                                                                                 ,         m2                Þ,
                                           m 1 Ý1 + 1/YÞ/2 + Ý1 ? m 1 Þ/2J 1 m 2 Ý1 + YÞ/2 + Ý1 ? m 2 Þ/2J 2
                  and when U 5 ßå     U, 1/2à
                                                           ÝV D1 , V D2 Þ = Ý0, 2m 2 Þ.

                   Thus there are two cases. For low spillovers (U < å
                                                                     U), there is an interior solution. For
                                     å
               high spillovers (U 5 ßU, 1/2à), we have a boundary solution in which the district with the low
               median elects a citizen who does not value public spending, while the district with the high
               median heads towards the other extreme, electing a citizen with twice the median preference.
                    To understand this intuitively, consider the two extremes of U = 0 and U = 1/2. In the
               first of these, J 1 = J 2 = 1 and Y = 1. Lemma 3 then implies that the majority preferred pair
               of representatives is

                         ÝV D1 , V D2 Þ = Ý                m1                 ,             m2                  Þ.
                                              1/2 + Ý1 ? m 1 Þm 2 /2Ý1 ? m 2 Þ 1/2 + Ý1 ? m 2 Þm 1 /2Ý1 ? m 1 Þ
           Using the fact that 2m i < V < 1, it is easy to show that V Di > m i for i 5 á1, 2â and V D1 < V D2 .
           Thus, both districts select representative types above the median. As above, this is explained
           by the voters’ desire to exploit the budgetary externality. An increase in the median voter’s
           type in one district, reduces the representative’s type in the other district. The former raises
           taxes and hence reduces the relative value of local public goods on the margin.
               When U = 1/2, the strategic delegation incentives are different. Each district’s median
           voter desires the same level of spending on the two public goods. However, district 2’s
           median voter prefers more of both public goods than does district 1. Thus district 1’s median
           voter has an incentive to have a lower representative type to reduce public goods spending,
           while that in district 2 will wish to have a representative with a higher valuation. They pull in
           opposite directions until one or both districts has put in their most extreme type. Our
           assumption that 2m 2 < V implies that district 2 can obtain its preferred level of public goods
           when district 1 has put in its most extreme type so that district 2’s median voter is getting its
           preferred outcome. footnote
               The policy outcomes associated with Lemma 3 are described in our next result.
Proposition Suppose that W = 1/2. Then, if U < å  U, the pair of public goods pairs Ýg i , g i Þ    where
                                                                                                     1   2 i5á1,2â
                                                          Ý1 ? UÞm 1                            Um 2                y
                                   g i1 = ß                                      +                                à
                                               m 1 Ý1 + 1/YÞ/2 + Ý1 ? m 1 Þ/2J 1   m 2 Ý1 + YÞ/2 + Ý1 ? m 2 Þ/2J 2 p
                        and
                                                      Ý1 ? UÞm 2                           Um 1                 y
                                   g i2 = ß                              +                                    à
                                         m 2 Ý1 + YÞ/2 + Ý1 ? m 2 Þ/2J 2     m 1 Ý1 + 1/YÞ/2 + Ý1 ? m 1 Þ/2J 1 p
                          is the unique policy outcome under centralization. If U ³ å    U, the pair of public goods
                          pairs
                                                                 2m Uy 2m 2 Ý1 ? UÞy
                                               Ýg i1 , g i2 Þ = Ý p2 ,       p        Þ, i 5 á1, 2â.
                          is the unique policy outcome under centralization.
               It is interesting to compare these outcomes with those produced by a non-cooperative
               legislature. With low spillovers, the fully cooperative legislature eliminates the political risk
               associated with centralization, but at the expense of over-provision of public goods
               stemming from strategic delegation. With high spillovers ÝU = 1/2Þ, the fully cooperative
               legislature produces, with probability one, one of the public goods pairs which is selected
               with equal probability by the non-cooperative legislature.
           Partially Cooperative Legislature
                   In cases where W 5 Ý1/2, 1Þ, the legislature exposes each district to some political risk
               since the identity of the politically decisive district is uncertain. It also gives incentives for
               strategic delegation to affect policy outcomes when the other district holds political power.
               Hence, it combines features of the previous sub-sections. While it is no longer possible to
               obtain closed form solutions for ÝV D1 , V D2 Þ, we are able to solve the model numerically.
                   We present numerical results for three scenarios depending on the degree of
 heterogeneity between the districts. The first has almost identical districts, the second has
 medium heterogeneity and the third has a large degree of heterogeneity. For comparative
 purposes, we provide results for the cases W = 1/2, W = 3/4 and W = 1. footnote The
 equilibrium choice of representatives are given in Figures 1, 2, and 3. As in the cooperative
 case, when W = 3/4, there are two possible cases — interior solutions where the first order
 conditions hold with equality and extremal solutions where district 1’s representative has
 preferences at the lower extreme of the distribution of preferences. The extremal solution
 arises in the case of high heterogeneity. Note also that, in contrast to the identical districts
 case, the equilibrium representative type for district 1 is no longer always decreasing in W.

Welfare Comparisons
      Welfare comparisons in the case in which the legislature is non-cooperative (W = 1Þ are
 straightforward. Using Proposition 4, it can be shown that welfare under centralization is
 increasing in the degree of spillovers. Moreover, it is clear that decentralization out-performs
 centralization when spillovers are zero, since the latter generates no public goods for one
 district. However, in contrast to the case of identical districts, centralization does not
 necessarily out perform decentralization when spillovers are maximal. When U = 1/2,
 centralization produces a uniform level of public goods m 1 y/p with probability 1/2 and a
 level m 2 y/p with probability 1/2. This may be worse than the decentralized outcome where
 district i receives outcome m i y/Ý2 ? m i Þp. Accordingly, either a decentralized system is
 welfare superior for all values of U or there exists a critical value of U, strictly greater than 0,
 such that a centralized system is welfare superior if and only if U exceeds this critical level.
      Welfare comparisons for more cooperative legislatures are less straightforward
 analytically and we must turn to simulations for guidance. In general, we can show that when
 m i = m i decentralization continues to be welfare superior for small spillovers. footnote In
 addition, it is clear that centralization does not necessarily out perform decentralization when
 spillovers are maximal. For example, with W = 1/2, Proposition 5 applies and the uniform
 level of public goods when U = 1/2 will be m 2 y/p, which is too high from a social viewpoint
 (assuming m i = m i Þ. Analytically, the problem lies in showing that if centralization is
 preferred at some level of spillovers, it is preferred at all higher levels. This is difficult even
 in the case when W = 1/2 for which we have explicit solutions.
      Figures 4, 5 and 6 provide the welfare comparisons corresponding to the scenarios
 described above. In all cases, there exists some critical level of spillovers such that
 centralization is welfare superior if and only if U exceeds this level. footnote Two further
 points are apparent from the Figures. First, the critical level of spillovers is increasing in the
 degree of heterogeneity for all values of W we consider. Thus, the simulations support the
 idea that heterogeneity across the districts weakens the case for centralization. Second, the
 critical level is not necessarily decreasing in W, suggesting that there is no presumption that
 more cooperative legislative norms imply a stronger case for centralization when districts
 differ. This differs from the findings for identical districts reported in Proposition 3.
      To summarize, the simulations suggest a picture that is broadly consistent with the
 conclusions of Oates’ analysis of non-identical districts. If the median and mean tastes for
 public spending are close, a decentralized system is welfare superior for small spillovers.
 However, there exists a critical value of spillovers, such that a centralized system is welfare
 superior if and only if U exceeds this critical level. This level of spillovers is higher the
 greater the degree of heterogeneity. This similarity not-withstanding, a very different logic
 underlies our results. In Oates’ analysis the poor performance of centralization when districts
 differ follows directly from the assumption of uniform provision. In our analysis, it is due
 the political consequences of setting up a centralized system with non-identical districts.
 Heterogeneity worsens the conflict of interest between jurisdictions in selecting policy
 choices. footnote

                                               Discussion
    The paper has developed a particular modeling approach in order to make comparisons
 between centralized and decentralized systems of government. In this section, we discuss the
 implications of relaxing two key assumptions – uniform taxation and the absence of mobility
 between jurisdictions.

Non-uniform Taxing and Spending
      Throughout, we have assumed that financing decisions are uniform, while expenditure
 decisions are not. This can be justified on empirical grounds since most centralized systems
 of government appear to operate (approximately) according to such rules. footnote These
 assumptions can, however, be relaxed and, in doing so, we can gain some insight into why
 such conventions are the norm.
      Suppose then that taxes can be different in each district, so that the representative
 holding political power chooses a pair of local public goods levels Ýg 1 , g 2 Þ and a pair of
 district-specific taxes ÝT 1 , T 2 Þ. Such taxes can now serve two roles — they raise revenue for
 public spending and are a direct instrument for effecting cross district redistribution. While
 the former rids us of the budgetary externality that common pool financing generates, the
 latter increases political risk under centralization significantly.
      Consider the extreme case where W = 1. Then, the representative holding political power
 can set a tax on the other district equal to y and thereby extract all their resources. With our
 logarithmic preferences, zero private consumption is very bad indeed and decentralization is
 preferred no matter what the degree of spillovers. While this is the most extreme case, it is
 clear that the welfare cost of non-cooperative legislative behavior is likely to be high when
 cash based mechanisms for cross-district redistribution are feasible. Uniform tax codes
 eliminate an important source of such redistributions. We suspect that this finding explains
 the widely observed preference for uniform tax codes in federal systems.
      It is also worth noting that even when the legislature behaves perfectly cooperatively
 ÝW = 1/2Þ, non-uniform taxation does not resolve the problems of centralization arising from
 strategic delegation. Suppose that in each district i, m i = m i so that if the majority preferred
 types are just the median types Ým 1 , m 2 Þ, centralization produces the socially optimal
 allocation. This will be the outcome when there are no spillovers. However, when there are
 spillovers, the median voter in each district has an incentive to strategically delegate to a
 candidate with a lower preference for public spending. This is because district i’s tax
 depends only on the type of district i’s representative, while the public good levels depend
 upon both representatives’ types. Suppose, for example, that U = 1/2. Then, if the
 representatives are of types ÝV 1 , V 2 Þ, for each district i it is the case that g i = yÝV 1 + V 2 Þ/2p
 and T i = V i y. It is now straightforward to show that the majority preferred types are given
 by:
                                             m 1 ? Ý1 ? m 1 Þm 2 m 2 ? Ý1 ? m 2 Þm 1
                        ÝV D1 , V D2 Þ = Ý                      ,                    Þ.
                                             m 1 + Ý1 ? m 1 Þm 2 m 2 + Ý1 ? m 2 Þm 1
 Local public goods are thus under-supplied in political equilibrium.
    If uniform tax codes can be seen as a device to reduce the welfare costs associated with
  inter-district redistribution, one might also try to justify the traditional assumption that
  spending decisions are uniform with the same logic. The task would be to understand when
  welfare under centralization would be higher when representatives were constrained to set
  g 1 = g 2 . In such circumstances, one might argue that we should expect to see a norm of
  uniform spending adhered to. In practice, however, we suspect that such a norm is much
  more difficult to establish than provisions of uniform taxation. Most notions of equal
  treatment would have little to do with equal expenditures. Deciding what constitutes equal
  provision of flood defences for a land-locked and coastal area has nothing to do with uniform
  provision. Similarly, defining equal access to roads in an urban and rural area may imply
  very different levels of spending. These inherent heterogeneities in spending needs make it
  hard indeed to imagine a satisfactory scheme of uniform provision.

Mobility
       We have assumed that the citizens continue to reside in the same location under either
  policy making arrangement that we have considered. This could be justified if there were
  other immovable local public goods such as language and culture that tie individuals to
  locations. It is interesting to consider the consequences of allowing mobility in the model.
  This could be incorporated by adding a prior stage to the model in which citizens chose
  which district to live in. If mobility is costless, equilibrium requires that no citizen wishes to
  relocate given the composition of the district in which they have chosen to live.
       Free mobility has striking implications for the model with centralization; only two
  districts with identical median voters will satisfy the required equilibrium condition. Citizens
  make the same tax payment no matter where they choose to live and hence prefer to live in
  the district that has the greatest expected utility from public goods. Thus equilibrium requires
  that both districts must have the same expected value of public goods provision. This is true
  only if they elect identical representatives, which in our model requires that the median type
  be the same in both districts.
       By contrast, decentralized policy making can lead to districts not being identical. The
  argument exploits the fact that, under decentralization, our preferences exhibit a
  single-crossing property in preferences familiar from Epple and Romer (1991) and Benabou
  (1996). Specifically, let U i ÝV, Ým 1 , m 2 ÞÞ be the utility of a type V living in district i when the
  median’s in each district are Ým 1 , m 2 Þ. Under the assumption that the equilibrium policy
  choices Ýg 11 , g 12 Þ and Ýg 21 , g 22 Þ are increasing in m i , it is straightforward to show that
  / 2 U i ÝV, Ým 1 , m 2 ÞÞ//V/m i > 0. This says that types with high preferences for public goods
  crave a district with a higher median and individuals sort. Thus, under this assumption, we
  would get an outcome in which all the high and low public good preference types reside
  together. Moreover, under reasonable definitions of stability (Benabou (1996)) the only
  possibility would be for a stratified outcome. That said, establishing that the (intuitively
  plausible) assumption that the equilibrium policy choices Ýg 11 , g 12 Þ and Ýg 21 , g 22 Þ are increasing
  in m i is generally true, appears difficult.
       Thus our model seems to suggest that, with free mobility, decentralization gives maximal
  heterogeneity, while centralization promotes homogeneity. Where mobility costs are low,
  therefore, we would not expect our analysis (which held the degree of cross-district
  heterogeneity fixed) to be valid. It is somewhat more difficult to discern how this affects the
  welfare results. Our results have shown that homogeneity favors centralization and
  heterogeneity favors decentralization. Hence, migration will tend to bring the welfare in each
  case closer together, making it harder to say a priori which is better. This is an issue which
  could usefully be investigated in future work.
                                    Conclusion
     The relative merits of decentralized and centralized systems of taxing and spending have
long been of interest to public economists. This paper has modified the usual model of a
centralized system by assuming that districts can receive different levels of local public
goods. In this framework, a benevolent government can realize advantages of centralization
without any of the costs (such as uniform provision) identified in the existing literature. The
case for decentralization must, therefore, be driven by imperfections in the working of
decision making institutions. Our political economy analysis develops models of policy
making under the two regimes which capture features of decision making used in practice.
We then identify the kinds of forces that determine which system will lead to a higher level
of social welfare.
     It is perhaps comforting that the conventional trade-off between cross-district
heterogeneity and spillovers emerges intact from our analysis. However, it is important to
refocus attention on the role of decision making institutions rather than the assumption of
uniform provision in shaping that trade-off. Under the benevolent planner assumption, there
seems little doubt that for many types of public spending, an unrestricted centralized system
is, in principle, superior. The case for centralization in practice will then inevitably depend
on how effectively the political process can harvest the benefits of centralization. We have
emphasized how legislative norms and consequent incentives to delegate policy making
strategically enter the fray. The focus on the political process also delivers new insights.
Our observation that decentralization outperforms centralization with low spillovers even
when districts are identical is an important example.
bibitem Alesina, Alberto and Enrico Spoalore, [1997], “On The Number and Size of
            Nations,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112, 1027-1056.
bibitem Baron, David and John Ferejohn, [1989], “Bargaining in Legislatures” American
            Political Science Review, 83, 1181-1206.
bibitem Benabou, [1996], “Equity and Efficiency in Human Capital Investment: The Local
            Connection”, Review of Economic Studies, 63(2), 237-64.
bibitem Besley, Timothy and Stephen Coate, [1997], “An Economic Model of Representative
            Democracy,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(1), 85-114.
bibitem Bolton, Patrick and Gerard Roland, [1997], “The Break-up of Nations: A Political
            Economy Analysis,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(4), 1057-90.
bibitem Buchanan, James and Gordon Tullock, [1962], The Calculus of Consent, University
            of Michigan Press: Ann Arbor.
bibitem Chari, V.V., Larry Jones and Ramon Marimon, [1997], “The Economics of
            Split-Ticket Voting in Representative Democracies”, American Economic
            Review, 87(5), 957-76.
bibitem Coate, Stephen, [1997], “Distributive Policy Making as a Source of Inefficiency in
            Representative Democracies,” Institute of Economic Research, University of
            Pennsylvania, Working Paper No. 97-041.
bibitem Ellingsen, Tore, [1998], “Externalities versus Internalities: A Model of Political
            Integration,” Journal of Public Economics, 68, 251-268.
bibitem Epple, Dennis and Thomas Romer, [1991], “Mobility and Redistribution”, Journal of
            Political Economy, 99(4), 828-58.
bibitem Ferejohn, John, Morris Fiorina and Richard McKelvey, [1987], “Sophisticated
            Voting and Agenda Independence in the Distributive Politics Setting,” American
            Journal of Political Science, 31, 167-93.
bibitem Inman, Robert P. and Michael A. Fitts, [1990], “Political Institutions and Fiscal
            Policy: Evidence from the U.S. Historical Record”, Journal of Law, Economics
            and Organization; 6, 79-132.
bibitem Inman, Robert and Daniel Rubinfeld, [1997a], “Rethinking Federalism,” Journal of
            Economic Perspectives, 11 (4), 43-64.
bibitem Inman, Robert and Daniel Rubinfeld, [1997b], “The Political Economy of
            Federalism,” in D.C. Mueller, (ed), Perspectives on Public Choice: A Handbook,
            Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
bibitem Lockwood, Ben, [1998], “Distributive Politics and the Benefits of Decentralization,”
            typescript.
bibitem Oates, Wallace, [1972], Fiscal Federalism, Harcourt Brace: New York.
bibitem Osborne, Martin and Al Slivinski, [1996], “A Model of Political Competition with
            Citizen-Candidates,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(1), 65-96.
bibitem Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini, [1992], “The Politics of 1992: Fiscal Policy
            and European Integration”, Review of Economic Studies, 59(4), 689-701.
bibitem Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini, [1994], “Does Centralization Increase the Size
            of Government?”, European Economic Review, 38 (3-4), 765-73.
bibitem Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini, [1996a], “Federal Fiscal Constitutions: Risk
            Sharing and Redistribution,” Journal of Political Economy, 104(5), 979-1009.
bibitem Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini, [1996b], “Federal Fiscal Constitutions: Risk
            Sharing and Moral Hazard,” Econometrica, 64(3), 623-646.
bibitem Riker, William, [1962], The Theory of Political Coalitions, Yale University Press:
            New Haven.
bibitem Rubinfeld, Daniel, [1987], “The Economics of the Local Public Sector,” in A.J.
           Auerbach and M. Feldstein, (eds), Handbook of Public Economics II, New York:
           Elsevier Science Publishers.
bibitem Tiebout, Charles, [1956], “A Pure Theory of Local Expenditures,” Journal of
           Political Economy, 64(5), 416-24.
bibitem Weingast, Barry, [1979], “A Rational Choice Perspective on Congressional Norms,”
           American Journal of Political Science, 23, 245-262.
bibitem Weingast Barry, Kenneth Shepsle and Christopher Johnson, [1981], “The Political
           Economy of Benefits and Costs: A Neoclassical Approach to Distributive
           Politics,” Journal of Political Economy, 89, 642-664.
                                                   Appendix
Proof of Lemma 1: Suppose that m 1 = m 2 = m. We first check for symmetric interior
equilibria in which          V D1 = V D2 = V D 5 Ý0, VÞ. Any such equilibrium must satisfy the first order
            /U 1 ÝV D ,V D ,mÞ
condition         /V 1
                                 = 0. Using the expression for /U   1
                                                                 /V 1
                                                                      and the facts that

                                                   2V D ßWÝ1 ? UÞ + Ý1 ? WÞUày
                                   g 11 = g 22 =                p              ,

                                                   2V D ßÝ1 ? WÞÝ1 ? UÞ + WUày
                                   g 12 = g 21 =                 p             ,

and T 1 = T 2 = V D y, the first order condition can be written as:

                 m ß WÝ1 ? UÞ + Ý1 ? WÞU + WU + Ý1 ? WÞÝ1 ? UÞ à = Ý1 ? mÞ .
                             2            2  2                  2
                   D
                 V    WÝ1 ? UÞ + Ý1 ? WÞU   WU + Ý1 ? WÞÝ1 ? UÞ    Ý1 ? V D Þ
This is a linear equation for V D and it is straightforward, if tedious, to show that
                                           VD =             m
                                                    m + Ý1 ? mÞaÝU, WÞ
where aÝU, WÞ is as defined in the text.
                                                              Ý0,0,mÞ           ÝV,V,mÞ
    Since 0 < m < V D < 2m < V, it must be the case that /U 1/V 1
                                                                      > 0 > /U 1/V 1
                                                                                        . Thus,
                                              D      D                D    D
we cannot have boundary equilibria in which V 1 = V 2 = 0 or that V 1 = V 2 = V. We may
therefore conclude that there is a unique symmetric equilibrium of the game in which both
players select V D . [End Proof]

Proof of Lemma 2: It is clear from Lemma 1 that
                             2mßWÝ1 ? UÞ + Ý1 ? WÞUày 2mßWU + Ý1 ? WÞÝ1 ? UÞày
       Ýg ii , g i?i Þ = Ý                           ,                         Þ i 5 á1, 2â,
                              ßm + Ý1 ? mÞaÝU, WÞàp    ßm + Ý1 ? mÞaÝU, WÞàp
is a symmetric policy outcome under centralization. Suppose there existed another such
                   å å
policy outcome áÝ g ii , g i?i Þ : i 5 á1, 2ââ and let ÝV D1 , V D2 Þ be the pair of majority preferred
                                                                                         å å         å å
types generating it. Lemma 1 allows us to assume that V D1 ® V D2 . But then Ý g 11 , g 12 Þ = Ý g 21 , g 22 Þ
                                                                                               å     å      å
if and only if WÝ1 ? UÞ = Ý1 ? WÞU or, equivalently, W = U = 1/2. It follows that g 11 = g 22 = g
and, from the first order conditions,
                                         my 1   Ý1 ? mÞy
                                              =          ß 1 å à,
                                         2p å
                                            g       2     y ? 2g
which implies that
                                                      å
                                                      g = my/p.
But this is exactly the outcome generated by the symmetric solution described in Lemma 1
when W = U = 1/2. [End Proof]

Proof of Proposition 3: We begin by establishing three of the claims made in the text.
Claim 1: For all W, /W c ÝU, WÞ//U ³ 0 with the inequality holding strictly if and only if
U < 1/2.
   We know that
                 W c ÝU, WÞ = 2Ý1 ? mÞ ln yÝ1 ?          m       Þ
                                                    m + Ý1 ? mÞa
                                               2mJy                  2mKy
                                   + mßln                  + ln                 à.
                                          ßm + Ý1 ? mÞaàp       ßm + Ý1 ? mÞaàp
Differentiating with respect to U yields
            /W c ÝU, WÞ     /J//U /K//U    2ßÝ1 ? mÞm ? aÝ1 ? mÞmà/a//U
                        = mß J +        à?                              .
               /U                   K             ßm + Ý1 ? mÞaàa
Evaluating the derivatives /J//U and /K//U, we have:
            /W c ÝU, WÞ    Ý1 ? 2WÞ 2 Ý1 ? 2UÞ   2ßÝ1 ? mÞm ? aÝ1 ? mÞmà/a//U
                        =m                     ?                              .
               /U                 JK                    ßm + Ý1 ? mÞaàa
The first term is always non-negative and positive unless U = 1/2 or W = 1/2. When m = m,
the second term is always non-negative and positive unless U = 1/2 or W = 1. The result
follows.
Claim 2: For all W, /W c ÝU, WÞ//W ² 0 with the inequality holding strictly if and only if
U < 1/2.
    Following the logic of the previous claim, we have that
            /W c ÝU, WÞ    Ý1 ? 2WÞÝ1 ? 2UÞ 2   2ßÝ1 ? mÞm ? aÝ1 ? mÞmà/a//W
                        =m                    ?
               /W                 JK                   ßm + Ý1 ? mÞaàa
The first term is always non-positive and negative unless U = 1/2 or W = 1/2. When m = m,
the second term is always non-positive and negative unless U = 1/2 or 0 or W = 1. The result
follows.
Claim 3: For all W, W c Ý1/2, WÞ = W d Ý0Þ.
    To see this, observe first that aÝ1/2, WÞ = 1 for all W, which implies that the policy
outcome under centralization is given by g ii = g i?i = myp . This implies that

                                                          my     my
               W c Ý1/2, WÞ = 2Ý1 ? mÞ ln yÝ1 ? mÞ + mßln p + ln p à = W d Ý0Þ.

    We can now prove the Proposition. Let W be given. By Claim 3, W d Ý0Þ = W c Ý1/2, WÞ and
by Claim 1, W c Ý1/2, WÞ > W c Ý0, WÞ. It follows that W d Ý0Þ > W c Ý0, WÞ and, since W d ÝUÞ is
decreasing in U, that W d Ý1/2Þ < W c Ý1/2, WÞ. By the intermediate value theorem and Claim 1,
there exists a unique value of U, denoted å  UÝWÞ, such that å
                                                             UÝWÞ 5 Ý0, 1/2Þ and W d Ýå UÝWÞÞ
       å                                                                              å
= W c ÝUÝWÞ, WÞ. Claim 1 and the fact that W d ÝUÞ is decreasing, implies that W d ÝUÞ
          å                        å            å
> Ý<ÞW c ÝUÝWÞ, WÞ for all U < Ý>ÞUÝWÞ. That UÝWÞ is decreasing in W follows routinely from
Claims 1 and 2 and the fact that W d ÝUÞ is decreasing. [End Proof]
Proof of Lemma 3: For i = 1, 2, let r i : ß0, Và ¸ ß0, Và denote the district i median voter’s
reaction function. By definition, for all V 2 5 ß0, Và,
                            r 1 ÝV 2 Þ = arg maxáU 1 Ýr 1 , V 2 , m 1 Þ : r 1 5 ß0, Vàâ,
and for all V 1 5 ß0, Và,
                          r 2 ÝV 1 Þ = arg maxáU 2 ÝV 1 , r 2 , m 2 Þ : r 2 5 ß0, Vàâ.
Since ÝV D1 , V D2 Þ is majority preferred if and only if ÝV D1 , V D2 Þ = Ýr 1 ÝV D2 Þ, r 2 ÝV D1 ÞÞ, we may
understand the set of majority preferred types by studying the players’ reaction functions.
     Some general features of the reaction functions follow from the properties of the payoff
functions. Recall from the earlier discussion in the text that each player’s payoff is a strictly
concave and differentiable function of his strategy. This implies (i) that r 1 ÝV 2 Þ = 0 if
/U 1 Ý0, V 2 , m 1 Þ//V 1 < 0; (ii) that r 1 ÝV 2 Þ = V if /U 1 ÝV, V 2 , m 1 Þ//V 1 > 0; and (iii) that
otherwise r 1 ÝV 2 Þ is implicitly defined by the first order condition
/U 1 Ýr 1 ÝV 2 Þ, V 2 , m 1 Þ//V 1 = 0. In addition, the fact that types are strategic substitutes implies
that r 1 ÝV 2 Þ is non-decreasing. Similar remarks apply to the district 2 median voter’s reaction
function
     It remains therefore to determine the details of each player’s reaction function. Let
V 1 ÝV 2 Þ denote the level of V 1 ÝV 2 Þ beyond which district 2’s median voter (district 1’s median
voter) would like a type 0 representative. These levels are implicitly defined by the equalities
                                        /U 1 Ý0, V 2 , m 1 Þ//V 1 = 0,
and
                                        /U 2 ÝV 1 , 0, m 2 Þ//V 2 = 0.
Using the facts that
                     p             Ý1 ? UÞ 2                U2                 1 ? m1
        /U 1 //V 1 = y ám 1 ß                     +                     à?ß                  àâ,
                              V 1 Ý1 ? UÞ + V 2 U   V 2 Ý1 ? UÞ + V 1 U     2 ? ÝV 1 + V 2 Þ
and
                     p             Ý1 ? UÞ 2                U2                 1 ? m2
        /U 2 //V 2 = y ám 2 ß                     +                     à?ß                  àâ,
                              V 2 Ý1 ? UÞ + V 1 U   V 1 Ý1 ? UÞ + V 2 U     2 ? ÝV 1 + V 2 Þ
we obtain
                                                     2dÝUÞm 2
                                         V1 =
                                                 1 ? m 2 + dÝUÞm 2
and
                                                    2dÝUÞm 1
                                        V2 =                      ,
                                                1 ? m 1 + dÝUÞm 1
where
                                                    Ý1 ? UÞ 3 + U 3
                                         dÝUÞ =                     .
                                                      UÝ1 ? UÞ
Observe that dÝUÞ is decreasing in U, that dÝ1/2Þ = 1 and that lim U¸0 + dÝUÞ = K. This implies
that V 1 ³ 2m 2 and V 2 ³ 2m 1 .
    Next we characterize the highest type representative each district’s median voter would
want. It is straightforward to show that
                                        /U 1 Ý2m 1 , 0, m 1 Þ//V 1 = 0
and
                                        /U 2 Ý0, 2m 2 , m 2 Þ//V 2 = 0,
which implies that district i’s median voter desires a type 2m i candidate when the other
district selects a type 0 candidate. By assumption, 2m i < V, so that the upper bound
constraint on type choice is not binding here. It follows that for both districts i = 1, 2,
r i Ý0Þ = 2m i .
      We may conclude from the above that for all V 2 5 ß0, mináV 2 , Vâà, r 1 ÝV 2 Þ is implicitly
defined by the first order condition
                                       /U 1 Ýr 1 ÝV 2 Þ, V 2 , m 1 Þ//V 1 = 0
and for all V 2 5 ÝmináV 2 , Vâ, Và,
                                                  r 1 ÝV 2 Þ = 0.
Further, we know that r 1 Ý0Þ = 2m 1 and that r 1 ÝV 2 Þ is downward sloping on ß0, mináV 2 , Vâà.
Similarly, for all V 1 5 ß0, mináV 1 , Vâà, r 2 ÝV 1 Þ is implicitly defined by the first order
condition
                                       /U 2 ÝV 1 , r 2 ÝV 1 Þ, m 2 Þ//V 2 = 0
and for all V 1 5 ÝmináV 1 , Vâ, Và,
                                                  r 2 ÝV 1 Þ = 0.
Further, we know that r 2 Ý0Þ = 2m 2 and that r 2 ÝV 1 Þ is downward sloping on ß0, mináV 1 , Vâà.
    We can now prove the lemma. Recall from above that ÝV D1 , V D2 Þ is majority preferred if
                                                                                  å
and only if ÝV D1 , V D2 Þ = Ýr 1 ÝV D2 Þ, r 2 ÝV D1 ÞÞ. Suppose first that U < U. Then, from the definition of
å
U in the text, it follows that dÝUÞ > Ý1?m          Ý1?m 1 Þm 2
                                                         2 Þm 1
                                                                , which in turn implies that

                                                 2dÝUÞm 1
                                     V2 =                      > 2m 2 .
                                             1 ? m 1 + dÝUÞm 1
This inequality implies that there exist no boundary equilibria in which V Di = 0 for one or
more districts. If V D1 = 0, then V D2 = r 2 Ý0Þ = 2m 2 , but since 2m 2 < V 2 we know that
r 1 Ý2m 2 Þ > 0 which contradicts the fact that V D1 = 0. If V D2 = 0, then V D1 = r 1 Ý0Þ = 2m 1 , but
since 2m 1 < V 1 we know that r 2 Ý2m 1 Þ > 0 which contradicts the fact that V D2 = 0. Since
max r i ÝV ?i Þ < V, it is apparent that there can be no boundary equilibria in which V Di = V for
one or more districts.
      It follows that there must exist an interior             equilibrium. Any such equilibrium ÝV D1 , V D2 Þ
                                             /U i ÝV D1 ,V D2 ,m i Þ
must satisfy the first order conditions             /V i
                                                                     = 0 for i 5 á1, 2â. Using the expressions
      /U i
for /V i , i 5 á1, 2â from above, we may write these first order conditions as:

                              Ý1 ? UÞ 2              U2                 1 ? m1
                   m1ß                      + D                   à=                    ,
                         V D1 Ý1        D
                               ? UÞ + V 2 U  V 2 Ý1 ? UÞ + V D1 U    2 ? ÝV D1 + V D2 Þ
and
                              Ý1 ? UÞ 2               U2               1 ? m2
                   m2ß     D             D   + D              D à =                    .
                         V 2 Ý1 ? UÞ + V 1 U  V 1 Ý1 ? UÞ + V 2 U   2 ? ÝV D1 + V D2 Þ
Combining the two first order conditions, we obtain
                             m1 ß       Ý1 ? UÞ 2               U2
                                                       + D                   à
                           1 ? m 1 V 1 Ý1 ? UÞ + V 2 U
                                     D             D
                                                        V 2 Ý1 ? UÞ + V D1 U
                                        Ý1 ? UÞ 2               U2
                          = m2 ß D                     + D                   à,
                           1 ? m 2 V 2 Ý1 ? UÞ + V 1 U
                                                   D
                                                        V 1 Ý1 ? UÞ + V D2 U
which implies that
                                                    V D1 = YV D2 ,
where Y is as defined in the text. Notice that the assumption that U < å   U implies that Y > 0.
Using this and the first order conditions for V D1 and V D2 respectively yields:

                                    V D1 =                  m2
                                              m 2 Ý1 + YÞ/2 + Ý1 ? m 2 Þ/2J 2
and

                                  V D2 =                    m1                 ,
                                             m 1 Ý1 + 1/YÞ/2 + Ý1 ? m 1 Þ/2J 1
where J 1 and J 2 are as defined in the text.
   Suppose now that U ³ å     U. Then, from the definition of å
                                                              U in the text, it follows that
        Ý1?m 1 Þm 2
dÝUÞ ² Ý1?m 2 Þm 1 , which in turn implies that

                                                    2dÝUÞm 1
                                      V2 =                        ² 2m 2 .
                                                1 ? m 1 + dÝUÞm 1
This inequality implies that there exists a boundary equilibrium in which
ÝV D1 , V D2 Þ = Ý0, 2m 2 Þ. This is because r 1 Ý2m 2 Þ = 0 and r 2 Ý0Þ = 2m 2 . The same arguments
from above imply that there exist no other boundary equilibria. To complete the proof,
therefore, we need to show that there are no interior equilibria. We                      know that any such
                     D   D                                              /U i ÝV D1 ,V D2 ,m i Þ
equilibrium ÝV 1 , V 2 Þ must satisfy the first order conditions               /V i
                                                                                                = 0 for i 5 á1, 2â.
                                                  D       D                                             å
Using the above logic, this means that V 1 = YV 2 . But the assumption that U < U implies that
Y ² 0 which, in turn, is inconsistent with the hypothesis that ÝV D1 , V D2 Þ > Ý0, 0Þ. [End Proof]
          0.6
                                                                             lamda2 (.5)

          0.5


          0.4
lamda's




                                                                            lamda2 (.75)
          0.3                lamda2 (1)


                             lamda1 (1)
          0.2
                                                                            lamda1 (.75)


          0.1

                                                                             lamda1 (.5)
           0
                     0                    0.1     0.2        0.3   0.4                     0.5
                                                         k




                     0.6
                                                                         lamda2 (.5)


                     0.5

                                                                         lamda2 (.75)
                     0.4
           lamda's




                                                                         lamda2 (1)
                     0.3

                                                                         lamda1 (1)
                     0.2

                                                                         lamda1 (.75)
                     0.1

                                                                         lamda1 (.5)
                         0
                             0              0.1    0.2       0.3   0.4                  0.5
                                                         k
          0.8
                                                                                             lamda2 (.5)

          0.7
                                                                                             lamda2 (.75)

          0.6

          0.5
lamda's


                                                                                              lamda2 (1)
          0.4

          0.3

          0.2
                                                                                             lamda1 (1)
          0.1
                                                                lamda1 (.75)
                    lamda1 (.5)
           0
                0                    0.1                  0.2                  0.3     0.4                  0.5
                                                                      k




          1.74

                        Wcent (.5)
          1.72

           1.7
                                            Wcent (.75)                    Wcent (1)            Wdec
Welfare




          1.68

          1.66

          1.64

          1.62

           1.6
                    0                 0.1                 0.2                   0.3    0.4                  0.5
                                                                       k
                                                    Wdec
          1.74

                     Wcent (.5)
Welfare   1.72


           1.7                    Wcent (.75)              Wcent (1)



          1.68


          1.66


          1.64
                 0        0.1           0.2            0.3                 0.4                 0.5
                                                k




           1.8

          1.78

          1.76                                  Wdec

          1.74

          1.72
Welfare




           1.7                                                                   Wcent (.5)


          1.68
                                                               Wcent (1)
          1.66

          1.64                                                                   Wcent (.75)

          1.62

           1.6
                 0        0.1           0.2            0.3                 0.4                 0.5
                                                k
