NBER WORK[NG PAPER SERIES

DAMAGES AND INJUNCTIONS IN THE
PROTECTION OF PROPRIETARY
RESEARCH TOOLS
Mark Schankerman
Suzanne Scotchmer

Working Paper 7086
http://www.nber.org/papers/w70 86
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 1999

We are grateful to the Sloan Foundation and the National Science Foundation for financial support, and to the
managers, scientists, and lawyers in many biotechnology firms who provided valuable information about the
biotechnology industry and the legal context in which it operates. We thank Stephen Maurer for guidance on
legal issues and many helpful suggestions, and also Rebecca Eisenberg, Brian Wright, and other participants
at the NBER conference on the Patent System and Innovation (January 1999) for helpful discussions. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

© 1999 by Mark Schankerman and Suzanne Scotchmer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Damages and Injunctions in the Protection
of Proprietary Research Tools
Mark Schankerman and Suzanne Scotchmer
NBER Working Paper No. 7086
April 1999
JELNo. KO

ABSTRACT
Profit on proprietary research tools is determined partly by the remedies for infringement, such
as damages and injunctions. We investigate how damages under a liability rule and the opportunity

for injunctions under a property rule can affect the incentives to develop research tools. We show

that the prevailing legal doctrine of damages under liability rule, called lost profit or reasonable
royalty, suffers from a logical circularity which leads to an indeterminacy in permissible damages.
This can create insufficient incentives to develop research tools. Incentives can be improved either
by a property rule with injunctions or by a liability rule under the doctrine of unjust enrichment.

Mark Schankerman
Department of Economics
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
UK
rn.schankerman@lse.ac.uk

Suzanne Scotchmer
University of California
2607 Hearst Ave.
Berkeley, CA 94720-73 20
and NBER
scotch@socrates.berkeley.edu

1. Introduction
Intellectual property is usually conceived as protecting commodities in the end-user mar-

ket. In modern industries such as biotechnology, another type of proprietary invention

has become the focus of much controversy and litigation, namely, technologies which
have no direct commercial value to end users, but are inputs to developing such com-

modities. We will refer to such inventions as research tools or enabling technologies.
Examples include the Cohen-Boyer patent on the technology for inserting foreign genetic material into bacteria, the Genentech patent on a technology for getting foreign
genes to "express", the PCR technology for replicating DNA in test tubes, gene guns,
and recent suppression technologies that cause gene sequences to become inactive. Since
research tools are not sold to consumers, the traditional analysis of intellectual property

does not apply. The profit on research tools comes from licensing and profit-sharing

arrangements with firms that want to use the research tools to create other products.
Profit-sharing agreements may take the form of licensing contracts, research joint ven-

tures, and mergers. We observe all three types of arrangements in the biotechnology
industry.

The value of any intellectual property depends on how easily it can be enforced. The

latter depends both on the costs of litigation and on the remedies for infringement. For
products sold to consumers, the remedy can be money damages or an injunction to stop
selling the infringing product in the market. Infringement of a research tool has another

remedy: an injunction against developing the product, rather than against marketing
it. In legal parlance, the difference between damages and injunctions is the difference
between a liability rule and a property rule.

An economist's instinct is that the threat of damages should be enough to enforce
intellectual property rights, and that injunctions are unnecessary.' However, this view
1111 fact there is very little economics literature on injunctions. Lanjouw and Lerner (1996) study
how firms can use preliminary injunctions to force favorable settlement terms when litigation costs are
asymmetric, and present some supporting evidence. A preliminary injunction stops alleged infringe-

ment during the trial, whereas a permanent injunction (which we study in this paper) occurs after
infringement is found, and holds for the life of the patent unless the firms contract around it. Aggarwal

was contradicted in several interviews we conducted with patent counsel and CEOs of
biotechnology firms, who viewed injunctions as an indispensable tool in protecting their
intellectual property. In this paper we investigate whether appropriately chosen damages

can obviate the need for injunctions, and whether such damages are consistent with the

legal doctrines on which they are based, namely, the currently favored doctrine of lost
profit/reasonable royalty and the less used doctrine of unjust enrichment.
Both the right to collect damages and the right to enjoin an infringing research program are constrained by the doctrine of laches. A failure to make a timely effort to stop

infringement can nullify the right to recover damages or to enjoin infringement. After
an infringement begins, delay is profitable to the patentholder because delay increases
the cost that the infringer has sunk when the firms finally negotiate a settlement. Our
analysis not only sheds light on how injunctions can improve on damages as a remedy to

infringement, but also provides guidance on how much delay should be allowed before
the defense of 1achs can be invoked.
Our main conclusions are as follows:

• There is a basic circularity of reasoning that afflicts the lost profits/reasonable
royalty doctrine of damages. On one hand, prospective damages determine the
profitability of licensing, and on the other hand, the profitability of licensing (hence

"lost profits" in case of infringement) determine damages. Because of this circu-

larity, a wide range of damage measures are consistent with the doctrine. Low
damages, but not damages high enough to deter infringement, are consistent with
it.

• Injunctive relief can improve the incentives to develop research tools under "most"

interpretations of the lost profit/reasonable royalty rule. However, injunctions
are not an improvement if they must be invoked "too soon" (before the infringer
has sunk any costs) or "too late" (so that the potential infringer, anticipating an
unfavorable settlement after the injunction, will be deterred from infringement).
(1998) discusses how damages interact with litigation costs.
1

Injunctive relief cannot improve on damages under the unjust enrichment doctrine
of damages.

• Under a liability rule, the unjust enrichment doctrine of damages provides greater
incentives for developing research tools than the lost profit/reasonable royalty doc-

trine.

A unifying theme in these conclusions is that, if the goal is to increase the profitability

of the research tool, then remedies for infringement —either damages under a liability
rule or injunction and settlement under a property rule — should not be so stringent that

infringement would be deterred in the absence of an ex ante license. Infringement of
the research tool is profitable to the patentholder because the infringer must either pay

high damages ex post (under the liability rule) or is forced into an ex post negotiation
when part of his costs have been sunk (under the property rule). If infringement is

deterred, then theowner of the research tool must negotiate an ex ante license before
any of the development costs have been sunk. The bargaining assumption that underlies
these conclusions is that the firms share the whole bargaining stake when they strike the

bargain, namely, the value of the product net of the costs that have not been sunk.2

In Section 2 we present a stylized model in which a firm (firm 1) has developed a
proprietary research tool, which is an input for second-generation products. Either firm 1

or another firm (firm 2) can develop a product with commercial value using the research

tool, but the development process is itself an infringement. Section 2 investigates the
liability rule, where the only remedy for infringement is damages. In Section 3 we discuss

the legal doctrines of damages that apply in the U.S., and examine which doctrine
creates greater incentives for developing research tools. Section 4 analyzes a property
rule, where the firms can seek injunctive relief. We also discuss the doctrine of laches,

and how it constrains strategic timing of injunctions. In Section 5 we show how the
model is modified if there are nonproprietary alternatives to the research tool.
2Even with several prospective developers, the patentholder cannot collect all the profit by auctioning
use of the research tool, provided the second product is itself patentable. See Scotclimer (1996).

9

Our model has the cumulative features of Scotchmer (1991), and Green and Scotch-

mer (1995), but we focus on different issues. They investigated the division of profit
between sequential innovators, where the second innovation might or might not infringe

the first patent, and discussed how patent breadth (the probability of infringement) affects the terms of licensing. For research tools, any unauthorized use of the proprietary

tool is an infringement. The division of profit is mainly governed by the remedies for
infringement, in particular, the legal theory of damages and the possibility of injunction.

The perspective taken here is that intellectual property rights are not exercised as the
right to exclude, but as the right to collect licensing fees by threatening to exclude (under

a property rule) or by threatening to collect damages (under a liability rule). Provided
the owner of the research tool can collect licensing fees, he can profit by encouraging
other firms to use the tool in developing products. The rules for enforcing intellectual
property rights set the threat points for licensing agreements, and hence the division of
profits. With frictienless licensing, intellectual property will not stifle the development
of second-generation products.
This is a different perspective than is often taken by legal scholars such as Eisenberg

(1989), and Heller and Eisenberg (1998), who are less optimistic about contracting,
and want to ensure that inventions are put to good use even when contracting fails.

Injunctions can foreclose the use of research tools when licensing fails, and for this
reason Eisenberg argues against giving patent holders injunctive relief for research tools.
Instead she proposes that courts impose damages equal to reasonable royalty payments.3

Merges (1996) takes a different position, arguing that to exclude injunctive relief and to

rely exclusively on damage remedies would put an unmanageable burden on the courts
to set damages or compulsory licensing fees in a way that serves the public interest. This
3She discusses the relative merits of property and liability rules in the context of the experimental
use exception in patent law. It remains unclear how broadly U.S. courts will grant this exception. In
Roche Products, Inc. v. Bolar Pharmaceuticals Co. 733 F.2d 858 (1983), the Federal Circuit ruled that
the experimental use exception did not protect the use by generic drug manufacturers of a patented
drug for testing to meet FDA drug approval requirements. This was overruled through legislation by
Congress in 1984 (see 35 U.S.Code Section 271(e)(l)). The scope of exempt subject matter under
Section 271(e) has been extended to cover medical devices (Eli Lilly & Co. v. Medtronic, Inc. 872 F2d
402, 1989). European countries and Japan also have experimental use exceptions.

3

problem can be avoided by permitting injunctions. We also argue that a property rule
can be superior to a liability rule, but for a different reason. Since damages consistent

with the prevailing doctrine can be too low, the threat of injunction can improve the
first patentholder's bargaining position, and improve the incentive to develop research
tools.

2. Analysis of the Liability Rule (Damages)
We first describe the model, and then analyze how damages affect the research tool
owner's profit under a liability rule. In Section 3 we discuss what damages are consistent

with legal doctrines.
We assume there are two firms, i =

1,

2, and that a research tool has been patented by

firm 1. Either firm can develop a particular product using this tool, and the firms' R&D

costs are respectively c1c2, observable to both firms. The profit available by achieving

the product is v. We assume throughout that min{ci, c2} < v, so that the firms will
want to invest. We assume that unauthorized use of the research tool is an infringement,

and that if development of a product was not authorized by a license, then marketing
the product is also an infringement.
The premise of our analysis is that it is desirable to transfer the entire profit surplus

of the product to the owner of the research tool, where the profit snrplus is max{v —
c1, v —

c2}.

Once the research tool is invented, it is in the interest of the owner not to

jeopardize its use in creating new products. The owner will license on terms that the
users will accept, since it is better to license at a low price than not to license at all.
This places a natural constraint on how much profit can be collected from users of the

research tool (it cannot be larger than the profit surplus), and ensures that the tool is
used to develop all new products whose profit surplus is nonnegative. For the research

tool itself, there is no guarantee that the inventor's costs will be covered, and that is
why it is desirable to maximize his profit, subject to the self-imposed constraint that
the second generation products are not jeopardized.
4

The order of decisions is shown in Figures 1 and 2 for two cases: first, that firm 1 has

a pure research tool and no expertise (or very high costs ci) to develop the product, and

second, that the owner of the research tool might compete with firm 2 in development

of the product, or even preempt firm 2 entirely.4 Development of the product by firm

2 is an infringement of the research tool, and the firms must either license ex ante
or resolve the infringement issue ex post, after the product has been developed. The
prospect of resolving the infringement ex post sets the bargaining positions for the ex

ante agreement. The considerations relevant to equilibrium profit in both cases are
summarized in Table 1.
We assume that in equilibrium the firms will bargain ex ante to an efficient outcome.

This means that the product will be developed if and only if it adds to joint profit, and

that the most efficient (lowest cost) firm will invest. In addition, an inefficient patent
race will be avoided. The role of damages (and other aspects of intellectual property) is

that damages determine the threat points for the firms' ex ante bargain. For example,
the prospective damages determine whether an unlicensed firm has an incentive to race

and then pay damages if it wins. The attractiveness of racing without a license will
determine the terms of the license.
Throughout the analysis, we assume that whenever firms make a bargain, they share

the bargaining surplus in shares , 1 — ,\). To determine the firm's equilibrium profit,
the bargaining share is added to the firm's threat point. If the firms have symmetric
bargaining positions, then it is natural to assume = 1/2, as in the Nash bargaining
solution. The threat points, bargaining surplus and equilibrium profits are listed in
Table 1 for the cases summarized in Figures 1 and 2.
4According to our interviews. vertical integration of life sciences firms and plant biology firms is
increasing. In addition, some biotechnology products naturally play a dual role as research tool and
product, e.g., the genetic sequence for a hepatitus C inhibitor, which is both the basis for a diagnostic
product, and a research tool for developing a vaccine.

5

FIGURE 1. SEQUENCE OF DECISIONS UNDER A LIABILITY RULE
FIRM 1 IS A PURE RESEARCH FIRM

No
(Develop)

Yes

Payoffs:
Terms of License
if d> v-c2 then (X(v-c2), (1-X)(v-c2))
Yes

if d vc2 then (d, v-c2-d)

Keep

(d,

(0, -c2)

FIGURE 2. SEQUENCE OF DECISIONS UNDER A LIABILITY RULE
FIRM 1 CAN DEVELOP THE SECOND PRODUCT

No

Yes

Firm 2

Terms of License

((v+d)/2 - cj,

(v-d)/2-c2)
(d, v-c,-d)

6

Equilibrium
Profits

Surplus

Bargaining

Threat
Points

Table
would not invest in the

d, v-c7-d

0

A(v-c), (l-X)(v-c)

v-c2

0 .0

v-c2d

v-c2>d

d, v-c2-d

Firm 2 will not
develop the product
without an ex ante
license:

Firm 2 would
develop the
product without an
ex ante license:

__________________ ___________________
Case la
Case lb

1

Case 3a

max{0,c2-cj}

max{cj,c2}

7

d+Amax{0, c2 -cj),
v-c2-d+(1-2)x

max{0, c2- ci)

d, v-c2-d

would invest:
d> v-2c,

1

(v+d/2-cj+Xmax{c,,c2),
(v-d)/2-c2 + (1-A) x

max{c1. c2 }

(v+d)12-cj, (v-d)12-c2

v-c2

Firm

0

v-c1+Amax{0, c,-c2},
(1-2)max{0, c1-c2

max(0, cj-c2}

v-c1,

d> v-2c2

Firm 2 would invest:
v>2c1 and

Case 3b

__________________
_____________________

d

product:

min(v-2cjv-2c2}

would invest, but not both.

Case 2: Absent an ex
ante license, the firms
would race for the

Case 3: Absent an ex ante license, one firm

Equilibrium profits as they depend on damages

Case 1: Firm
product, v<c1

1.

2.1. Pure Research Tools
In Cases la and ib, described by Figure 1, we assume that c1 is very high (ci > v), so
that firm. 1 would not invest in the product even if firm 2 failed to invest. Instead he

will license to firm 2. In Case la, damages d are relatively small — small enough so
that firm 2 would make non-negative profit even if it were caught infringing and paid
damages. In Case ib, damages d are assumed large enough so that firm 2 will not invest

without an ex ante agreement.

Either firm can refuse an ex ante license. Refusal of either firm leads the two of
them down the right branch of Figure 1. If firm 2 then invests without an ex ante
license, knowing that its research (hence product) will infringe, firm 2 will be charged the

damages d if it patents or commercializes the product. Patenting or commercialization
involves disclosure, and the infringement is thus revealed.

For completeness, in the rightmost branch after "patent?", we investigate whether
firm 2 can avoid these damages by threatening to keep the invention secret in order to

enhance its ex post bargaining position. If firm 2 tried to license ex post for smaller
license fees than d, firm 1 would refuse the ex post settlement, knowing that it is more
profitable for firm 2 to commercialize and pay damages d (provided v — — d > 0) than

to carry out the threat of keeping the invention secret.
Thus, the profits that accrue without an ex ante license are (d, v — c2 — d), and these
"threat points" are also the equilibrium profits with an ex ante agreement when damages

d are relatively small because there is no further efficiency gain to be shared. This is
shown in Table 1, Case la.
However if damages for infringement are relatively high, specifically, if v —

—d

< 0,

then. firm 2 would end up with negative profit, absent an ex ante agreement. The
5According to our interviews, owners of research tools often license them for uses that do not overlap

with their own downstream business interests. We interpret this as cases where c1 > v or c1 > C2.
Because valuation of enabling technologies is difficult, licensing arrangements often take the form of
equity stakes rather than cash or royalties. This distinction is not relevant in our models.

8

righthand branch will not be followed, and an ex ante agreement is necessary to elicit
investment. The efficiency surplus to be shared in the ex ante agreement is v — c2, which

leads to the equilibrium profits (v — c2),

(1 — )s.)(v — c2))

shown in Table 1, Case lb.

We reach the following conclusions.

Lemma 2.1. Suppose that firm 1 has a patented research tool which is required to
develop a new product with value v, and c1 > v > c2.
Under a liability rule, if d
If d> v —

c2,

v

—

c2,

then equilibrium profits are (d, v — c2

then equilibrium profits are (.A(v — c2), (1 —

—

d).

— c2)).

The proposition states how damages d should be set in order to maximize the incentive to develop the research tool. As mentioned above, a consequence of efficient ex ante

agreements is that thigh prospective damages d will not stifle use of the research tool.
A new product will be developed if and only if v — c2 > 0, irrespective of damages for
infringement. The only role played by d is in dividing the profit between the firms.

Proposition 2.2. Suppose that firm 1 has a patented research tool which is required to
develop a new product with value v, and c1 > v >

c2.

Under a liability rule, the damages

d that lead to maximum profit for firm 1 are d = v — c2. Higher damages reduce firm
l's profit.

2.2. Vertically Integrated Firms
Cases 2 and 3 in Table 1 describe the circumstance where the first patent holder not only

owns the proprietary research tool, but also has expertise to develop the downstream
product. The different cases in Table 1 reflect different combinations of {v, c1, c, d}.

Even if firm 1 has expertise to develop the product (v > c1), it prefers to delegate to
firm 2 if firm 2 is more efficient (c1 > c2). Whether or not firm 1 wants to delegate, firm

2 has the option to infringe the patent and force an ex post settlement in which firm 2
9

pays damages d to firm 1. If damages d are relatively low, this threat constrains firm
l's ability to profit from its research tool.
The bargaining surpluses in Table 1 are derived from three sources: by ensuring that
the product is invented when otherwise it would not be (Case ib); by allowing the firms

to avoid the cost-duplication of a patent race (Case 2); and by allowing the firms to
delegate research effort to the lowest-cost firm (Cases 3a and 3b).

Since threat points for the ex ante agreement are set by reference to what would

happen otherwise, we must know what would happen in a patent race. A race will
never happen in equilibrium, because it duplicates costs. However, the prospect of an
inefficient race sets the firms' threat points for the license in Case 2. We assume that
if the firms race, each wins with probability one-half. If firm 2 is the winner, then it
pays damages d to firm 1 in an ex post settlement of the infringement. Thus firm 2 will
race if its expected profit, (v — d)/2

—

c2, is greater

than zero, and firm 1 will race if its

expected profit, (v + d)/2 — c1, is greater than its payoff for not racing, which is d. Thus
the firms will race if v — 2c1 > d and v — 2c2 > d, shown in Table 1.

A complication arises when the "race" has room for only one firm. Suppose that
either firm can make profit alone (v > c and v2 — c2 > d), but neither can make positive
profit if they race. There can be two equilibria, one in which the low—cost firm invests

and another in which the high-cost firm invests. The ex ante agreement depends on the
firms' joint conjecture about who would invest, absent an ex ante license. If the efficient

firm would invest, there is no bargaining surplus to be shared. If the inefficient firm
would invest, then the surplus to be shared ex ante is the saved cost, e.g., c2 — c1 if firm
2 is the inefficient firm.

The equilibrium profits of firm 1 derived in Table 1 are summarized in Figures 3 and

4. Figure 3 depicts the cases where the low-cost firm would invest, absent an ex ante
agreement (the low-cost firm can either be firm 1 or firm 2). Figure 4 depicts the cases
where the high-cost firm would invest. There are two striking features of Figures 3 and 4.

First, firm l's profit is never monotonic in damages d. It drops discontinuously at values
10

FIGURE 3. FIRM l's EQUILIBRIUM PROFIT AS IT DEPENDS ON DAMAGES
Assume the low-cost firm would invest, absent an ex ante agreement
Case: c1 >

c:

Case: c->

c

v—C:

V—Cl

d
(v+d)12-(1 -)c1

v—2c1

V—C:

v —2 c-

d

d

FIGURE 4. FIRM l's EQUILIBRIUM PROFIT AS IT DEPENDS ON DAMAGES
Assume the high-cost firm would invest, absent an ex ante agreement
Case: c- >

Case: c >

c1

V —c

v—cl

+ X(c —

c)

d + (c — c1)

d

(v+2-(1-)c1

(v+d)/2—c1+c

v—2c1

v—c-

d

v—2c1

v—2c-

d

of d where damages have become so large that one of the firms would no longer race.
Second, there is no guarantee that damages will allow appropriation of the full surplus

by firm 1. The next section shows how appropriation depends on the legal doctrine of
damages.

We summarize the important parts of Table 1 and Figures 3 and 4 as:

Proposition 2.3. Suppose that firms 1 and 2 can respectively develop the product at
costs c1 and c2, both smaller than v.

(i) Suppose that damages under a liability rule satisfy d < min{v — 2c1, v — 2c2},
so that the firms would race, absent an ex ante license. Then less than the full profit
surplus is transferred to firm 1 in an ex ante agreement.

(ii) Suppose that, absent an ex ante agreement, the higher-cost (inefficient) firm
would invest in th product. Then under a liability rule, even if the firms form an ex

ante agreement, there is no damage d that results in firm 1 collecting the full profit
surplus.

(iii) Suppose that, absent an ex ante agreement, the lower-cost (efficient) firm would
invest in the product. Then by setting d = min{v — c1, v — c2} (damages under a liability
rule are equal to the full profit surplus), all the profit is transferred to firm 1.

Proof. (i) Firm 2's equilibrium profit is its threat point, (v + d)/2 —

c1,

plus its

bargaining share of the cost saving, (1 — ).) max{ c1, c2}. Both are positive, so firm 2
makes positive equilibrium profit. Since the profit of firm 1 and firm 2 sum to the profit
surplus, max{ v — c1, v — c2 },

it follows that firm 1 does not collect the full surplus.

(ii) Whether the inefficient firm is firm 1 or firm 2, there is a positive bargaining
surplus to divide in the ex ante agreement, namely, max{ci — c2, c2 — ci}. Hence firm 2

earns positive profit, and as in (i), not all the surplus is transferred to firm 1.
(iii) If firm 1 is the more efficient firm, then v — c1= d > v
12

—

c2,

so firm 2 plays no

role. Firm 1 invests and receives the surplus. If firm 2 is the more efficient firm, then

d v — c2, and all the surplus is transferred to firm 1 as a damage settlement, if not as
an ex ante license. U

Proposition 2.3 shows that it may not be possible for the developer of the research

tool to appropriate the full surplus through the use of only one instrument, damages,
even when firms strike ex ante licenses in the shadow of such damages. In the next
section we discuss whether full appropriation by the research tool owner is consistent
with the prevailing legal doctrines. We then consider whether full appropriation can be
achieved with another instrument, injunctive relief.

3. Legal Doctrines of Damages under the Liability Rule
In this section we discuss the legal doctrines of damages for patent infringement in the
United States, and interpret them for our model. We identify a basic logical circularity

in the prevailing legal doctrine of damages, and argue that this circularity reduces the
efficacy of damages in enforcing intellectual property rights for research tools. We analyze the case where the tool owner earns revenue only by licensing to other firms (Case 1

in Table 1). The same issue arises in the other cases of Table 1 as well, but the analysis
is more complicated.

There is a basic tension that runs through the case law on patent infringement
damages. It arises from the fact that there are two different objectives: to deny to the
infringer the fruits of his illegal act, and to restore to the patentee the benefits which
he would have derived in the absence of infringement (England v. Deere & Co., 221 F.
Supp. 319, 1963). The legal doctrines of damages corresponding to these two objectives

are unjust enrichment, and lost profit/reasonable royalty (hereafter, reasonable royalty).
The content of these doctrines has evolved over time, but the basic distinction remains.
Prior to 1946, when the current statutory rules on damages took form, the courts appear
to have given greater weight to unjust enrichment. During the post-war period the courts
have relied exclusively on the reasonable royalty doctrine. In that doctrine, the sole basis
13

for recovery is the patentee's damages and not the infringer's profits, though the latter
may be relevant evidence for computing the patentee's actual damages or a reasonable
royalty (e.g., Zegers v. Zegers, Inc. 458 F.2d 726, 1972).

Unjust Enrichment: Under this doctrine, the patent owner is entitled to recover
profits realized by the infringer on the theory that the infringer should not profit from
his wrongdoing. The infringer is viewed as holding these profits "in constructive trust"
for the infringed party. This doctrine was prominent in the late part of the 19th century,

and used as late as the second world war (Littlefield v Perry, N.Y. 1875, 188 US 205;

Amusement Corp. of America v Mattson, C.C.A. Fla. 1943, 138 F.2d 693). In most
case law, the measure of unjust enrichment was the profits realized by the infringer (e.g.,

Leman v. Krentler-Arnold Hinge Last Co., 284 U.s. 448, 1932). However a number of
cases enunciated the more subtle principle that the measure of unjust enrichment should

be the advantage gained by using the infringed invention instead of other available,
nonproprietary alt'natives.6
In our model so far, where an infringer could not have developed the product without

the patented research tool, the unjust enrichment is v—c. In Section 5 we reinterpret the
concept of unjust enrichment for the case where a nonproprietary substitute is available.

Lost Profit and Reasonable Royalty Under this doctrine, damages should restore the

patentee to the condition that would have prevailed had the infringement not occurred.
This shifts the focus from the infringer's profits to the patentee's foregone profits (Yale

Lock Mfg. Co. v Sargent, 117 U.S. 536, 1886). The doctrine as currently applied was
enuncicated in Panduit Corp. v Stahlin Bros Fibre Works (575 F.2d 1152, 1978). The
court stated that the patentee is entitled to recover "actual damages" (also referred to as
"lost profit") or, when these cannot be proved, not less than a "reasonable royalty." The

principle is to restore the patentee to the position "but for" the infringement. Whether
lost profit is lost sales or lost licensing revenues depends on whether the owner would
have developed the application himself or would have licensed to another firm. From an
6For example, Mowry v Whitney. 81 U.S. 620, 1872; Horvath v McCord Radiator and Mfg. Co., 100
F.2d 326, 1938; Gordon Form Lathe Co. v Ford Motor Co., C.C.A. Mich., 133 F.2d 487, 1943.

14

evidentiary point of view, this distinction would be hard for courts to assess.7 However,

in the case we analyze, where the research tool only earns profit through licensing, lost
profit is lost licensing revenues. Hence it is the reasonable royalty measure of damages

that applies.

Not surprisingly, despite judicial efforts to identify the relevant considerations in

setting a reasonable royalty (e.g., Georgia-Pacific Corp. v. United States Plywood
Corp., 38 F. Supp. 1116, 1970), the doctrine has proved difficult to implement in a
consistent and predictable manner (Conley, 1987). In this paper we make a stronger
criticism: the doctrine involves a circularity, with the consequence that a whole range
of damage measures d is logically consistent with it. Under the doctrine, damages d
can be very low, and licensing in the shadow of such damages might provide only weak
incentives for developing research tools.
To see the circi4arity, recall that foregone profits are foregone licensing revenues. Our

earlier analysis shows that firm l's equilibrium profits are determined by the damages d.
Firm l's equilibrium profit (hence its "lost profit" in the case of infringement) is precisely

d in the right branch of the tree in Figure 1, where d can have any value less than or
equal to v — C2. On the other hand, the reasonable royalty doctrine is not consistent
with d > v — c2 because such damages would force an ex ante license in which the owner

of the research tool takes profit )(v — c2), which is smaller that the putative damages d,

a contradiction.
We thus have the following observations about legal doctrines of damages:

Remark 1. Damages d are consistent with the reasonable royalty doctrine if and only
if 0 < d < v — c2. Thus, damages large enough to dissuade infringement, absent an ex
ante license (d> v — c2), are not consistent with this rule. The only damages d that are
consistent with the unjust enrichment doctrine are d = v

—

c2.

TPanduit addressed the evidentiary problem by requiring the patent owner to establish four things

in order to recover the profit on lost sales: a demand for the patented product, that there were no
acceptable noninfringing substitutes, a manufacturing and marketing capability to supply the market,
and the profit that would have been made on lost sales.
15

Remark 2. The unjust enrichment doctrine transfers the full surplus to the research
tool owner. The reasonable royalty doctrine will not transfer the full surplus, except at
the maximum damages d consistent with the doctrine.

4. Analysis of the Property Rule (Injunctions)
According to interviews with patent attorneys and in-house counsel in biotechnology
firms, injunctions are an important instrument to enforce intellectual property rights on
research tools. Those interviewed claimed that damages would be less effective without

the threat of injunctions. Injunctions encourage ex ante licensing and force ex post
settlements when infringement occurs. Moreover, the interviewees recognized that the
timing of injunctions affects profits. Delays in requesting injunctions can shift profits to
the owner of the research tool, since delay means that the infringer has sunk some of

its cost by the tin settlement occurs. However, they emphasized that discretion over
strategic delay in seeking injunctions is severely limited by the doctrines of laches and
estoppel.8

We now examine how injunctions can be used to protect intellectual property on
research tools. In the previous section we assumed that if no ex ante license is negotiated,

the patentholder's remedies are (i) to develop the product, perhaps inefficiently, (ii) to
allow infringement by the second firm and collect damages ex post, or (iii) to engage in a
(perhaps inefficient) patent race, followed by a damage payment if the second firm wins.
We now assume that the patentholder can allow an infringing research program to begin,

and then sue for an injunction. The bargaining positions for settlement after injunction

are different than they would be for an ex ante license, before any research costs are
8We found two cases of apparently successful strategic delay in seeking injunctive relief. The first
involved Monsanto's Roundup-Ready corn which infringed an enabling technology developed by DNA
Plant (DNAP) Technology Corporation (transwitch, a transgenic method for silencing gene expression
in plants). DNAP sought an injunction after most of Monsanto's development costs had been sunk, and
this led to an ex post license arrangement favorable to DNAP. In the second example. Monsanto obtained
a late injunction in 1996 against DNAP for infringing one of its enabling technologies. According to
the research director at DNAP, the injunction covered many of its newly developed plant products and
led to shutting down the company, which was subsequently bought by Monsanto.

16

FIGURE 5. SEQUENCE OF DECISIONS UNDER A PROPERTY RULE (INJUNCTIONS)

Yes
Firm 2 sinks costs c52?
(infringement revealed)

Terms of License
if v-(c2 - c52) < 0

profits are 2(v-c2), (1-A)(v-c2)
if v-(c2 - Cs2) >0

profits are 2(v-c2+ c52), (1-2)(v-c,+ c52) - c2

Yes
0, (v-C2)

settlement
2(v—c2+ c2) , (1—2)(v—cs+ cs2)_ C52

FIGURE 6. FIRM 1 'S PROFITS UNDER A PROPERTY RULE
AS COMPARED TO A LIABILITY RULE

v-c2

d

Cs

c5, = cL/2-(v-cs)

c52 = (1-X)(v-c,)/X

17

sunk, or would be ex post, after the second patent has issued and all development costs

have been sunk. We explore how injunctions affect the firms' equilibrium profit. For

simplicity we analyze this question assuming that firm 2, but not the owner of the
research tool, has the expertise to develop the subsequent product (c1 > v >

c2).

Figure 5 shows the order of decisions. As before, we assume that firm 1 will not offer

an ex ante license if it knows that, absent the ex ante license, firm 2 will embark on a
program of infringement. As we shall see, firm 2's willingness to begin investing without

a license depends on how much delay will occur before the injunction and settlement.
In law, the defense of laches becomes available only after unreasonable delay by the

patent owner in enforcing his rights (see below). In the model, we capture this feature

by assuming that the defense of laches can be invoked by firm 2 after it has sunk a

portion c of the total cost c2. If the patentholder delays beyond this point, he loses
his right both to efljoin and to collect damages ex post. However if he enjoins at the
last possible moment, he forces a settlement in which the firms share the remaining
bargaining surplus v — (c2 — c), which is positive, since v — c2 is positive. We first
consider how the firms would like to affect c after the infringing research program has
begun, then consider whether firm 2 would embark on the infringing research program,

and finally show how the equilibrium (ex ante) division of profit depends on c The ex
post perspective and ex ante perspective give different and conflicting insights.

Remark 3. Once infringement has begun, firm I prefers to delay injunction and settlement until all of firm 2's costs have been sunk, while firm 2 prefers that injunction and
settlement occur as early as possible.

To see this, consider the right-hand side of the tree in Figure 5. With injunction and

settlement when c has been sunk, the profits of firms 1 and 2 are .)(v — c2 + c) and
(v — c2)

—

.\(v

—

c2

+ c). The remark follows because firm 2's profit is decreasing in c

and firm l's profit is increasing in c.
However, Remark 3 is not the right analysis from an ex ante point of view. Instead,
18

Remark 4. If c is sufficiently high, an infringing research program will never begin,
and this reduces firm l's profit from an ex ante point of view. Thus firm 1 can benefit
by being constrained by the doctrine of laches.

Figure 6 depicts firm l's equilibrium profit in the injunction regime as a function of

the costs c that firm 2 must sink before the injunction. At each c < (v — c2)(1 —
the patentholder's profit is A(v — c2 + c), because the remaining bargaining surplus to

+ c)

However profit falls at c = (v — c2)(1 — ))/). Any higher
c will deter investment, since firm 2's anticipated profit, (1 — )..)(v — c2 + cfl — c, is
split is (v — c2

0.

negative. Anticipating this, firm 2 has a credible incentive not to embark on an infringing

investment program, which forces an ex ante agreement in which the bargaining surplus
is v —

c2.

That is, the patentholder is forced into a negotiation before firm 2 has sunk

any costs, and this reduces his profit.

The relationshi between the patentholder's profit and the severity of laches is summarized by the following proposition and Figure 6.

Proposition 4.1. Under a property rule, the patentholder's profit increases with c on
the domain (0,(v—c2)(l—A)/A), has maximal value ofv—c2 atc = (v—c2)(l—))/.\,
—
and is smaller for c >
(v — c2)(l — .\)/A than for any c E (0, (v — c2)(l
In the next proposition we compare the first patentholder's profit under a property
rule with the right to injunctions after sunk cost c and a liability rule with damages d.
The comparison can be seen in Figure 6.

Proposition 4.2. Suppose that under the liability rule, damages satisfy d < (v — c2).
Let c represent the amount of delay that is allowed before the defense of laches can be
invoked under a property rule. Then if c (—c2(v—c2), -(v—c2)), the patentholder
earns more profit under the property rule with injunctions than under the liability rule
with damages.
19

Corollary 4.3. Under the property rule with injunctions, if c =

(1

—

—

then the tool owner obtains the full surplus v — c2.

The previous proposition and corollary explain how the allowable delay under laches

should be chosen in order to guarantee that the research tool owner appropriates the
full surplus. In practice, the allowable delay is constrained both by how long it takes to
discover infringement (which, according to our interviews, may vary across industries)

and on how much additional delay the court allows under the doctrine of laches. In
biotechnology, the owner of a research tool typically learns about infringement when the

infringer conducts field trials (which typically begin about halfway in the development
process). This sets a lower bound to the costs that the infringer has sunk before being
enjoined from continuing.

To invoke the defense of laches, a defendant must show that the patentee unreason-

ably delayed enforcing his property right and that this caused him injury (Columbia
Broadcasting System, Inc. v. Zenith Radio Corp., 391 F.Supp. 780, 1975). In practice,
the patentee has considerable latitude. However, the defense of laches is more likely to
be granted by the courts if the infringer made significant investments during the period

of delay.9 Moreover, in a series of recent cases, the courts have held that a delay of
six years triggers a rebuttable presumption of laches, and shifts the burden of proof to
the patentee to show that the defense of laches does not apply.'° In addition to laches,
an infringer may invoke the related defense of estoppel. Estoppel can be invoked if the

patent owner made representations by statements or conduct which implied that the
patent would not be enforced, and if the defendant relied upon them and suffered injury
as a result." Unlike laches, a defense of estoppel does not require unreasonable delay
by the patent owner, and can be invoked at any time.
9Rome Grader & Machinery Corp. v. J.D. Adams Mf. Co., 135 F.2d 617, 1947: Whitman v. Walt
Disney Productions, Inc., 148 F.Supp.37, 1957; Siemens Aktien-gesellschaft v. Beltone Electronics
Corp., 381 F.Supp. 57, 1974.
10Jensen v Western Irr. and Mfg., Inc., C.A. Or. 1980, 650 F.2d 165; Lemelson v Carolina Enterprises,
Inc. D.C. N.Y. 1982, 541 F.Supp. 645; Advanced Cardiovascular Systems, Inc. v Scimed Life Systems,
Inc., C.A. Fed. (Minn.) 1993, 988 F.2d 1157.
"See Studiengesellschaft Kohie mbH v Eastman Kodak Co, C.A.Tex. 1980, 616 F2d 1315. For more
extensive references to the case law on laches and estoppel, see USCA (1984), Sec.282 and 286.

20

5. Patent Breadth and Alternative Research Tools
Our analysis so far has assumed that the research tool is the only vehicle for achieving
the later product. For some research tools, such as a genetic sequence required to develop

a medical therapy, this is so. For others, such as methods for inserting foreign genetic
material into cells, there may exist nonproprietary substitutes. The threat points for ex
ante licensing are now established by the option to use or develop a competing tool. We shall assume that the cost of developing or using the next best research tool is a, and

that the magnitude of a is determined by the breadth of the patent on the research tool.
We now show that our main conclusions also apply in this more general model. To do
this we must reinterpret damages under the liability rule.

Firm 2 faces the choice of whether to obtain an ex ante license, and if not, then
whether to infringe by using the research tool or to use the nonproprietary alternative.
If he uses the alternative technology, he must pay a real cost of a, and if he uses the
patented research tool without an ex ante license, he must pay infringement damages ex

post. The less costly of these determines the threat point for the ex ante agreement.
Case 1 in Table 2 describes the case where the owner of the research tool does not
have a capability to invest in the product. The other cases, which depend on both firms'
costs of developing the production, c1, c2, as well as the value v, are also summarized in

the table. In Case 2, the second product is sufficiently valuable (v is sufficiently high

relative to the costs) that both firms would race. If firm 2's strategy in the race is to
infringe the first patent, it must pay damages d if successful, so the expected damages

are d/2. If firm 2's strategy is to use the nonproprietary alternative at cost a, then it
pays no damages ex post. Thus, firm 2 will infringe the proprietary technology in a race

if and only if d < 2a. The two firms' expected profits in the race are written as the
"threat points" for Case 2.

In Case 3, the value v is lower relative to costs than in Case 2, and there is only
room for one firm in the race. Firm 1 would invest if v > c1 and firm 2 would invest if

21

Profits

Equilibrium

Surplus

Bargaining

Threat
Points

a

v-c2-a

v-c,-Aa

,

0,

v-c7-d

d

d ,v-c2-d

d,

a>

v-c2> min{ a, d)

a< d

without an ex
ante license:
v_c2

license:

(1-A)
(v-c2)

X(v-c),

v-c2

0,0

min{a,dJ

not invest

Firm 2 would

Case lb

Firm 2 would invest
without an cx ante

Case Ia

product, v<ci

Case 1: Firm I would not invest in the

d>2a

nonproprietary
alternative:

max{c,,c2}

22

+(1-A)max{cj,c2}

+ (/-A)max{cj,c2}

,

(v12)-c2-Aa

(v/2)-c1+Aa
+Amax{cj,c2}

a+

,,

(v-d)/2-—c2

+Amax{c,,c2} ,

(v+d)12 - c1

max{cj,c2}

(v-d)12-c2

(v+d).'2-cj,

v/2-c2-a

would infringe:

use the

v12-cj,

Absent an cx ante
license, firm 2

Absent an cx ante
license, firm 2 would

d < 2ci

Case 2b

Case2a

firms would race for the product.

Case 2: Absent an ex ante license, the

1

+ Ax
(1-A) max{0,c,-c2}

max{O,cj-c2},

v-c1

max{0,cj-c2}

0

would invest

v-c1,

Firm

Case 3b

v-d-c2

max{O,c2-cj }

max{0,c2-c,},
v-c2-d+ (1-A)x

d+ A x

max{O,c2-c,}

d,

v-c2

-a

maxlO,c2-cj},
v-c2+Aa+
(1-A)max{0,c2-cj

Aa + Ax

a+ max{O,c2-cj}

0,

d> a

Firm 2 would invest
Firm 2 would
Firm 2 would use
the nonproprietary
infringe:
d< a
alternative:

Absent an cx ante license, one firm
would invest, but not both.

Case 3a

Case 3:

Table 2. Equilibrium profits as they depend on damages d and alternative cost

v

c2

+ min{a, d}. In Case 3, either firm would be willing to invest, assuming that the

other did not. There are two equilibria, absent an ex ante agreement, only one of which
is efficient.

The following lemma summarizes what we learn from Table 2. The important impli-

cation is summarized in the proposition, namely that the existence of a nonproprietary
alternative undermines the first firm's profit.

Lemma 5.1. Suppose that firm 1 has a patented research tool, and a nonproprietary
substitute is available at cost a. One of these tools is required to develop a new product
of value v, and c1 > v >

c2.

Then under a liability rule,

(i) If min{d, a) > v — c2, then equilibrium profits are [A(v — c2), (1 —
(ii) If min{d, a) < v — c2, then equilibrium profits are

—

ifd <a;
[Aa,v — c2 — Aa] ifd> a.
[d,v —

c2

—

d]

Proposition 5.2. Suppose that firm 1 has a patented research tool, and a nonproprietary substitute is available at cost a. Suppose that one of these tools must be used as

> c2. Then, under a liability
rule with damages d, firm l's profit is increasing (nondecreasing) in a. Given a, the
an input to develop a new product of value v, and c1 >

v

damages d that maximize firm l's profit are d = min{v —

c2,

a}.

The availability of a nonproprietary substitute changes the interpretation of both
legal doctrines of damages. For the reasonable royalty doctrine, the circularity identified

in Section 3 persists. Profit, hence "lost" profit, is lower when a substitute is available
because the first innovator's ex ante bargaining power is lower, reducing his licensing
profit in equilibrium.

By Proposition 5.2, it is impossible to have d > a under the reasonable royalty
doctrine of damages. If d > a, then firm l's profit in equilibrium is only )a, which is
less than d, a contradiction. In addition d > v — c2 is impossible. If d > v — c2, firm l's
profit is A(v — c2), which is less than d, a contradiction. We have
23

Remark 5. When there is a nonproprietary alternative to the patented research tool,
the only damages d that are consistent with the reasonable royalty doctrine of damages

<d

inin{a, v — c2}. The only damages d that are consistent with the
unjust enrichment doctrine are d = min{a, v — c2}.

satisfy A(v — c2)

Thus the largest damages available under either doctrine are min{a, v — c2}, and

damages can be lower under the reasonable royalty doctrine. At lower damages, the
owner of the research tool cannot appropriate the full surplus. Then, as in the previous

sections, incentives can be imrpvoed by a property rule with injunctions, or the unjust
enrichment theory under liability.

24

References
[1] Aggarwal, Rajesh, (1988) "Optimal Damage awards in Cases of Patent Infringement", mimeograph, Amos Thck School, Dartmouth College
[2] Conley, D. (1987), 'Economic Approach to Patent Damages,' 15 American Intellectual Property Law Association Quarterly, 854-380.

[3] Eisenberg, Rebecca (1989), 'Patents and the Progress of Science: Exclusive Rights
and Experimental Use', 56 University of Chicago Law Review, 1017-1055.
[4] Green, Jerry and Suzanne Scotchmer (1995), 'On the Division of Profit in Sequential

Innovation', The Rand Journal of Economics 26 (Spring), 20-33.
[5] Heller, Michael A. and R. S. Eisenberg (1998), 'Can Patents Deter Innovation? The
Anticommons in Biomedical Research', Science 280, 698-701..

[6] Lanjouw, Jeai and Joshua Lerner (1996), "Preliminary Injunctive Relief: Theory and Evidence from Patent Litigation," National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper No. 5689

[7] Merges, R.P. (1994), 'Of Property Rules, Coase, and Intellectual Property', 2655
Columbia Law Review, 266 1-2778.

[8] Merges, R.P. (1996), 'Contracting into Liability Rules: Intellectual Property Rights
and Collective Rights Organizations', 84 UCLA Law Review, 1293-1393.

[9] Scotchmer, Suzanne (1991), 'Standing on the Shoulders of Giants:Cumulative Re-

search and the Patent Law', Journal of Economic Perspectives, Symposium on
Intellectual Property Law.

[10] Scotchmer, Suzanne (1996) "Protecting Early Innovators: Should SecondGeneration Products be Patentable?", The Rand Journal of Economics 27, 322331.

[11] United States Code Annotated, Title 35: Patents (1984; updated 1998). St. Paul,
Minn: West Group.
25

Annex: Interview List
John Bedbrook, Senior Vice President, DNA Plant Technology (Oakland, Ca.)
Steve Briggs, Vice President, Novartis (San Diego, Ca.)

Jerry Caulder, Executive Chairman and CEO, Xyris Corp. (San Diego, Ca.)
Arthur J. Chatroo, Director of Legal Affairs, Mycogen (San Diego, Ca.)
Dan Hunt, Senior Counsel and Head of Licensing, Chiron (Emeryville, Ca.)

Nancy Koch, Patent Litigator, Chiron (Emeryville, Ca.)
Victor Knauf, VicePresident of Research, Calgene (Davis, Ca.)
Peggy Lemaux, Dept.of Plant and Microbial Biology, UC Berkeley, formerly at deKaib

Edward Penhoet, former CEO and founder, Chiron (Emeryville, Ca.)
John M. Sanders, Patent and Trademark Counsel, Mycogen (San Diego, CA.)
Carl Schwedler, Intellectual Property Counsel, Calgene (Davis, CA.)

26

