                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                ROLES OF THE MINIMAL STATE
                                  VARIABLE CRITERION IN
                              RATIONAL EXPECTATIONS MODELS

                                          Bennett T. McCallum


                                           Working Paper 7087
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w7087

                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 1999




This paper was prepared for the conference in honor of Robert P. Flood, held January 15-16,1999, at the
International Monetary Fund in Washington, D.C. I am indebted to Edwin Burmeister, Bob Flood, Robert
King, and Edward Nelson for comments on previous drafts. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 1999
         by Bennett T. McCallum. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source,
Role of the Minimal State Variable Criterion
in Rational Expectation Models
Bennett T. McCallum
NBER Working Paper No. 7087
April 1999
JELNo. C32, E00, E31, C63

                                          ABSTRACT

   This paper concerns the minimal-state-variable (MSV) criterion for selection among solutions
in rational expectations (RE) models that feature a multiplicity of paths that satisfy all of the
model's conditions. It compares the MSV criterion with others that have been proposed, including
the widely used saddle-path (or dynamic stability) criterion. It is emphasized that the MSV
criterion can be viewed as a classification scheme that delineates the unique solution that is free
of bubble or sunspot components. This scheme is of scientific value as it (a) yields a single
solution upon which a researcher can focus attention if desired and (b) provides the basis for a
substantive hypothesis that actual market outcomes are generally of a bubble-free nature. In the
process of demonstrating uniqueness of the MSV solution for a broad class of linear models, the
paper exposits a convenient and practical computational procedure. Also, several applications to
current issues regarding monetary policy are outlined.


Bennett T. McCallum
Graduate School of Industrial Administration
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
and NBER
bm05@andrew.cmu.edu
I. Introduction
       It is well known that Bob Flood's second paper with Peter Garber (Flood and Garber,

1980b) was an influential pioneering work in empirical testing for the existence of bubble

phenomena in rational expectations macroeconomics. It is not so well known, by contrast, that his

paper with Burmeister and Garber (Burmeister, Flood, and Garber, 1983) provided one of the

earliest steps toward a useful and general classification of rational expectations solutions, theirs

focussing on the distinction between bubble and bubble-free (or fundamentals) solutions.' The

present paper amounts to an extension of this type of classificational analysis, together with an

attempt to establish the scientific merits of one particular scheme.

       For many years now it has been commonplace knowledge that many dynamic models with

rational expectations (RE) feature a multiplicity of paths that satisfy all of the conditions for

intertemporal equilibrium. Indeed, most dynamic RE models that are not based on explicit

optimization analysis of individuals' behavior fall into that category and so do some that involve

full-fledged general equilibrium analysis with optimizing agents.2      But in many applications the

analyst is not specifically concerned with this multiplicity—often interpreted as the possible

existence of "bubbles'—-and wishes to focus attention on one particular path that is presumed to be


   What, it might be asked, is the definition of a bubble in a rational expectations model? The
basic idea of Burmeister, Flood, and Garber (1983) is that a bubble is an extra component that
arises in addition to the component that reflects "market fundamentals," an important implication of
which is that bubble components are not necessarily explosive. Unfortunately, the identification of
market fundamentals has to be made on a model-specific basis, although there is rarely any
disagreement. Below it will be argued that the MSV solution procedure is constructed so as to
yield the market fundamentals solution, thereby providing a method for defining bubbles in
particular cases.
2
  Leading examples of the latter type include real asset price bubbles in overlapping-generations
models, as demonstrated by Calvo (1978) and Woodford (1984), and price level bubbles in infinite-
horizon monetary models, as in Brock (1975), Flood and Garber (1980b), Gray (1986), and
Obstfeld and Rogoff (1983).
of economic relevance, e.g., if bubbles were absent.3 Consequently, several alternative criteria

have been proposed for selection of the path on which to focus. Among these are Taylor's (1977)

"minimum-variance" criterion, the "expectational-stability" criterion of Evans (1985) (1986), the

"minimal-state variable" criterion made explicit in McCallum (1983), and the popular "saddle path"

or "stability" criterion. The latter is favored by Sargent (1987), Whiteman (1983), Blanchard and

Kahn (1980), Blanchard and Fischer (1989), and many others, and is often used in computation

algorithms such as King and Watson (1995) or Klein (1997).

   In practice, analysts are often unclear as to which of the criteria is being utilized, when attention

is focused on a single solution, because in many cases the last three of the four above-listed criteria

all point to the same solution. Some analysts are explicit, however, and a sampling of the literature

suggests that the most frequently adopted of the criteria, in these cases of explicit justification, is

that of stability or non-explosiveness. The stability criterion has been recommended, moreover, in

the influential textbooks of Sargent (1987, pp. 197-9, 306-7) and Blanchard and Fischer (1989, pp.

225, 260).

   One purpose of the present paper is to consider the strengths and weaknesses for scientific

research of these alternative criteria. In particular, it will be argued that the stability and

minimum-variance criteria are inherently unsatisfactory. By contrast, the minimal-state-variable

(MSV) criterion is scientifically attractive, according to our argument, for it provides a

classificational scheme that is designed to be useful in terms of positive analysis. The criterion of

expectational stability, finally, will be characterized as reflecting a substantive behavioral

hypothesis rather than a classification scheme, so its attractiveness is an empirical issue rather than

a question of constructive scientific practice.


  Although empirical testing is attractive in principle, this practice is in fact extremely common.
This seems to be recognized by Blanchard and Fischer (1989, p. 260).


                                                    2
          A second purpose of the paper is to emphasize that the minimal-state-variable (MSV)

criterion generally identifies a single solution that can reasonably be interpreted as the unique

solution that is free of bubble components, i.e., the fundamentals solution. It can accordingly be

used as the basis for tests of a substantive hypothesis to the effect that bubble solutions are not of

empirical relevance. This hypothesis would remain of interest, moreover, even if the association of

the MSV criterion with the bubble-free property were not accepted.

      In conducting this argument, it will be expositionally useful to provide illustrations in the

context of a particular example. Consequently, one will be developed in Section II. The

unsatisfactory nature of the minimum variance and stability criteria will then be argued in Section

III. Section IV will make the case for the MSV criterion, with attention being devoted to a critical

argument of Froot and Obstfeld (1991), and Section V will consider the "expectational stability"

criterion of Evans (1985, 1988). Next, Section VI will demonstrate how unique MSV solutions can

be defined and calculated in a very wide class of linear rational expectations models, after which

Section VII will describe the relevance of the foregoing analysis for some prominent recent

research. Finally, Section VIII will provide a brief summary.

II.       An Illustrative Model

      As a vehicle for illustrating several of the points to be made below, consider the familiar Cagan

money demand function

(1)       mt-pt=y+aEtAp+i+,
where mt and Pt are logs of an economy's nominal money stock and its price level. Also, E(•) is

defined as E(•I), where         includes mt,mti,..., Pt, Pt-i,..., and ,       The disturbance , which

reflects random behavioral demand shifts, will be assumed to be a random walk variate so that AE

= U is white noise. For our purposes it is of no consequence whether or not one conceives of (1) as



                                                       3
resulting from an explicit maximization problem, since there are such models that give rise to

multiple solutions and our points are designed to be relevant for any model with multiple

solutions—with correct account being taken of all non-negativity requirements,

transversality conditions, and anything else that might eliminate some paths from contention as

solutions.

   To represent policy behavior that generates the money supply, we will adopt a rule of the

following form:

(2) Am =       +

Thus the money stock growth rate in each period is related to inflation in the previous period. One

would expect sensible policy behavior to involve a negative value of J.tl, so that money creation is

slowed when recent inflation has been rapid, and a value that is not too large (so as to avoid

instrument instability). But for the present we shall adopt only the restriction    (a-i)2 /(..4a)

which is necessary (as we shall see) for the Ap solution values to involve real (i.e., non-complex)

numbers. It would of course be possible to include a random disturbance term in (2) as well as (1),

but nothing would be gained and clutter would be added. To complete the model, it needs to be

specified that it pertains to all periods t = 1,2,... with m0 and Apo given. The specified type of

policy behavior can therefore only be adopted after an economy is already in existence so that Ap0

and m0 will be well defined. Inserting (2) into the first difference of(l) yields

(3) Jo + ji1Ap1 = Ap + aEApt+i - aEiApt + Ut,
and for present purposes it will suffice to consider solutions of the form4

(4) Ap = 7t0 + it1Api + 2Ut.


   This point will be explained below, in Section IV.



                                                   4
The latter implies EAp+i = Ito + 7ti(ito + t1Ap1 + it2Ut) so substitution into (3) yields

(5)     p.o   + p.iApi = 710 + itiApi + 7t2Ut + arts + a7ti(Ito + itiApi + 7t2Ut) - a(ito + rt1Ap1) + U1.

Thus for (4) to be a solution it must be true that

(6a) p.o=7t0+a7tiito

(6b) pti=iti+aiti2
(6c) 0 = 712 + arc1rr2 +1.

The second of these clearly implies that5


(7)       I
              = (a—1)±[(a—1)2 +4ap.]"2
                              2a
Once it is decided whether to add or subtract the positive term d [(a-i)2 + 4ap.i]2, the values of

it0 and it2 will be defined uniquely. But that decision is crucial for determining the model's

implied behavior of Ap1. That fact is illustrated in Figure 1, where rr1 = (a - 1+ d)/2a and 7t1 =

(a - 1 - d)/2a are plotted for a = - 4 (representative for all a <-1) against           Clearly, values of it1

(the lower branch) and it (the upper branch) lie both within and outside of the range -1 <ii < 1

that is necessary for dynamic stability. (In the somewhat unrealistic case with —i <a <0, not

illustrated in Figure 1, it exceeds 1.0 for all p. that give real roots.)

      A particularly simple and transparent special case of this example occurs when p. = 0 in (2), so

that the money stock growth rate is constant. In that case one might expect ApII to be absent from

(4), since it does not appear in the model and can affect the value of Ap1 only if it is (arbitrarily)

expected by the economy's participants to affect p1. Thus we are led to look for solutions of the

form Ap1 = 710 + it2u1 in this case, and we find that APt = — ut. This result is of course consistent



  From (7) we see that p. > (a-i)/(-4a) would give complex roots.



                                                          5
                            Figure 1



                      Roots of Equation (6b)
    2.5
                                            I

                                                aIph=-4
     2        J   L               L___

    1.5

          =



    0.5
2             I
              I
                  I
                  I
                        I
                        I
                                  I
                                  I
                                            I
                                            I     I
                                                          I
                  I     I         I         I     I       I
                  I     I         I         I     I       I
     O
              I   I     I         I         I     I
              I   I     I         I         I     I       I
              I   I     I         I               I       I




                            'value of mul




                                       6
with our more general example. Indeed, the solutions in (7) for itI are it1           0 and rt( = (a-l)Ia

when t1       = 0, the first of which implies the absence of Ap, from (4) and duplicates the solution

just found.6 The second value, 7t1 = (a-1)/a, is with a <0 unambiguously greater than 1.0, so it

implies an explosive, dynamically unstable path. Furthermore, this value it will support an

infinity of unstable paths. This may be seen by supposing that 7t3Ut1 is added to the conjectured

solution in (4) and then verifying that this expression is consistent with all of the model's equations

for any value of 7t3 (upon which 7t2 depends).7 If rr1 = 0 is taken as the relevant value for itt,

however, it is implied that 7t3 = 0 and it2 = —1.

         Note that in the special case in which        0, the solution involving it1 (i.e., Ap =      — Ut) iS


clearly the one that would be regarded as the bubble-free or fundamentals solution by Burmeister,

Flood, and Garber (1983).8 Indeed, analogous solutions are so regarded quite generally in the

literature in examples similar to our special case. By contrast, the solutions involving it1 would

generally be regarded, in this special case, as bubble solutions—i.e., solutions that add bubble

components to the fundamentals solution. McCallum (1983, pp. 147, 161) proposed a general

extension of the bubble vs. bubble-free terminology to cases analogous to those in which                0 in

the example at hand; that extension will be utilized below.



'   Note that        = 0 because (a-i) + [(a1)2]U2 = (a-i) — (a-i) since [(a-i)2]"2 is by convention a
positive number and a-i is in the present case negative.

   The undetermined-coefficient conditions are (6a), (6b), 0 = 7t2 + ait1it2 + air3 + 1, and 0 = it3 +
a7t 1it3 - alt3. With iti = (a-1)/a, the last of these is satisfied for any it3 and the next to last relates
it2 to it3.

    Burmeister, Flood, and Garber (1983) work in the context of a Cagan-style model similar to (1),
8

except with a white-noise rather than a random-walk disturbance, and define the bubble-free or
fundamentals solution as the one that depends only upon "current and expected future values of
money and the disturbance" (1983, p. 312).

                                                      7
III.      The Stability and Minimum Variance Criteria

   As it happens, extensive utilization of the foregoing example will be briefly delayed, for our

argument concerning the stability and minimum-variance criteria can be developedwithout

reference to any particular model. Let us begin with Taylor's (1977) minimum-variance criterion.

According to the latter, the choice among multiple solutions should be dictated by the

unconditional variance of a variable analogous to Ap in the foregoing example. But there are two

serious flaws with this proposal, the first of which is its ambiguity. Specifically, in many models

there will be more than one endogenous variable of interest. (In fact, even in the example of

Section lI—despite the appearance of equation (3)—there are two endogenous variables, Ap and

Am.) But in such cases the minimum variance criterion will not be well specified, because the

various endogenous variables may indicate different solutions. Indeed, in some cases there may

even exist some ambiguity as to whether the (possibly detrended) level or first difference of a given

variable is relevant. Second, the minimum-variance criterion is presumably intended to pertain to

the solution path that would be empirically relevant. But that would of course suggest that the

modeled economy's agents are motivated to choose the minimum-variance solution over others, and

it is not the case that agents will typically be so motivated. Indeed, the minimum-variance criterion

evidently pertains to some social desideratum, not anything that could be affected by any single

agent's choice. Consequently, the model's agents will have no incentive to select this solution path,

so there is no particular reason to believe that it would in fact be empirically relevant.

       Turning now to the case of the stability criterion, our argument is quite different. Here the

problem is that the criterion is, to a significant extent, self-defeating. For the criterion is precisely

that the selected solution path must be non-explosive——dynamically stable—under the natural

presumption that exogenous driving variables (such as shocks and policy instruments) are non-



                                                      8
explosive. Yet one important objective of dynamic economic analysis is to determine whether

particular hypothetical policy rules—or institutional arrangements—would lead to desirable

economic performance, which will usually require stability. Or, to express the point somewhat

differently, the purpose of a theoretical analysis will often be to determine the conditions under

which a system will be dynamically stable and unstable. But, obviously, the adoption of the

stability criterion for selection among solutions would be logically incompatible with use of the

models' solution to determine if (or under what conditions) instability would be forthcoming. To

the extent, then, that this objective of analysis is important, the stability criterion is inherently

unsuitable. One cannot use a model to determine whether property "A" would be forthcoming, if

the model includes a requirement that "A" must not obtain.

   In addition, there are a substantial number of cases in which there exists an infinity of solution

paths all of which are stable. In such cases, then, the stability criterion fails to select a single path

on which to focus as the bubble-free or fundamentals path.9 That failure would be defensible if it

were true that no single path has special characteristics that justify labeling it as bubble-free, but it

is not. Even in these cases the MSV criterion provides a clear demarcation between one path and

the others. To develop that argument is the purpose of the next section.




  Because of their use of the stability criterion, Blanchard and Fischer (p. 260) suggest that if
bubble paths are explosive then "unless the focus is specifically on bubbles, assume that the
economy chooses the [stable] path, which is the fundamental [bubble-free] solution"—and do so
even if there is no aspect of the model that explicitly disqualifies the explosive paths. But then in
cases in which the bubble paths are not explosive, they are unable to recommend among various
courses of action. Instead, they retreat to a hope—a "working assumption"—that "the conditions
needed to generate stable multiplicities of equilibria are not met in practice" (p. 261). But we know
that in various cases this hope is not justified.

                                                     9
IV.      The MSV Criterion

   The MSV criterion is designed to yield a single bubble-free solution by construction. Its

definition begins by limiting solutions to those that are linear'0 functions—analogous to (4) in the

example of Section II—of a minimal set of "state variables," i.e., predetermined or exogenous

determinants of current endogenous variables. For a set of state variables to be minimal, it must be

"one from which it is impossible to delete... any single variable, or group of variables, while

continuing to obtain a solution valid for all admissible parameter values" (McCallum, 1983, p.

145). Here the language is somewhat convoluted because there is not in general a unique minimal

set of state variables, even though there is a unique MSV solution. Two or more different sets of

variables may span the same space, of course, with neither being a proper subset of the other.

      But relying upon a minimal set of state variables is not the only requirement (in addition to

linearity) for a MSV solution. In cases in which the minimal set includes a lagged value of an

endogenous variable there will typically be more than one solution to the undetermined-coefficient

identities analogous to equations (6) above. So one part of the definition of the MSV solution is a

rule for selection of the appropriate solution. That rule is that the solution continues to be based

on a minimal set of state variables for all special cases of the parameter values. Typically, some

admissible sets of parameter values will include zero coefficients in all structural equations for a

lagged endogenous variable. But in any such case, this lagged value will not be part of a

minimal set, so its solution-equation coefficient analogous to 7t will be zero for the MSV

solution in that special case. Thus the MSV solution must be, to pertain for all admissible

parameter values, the one that is the MSV solution in that special case.




'° In linear models, that is.




                                                     10
     To illustrate this determination, consider the choice between t1 and t1 in the example of

Section II. In the special case in which t1 = 0 in (2), the variable Ap.i does not appear in model

(and in fact appears to be an irrelevant bygone). Thus Api can in this case affect the value of Ap

only if it is—arbitrarily——expected by the economy's participants to affect Apr. Thus it does not

appear in the minimal set of state variables in this special case with     = 0, so 7t = 0 is implied.

But from the perspective of the general case, it is it1 that yields the value 0 in this special case, it1

instead being equal to (ct-1)Ia. Consequently, it is the solution to equations (6) with rr1 = rr1 that

makes (4) the MSV solution expression for Ap in this model.

     It is important to recognize that this definition for the MSV solution involves a procedure that

makes it unique by construction. It is logically possible to dispute whether this solution warrants

being termed the bubble-free or fundamentals solution, although the answer seems to the present

writer to be a clear           But it makes no logical sense to argue that the MSV solution is not
          12
unique.

     In that regard, Froot and Obstfeld (1991) have suggested that the MSV solution is not unique by

demonstrating an example in which there is a non-linear function of the single state variable that

constitutes a minimal set. That demonstration does not provide a valid counterexample to the

claim of the last paragraph above, however, because linearity of the solution expressions such as

(4) is required for the MSV solution. It is not surprising, it should be said, that Froot and Obstfeld


    The reason, of course, is that all other solutions involve—at least in special case—"extraneous"
state variables, ones not in a minimal set. Thus the solution values involve variables that do not
appear in the model's structural equations and therefore affect the endogenous variables only
because they are (arbitrarily) expected to do so. I would also claim that the MSV solution
corresponds to the bubble-free or fundamental values in all the standard, non-contentious examples
in the literature. This claim caimot be proved correct, of course, but I am happy to put it forth as a
refutable conjecture.
12
      Recall   that our argument is presuming a linear model. It is possible to distinguish MSV
solutions in some nonlinear models, but no general analysis has yet been developed.


                                                    11
would have misinterpreted the definition given in McCallum (1983), because the latter mistakenly

took it for granted that only linear expressions would provide solutions in the class of linear models

considered. But the outlined procedure, which defines the MSV solution, was expressly designed

to yield a unique solution. So the restriction of linearity would have been explicitly included if the

author had realized that it was needed.

   The example presented in Section II was chosen, as one would expect, to illustrate points

concerning the contrast between MSV and other solution criteria. In particular, for values of 1L1 <
                                                                +
2c- 1, the MSV solution features dynamic instability since r1 <-1. Thus this case demonstrates

that the set of solutions selected by the MSV criterion, but ruled out by the stability criterion, is not

empty. It is, moreover, intuitively plausible that instability would obtain in this case, as it reflects

a very strong application of policy feedback response—which when excessive induces "instrument

instability." Indeed, this is an example of the type of determination that a dynamic model should

be able to provide—i.e., the conditions under which feedback is destabilizing. Alternatively, the

example of Section II also illustrates the possibility of non-exploding bubble solutions, which occur

when 1 <Jii <(cx-1)2/(-4a).

   At this point in the discussion it should be clear that the MSV criterion may be regarded as a

classification scheme, i.e., a technique for delineating the solution that is of a bubble-free or

fundamental nature from those that include bubble components. This scheme is intended to be

scientifically useful, by providing a single solution that the researcher may focus upon if he/she is

engaged in an investigation such that the possibility of bubbles is deliberately excluded at the

outset. In addition, the classification scheme serves a second scientific purpose by providing the

basis for a substantive hypothesis to the effect that market outcomes in actual economies are

generally of the bubble-free variety. Even though RE general equilibrium analysis provides no



                                                   12
general theoretical basis for ruling out bubble solutions, it is a coherent plausible substantive

hypothesis that such solutions do not occur in practice.

   The plausibility of that hypothesis is emphasized by the undetermined-coefficient method of

deriving the MSV solution. The relevant point is that, in the space of it1 values, the bubble-free

value it is of measure 1/2. And this continues to be true in the special case with jt, =0 in which

there is an infinity of non-MSV bubble paths. In that case, the MSV solution features it1 = 0,

yielding APt    ILO- Ut. Use of the value ir1 = (a-1)/a, however, gives rise in this case to an infinity

of solutions of the form

(8) APt = 7to + itiApi + it2ut + 7t3Ut1,
where the multiplicity arises because any value of it3 will satisfy the model when it equals (a-1)/a

(given that     = 0). For some researchers, it is a common practice in such cases to presume that the

outcome—the particular path realized in the market—is determined by an "initial condition" Apo

that serves to pin down it2. From that perspective there is only a single value of Apo that will imply

   = -1, and   also that it = it3 = 0, thereby yielding the bubble-free solution.'3 In the space of

initial conditions, then, the bubble-free outcome is of measure zero. But is entirely unclear which

of these spaces is relevant to the market's solution outcome. It is thus a plausible hypothesis that

bubble-free solutions will obtain generally.'4 The generation of that hypothesis is the second

scientific contribution of the MSV solution criterion.




    Recall that we are discussing the case with it, = 0. The solution value for it3 when it1 = (c-1)/c
is undetermined.

   Application to the striking argument of Woodford (1994, pp. 105-11 1), Bernanke and Woodford
(1997, pp. 669-675), and Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (1997, pp. 20-23), is considered below in
Section VII.

                                                    13
V.       The Expectational Stability Criterion

     The last alternative criterion to be explicitly discussed is that of "expectational stability" as

developed by Evans (1985, 1986).' The basic idea is to determine whether there is convergence

of an iterative procedure toward a RE solution; if there is such convergence the RE solution

approached is the one selected by this criterion. It is not entirely clear whether the steps in the

iterative process are supposed to reflect sequential positions in calendar time or in some type of

conceptual meta-time, but to this reader the latter seems more appropriate. In any event, the

sequence of calculations begins with a function, analogous to the expression just below (4), that

determines expectations—but with coefficients that differ somewhat from those implied by RE in

the model at hand. Then the model and this expectation function imply a "law of motion" for the

model's endogenous variables. This law of motion, which may not be fully consistent with the

expectation function used in its derivation, is then adopted as the basis for a revised expectation

function to be used (in the same way) in the next round of the iterative process. Expectational

stability obtains when this process converges to the RE solution under consideration.'6 In fact

there are two variants: weak expectational stability obtains if the original expectation function is

specified so as to include the same determining "state variables" as the RE solution under

consideration, whereas strong expectational stability obtains when additional variables are

permitted in the expectations function.




' For more recent developments see Evans (1989) and Evans and Honkapohja (1992, 1997).
 6
   Actually, it is shown by Evans (1989) and Evans and Honkapohj a (1997) that expectational
stability obtains when the differential equation analog of this difference equation converges. This
will be the case under a somewhat broader set of conditions, so convergence of the iterative
procedure is sufficient but not necessary of expectational stability. This result draws on Marcet and
Sargent (1989).

                                                      14
     The process can be illustrated with the model of Section II. With a RE solution of form (4),

whether or not it is the MSV solution, expectations will conform to EAp+, = tO + 7tiApt so the

iterative procedure assumes that expectations at t of Ap+, satisfy

(9) Apt+le =         + 4i APt,

where n indexes the iterations. Now with (9) prevailing, Apt will be determined by the analog of

(3), namely,       tO + j.t1Ap.1 = Ap+ a(o11 + 4i'Apt) - aApte + ut , where Apte is given from the

past.'7 The last equation can be written as

(10)       Ap=(i +a4) Q.to-cL4o +J.L,APti +aApteut]
and it suggests that expectations for Ap÷1 should satisfy

(11) Ape,' = (1-a + acji)' [.LQ - a4o + 1Ap]
since Ut 1S white noise. Then writing the right-hand side of the latter in form (9) gives

(12)        4fl+I = (1—a + aji)' (J1O - ao)                         = (1-a + cA1)' Jti,

which define an iterative process for the values.

     From the second of expressions (12), we see that the stationary values for        are the same as the

two roots in (7). The expectational stability analysis selects the one—if there is one—for which

the difference equation in 4 is dynamically stable, i.e., the one that would be approached by

the iterative process. From plots 0f4,fl+I vs. 4i' such as those in Figure 2, we can see that the root

       is (locally) stable, since the slope is less than 1.0 in absolute value for all ji, <(a-i)2 /(-4a).

At the


17
    It is not entirely clear whether Evans and Honkapohja (1992, 1997) would agree with this
derivation, as their examples do not include expectations formed at different times. But in the
present model, Ape is clearly meant to represent the expectation of Ap formed in period t- 1. So it
is not what the iterative procedure at t is concerned with! Thus it would seem incorrect to write
4hh1   + 4'    Ap, in place of Apte in (10).


                                                      15
                                         Figure 2

                   Mapping for eq. (12): mul = -2, alpha = -4
       2

     1.5


       1


     0.5                                       —


                                                   I             I            I
+                                                  I             I            I
C      0                                       _L                J
                                                                 I
                                                                              L____
                                                                              I
                                                   I
                                                   I             I            I
                                                                 I            I
                                                                 I            I
                                               —

                                                   I             I            I
                                                                 I            I
                                               _L - J
                                                   I             I
                                                                          -
                                                                              I



                                                   I             I




                                         phil(n)


                   Mapping for eq. (12): mul = 0.5, alpha = -4



     1.5


       1
                                                                 I                I


                                                                 I                I
     0.5
                                                                     I            I

+
.E     0                         —. .____L
                                     I                 I
                                                                 J
                                                                     I
                                                                                  L
                                                                                  I

                                     I                 I
     -0.5                        —




      —1
                                     I
                                                       L.
                                                       I

                                     I                 I
     -1.5
                                     I                 I
                                     I                 I
       -2
            -0.5         0        0.5                                .5       2       2.5
                                     phil(n)




                                                            16
root 4, by contrast, the slope will exceed 1.0 in absolute value so the iterative process will not be
convergent. With 4)i = 4)i, moreover, the behavior 0f4)0fl is stable for all parameter values

yielding real roots in (6b). In this example, then, the expectational stability criterion points to the

same solution as does the MSV criterion as long as p.i<1.

     It is not entirely clear, however, just how much emphasis should be placed on that agreement.

One reason is that Evans and Honkapohja (1992) argue that there are some cases in which

expectational stability does not point to the MSV solution. I am not entirely persuaded that these

cases include any well-motivated economic models, but in any event that is not the main point.

The point, instead, is that if the analysis calls for focus on the bubble-free solution, then that would

still be accomplished by means of the MSV criterion. If expectational stability provides an

accurate guide to the behavior in actual economies, then a non-MSV bubble solution would prevail

in such cases. But that would provide no reason for changing the classification of bubble vs. non-

bubble solutions. And it is far from certain that expectational stability does provide a guide for

actual economic behavior, for that hypothesis requires that this particular iterative process, among

all those that could be conjectured, is empirically relevant. Nevertheless, while the amount of

warranted emphasis is unclear, it is the case that in most—if not all—sensible models the

expectational stability criterion does point to the MSV solution.'8




 8
     The example in Evans and Honkapohja (1992) is an exception but is not, I would suggest, as
well motivated as the model in the present paper, which differs in its assumptions regarding the
times (actually, information sets) relevant for forming expectations of Ap and Ap1+,.


                                                    17
VI.    General Derivation in Linear Models


       The argument above has relied on the proposition that there is a unique MSV solution in a

wide class of linear models; the main purpose of this section is to demonstrate the validity of that

claim. In addition, a second purpose is to present a compact and easily understood exposition of a

convenient and practical computational procedure for solving linear rational expectations models.

This procedure, which is applicable to a class of models that is broad enough to include most cases

of practical interest, can be implemented by means of a MATLAB routine provided by Paul Klein

(1997).19 The present exposition departs from Klein's, however, by relying upon the elementary

undetermined-coefficients (UC) approach used throughout the present paper. In a sense, the

current exposition could be viewed as merely an extension to the appendix of McCallum (1983). It

is an extension that is nontrivial, however, and essential for practical (i.e., computational) purposes.

Here it is accomplished by use of the generalized Schur decomposition theorem discussed by Klein.

The UC reasoning utilized here is, however, much more elementary mathematically than Klein's.20

        Let y be a Mx 1 vector of non-predetermined endogenous variables, k be a Kx 1 vector of

predetermined endogenous variables, and Ut be a Nx I vector of exogenous variables. The model




' Klein's (1997) approach builds upon earlier contributions of King and Watson (1995) and Sims
(1996). Other significant recent contributions are Uhlig (1997) and Binder and Pesaran (1995),
which use UC analysis. The Uhlig paper also features a useful procedure for linearizing models
that include nonlinear relationships.

20An earlier draft of this paper included a demonstration that closed-form representations of MSV
solutions can be obtained by means of formulae developed by Whiteman (1983). This
demonstration was illustrated in the context of the simple example of Section II, in line with the
much more extensive analysis in McCallum (1985). That analysis was more tedious and less useful
that that of the present section, however, since the latter is based on a convenient computational
algorithm. The present discussion is taken in large part from McCallum (1998).


                                                   18
can then be written as



(14)   A11 Ey+i = Biiy + B12k + C1u

(15) u=Ru..i+c


where A11 and B11 are square matrices while    is aNxl white noise vector.21 Thus Ut iS formally a

first-order autoregressive process, which can of course be defined so as represent AR processes of

higher orders for the basic exogenous variables. Also, for the predetermined variables we assume



(16)   k+1 = B2ly + B22k + C2u.



If only once-lagged values of y were included in k, then we would have B21 =I, B22 = 0, and C2

= 0, but the present setup is much more general. Crucially, the matrices A11, B21, and B22 may be

singular; that is what makes the setup convenient in practice.

       In this setting a UC solution will be of the form



(17) yt=Qkt+Fu


(18)   k+1 =flik+1TI2u,




21
   Here, as above, Ey÷i is the expectation of yt+i conditional upon an information set that includes
all of the model's variables dated t and earlier.


                                                  19
where the Q, F, ['Ii, and ['12 matrices are real. Therefore, Ey+i = cEk±1 + FEu+1 = Q([T1k+112u)

+ ['Rut. Substitution into (14) and (16) then yields



(19)       A11 [(fl ik+F12u) + FRu] = ii {Qkt+Fu] +       2k1   + C1u1

and

(20)       (U1k+112u) = B2i(k+Fu) + B22k + C2u.



Collecting terms in k, it is implied by UC reasoning that




(21)       [A11 01 [1 = [B11 B12 1
           [0 I][ [1 j [B21 B22][I
                                       [
whereas the terms in ut imply



(22)       A11fl2+A11FR=B11F+C1



(23) 112=B21F+C2.


           Let A and B denote the two square matrices in (21), and assume that B-?A is nonzero for

some complex number 2. This last condition will not hold if the model is poorly formulated (i.e.,

fails to place any restriction on some endogenous variable); otherwise it will be satisfied even with

singular A11, B21, B22.22 Then the generalized Schur decomposition theorem guarantees the


22
     See   King and Watson (1995) or Klein (1997).


                                                     20
existence of unitary (therefore invertible) matrices Q and Z such that QAZ = S and QBZ = T, where

S and T are triangular.23 The ratios t1/s1 are generalized eigenvalues of the matrix pencil B -

they can be rearranged without contradicting the foregoing theorem. Such rearrangements

correspond to selection of different UC solutions as discussed in McCallum (1983, pp. 145-147 and

165-166). We shall return to this topic below; for the moment let us assume that the eigenvalues

t/s (and associated columns of Q and Z) are arranged in order of their moduli with the largest

values first.

         Now premultiply (21) by Q and define H Z'. Then since QA = SH and QB = TH, the

resulting equation is




(24)     [S11 0 1 [H11 H12 1  ['1 = [T11 0 1 [H11 H12 1 [Q
         [S21 S22j[H2, H22][ fT1 j [T21 T22][H2I H22j[I



and its first row can be written as



(25)     S1 1(H1 1+H12)fJ1 = T1 1(H11+H12).



The latter will be satisfied for Q such that



(26) = -HH12 = -H(-H11Z12Z) =z12z,

23
     See Golub and Van Loan (1996, p. 377).
24
     Or, in the terminology used by Uhlig (1997), are eigenvalues of B with respect to A.


                                                   21
where the second equality results because HZ = I. Thus we have a solution for , provided that

Z exists.25

       Next, writing out the second row of (24) we get



(27)   S21(H11Q+H12)111 + S22(H21Q+H22) [11 = T21(H11c+H12) + T22(H21c+H22).




Then using (26) and HZ = I we can simplify this to



(28)   S22 Z fT1 = T22   Z

so since S exists by construction 26 we have



(29)   11 = Z22   S T22 Z.


       To find F and 112 we return to (22) and (23). Combining them we have



(30) GF+A11FR=F


25 This is the same condition as that required by Klein (1997, p. 13) and King and Watson (1995,
pp. 9-11). It appears to provide no difficulties in practice. The King and Watson example of a
system in which the condition does not hold is one in which B12 = 0 in my notation so the MSV
solution has Q = 0 and the other solution matrices follow easily.
26
   By the arrangement of generalized eigenvalues, S22 has no zero elements on the diagonal (and is
triangular).


                                                22
where G A11B21 - B11 and F C1 - A11QC2. If G' exists, which it typically will with

nonsingular        the latter becomes




(31) F + G'A11FR = G'F.


This can be solved for F by the steps given in McCallum (1983, p. 163) or can be obtained as



(32)     vec(F) = [I + R'øG'Aiif' vec(G'F),



as in Klein (1997, p. 28).27 Finally, 112 is obtained from (23). In sum, the UC solution for a given

ordering of the eigenvalues is given sequentially by equations (26), (24), (32), and (23).



         Different values of Q, and thus different solutions, will be obtained for different orderings

of the generalized eigenvalues tIs. What ordering should be used to obtain the economically

relevant solution? Many writers, following Blanchard and Kahn (1980), arrange them in order of

decreasing modulus and conclude that a unique solution obtains if and only if the number with

modulus less than 1.0 ("stable roots") equals K, the number of predetermined variables. The

minimal-state-variable (MSV) procedure, by contrast, is to choose the arrangement that would yield

  —    0 if it were the case that B12 = 0—this step relying upon the continuity of eigenvalues with




27 This uses the identity that if A, B, C are real conformable matrices, vec(ABC) = (C'®A) vec(B).
See Golub and Van Loan (1996, p. 180).


                                                   23
respect to parameters.28 Uhlig (1997, p. 17) correctly notes that this procedure is difficult to

implement and also that in many cases it will lead to the same solution as the Blanchard-Kahn

stability criterion. Adoption of the decreasing-value arrangement will therefore often be attractive,

even for MSV adherents. In such cases it seems unnecessary, however, to limit one's attention to

problems in which there are exactly K stable roots. If there are fewer than K stable roots, the MSV

criterion will produce a single explosive solution whereas if there are more than K stable roots, it

will yield the single stable solution that is bubble-free—both of these being solutions that may be of

particular scientific interest. In those exceptional cases in which an MSV analyst suspects that the

Blanchard-Kahn and MSV criteria would call for different solutions, he/she could replace B12 with

a B12, plot eigenvalues for various values of a between 1 and 0, and then adjust the ordering if

necessary.

VII. Relevance for Recent Issues

        The example of Section II is simple and clearly related to much of the existing bubble

literature, but may seem remote from most monetary policy discussions of the late I 990s. To show

that such is not the case—that the example is in fact highly relevant—is the purpose of the present

section.

        Let us begin by considering the following model, in which y denotes the log of output

relative to capacity, R is a nominal interest rate, and vt is a white-noise disturbance:

(33)    yt = b0 + b1 (R - E1Ap+i) + vt                  b1<0

(34) Ap = (1-0) EAp+i + OAp1 + ayt                      a>O

(35)    R= to± t1 (EAp+1 - Ap)+ J.2Yt                   }.11412>0




28 With B12 = 0, k does not appear in the system (14) (19), in this case so k represents extraneous
variables of a bootstrap, bubble, or sunspot nature.

                                                   24
Here (33) is a textbook-style IS function,29 (34) is a price-adjustment relation that with OO<1 can

represent either the specification of Calvo (1983) and Rotemberg (1982) or the Fuhrer-Moore

(1995) setup, and (35) is an interest-rate policy rule that can reflect pure inflation targeting (with i2

= 0) or a rule of the more general Taylor (1993) variety.

        Substitution of(35) into (33) and elimination of y then yields a linear equation that includes

the variables Api, EAp+i,        and v1. That list differs from the one pertaining to equation (5) by

not including EiAp+i, but that difference is of no consequence for the issues at hand because the

distinction between EAp+i and EjAp÷i is irrelevant for the condition analogous to (6b) that

determines the value of the crucial coefficient on APtI in the RE solution expression. Indeed, it can

be verified that for some admissible parameter values the system has two stable solutions.3°

Interestingly, large values of .t1 do not generate explosive MSV solutions with the policy rule (35).

but if Api is entered in place of E1Ap+i then large pt values will induce instability, just as in the

example of Section II.

        An issue that has attracted considerable attention recently is the so-called "Woodford

warning" of possible solution "indeterminacy" when policy feedback rules relate to market

expectations of inflation or some other target variable, a problem emphasized by Woodford (1994).

Kerr and King (1996), Bernanke and Woodford (1997), Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (1997), and

Svensson (1998). An example can be presented in the following system, which is adapted from

Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (1997, p. 16):

(36)    Yt = Ey+j   + b1 (R - Ez\p+i) + v                b1<O




29 It would be more desirable theoretically to use an expectational IS relation, as argued in
McCallum and Nelson (1997) and elsewhere, but that would lead to a cubic equation for the
coefficient on Pti in the MSV solution without altering the basic message.
° Two stable solutions exist if the parameters are a = 0.2, b1 = 0.5, 0 0.2, and = 0.5.

                                                    25
(37) Ap = 13EtApt+, + aEy                              c>0, 0<13<1


(38) R=jiIEAp+,
Here we have an expectational IS function, a Calvo-Rotemberg price adjustment specification, and

a pure inflation-forecast targeting rule.3' For simplicity, constants are eliminated by normalization

and v is again taken to be white noise. In this system there are no predetermined variables so the

MSV solution is of the form y= tiVt, iPt = 42Vt. Trivial calculations show that 4, = 1, 2 =   ct.   so

the solution is y = v, AP = avt. The policy coefficient     does not appear in the solution equations

because policy is responding to the expected future inflation rate, which is a constant (normalized

to zero). A caveat must be applied to the foregoing, however: the MSV solution is defined only for

t,>1.0. Values of ti<l.0 are inadmissible for "process consistency" reasons, introduced by Flood

and Garber (1980a) and discussed in McCallum (1983, pp. 159-160).

        But suppose that the researcher looks for solutions of the form

(39)    yt=4,iApti +412vt

(40)    APt = 2,APt., +

Then Eyt+, = 4, i(42,Apti 422vt), EAp+i = 42i(2iApti +422vt), and the undetermined-coefficient

conditions analogous to (6) are

(41a) ,, = 411t21 + bi(jii—1)2i2
(41b) ,2=1i422+b,Qt,-1)42, 422 1

(41c) 21 =          + a4
(41d)   422 =   132I22 +Ul2.

From the first and third of these we obtain the crucial requirement


'   Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (1997) also include terms involving Yt and R, on the right-hand side
of(38). They are omitted here only to keep the example as simple and transparent as possible.

                                                  26
(42)   4)21 = 14)21 +


Clearly, one root of the foregoing is 4)21    0, which implies 4) = 0 and consequently gives the MSV

solution. But (42) is also satisfied by values of 4)21 such that


(43)
           —
       4)21 —   __________
                ______________



Here ö2 - 43 is positive for j.i < 1 and > 1 + [23" —(l+13)]/(-bict).32 So for those values, there

are non-zero real roots for 4)21 and thus solutions in addition to the MSV solution. That this

possibility obtains for large values of      represents a problem for monetary policy, according to the

non-MSV analysis of the authors mentioned above. But under the hypothesis that the MSV

solution prevails, large values of jt pose no problem: the solution remains y =vt, Pt       = a vt. Since
        is conceptually akin to setting R such that EAp+i = 0, where 0 is the implicit target rate of

inflation, the MSV hypothesis seems more consistent with the inflation forecast targeting

prescription of Svensson (1998) than does the non-MSV analysis of Bernanke and Woodford

(1997) or Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (1997). This conclusion pertains, I conjecture, to this entire

body of analysis, not just the single (and extreme) case considered above. In any event, it should

be emphasized that if a multiplicity of solutions is found by considering non-MSV procedures, it

has nothing to do with the phenomenon of "nominal indeterminacy"—i.e., cases in which a model

determines values of real variables but not nominal variables. For a recent discussion of this

distinction, see McCallum (1997).

       Finally, we might also mention the "fiscal theory of price level determination," due

principally to Woodford (1995) and Sims (1994), which has been attracting a good bit of attention.


32 Note that with the values = .99, a = .3, b1 = -l used by Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (1997), this
last expression equals 1 + [1.96 + 1.99]/0.3      14.2, precisely as reported in their Table 4 for this
special case.


                                                    27
In this regard, the argument presented in Section 7 of McCallum (1997) indicates that adoption of

the fiscal theory of price level determination, in contrast to the more traditional "monetarist"

approach, amounts to acceptance of the hypothesis that a non-MSV or bubble solution is

empirically relevant. The MSV solution is also available,33 however, and implies fully traditional

price level-money stock relationships and behavior.

VIII. Conclusions

   Let us conclude with a brief summary. This paper has been concerned with the minimal-state-

variable (MSV) criterion for selection among solutions in linear rational expectations models that

feature a multiplicity of paths that satisfy all conditions for equilibrium. The paper compares the

MSV criterion with others that have been proposed, including Taylor's (1977) minimum-

variance criterion, the expectational stability criterion of Evans (1985, 1986), and the saddle-

path or non-explosiveness (i.e., dynamic stability) criterion favored by Blanchard and Kahn

(1980), Blanchard and Fischer (1989), Sargent (1987), and Whiteman (1983) and utilized in

practice by a large number of researchers. It is emphasized that the MSV criterion can be

viewed as a classification scheme, one that delineates the unique solution that is of a bubble-free

nature—i.e., reflecting only market fundamentals—from those that include bubble or bootstrap

components.

   It is argued that the MSV classification scheme is of scientific value in two ways. First, it

provides a unique solution upon which a researcher may focus attention if the project at hand

suggests or permits the a priori exclusion of bubble solutions. Second, it provides the basis

for a substantive hypothesis to the effect that market outcomes in actual economies are generally of

a bubble-free nature. In describing the latter role, the paper argues that the possibility that


   The example cited is one in which the model is not linear, so the MSV concept has to be
extended and the generality of Section VI cannot be claimed.


                                                   28
bubble-free solutions dominate empirically is much more plausible than is suggested by

solution approaches that parameterize different solutions by (possibly irrelevant) initial

conditions rather than by undetermined-coefficient parameter values. It also explains the basis of

McCallum's (1983) "subsidiary principle" that is used to make the MSV solution unique by

construction.

       In the process of demonstrating the uniqueness of the MSV solution, the paper presents a

convenient and practical computational procedure for solving linear rational expectations models of

a very broad class. This exposition, which utilizes the generalized Schur decomposition theorem, is

developed by means of the mathematically simple undetermined-coefficients approach. In addition.

examples are provided that illustrate the applicability and importance of the MSV criterion to issues

of current concern in the analysis of monetary policy rules.

       Finally, it should be recognized that some readers may be unwilling to accept the paper's

interpretation of the MSV solution as the bubble-free or fundamentals solution. In that case, it

remains true that the MSV approach provides a unique solution upon which a researcher may focus

attention, if desired, and provides the basis for a substantive hypothesis to the effect that actual

outcomes generally conform to the MSV solution. If this hypothesis is in fact true, then several

classes of problems discussed in the literature are empirically irrelevant.




                                                   29
                                         References

Bernanke, B.S., and M. Woodford (1997) "Inflation Forecasts and Monetary Policy," Journal of
   Money, Credit, and Banking 29, 653-684.


Binder, M. and M. H. Pesaran (1995). "Multivariate rational expectations models: A review and
   some new results." In M. H. Pesaran and M. Wickens, eds., Handbook of Applied
   Econometrics. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.

Blanchard, O.J., and C.M. Kahn (1980) "The Solution of Linear Difference
   Models Under Rational Expectations," Econometrica 48, 1305-1311.

Blanchard, O.J., and S. Fischer (1980). Lectures on Macroeconomics. MIT
   Press, Cambridge, MA.

Blanchard, 0. J. and C.M. Kahn (1980). "The solution of linear difference models under rational
   expectations." Econometrica 48, 1305-13 11.

Brock, W.A. (1975) "A Simple Perfect Foresight Monetary Model," Journal of
  Monetary Economics 1, 133-150.

Burmeister, E., R.P. Flood, and P.M. Garber (1983) "On the Equivalence of
  Solutions in Rational Expectations Models," Journal of Economic Dynamics
  and Control 5,311-321.

Calvo, G.A.(1978) "On the Indeterminacy of Interest Rates and Wages with
   Perfect Foresight," Journal of Economic Theory 19, 321-337.

___________ (1983) "Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework," Journal of Monetary
   Economics 12, 383-398.

Clarida. R., J. Gali, and M. Gertler (1997) "Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic Stability:
   Evidence and Some Theory," NBER Working Paper 6442.

Evans, 0. W. (1985) "Expectational Stability and the Multiple Equilibria
  Problem in Linear Rational Expectations Models," Quarterly Journal of Economics
  100, 1217-1233.




                                               30
______________ (1986) "SelectionCriteria for Models with Non-Uniqueness,"
  Journal of Monetary Economics 18, 147-157.

_____________ (1989) "The Fragility of Sunspots and Bubbles," Journal of
  Monetary Economics 23, 297-3 17.

Evans, G.W., and S. Honkapohja (1992) "On the Robustness of Bubbles in Linear
  RE Models," International Economic Review 33, 1-14.


                and                  (1997) "Learning Dynamics," Working Paper.

Flood, R.P., and P.M. Garber (1980a) "An Economic Theory of Monetary Reform," Journal of
   Political Economy 88, 24-58.

___________ and ________ (1980b) "Market Fundamentals vs. Price Level Bubbles: The First
  Tests," Journal of Political Economy 88, 745-770.

Froot, K.A. and M. Obstfeld (1991) "Intrinsic Bubbles: The Case of Stock
   Prices," American Economic Review 81, 1189-1214.

Fuhrer, J.C., and G.R. Moore (1995) "Inflation Persistence," Ouarterly Journal of Economics 109,
   127-159.

Golub, G. H. and C.F. Van Loan, C. F. (1996). Matrix Computations, 3rded. Baltimore: Johns
   Hopkins.

Gray, J.A. (1984) "Dynamic Instability in Rational Expectations Models: An
  Attempt to Clarify," International Economic Review 25, 93-122.

Kerr. W., and R.G. King (1996), "Limits on Interest Rate Rules in the IS Model," Federal Reserve
  Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly 82 (No. 2), 47-76.

King, R. G. and M. W. Watson (1995). "The solution of singular linear difference systems under
   rational expectations." Working paper, University of Virginia.

Klein. P., (1997). "Using the generalized Schur form to solve a system of linear expectational
   difference equations." Working paper, Stockholm University (TIES).

Marcet, A., and T.J. Sargent, "Convergence of Least Squares Learning
  Mechanisms in Self Referential Linear Stochastic Models," Journal of
   Economic Theory 48, 3 37-368.

McCallum, B.T. (1983) "On Non-Uniqueness in Rational Expectations Models: An
  Attempt at Perspective," Journal of Monetary Economics 11, 139-168.



                                                 3'
_______________ (1985) "On z-Transform and Minimal State Variable Solutions
  to Linear Rational Expectations Models," Working Paper, Carnegie Mellon
  University.

_______________ (1997) "Issues in the Design of Monetary Policy Rules," NBER Working paper
   6016. Also forthcoming in J.B. Taylor and M. Woodford (eds.), Handbook of Macroeconomics.



McCallum, B.T., and E. Nelson (1997) "An Optimizing IS-LM Specification for Monetary Policy
  and Business Cycle Analysis," NBER Working Paper 5875. Also forthcoming in Journal of
  Money, Credit, and Banking.

McCallum, B.T. (1998) "Solutions to Linear Rational Expectations Models: A Compact
  Exposition," Economics Letters 61,143-147.

Obstfeld, M. and K. Rogoff (1983) "Speculative Hyperinflations in Maximizing
  Models: Can We Rule Them Out?" Journal of Political Economy 91, 675-687.

Rotemberg, J.J. (1982) "Sticky Prices in the United States," Journal of Political Economy 60,
   1187-12 11.

Sargent, T.J. (1987) Macroeconomic Theory, 2nd ed. Academic Press, New York.

Sims, C.A. (1994) "A Simple Model for Study of the Determination of the Price Level and the
   Interaction of Monetary and Fiscal Policy," Economic Theory 4, 38 1-399.

_________ (1996). "Solving linear rational expectations models." Working paper, Yale
   University.

Svensson, L.E.O. (1998) "Inflation Targeting as a Monetary Policy Rule," NBER Working Paper
   6790.

Taylor, J.B. (1977) "Conditions for Unique Solutions in Stochastic Macroeconomic Models
  with Rational Expectations," Econometrica 45,
   1377-13 85.

____________ (1993) "Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice," Carnegie-Rochester Conference
   Series on Public Policy 39, 195-2 14.

Uhlig, H. (1997). "A toolkit for analyzing nonlinear dynamic stochastic models easily." Working
   paper, University of Tilburg.

Whitman, C.H. (1983) Linear Rational Expectations Models: A User's Guide.
  University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis.


                                                32
Woodford, M. (1984) "Indeterminacy of Equilibrium in the Overlapping Generations
  Model: A Survey," Working Paper, Columbia University.

_______________ (1994) "Nonstandard Indicators for Monetary Policy: Can Their
  Usefulness Be Judged from Forecasting Regressions?" in Monetary Policy,
  ed. by N.G. Mankiw. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

_______________ (1995) "Price-Level Determinacy without Control of a Monetary Aggregate,"
  Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 43, 1-46.




                                            33
