        The Role of Foreign Direct Investment in International Capital Flows

                                         Robert E. Lipsey



1. Introduction

        The purpose of this essay is to provide some quantitative historical background to the

question of what role direct investment plays in the broader story of international capital flows.

The essay examines whether that role has changed over time, or changed for some groups of

investing or receiving countries, and how that role differs among countries and types of

countries.

        International flows of capital perform a variety of functions in the world economy. For

example, they permit levels of domestic investment in a country to exceed the country’s level of

saving. That has been the case for the United States for the last 15 years and for most of the last

25 years. For rapidly growing economies, such as the United States and Argentina in the 19th

century, inflows of foreign investment permit faster growth, and/or growth with less sacrifice of

current consumption, than could otherwise take place. For countries generating large amounts of

saving, international capital flows provide a means to invest where returns are higher than at

home, as was the case for Great Britain in the 19th century and for Japan more recently.

        These are long-term uses of what are, in some cases, prolonged periods of capital flows

into or out of particular countries. Shorter periods of capital flows may serve some different

functions, such as smoothing various types of cyclical or other economic fluctuations. For

_________________________
*
 I am indebted to Shachi Chopra-Nangia and Ewa Wojas for able research and statistical assistance. An
earlier version of this paper was presented at the NBER Conference on International Financial Flows in
Woodstock, Vermont, October 16-18, 1997.
                                                  2

example, Edelstein (1982) has suggested that while inward capital flows to the United States

during the 19th century were not large relative to domestic capital formation over long periods,

they were much more important in shorter periods when capital formation spurted far ahead of

more slowly growing saving levels, financing booms in capital formation that might otherwise

have been strangled by rising interest rates. Countries heavily dependent on particular crops

need capital flows to finance periods when crops fail or when crop prices fall drastically,

permitting consumption, and perhaps capital formation, to be at least partially sheltered.

International capital flows can also help to finance periods of war or of reparations, sometimes

resulting from defeats in wars.

       When these uses of international capital movements are studied, the flows of capital are

usually measured net, as the difference between outflows and inflows, rather than by examining

outflows and inflows separately. That is partly out of necessity, for lack of gross flow data.

Most international capital flows during the 19th century are approximated by estimates of the net

balance on current transactions, where it can be estimated, or even by the merchandise trade

balance, where it cannot. One exception to this rule is that there have been many studies of

flotations of foreign securities during the 19th century, particularly in the British capital market.

Some of the components of the balance on capital account are, even now, usually observed in the

form of net outflows or inflows; the simultaneous, or almost simultaneous, purchases and sales

of different types of equity, of government securities, of private bonds, and of short term debt is

not observable for many countries.

       Flows of direct investment capital are an exception to this netting out of outward and

inward flows; for many countries, data are available separately for outward and inward flows.

The outward flows are measured as the flows involving firms based in the reporting country,
                                                  3

although these firms can, at times, repatriate their foreign investment, producing negative

outward flows. The inward flows represent the activity in the country of firms based in other

countries. The division reported now by the IMF, following this practice, is between

“investment abroad” and “investment in” a country.

       A possible way to explain the different treatment of direct investment, aside from the

problems of collecting data, is that direct and portfolio investment are related differently to the

financial markets in home and host countries. In the markets for bank loans, government

securities, and private company bonds and equity, many buyers and sellers are competing with

each other to supply and acquire fairly standardized types of assets with fairly well defined

prices in identifiable markets. Changes in flows can presumably be associated with changes in

various interest rates in markets for these types of securities. It may matter little in the French

and UK corporate bond markets whether, for example, the UK demand for French corporate

bonds and the French demand for UK corporate bonds both increase equally at the expense of

demands for each country’s own bonds, or both decrease equally in favor of their own countries’

securities, or whether there is no change in any of these demands.

       Direct investment flows, on the other hand, do not enter any general financial market.

They are internal to each firm, and an inflow is not simply offset by an outflow. Each flow

brings something different to a country because it is attached to a specific firm. Equal direct

investments from France to Germany and Germany to France do not simply cancel each other

out; there has been an addition to the stock of French skills producing in Germany and an

addition to German skills producing in France. Thus, a comparison of net direct investment

flows with aggregate net international investment misses much of the significance of direct

investment.
                                                  4

       This contrast should not be drawn too sharply. Portfolio investment may also flow in two

directions at any given time. Investors in country 1 make portfolio investments in country 2

while investors in country 2 are making such investments in country 1. They may be seeking

country or industry diversification in their portfolios even if their preferences and attitudes

toward risk are the same. If they are not the same, investors in one country may be indulging a

greater appetite for political risk or industry instability combined with higher returns.

       The flow of direct investment is very much a two-way street among the top investing

countries, even though direct investment is more concentrated among source countries than

among recipient countries. The top ten exporters of direct investment capital accounted for over

90 per cent of the world total in 1989-1993 while the top ten recipients accounted for less than

three quarters of reported inflows. Nevertheless, six of the top ten exporters were also among the

top ten recipients, and two of the other top recipients ranked just below the top ten as exporters

(World Bank, 1997). Another distinction between the exporter and importer groups was that the

exporter group was a little more stable: eight out of the ten largest exporters of direct investment

capital in 1969-73 were also in the group in 1989-93, while only six of the ten largest importers

were still among the ten largest importers in 1989-93.

       The data for the stock of outward and inward investment, which presumably reflect the

cumulation of flows over many years, show similar concentrations. The top ten holders of direct

investments abroad in 1995 owned 87 per cent of the world total, while the top ten host countries

were the location of about two thirds of the stock. Six of the top host countries were also among

the top ten holders (United Nations, 1996).
                                                  5

2. The Definition and Measurement of Direct Investment: Control vs. “Lasting interest”

        Direct investment is often discussed as if it consisted entirely of the investment

associated with multinational corporations. Such a concept would match the theoretical

literature on direct investment, but the data available do not follow it. There are many aspects of

multinational corporation activity not included in measures of direct investment and all past and

present definitions of direct investment include transactions that do not involve multinationals.

        The definition of direct investment, and therefore its measurement, have changed

considerably over time. Definitions and measurements even now differ among countries despite

the efforts of international agencies to push for uniformity.

        The United States was a pioneer in surveying both outward and inward direct investment.

The object of the surveys, as described in the 1937 inward investment survey, was to measure

“…all foreign equity interests in those American corporations or enterprises which are controlled

by a person or group of persons…. domiciled in a foreign country” (U.S. Department of

Commerce, 1937, p. 10). The term “equity interest” encompasses all holdings of common and

preferred stock, advances, and intercompany accounts. No definition of “control” is provided,

but control is the criterion for inclusion.

        The outward survey for 1950 (U.S. Department of Commerce, 1953) does provide a

definition of direct investments, “…the United States equity in controlled foreign business

enterprises….as statistically defined for the purposes of this survey” ( p. 4). Four categories

were covered:

1. “Foreign corporations, the voting securities of which were owned to the extent of 25 percent

    or more by persons or groups of affiliated persons, ordinarily resident in the United States…”
                                                  6

2. “Foreign corporations, the voting stock of which was publicly held within the United States

   to an aggregate extent of 50 percent or more, but distributed among stockholders, so that no

   one investor, or group of affiliated investors, owned as much as 25 percent.”

3. “Sole proprietorships, partnerships or real property (other than property held for the personal

   use of the owner) held abroad by residents of the United States.”

4. “Foreign branches of United States corporations…”

       Three of these categories are part of current measures of direct investment, but the second

one is not. An earlier definition had been even broader, including publicly owned companies

with as little as 25 per cent of stock in scattered U.S. holdings. The definition of control has

been narrowed to mean ownership by a company, a person, or a small affiliated group. The

change eliminated from the total of U.S. outward direct investment mainly Canadian companies,

probably including such companies as Canadian Bell and Alcan Aluminium, that for historical

reasons had large numbers of non-corporate U.S. holders.

       The current definition of direct investment, endorsed by the OECD (1996) and the

International Monetary Fund (1993) avoids the idea of control in favor of a much vaguer

concept. “Foreign direct investment reflects the objective of obtaining a lasting interest by a

resident entity in one country (“direct investor”) in an entity resident in an economy other than

that of the investor (“direct investment enterprise”). The lasting interest implies the existence of

a long-term relationship between the direct investor and the enterprise and a significant degree of

influence on the management of the enterprise” (OECD, 1996, pp. 7-8).

       While this concept is a vague one, the recommended implementation is specific. “OECD

recommends that a direct investment enterprise be defined as an incorporated or unincorporated

enterprise in which a foreign investor owns 10 per cent or more of the ordinary shares or voting
                                                   7

power of an incorporated enterprise or the equivalent of an unincorporated enterprise….An

effective voice in the management, as evidenced by an ownership of at least 10 per cent, implies

that the direct investor is able to influence, or participate in the management of an enterprise; it

does not require absolute control by the foreign investor” (OECD, 1996, p. 8).

       The idea of control, which is behind much of the literature on multinationals, has been

specifically abandoned. The Fifth edition of the IMF Balance of Payments Manual points out

(p. 86) that the concept of direct investment now used “…is broader than the SNA concept of

foreign-controlled, as distinguished from domestically controlled resident enterprises.” A single

“direct investment enterprise” could be part of several different multinational firms, possibly

from several countries. Duplication is avoided in investment flow and stock data, the main areas

of concern to the OECD and the IMF, by allocating the financial aggregates to the various

owners according to the extent of their ownership. However, data on the activities of

multinationals, particularly those collected by home countries on, for example, the sales,

employment, or output of their multinational firms or their overseas operations, could easily

contain duplication if this 10 per cent criterion is used.



3. Historical Background

       a. Direct Investment Before World War I

       The history of multinational firms, and of the cross-border capital flows associated with

them, foreign direct investment, goes back a long time. Mira Wilkins reminds us that “…the

origins of American multinational enterprises go back to the colonial period…” and that

“Multinational enterprise headquartered in Europe has a longer history than American business

abroad, going back to the middle ages (1977, p. 577). She describes “modern” American
                                                   8

multinational corporations as dating from the 1850s and “…investments over borders of modern

European-headquartered manufacturing companies…to have accelerated in the late nineteenth

and early twentieth centuries.” She suggested that historical studies of international capital flows

“…often short-changed foreign direct investment.”

        It is striking, in view of the current interest in multinationals and foreign direct

investment, that many descriptions of pre-World War I capital flows, perhaps the largest in

history relative to total income or fixed investment, either did not discuss direct investment at all

(Iverson, 1936),or combined it with portfolio investment, as in the compilation in Palgrave

(1910, Vol. II), without considering whether the determinants or effects were similar. However,

Hobson (1914) did describe a half-century or more that “…has witnessed an enormous rise in the

importance of the international company, in railways, mining, tramways, water, gas, electricity,

banking, insurance, finance, land plantations, and other enterprises” (p.125). “The international

company has even extended to manufacturing, but there it is still somewhat rare…” In one of his

early books, John Dunning (1970) described the pre-World War I situation by the statement that

“In 1914, 90 per cent of all international capital movements took the form of portfolio

investment- i.e., the acquisition of securities …issued by foreign institutions, without any

associated control over, or participation in their management….several American and European

companies …already owned sizeable foreign manufacturing ventures, but these were the

exceptions rather than the rule, and they rarely accounted for a major part of the enterprises’ total

activities.” (p. 2).

        The consensus was probably well summarized by Arthur Bloomfield’s appraisal that

“Portfolio investment was a far more important component of long-term capital movements

before 1914 than direct investment…” (p. 3), although Bloomfield noted one exception, China,
                                                 9

among host countries, and one, the United States, among investing countries. Another apparent

exception among investing countries, heavily weighted by investment in China, was Japan, with

almost 90 per cent of its foreign investment in the form of direct investment, as indicated in a

number of sources cited by Mira Wilkins (1986). Bloomfield also noted that “Before 1914… the

concept of direct investment (in its present-day sense) was not clearly distinguished from other

(noncontrolling) equity investments in private foreign enterprises (Bloomfield, 1968, pp. 3-4).

       The idea that direct investment flows were negligible before 1914 was challenged, at

least as it applied to investment in developing countries, by Peter Svedberg (1978) who claimed

that it was an illusion stemming from the typical methods of estimating flows and stocks. These

relied heavily on compilations of government bond purchases and holdings and on London stock

exchange and other similar flotations. They therefore missed many direct investments that did

not pass through the exchanges. Also, by assuming that none of those that were publicly floated

were bought by controlling interests, the estimates classified some direct investment as portfolio

investment. After reviewing the data, Svedberg estimated that some 44 – 60 per cent of the $19

billion of accumulated investment in developing (or “underdeveloped” ) countries in 1913-14

was in the form of direct investment. Furthermore, similar ratios could be found for investment

in many different areas and by many different home countries, and was not peculiar to

investment by the United States.

       Whatever the correct picture for the world before 1914, the history of U.S. inward

international capital flows in that period conforms to the traditional picture. Foreign investment

in the United States was overwhelmingly portfolio investment, to the extent that just before

World War I about 80 per cent of the stock of long-term investment in the United States was
                                                 10

portfolio investment (Lewis, 1938, p.546). Federal, state, and local governments and railways

were the chief borrowers, and most of the borrowing was in the form of bonds rather than equity.

        On the other side of the balance sheet, three quarters of the U.S. outward investment

stock in 1914 was in the form of direct investment ( Ibid, p. 605). Thus, even if it is true that the

worldwide role of direct investment before 1914 has been understated in the historical literature,

its large role in U.S. outward investment was outside the range of other capital exporting

countries’ experience and far greater than in other countries’ capital exports to the United States.

       The divisions between domestic and foreign financing and between direct and portfolio

investment can be thought of as ways of dividing up risks among different types of investors and

borrowers. One could imagine that in the early history of the United States, foreign capital might

have financed risky types of capital formation that domestic investors would avoid. However,

the nature of the projects financed by foreign capital does not support this idea. Early foreign

investment went mainly into government securities, probably thought of as relatively safe,

although some of them proved riskier than was expected. Later investment went heavily into

railroads. A common feature, aside from lending to the Federal government during the Civil

War, was that foreign portfolio investment went to large, lumpy, social overhead capital projects,

railroads, canals, and later, public utilities, relatively safer investments and less dependent on

local knowledge than the typically much smaller, and on that account, riskier enterprises in

agriculture or manufacturing, which were left mainly to local financing (Edelstein, 1982, pp. 39-

41, 237-238).

       There were many manufacturing enterprises set up by foreign craftsmen or entrepreneurs

with special skills. Since transportation and communication were so slow that it was impossible

to manage these enterprises from abroad, the investment was therefore often accompanied by the
                                                 11

migration of children or other relatives of the foreign investors to manage the enterprise.

Although these enterprises were a form of direct investment, they were different from most

direct investment now in that they were not controlled by parent firms as an outgrowth of their

businesses, but by individual investors. Mira Wilkins (1989) refers to these as “free standing

enterprises.” Over time they tended to become increasingly independent and often eventually

lost the status of direct investments when their owners migrated to the United States.

 b.    The Dominance of Direct Investment in U.S. Investment Abroad and of the United States

        in World Outward Direct Investment

       The United States has been, since its earliest days as a foreign investor, exceptionally

focussed on direct investment. An estimate for 1897, when the United States was still

predominantly a recipient of capital from abroad rather than a supplier, showed more than 90 per

cent of U.S. outward investment to be direct investment. By 1914, the share had declined to

three quarters, still far above the proportion in foreign investment in the United States or in

world investment as a whole (Lewis, 1938, p. 605).

       The period of World War I saw the first major U.S. portfolio investment abroad,

including large loans to foreign governments that outweighed total private financing. By the end

of 1919, direct investment had been reduced to a little over half of U.S. private investment

abroad but to less than a quarter of total foreign investment including intergovernment loans

(Lewis, 1938, p.447). The 1920s were characterized by rapid growth in both direct and portfolio

private investment abroad, but were unlike the earlier periods in that portfolio investment

became the predominant avenue for U.S. investment, tripling in value while direct investment

only doubled, and accounting for over 60 per cent of the growth in private U.S. investment
                                                12

abroad. By 1929, the value of U.S. private portfolio investment exceeded that of direct

investment for the first time (Lewis, 1938, pp. 450 and 605).

       The Great Depression reversed the change in the composition of the U.S. private foreign

investment portfolio that had taken place in the 1920s. Half of the foreign loans extended in the

late 1920s went into default (Mintz, 1951, p. 6). U.S. holdings of securities, even valued at par,

were reduced by almost 30 per cent (almost 50 per cent with defaulted bonds at market value),

and short-term credits were cut almost in half (Lewis, 1938, p.454). By 1940, direct investment

was back to 60 per cent of U.S. private outward investment. It was a little more than that in 1950

and remained between 60 per cent and two thirds through 1970 (U.S. Bureau of the Census,1975,

Series U 26 – U 39).

       U.S. government loans to foreign countries had expanded further during World War II

and by 1950 were almost twice the total of all private investment stocks. Thus the restored

dominance of direct investment in 1950 applied only to private investment. After 1950, U.S.

government loans did not increase greatly and by 1970, more than 70 per cent of U.S.

international assets were private and almost half were direct investment.

       The United States not only had much or most of its international investment in the form

of direct investment but also accounted for a large part of the world’s stock of direct investment.

In 1960, almost half of all the outward direct investment was owned by investors based in the

United States. No other country came close; the next ranking holder of direct investment was the

United Kingdom, at 18 per cent, followed by The Netherlands, at 10 per cent and France, at 6 per

cent (United Nations, 1988, Table 1.2). The large role of direct investment in U.S. foreign

investment was associated with a large role for the United States in the world’s direct investment

universe.
                                                 13




4. The Importance of FDI in Total International Investment Flows

       The first question we attempt to answer here is about the size of direct investment flows

relative to other forms of international investment. For almost all countries, a three-way division

is published by the IMF, separating international investment flows into Direct investment,

Portfolio investment, and Other investment.

       The definition of direct investment has been discussed above. Portfolio investment

includes equity securities, debt securities in the form of bonds, money market instruments, and

financial derivatives, such as options, all excluding any of these included in direct investment or

reserve assets. The distinction between long- and short-term formerly made has been abandoned

on the ground that original maturity is now of relatively little importance. The final category of

“Other investment” includes trade credit, loans, financial leases, currency, and deposits, mostly

short term assets.

       The categories do not match those of the pre-1980 data we use, and some of the

following tables therefore show an overlap for 1980-1984. The data for years before 1980 are on

a similar basis to later ones for direct investment, reported as “investment by,” mainly outflows

from the reporting country, and “investment in,” mainly inflows into the reporting country. That

is the case for most flows, but there can be reverse flows on both sides. A country’s firms can

repatriate accumulated earnings from their foreign affiliates, or sell foreign operations to foreign

buyers, resulting in a negative outflow (a positive entry in the balance of payments), and foreign

firms in a host country can repatriate earnings or sell operations, producing a negative inflow of

capital (a negative entry in the balance of payments).
                                                14

       For categories other than direct investment, the flows before 1980 are reported on a net

basis, not distinguishing between changes in assets and changes in liabilities. There is thus no

natural world total for those categories because every transaction should enter as both an asset

change and a liability change, and the total should therefore be zero. For these categories we

approximate gross flows very roughly by aggregating the net flows of those countries that report

net outflows in that category in each year. That is, we aggregate all the negative balance of

payments entries in each year under the headings of “Portfolio investment, net,” and “Other

investment, net.” The alternative of aggregating positive entries should give the same result if

the data were complete, but of course they are not. Judging by the 1980-84 overlap, the 1969-79

estimates for portfolio investment outflow are understated by almost 30 per cent and those for

“Other investment” by almost half.

       The amounts of the three major types of investment flows, by these imperfect measures,

are shown in Appendix Table 1. All types of international capital flows increased enormously.

Since these are nominal values, they reflect the rise in world nominal income, which was, in

1990-94, about 5&1/2 times as high as in 1970-74. All the forms of international capital flow

grew faster than world nominal income. If we take the overlap in 1980-84 as an indicator of the

underestimate of gross flows during 1970-1979, we would conclude that the flow of direct

investment grew the most and that “Other Investment” hardly grew faster than income (Table 1).

Since 1980, where we do have estimates of gross flows, portfolio investment has grown

somewhat faster than direct investment, and “Other Investment” hardly grew until 1995, when it

jumped ahead of the other two.

       The long-term trend, if there is one, seems to have been an increase in the share of direct

investment in total investment flows from 1980 through 1994, and possibly since 1970 (Table 2).
                                                  15

After 1994, the trend was apparently reversed, with a burst of portfolio and “Other” investment,

but the direct investment share remained well above that of the early 1970s.

       All these statements have an important cloud over them. That is the persistent world

current account deficit that has remained stubbornly close to $100 billion a year, instead of zero,

as it should be. That deficit, which is really a discrepancy item, is so large that it implies that the

correct figures for some of these entries could be very far different from those we are relying on

to study and to follow investment flows. The latest indicator of how far some of these numbers

are from the facts they are supposed to represent is the results of the recently completed survey

of U.S. portfolio investment abroad, which found that the market value of U.S.-owned foreign

securities at the end of 1994 was $910 billion instead of the previously estimated $556 billion, an

addition of 64 per cent.



5. The Geography of International Investment Flows

       a. Origins and Destinations of Direct Investment

       Outward direct investment originates mainly in the highest income countries, as can be

seen from Appendix Table 2. The United States was the chief source of direct investment in

1970-74, larger than all the other regions shown here put together. Europe caught up in the

second period and then far surpassed the United States. Japan caught up in 1985-89, and even

exported more direct investment capital than the United States during those years, although it is a

considerably smaller economy, with GDP less than three quarters of that of the United States in

nominal terms and less than 40 per cent in real terms. After 1990, Japan faded as a direct

investor and the United States resumed its position as the largest single supplier of direct

investment.
                                                16

       The most rapid growth in outward direct investment was in the two developing areas,

Developing Asia and Latin America, especially the former. By 1990-1994, according to the IMF

data, the outflow from the Developing Asian countries had reached over 85 per cent of the

Japanese level. However, these data grossly understate the contribution of Developing Asian

countries and its growth in recent years by omitting Hong Kong, even though they include

Taiwan, decorously concealed under the title, “Asia not specified.” The addition of Hong Kong

doubles the figure for the outflow from Southeast Asia in 1990-94. Hong Kong was a larger

supplier of direct investment funds than Japan in 1994, 1995, and 1996 (UN 1997, Annex Table

13.2) and its addition to the Developing Asia total brings that region to an important position as a

direct investor. The timing of the growth in Hong Kong’s outward investment is similar to that

in China’s inward investment, confirming the impression that much of the investment was going

to China. Although there is no reported surge in Hong Kong inward investment it is hard not to

suspect that some part of the outward investment originated outside Hong Kong.

       The flows to the main regional destinations for foreign direct investment are described in

Appendix Table 3. The two outstanding shifts in the destinations of FDI flows over the quarter

century were toward Asian countries, both China and Southeast Asia, and toward the United

States. The flow to the United States reached a peak in the 1980s, when it was larger than the

combined flows to all European destinations combined. After that, the flow to the United States

receded somewhat, and in the next period the major growth was in the flow to Europe. Direct

investment into Developing Asia continued to grow rapidly and that to Latin America revived.

In 1990-94, Europe resumed its earlier position as the main destination of direct investment.

Most of the increase over the previous period was matched by similar growth in European

outflows, an indication that a large part of the growth was in intra-European investment.
                                                 17

       There is more direct evidence on the nature of European FDI. If Europe were treated as a

single unit, its importance as a source and destination for FDI would be greatly reduced. Among

the European countries that publish inward FDI position data, all except the UK had received 60

per cent or more of their FDI stock from other European countries. And among those that

published outward FDI positions, all except the UK had sent half or more of their FDI to other

locations within Europe (OECD, 1998).

       Inflows into the United States have been volatile in the 1990s, first dropping to low levels

in 1991 and 1992 and then rebounding strongly. Inflows into Japan, always small, turned

negative in 1989 and, after a brief flurry in the early 1990s, stayed below $1 billion per year in

1993-96. Inflows into China, already far above earlier amounts, took off after 1991, reaching

over $42 billion, almost 10 times the 1991 level, in 1996 (United Nations, 1997). There has been

some suspicion that part of direct investment in China originates from China itself, routed

through Hong Kong for various reasons including favorable treatment accorded to foreign-

owned enterprises in China. If that is the case, such “round trip” investment does not appear to

be substantially financed by reported Chinese direct investment in Hong Kong, which is quite

small relative to inward direct investment in China.

       The major elements of the net flows of international capital in these regions since 1969

are summarized in Appendix Tables 4 through 6. Negative numbers represent net outflows of

capital and positive ones, net inflows.

       Europe and Japan were consistent net suppliers of direct investment to the rest of the

world and Latin America was a consistent absorber of such capital, as was Developing Asia,

especially in the last period (Appendix Table 4). In 1993-95, China far surpassed Latin America

as a net importer of direct investment (UN, 1997, Annex Tables B.1 and B.2). One odd case here
                                                 18

is the United States, which shifted from being the world’s major net supplier of direct investment

during the 1970s to being a large net recipient throughout the 1980s before returning to its

traditional role. The shift is sometimes attributed to the devaluation of the dollar that started in

1985, and it is true that the inflow was at its largest in 1987 to 1989, but the United States

switched to being a net importer of direct investment capital much earlier, in 1981, and was a net

importer through the period when the dollar was at its highest. Something more than exchange

rates must have been at work. The other switch was in Southeast Asia which, after absorbing

direct investment on balance from 1969 to 1992, became a net supplier, mainly on account of

Hong Kong, after that.

       The net flow of portfolio capital does not show the same consistency of direction as the

direct investment flow and some of the fluctuations are very large (Appendix Table 5). Japan

has been a pretty consistent capital exporter in this category since the 1970s, while the other

regions have mostly been importers. For the United States, portfolio inflows were particularly

large in 1985-89, just when direct investment inflows were also at a peak. In this period, the

high inflow into the United States almost exactly matched the outflow from Japan. The fact that

the peak period in the United States was the same as for direct investment suggests that whatever

led to the large inflows was not peculiar to direct investment. In Latin America, also, the jump

in direct investment inflows in the 1990s was accompanied by a large rise in portfolio capital

inflows. For the whole period since 1980, the regions listed reported imports of portfolio capital

reaching over $1¼ trillion, while the only net exporter in the list, Japan, reported less than half

that amount in exports (Table 3).

       In the case of other capital flows, only one region, Europe, was consistent over time with

respect to the direction of the flows, with inflows in every period (Appendix Table 6). Every
                                                   19

other region had periods of both inflows and outflows, sometimes with abrupt shifts from one to

the other. The United States was a net supplier of funds through 1979-83 and then turned to

being a net recipient. Latin America was almost always a supplier of funds, and the other

countries showed no consistent role.

        c. The Regional Distribution of Total Net International Investment Flows

        The combination of the various types of net capital flows is the total net international

flow of capital. Japan has been a consistent supplier of capital on the international market

throughout the whole period since 1980, while the United States has been a major net recipient

of international capital flows, especially in the most recent years (Appendix Table 7). Southeast

Asia and Latin America have been pretty continuous recipients and were relatively large ones

except when the United States began to absorb foreign capital on a large scale in 1983. Europe

has mostly absorbed capital on net balance except in the 1985-89 period.



6. Differences in Behavior among Types of International Financial Flows

        a. Volatility

        As was mentioned in the discussion of historical aspects of international investment,

above, different types of financial flows can perform quite different functions for both investing

and receiving countries. One difference among the types of flows that affects their functions,

especially for the recipients, is in their volatility, a subject that has received increased attention

since the Asian crisis began. We can compare flows of different types by asking how often net

flows to or from a country change signs. That is, how often do inflows turn into outflows and

outflows turn into inflows.
                                                  20

       For direct investment, among the 52 countries for which we have long runs of data, and

data for each type of capital flow, the average number of reversals was 2.50, indicating an

average run in a single direction of almost eight years (Table 4). The next most stable type was

portfolio investment, with 3.60 reversals, on average, an average run in one direction of four and

a half years. Other capital flows reversed signs 4.2 times on average. Thus, the general

impression of the relative stability of direct investment, relative to the other types, is confirmed.

       These comparisons take account of the direction of flows but not the size, which can vary

sharply without any change of direction. We compare the types of flow with respect to their

standard deviations in Table 5.

       In the case of the United States, both portfolio and short-term capital flows fluctuated less

relative to the average flows than did net direct investment. The United States was unusual in

this respect, however. For Japan and for the three regions, the averages for individual country

volatility, as measured by the ratios of standard deviations to means, was lowest for net direct

investment. The volatility of the aggregates in two of the three regions confirmed the relative

stability of direct investment. There is a particularly wide gap in Latin America between the

volatility of net portfolio investment and the relative stability of net direct investment.

       b. Relations Among Capital Flows

       If flows of direct investment respond to current economic conditions in each country, one

might expect to find alternating periods of larger outflows than inflows and larger inflows than

outflows and, therefore, a negative relationship between gross outflows and gross inflows. As

Table 6 indicates, for a selection of major exporters and recipients of FDI flows, that is not the

case. By and large, where there is a significant relationship, it is a positive one; direct

investment inflows into a country tend to be large when outflows from the country are large.
                                                   21

        To some extent, this relationship may reflect trends, or simply the effects of growth,

which we may partially remove by taking international flows relative to GDP. The trend

influence is confirmed by the fact that fewer equations are significant, the correlations are lower,

and one significant negative relationship appears, for Brazil, but the overall result is still that

outflows and inflows are positively related, where there is any significant relationship at all.

        We can also ask how gross or net FDI outflows are related to flows of capital in other

forms. The results for the 13 countries used in the test are presented in Table 7.

        The strongest relationship is that between outward direct investment and outward flows

of short-term capital. Large outflows of direct investment are accompanied by outflows of short-

term capital as well. There is also a much weaker positive association with net flows of portfolio

capital. Net outflows of direct investment are negatively correlated with net flows of all other

long-term capital and also with that part of it that is portfolio capital. Little of the variability in

one flow is explained by the other but there is at least some suggestion here of substitution

among types of long-term capital flows, especially between direct and portfolio capital flows.

        c. The Importance of Retained Earnings in Direct Investment

        One feature of flows of direct investment that distinguishes it from other forms of

investment is that it can be, and often is, financed from the retained earnings of affiliates. The

IMF and the OECD recommend that direct investment flows include "...the direct investor's

share of the company's reinvested earnings" (OECD,1996, p. 16). Unfortunately for our ability

to make comparisons across countries, many important capital exporters do not include

reinvested earnings in their capital flow data. Among the OECD countries, Belgium, Canada,

France, Italy, Japan, and Norway are in this group.
                                                 22

       The United States is one country that has kept records of retained earnings of its firms'

foreign affiliates over many years, although there have been some changes in their treatment in

the Balance of Payments. The distribution, by type, of U.S. direct investment outflows in recent

years is described in Table 8.

       Although there are large fluctuations in the proportions, reinvested earnings are clearly

the predominant form of financing of U.S. outward direct investment. They account for more

than half of investment over the whole period, in each sub-period, and in ten out of the fourteen

individual years. The only year in which they were not larger than each of the other forms of

investment was the severe recession year, 1982.

       One reason for the importance of reinvested earnings in U.S. outward direct investment is

that U.S. firms' foreign operations are relatively mature, having started earlier than most of those

from other countries. However, the large role of reinvested earnings is an old one for the United

States. During the late 1930s and through World War II they were virtually the only source of

additions to direct investment, and even when the pace of investment picked up after the war,

retained earnings still provided over 40 per cent of the growth.

       In the 25 years from 1950 through 1975, reinvested earnings accounted for more than

half of the growth in the stock of U.S. outward direct investment, 60 per cent in manufacturing

and trade, and somewhat lower proportions in petroleum and in other industries including

finance (Table 9).

       Some more recent data, for countries that keep such records, are summarized in Table 10,

for both home countries and host countries, 1989 through 1995. The large contribution of

retained earnings to growth in direct investment, a characteristic of U.S. outward direct

investment for so long, is not a universal characteristic of direct investment, as can be seen in the
                                                 23

large negative retained earnings on inward direct investment in the United States. The

importance of retained earnings appears to be related to the age of the investments, the U.S., the

U.K., Sweden, and Switzerland being direct investors of long standing. Much of U.S. inward

investment, on the other hand, is a product of the late 1980s, and, therefore very new during the

period covered. Similarly, Germany is a relatively late entrant as a major direct investor, partly

because much of its investment was confiscated after losses in two World Wars.

       Other factors may also play a role. During the period of exchange controls, many

enterprises were not permitted to repatriate their profits, particularly from developing countries.

There are also differences and changes in systems of taxation of overseas earnings that affect

where profits are made, where they are accumulated, and if and when they are repatriated.



Summary

       Direct investment, as a flow of capital, is only partly related to the activities of

multinational firms. Most of what these firms do and most of their impact, is unconnected with

current capital flows and parts of the capital flows are unconnected with multinational firms.

Over time, the definition of direct investment has shifted from an emphasis on control across

national boundaries to a vaguer notion of "lasting interest" and a "significant" influence on

management, and in the balance of payments data the enterprise is divided up statistically among

owners of shares of 10 per cent or more.

       The history of cross-border ownership of enterprises is a long one, and its importance as a

part of international capital flows before World War I a matter of some controversy. However, it

is clear that direct investment was more important in total U.S. investment abroad than in total

foreign investment by other countries and far more important than in foreign investment in the
                                                24

United States. As a result of this specialization in direct investment, the United States was the

dominant holder of direct investment assets in the decade or two after World War II.

       It is hard to assess the relative importance of direct investment as a method of financing

international investment flows because of the offsetting of one set of flows by another. In the

gross flow data, direct investment has accounted for a little under a quarter of flows since 1989,

and appears to have grown in importance since the 1970s.

       The United States was by far the major source of direct investment outflows in the early

1970s but Europe soon caught up and Japan almost did before fading out in the 1990s. Hong

Kong became a major investor in the 1990s, investing heavily in China. The United States

shifted from being the world's largest net supplier of direct investment to being a large absorber

of such investment from other countries, especially in 1985-89, and then reverted to its earlier

net supplier role. Latin America and Southeast Asia have been continuous net recipients of

direct investment.

       Portfolio capital has been supplied to the world steadily by Japan. The United States, at

times, particularly in 1985-89, has absorbed much of this capital, on net balance, and Southeast

Asia and Latin America have also been major borrowers.

       Total international capital flows, of which the United States supplied a large proportion

through 1983, have since then become a source of capital for the United States, as they have

been for China and Southeast Asia in almost every period. Europe also has been a net absorber

of capital in most periods, and Japan the only consistent supplier.

       In recent years, capital flows among the developed countries, particularly the United

States and Europe, have been dominated by portfolio capital. Direct investment has played the
                                                25

largest role in net outflows from Japan and especially in the inflows to Southeast Asia, China,

and Latin America.

       The different forms of international investment flows not only vary in importance among

regions but have different characteristics in other ways. Direct investment flows have been the

least volatile among the different types in most countries, the chief exception being the United

States, which has flipped back and forth from being the dominant net supplier to dominant net

recipient and back to dominant net supplier. For other countries, and particularly for developing

countries, direct investment has been the most dependable source of foreign investment.

       One reason for the relative stability of direct investment flows may be the importance

within them of retained earnings. These do fluctuate, of course, with profits, but they rarely shift

sharply into the negative once firms are well established. Retained earnings appear to be most

important in outward U.S. and U.K. investment. There are some large negative retained earnings

in recent years for foreign direct investment in the United States, relatively new and perhaps

purchased at the peak of real estate markets, but the general relationship seems to be that older

holdings of direct investment grow a good deal from retained earnings.
                                               26

References

Bloomfield, Arthur I. (1968), Patterns of Fluctuations in International Investment Before 1914,

       Princeeton Studies in International Finance, No. 21, International Finance Section,

       Department of Economics, Princeton University, December.

Dunning, John (1970), Studies in International Investment, London, George Allen & Unwin.

Edelstein, Michael (1982), Overseas Investment in the Age of High Imperialism: The United

       Kingdom, 1850-1914, New York, Columbia University Press.

Hobson, C.K., The Export of Capital (1914), London, Constable and Co.

International Monetary Fund (1993), Balance of Payments Manual, 5th Edition, Washington,

       DC, International Monetary Fund.

_______________________ (1996). Balance of Payments Yearbook, 1996, Washington, D.C.,

       International Monetary Fund.

_______________________ (1998). Diskette based on Balance of Payments Yearbook, 1997,

       Washington, D.C., International Monetary Fund.

Iverson, Carl (1936), Aspects of the Theory of International Capital Movements, Levin &

       Munksgaard, Copenhagen, and Humphrey Milford, Oxford University Press, London.

Lewis, Cleona (1938), America’s Stake in International Investments, Washington, DC, The

       Brookings Institution.

Mintz, Ilse (1951), Deterioration in the Quality of Foreign Bonds Issued in the United States,

       1920 –1930, New York, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), (1996), OECD Benchmark

       Definition of Foreign Direct Investment, Third Edition, Paris, OECD.
                                               27

______________________________________________________, (1998), International Direct

       Investment Statistics Yearbook, Paris, OECD.

Palgrave, Robert Harry Inglis, Editor (1910), Dictionary of Political Economy, London,

       Macmillan and Co.

Svedberg, Peter (1978), “The Portfolio-Direct Composition of Private Foreign Investment in

       1914 Revisited,” Economic Journal, No. 352, Vol. 88, December, pp.763-777.

United Nations (1988), Transnational Corporations in World Development: Trends and

       Prospects, Centre on Transnational Corporations, New York, United Nations.

____________ (1995), World Investment Report, 1995, New York and Geneva, United Nations.

____________ (1996), World Investment Report, 1996, New York and Geneva, United Nations.

____________ (1997), World Investment Report, 1997, New York and Geneva, United Nations.

____________ (1998), World Investment Report, 1998, New York and Geneva, United Nations.

U.S. Bureau of the Census (1975), Historical Statistics of the United States, Colonial Times to

       1970, Washington, D.C., U.S. Government Printing Office.

U.S. Department of Commerce (1937), Foreign Investments in the United States, Bureau of

       Foreign and Domestic Commerce, Washington, DC.

_________________________ (1953), Direct Private Foreign Investments of the United States,

       Census of 1950, Office of Business Economics, Washington, DC.

_________________________ (1982), Selected Data on U.S. Direct Investment Abroad, 1950-

       76, Bureau of Economic Analysis, Washington, D.C.

Wilkins, Mira (1977), “Modern European Economic History and the Multinationals,” Journal of

       European Economic History, Vol. 6, No.3, Winter, pp. 575-595.
                                             28

___________ (1986), “Japanese Multinational Enterprise before 1914,” Business History

       Review, 60, Summer.

___________ (1989), The History of Foreign Investment in the United States to 1914,

       Cambridge, MA and London, Harvard University Press.

World Bank (1995), World Data 1995, World Bank Indicators on CD-ROM, Washington, DC,

       The World Bank.

World Bank (1997), World Development Indicators on CD-ROM, Washington, DC, The World

       Bank.
                              Table 1

              Growth in Three Forms of Capital Outflow



                          1990-94/1970-74

               Direct Investment                 61.7

               Portfolio Investment              49.6

                Other Investment                  5.9

                          1990-94/1980-84

               Direct Investment                 5.24

               Portfolio Investment              5.97

               Other Investment                  1.08



Source: Appendix Table 1, with 1970-74 estimated from 1980-84 overlap
                                         Table 2

               Share of Direct Investment in Total Capital Outflow



                                1970-74             5.8

                                1975-79            18.0

                                1980-84a           11.6

                                1985-89 a          20.7

                                1990-94 a          25.4

                                1990-94 b          26.2

                                1994 b             31.3

                                1995 b             24.8

                                1996 b             20.4



                 a
                 Excluding Hong Kong and Taiwan
                 b
                     Excluding Hong Kong but including Taiwan



Source: Appendix Table 1, with 1970-74 and 1975-79 estimated from 1980-84 overlap
                  Table 3

 Reported Net Inflows of Portfolio Capital
                1980-1996
               ($ Million)


United States               $650,180

Japan                       -506,320

Europe                      276,200

Developing Asia              86,128

Latin America               273,771



        Total               1,286,279




Source: Appendix Tables 2 and 3.
                                        Table 4

         FREQUENCY OF SIGN CHANGES IN CAPITAL FLOWS, 1980-1995

                               (No. of Countries: 52)



                           No. of Sign Changes    Average Frequency   Average Duration
                                                   of Sign Changes         of Run


Net Direct Investment             130                   2.50                6.40

Net Portfolio Investment          187                   3.60                4.45

Net Other Investment              217                   4.17                3.83




   Source: IMF (1998).
                                                Table 5



              RATIOS OF STANDARD DEVIATIONS TO MEANS FOR VARIOUS

                                   TYPES OF INTERNATIONAL

                                   CAPITAL FLOWS, 1969-1993



                               Net FDI         Other LT,        Portfolio     Short Term
                                                 incl.
                                               Portfolio

United States                        1.302            1.469           1.188         1.297

Japan                                1.307            1.371           1.473         1.636

SE Asia
Unweighted Averagea                  1.373            1.857           1.658         1.561
Aggregateb                           1.455            2.265           1.835         1.179

Europe
Unweighted Average                   1.311            1.524           1.625         1.708
Aggregate                            1.008            1.911           2.102         1.823

Latin America
Unweighted Average                   1.072            1.792           2.228         1.478
Aggregate                            0.819            1.781           2.278         1.484



        a
            Unweighted average of standard deviations for individual countries.
        b
            Standard deviation of aggregate net flows to or from region.
                                   Table 6

              SUMMARY OF EQUATIONS RELATING FDI
               BY A COUNTRY TO FDI IN A COUNTRY,
                           1969-1994

                      FDI By=f(FDI In)          FDI By/GDP=f(FDI In/GDP)
                 Coefficient      Adj. R sq.   Coefficient of   Adj. R sq.
                  of FDI in                    FDI/GDP in
USA                 0.45             0.16*       -0.05           -0.04
                   (2.40)                        (0.18)
UK                  1.01             0.66**       0.73           0.32**
                   (7.02)                        (3.53)
Japan               4.13             0.01        -3.68           0.03
                   (1.09)                        (1.33)
Germany             2.26             0.60**       0.51           0.05
                   (6.26)                        (1.48)
France              1.49             0.85**       1.62           0.71**
                  (12.02)                        (7.70)
Netherlands         1.47             0.83**       1.04           0.47**
                  (11.27)                        (4.68)
Sweden              1.11             0.28**       1.20           0.18*
                   (3.26)                        (2.51)
Canada              0.49             0.36**       0.06           -0.04
                   (3.81)                        (0.38)
Brazil             -0.01            -0.04        -0.06           0.12
                   (0.14)                        (2.06)
Singapore           0.14             0.57**       0.09           0.07
                   (5.40)                        (1.59)
ALL                 0.76             0.38**       0.09           0.03**
                  (12.55)                        (3.03)

Numbers in parentheses are t-statistics
* Prob F <0.05
** Prob F <0.01
                                   Table 7



Simple Regressions Relating FDI Flows to Flows of Other Types of Capital
                             13 Countries


                                                                       2
                                             Coefficient of FDI    R

   Outward FDI x Short-term Capital                .230**         .148

   Outward FDI x LT Capital exc. FDI               -.016          -.003

   Outward FDI x Portfolio Capital                 .080*          .014

   Net FDI x Short-term Capital                    .059*          .012

   Net FDI x LT Capital exc. FDI                   -.097**        .039

   Net FDI x Portfolio Capital                     -.121**        .059



       *Significant at 5 per cent level

      **Significant at 1 per cent level
                                    Table 8

          Distribution, by Type, of U.S. Outflows of Direct Investment

              Equity Capital       Retained       Intercompany
                Outflows           Earnings       Debt Outflows

1982-86               26.7              84.9             -11.6

1987-91               23.6              64.6              11.8

1992-95               34.2              50.7              15.0



 1992                 37.6              41.8              20.6

 1993                 33.0              40.4              26.6

 1994                 24.8              62.4              12.8

 1995                 39.0              56.3                4.7



  Source: BEA diskette on “U.S. Direct Investment Abroad: Balance of Payments

  and Direct Investment Position.” Intracompany transactions with the Netherlands

  Antilles have been removed.
                                         Table 9



 Cumulated Reinvested Earnings and Changes in U.S. Outward Direct Investment Stock

                       Total and Selected Industry Groups, 1950-1975

                                        ($ Billion)

                      Change in         Investment        Cumulated     Share of
                        Direct             Stock          Reinvested   Reinvested
                      Investment         1975/1950         Earnings     Earnings
                         Stock
All Industries       112                10.5              60           54

  Petroleum           23                 7.7              10           43

Manufacturing         52                14.6              31           60

    Trade             12                16.4               7.5         62

 Other, incl.         19                16.0               7           37
  Finance


                Source: U.S. Department of Commerce (1982).
                                              Table 10



                            Outflows and Inflows of Direct Investment:

                                  Total and Reinvested Earnings

                                  Selected Countries, 1989-1995



                  Total Direct                 Share of     Total Direct    Reinvested    Share of
                  Investment                  Reinvested     Investment      Earnings    Reinvested
                                 Reinvested
                    Assets                     Earnings       Liabilities                 Earnings
                                  Earnings
                 (Outward FDI                    (%)       (Inward FDI)                     (%)

U.S.                   368,988      184,508      50.0           308,242        -47,582    -15.4
Germany                149,700       10,849       7.2             28,005        -6,687    -23.9
Netherlandsa            86,549        9,159      10.6             48,025         8,225     17.1
Sweden                  51,406       12,742      24.8             34,359         4,327     12.6
Switzerland             57,885       15,729      27.2             19,818         7,805     39.4
U.K.                   184,230      108,908      59.1           153,375         32,047     20.9


         a
         1989-1994

         Source: International Monetary Fund (1996).
                                  APPENDIX TABLE 1

                          WORLD INVESTMENT FLOWS

                                  $ MILLIONS
                          5-YEAR AVERAGES, 1970-1984


                      DIRECT          PORTFOLIO          OTHER        TOTAL
                   INVESTMENT        INVESTMENT       INVESTMENT

1970-1974                 3,564             5,081          26,608

1975-1979                36,669            14,493          76,336

1980-1984                44,751            42,247         145,149

                          CURRENT IMF DATA, 1980-1996

1980-1984                44,514 a          59,316 a       279,690 a    383,520

1985-1989               140,069 a         188,670 a       346,895 a    675,634

1990-1994               219,969 a         352,784 a       294,752 a    867,505

1990-1994               233,409           353,927 b       303,104 b    890,440

1994                    276,443           330,662 b       276,721 b    883,826

1995                    349,501           372,438 b       684,525 b   1,406,464

1996                    348,992           587,069 b       778,432 b   1,714,493


a
    Excluding Hong Kong and Taiwan
b
    Including Taiwan but not Hong Kong


Sources: IMF (1998), World Bank (1995) and (1997), United Nations
(1996), (1997), and (1998).
                                 APPENDIX TABLE 2

                 SOURCES OF DIRECT INVESTMENT OUTFLOWS

                                  $ MILLIONS
                          5-YEAR AVERAGES, 1970-1984

                        US       JAPAN       EUROPE     DEVPG        LATIN
                                                         ASIA       AMERICA


    1970-1974            8,670      1,042       6,968        23           31

    1975-1979           15,876      2,133      16,000       109          194

    1980-1984           10,117      4,280      24,889       240          358

                         CURRENT IMF DATA, 1980-1996

    1980-1984            9,592      4,280      24,958       163 a        262

    1985-1989           22,890     24,590      75,591     6,168 b        411

    1990-1994           50,240     26,286     121,846    22,696 c       1,625

    1994                69,264     18,089     131,789    36,302 c       2,936

    1995                86,738     22,508     177,416    42,180 c       2,797

    1996                87,812     23,442     172,053    48,024 c       3,770



    a
        Excluding Hong Kong & Taiwan.
    b
      Excluding Hong Kong but including annual average outward direct
    investment by Taiwan over the period 1984-89.
    c
        Including both Hong Kong & Taiwan.

 Sources: IMF (1998), World Bank (1995) and (1997), United Nations
(1996), (1997), and (1998).
                               APPENDIX TABLE 3

              DESTINATIONS OF DIRECT INVESTMENT INFLOWS

                                 $ MILLIONS
                         5-YEAR AVERAGES, 1970-1984

                       US      JAPAN    EUROPE        DEVPG        LATIN
                                                       ASIA       AMERICA

    1970-1974          2,070      126         7,181      708              1,308

    1975-1979          6,092      123        11,474     1,423             3,270

    1980-1984         17,965      262        15,202     3,641             5,214

                        CURRENT IMF DATA, 1980-1996

    1980-1984         17,965      262        15,536     4,716 a           6,308

    1985-1989         47,773      101        46,226    11,512 b           6,505

    1990-1994         36,507    1,371        91,489    36,182 b          15,287

    1994              45,678      912        84,642    59,753 b          27,495

    1995              67,527       39    138,030       68,385 b          28,838

    1996              76,955      200    120,109       77,995 b          40,056


    a
     Including annual average figures for outward direct investment by
    Hong Kong &Taiwan over the period 1980-85.
    b
        Including both Hong Kong & Taiwan.

Sources: IMF (1998), World Bank (1995) and (1997), United Nations
(1996), (1997), and (1998).
                           APPENDIX TABLE 4

         NET INFLOWS* OF DIRECT INVESTMENT, FIVE REGIONS

                              $ MILLIONS
                      5-YEAR AVERAGES, 1970-1984


                     US        JAPAN EUROPE        DEVPG      LATIN
                                                    ASIA     AMERICA

1970-1974             -6,600     -916       213       685         1,277

1975-1979             -9,784    -2,010    -4,526     1,314        3,076

1980-1984             7,847     -4,018    -9,688     3,401        4,855

                     CURRENT IMF DATA, 1980-1996

1980-1984             8,373     -4,018    -9,422     4,553        6,045

1985-1989            24,883 -24,489      -29,365     5,344        6,094

1990-1994           -13,733 -24,915      -30,357    13,486      13,662

1994                -23,586 -17,177      -47,147    23,451      24,559

1995                -19,211 -22,468      -39,386    26,204      26,041

1996                -10,857 -23,242      -51,945    29,970      36,286


* net flows are inflows minus outflows
a
    Excluding Hong Kong and Taiwan

b
 Including Taiwan and outward investment from Hong Kong, but including
inward investment
c
    Including Hong Kong and Taiwan

Sources: Appendix Tables 2 and 3.
                            APPENDIX TABLE 5

         NET FLOWS* OF PORTFOLIO CAPITAL, BY REGION

                            $ MILLIONS
                    5-YEAR AVERAGES, 1970-1984

                   US       JAPAN     EUROPE     DEVPG         LATIN
                                                  ASIA        AMERICA
                                                 INC TAIWAN


1970-1974           5,494      -292       -691           54         -18

1975-1979           8,140      392       3,014          254        790

1980-1984          12,449    -1,784     -4,521          576       1,568

                    CURRENT IMF DATA, 1980-1996

1980-1984          12,449    -1,908    -12,981          810       1,661

1985-1989          70,229 -69,458       23,802        1,749        -118

1990-1994          14,380 -14,354       39,192        8,231      40,225

1994               79,091 -27,219      -66,265      13,408       65,989

1995              137,401 -36,575       51,246      14,593        4,827

1996              274,879 -41,145      -25,111      17,585       60,104


*Inflows minus outflows


Sources: IMF (1998) and World Bank (1995) and (1997)
                           APPENDIX TABLE 6

          NET FLOWS* OF OTHER INVESTMENT, BY REGION

                             $ MILLIONS
                     5-YEAR AVERAGES, 1970-1984

               US         JAPAN         EUROPE    DEVPG         LATIN
                                                   ASIA        AMERICA
                                                  INC TAIWAN


                    CURRENT IMF DATA, 1980-1996

1980-84        -14,399       -5,428      42,073       20,639      22,477

1985-89         29,093       36,522       1,468        9,769       2,895

1990-94         85,088      -37,926      34,187       11,156       -9,412

1994            75,967      -40,714      89,957        9,973      -43,513

1995            35,579       -4,936       7,841       26,475      28,023

1996           -75,558       36,288      53,420       46,640      -22,922


* net flows are outflows less inflows

The figures for 1980-84, 1985-89 and 1990-94 are annual averages



Sources: IMF (1998) and World Bank (1995) and (1997)
                             APPENDIX TABLE 7

TOTAL AVERAGE ANNUAL NET INTERNATIONAL CAPITAL FLOWS,*
                      BY REGION

                                 $ MILLIONS

                US      JAPAN     EUROPE           DEVPG          LATIN AMERICA
                                                    ASIA
                                                  INC HONG KONG



1980-84          6,423 -11,354          19,670          26,002            30,183

1985-89       124,205 -57,425            -4,094         16,863             8,871

1990-94         85,735 -77,195          43,022          32,873            44,474

1994          131,472 -85,110           -23,455         46,832            47,036

1995          153,769 -63,980           19,701          67,272            58,891

1996          188,464 -28,098           -23,636         94,195            73,469


* net flows are outflows less inflows

Source: World Bank World Tables CD-ROM and IMF Balance of
        Payments Yearbook
