                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                  HOW EFFECTIVE ARE FISCAL
                                     INCENTIVES FOR R&D?
                                  A REVIEW OF THE EVIDENCE

                                           Bronwyn H. Hall
                                           Joim van Reenen


                                          Working Paper 7098
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w7098

                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                        April 1999




This paper draws on previous work by the authors (especially Hall 1995 and Bloom et al 1998) and their
colleagues. Special thanks to Lucy Chennells, Nick Bloom and Rachel Griffith. The second author thanks
funding from the ESRC Centre for Microeconomic Analysis of Fiscal Policy at the Institute for Fiscal
Studies. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©   1999   by Bronwyn H. Hall and John van Reenen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
How Effective are Fiscal Incentives for R&D?
A Review of the Evidence
Bronwyn H. Hall and John van Reenen
NBER Working Paper No. 7098
April 1999
JEL No. H32, 031, 038

                                           ABSTRACT

       This paper surveys the econometric evidence on the effectiveness of fiscal incentives for
R&D. We describe the effects of tax systems in OECD countries on the user cost of R&D - the
current position, changes over time and across different firms in different countries. We describe and
criticize the methodologies used to evaluate the effect of the tax system on R&D behavior and the
results from different studies. In the current (imperfect) state of knowledge we conclude that a dollar
in tax credit for R&D stimulates a dollar of additional R&D.

Bronwyn H. Hall                                  John van Reenen
Dept. of Economics                               Institute for Fiscal Studies
549 Evans Hall                                   7 Ridgmount St.
UC Berkeley                                      London WC1E 7AE
Berkeley, CA 94720-3 880                         UK
and NBER                                        jvanreeenenifs.org.uk
bhha1lecon.berkeley.edu
1. Introduction
Economists generally agree that the market will fail to provide sufficient quantities
of R&D as it has some characteristics of a public good. But how should policy
bridge the gap between the private and social rate of return? A tax-based subsidy
seems the market-oriented response as it leaves the choice of how to conduct and
pursue R&D programs in the hands of the private sector. There are several
drawbacks to this tool, however, compared with government financing and/or
conducting the R&D program directly (see Klette, Moen and Griliches, 1998).
Perhaps the primary objection is that fiscal incentives are simply ineffective in
raising private R&D spending - the response elasticity is so low it would take a
huge tax change to generate the socially desirable level of spending. This was the
conventional wisdom among economists until recently, so it is the key focus of
this paper. We address the issue of how governments (sometimes inadvertently)
have used the tax system to promote R&D, how researchers have evaluated these
effects, and what the results of their evaluations are.
    There are other objections to the use of the tax system to which we will be
paying less attention. First, the projects that should be promoted from a social
view are those with the largest gaps between the social and private return. Yet
private sector firms will use any credits to first fund R&D projects with the highest
private rates of return. In principle the state could do a lot better by targeting
the projects with the highest spillover gap. In practice this maybe very hard to
deliver because of the intrinsic uncertainty of knowledge creation and because of


                                          1
the tendency of states to reward lobbyists and bureaucrats rather than take the
optimal decisions.' In the face of pervasive government failure to implement the
optimal subsidy policy, tax credits appear more attractive.
   Using the tax system to stimulate R&D is far from the ultimate panacea for
failures in the market for knowledge. Implementation in the existing political
and tax environment has meant that there are frequent changes in the fiscal
incentives faced by firms that affect the costs of performing R&D in different
ways for different companies at different times. This heterogeneity is a burden for
companies and policy makers but is a boon for social scientists. A long standing
problem in the investment literature is the intractability of finding exogenous
variation in the user cost of capital. The heterogeneity across firms and time in
the cost of capital for this type of investment has the potential to help identify
parameters of the underlying R&D investment demand equation. The frequent
changes of government policy offer a rare opportunity to generate some exogenous
movement in the price of R&D (even across firms) that could be used to identify
a key part of the neoclassical model. What's bad for the economy may be good
for the econometricians!
    The paper is structured as follows. In section 2 we examine the tax treatment
of R&D in an international context and introduce the major issues. In section
3 we critically outline the methodologies researchers have used to examine the
effects of tax incentives on R&D. In section 4 we present the survey of results and
in section 5 we offer some concluding comments.
   1Q this point, see Cohen and Noll (1991) for discussion of the issue and a series of examples
drawn from the U. S. experience of the past thirty years. They demonstrate that large federal
R&D projects have frequently been continued well past the point where expected costs exceeded
expected benefits due to the existence of stakeholders that had legislative influence.


                                               2
2. The tax treatment of R&D across countries
2.1. The current position
The treatment of R&D by the tax system various extensively between countries
and over time. Table 1, which is drawn from many sources, summarizes the
position in approximately 1995 to the best of our knowledge.2 The second column
of the table attempts to give the definition of R&D that is used for the purpose of
the tax credit, which is often somewhat more restrictive than the Frascati manual
(OECD 1980) definition, but not always. The next two columns give the rates at
which non-capital R&D and capital R&D are depreciated for tax purposes. 100
percent means that the quantity is expensed. In most cases it is also possible
to elect to amortize R&D expenditure over 5 years. This might conceivably be
an attractive option if operating loss carryforwards are not available (to use the
R&D expense as a deduction even if no current tax is owed), but in most cases
tax losses can be carried forward and back (see column 7).

                                    [Table 1 about here]

    Given that R&D capital expenditure is typically only 10-13% of business R&D,
and that the business R&D-GDP ratio is typically 1-2% (OECD 1994), implying
an R&D capital equipment-GDP ratio of 0.1-0.2%, a remarkable amount of time
has been spent in many of these countries tinkering with the expensing and depre-
ciation rules for capital equipment used in R&D activities.3 Although almost all
    2Sources include Asmussen and Berriot (1993), Australian Bureau of Industry Economics
(1993), Bell (1995), Bloom, Chennells, Griffith and Van Reenen (1998), Griffith, Sandler and
Van Reenen (1995), Harhoff (1994), Hiramatsu (1995), Leyden and Link (1993). McFetridge
and Warda (1983), Seyvet (1995), Warda (1994), and KPMG (1995).
    31n addition to the features of the tax system targeted toward R&D equipment expenditures
at the federal level in many countries, in many U.S. states there is a special sales tax provision

                                                3
countries (except for the UK) treat this kind of capital expenditure somewhat like
ordinary investment) many have used complex speeded-up depreciation schemes
at one time or another to give a boost to a R&D capital equipment investment;
this can be often be justified by the simple fact that the economic life of this kind
of specialized equipment is likely to be shorter than that for other types of capi-
tal. Frequently the depreciation involved is also subject to the R&D tax credit.
Normally buildings or plant for use by an R&D laboratory do not participate in
these schemes.
    Columns 5 and 6 characterize the tax credit, if there is one. The rate and the
base above which the rate applies are shown; when the base is zero, the credit
is not incremental, but applies to all qualifying R&D expense. At the present
time, it appears that only France, Japan, Korea, Spain, the United States, and
Taiwan have a true incremental R&D tax credit, and they each use a slightly
different formula for the base. Canada has a non-incremental credit and Brazil
has a non-incremental credit that is restricted to computer industry research.
Column 8 shows that many countries also have provisions that specially favor
R&D in small and medium-sized companies. In France, for example, this takes
the form of a ceiling on the credit allowed that is equal to 40 million francs in
1991-1993 (approximately $6.7M). The effect is to tilt the credit toward smaller
firms, whereas direct R&D subsidies in France go to large firms to a great exteut
(Seyvet 1995). An exception to this rule is Australia, which has a minimum size of
research program to which the tax preference of 150% expensing applies: $20,000.
This seems to be related more to the administrative cost of handling the R&D tax
which exempts firms from paying sales tax on purchases or repairs of this kind of equipment.
This amounts to an additional tax credit of about 4-8 percent in the states that have this
provision.

                                             4
concession than to any policy decision (Bell 1995, Australian Bureau of Industry
Economics 1993).
   The next two columns give any differences in tax treatment that apply to
R&D done abroad by domestic firms or R&D done in the country by foreign-
owned firms. For the first type of R&D, any special incentives (beyond 100%
deductibility) will typically not apply, except that up to 10% of the project cost
for Australian-owned firms can be incurred outside Australia. For the second type
of R&D, it is frequently difficult to tell from the summarized tax regulations. In
Korea and Australia, foreign firms do not participate in any of the incentive
programs. In the United States and Canada, they are treated like domestic firms,
except that they do not receive an R&D grant in Canada when their tax liability
is negative.
   The final column tells whether the incremental tax credit is treated as taxable
income, that is, whether the expensing deduction for R&D is reduced by the
amount of the tax credit. Whether or not this is true typically has a major effect
on the marginal incentive faced by a tax-paying firm, but it is somewhat hard to
ascertain in many cases whether this feature applies.

2.2. Changes over time

Reforms of systems of taxing corporate income over the past decade have tended
towards lowering statutory rates and broadening the tax base. What has happened
to the tax treatment of R&D over that time period? This section documents some
of the main changes in the tax treatment of R&D in eight countries over the period
1979 to 1994 (see Bloom et al (1998) for more details). It is worth noting that the
cost of R&D figures reported in this section are calculated assuming that the R&D

                                        5
investment qualifies for any credit, that the amount of credit is not constrained
by any capping rules and that the firm has sufficient tax liability against which to
offset the credit. In the next section we investigate how the various credits affect
firms in different positions.
   The following assumptions are made concerning the type of R&D investment
to be analysed. We consider a domestic investment, financed from retained earn-
ings, in the manufacturing sector and divided into three types of asset for use in
R&D - current expenditure, buildings, and plant and machinery. An important
assumption in the modelling strategy used here is that current expenditure on
R&D is treated as an investment - that is, its full value is not realised immedi-
ately but accrues over several years. Current expenditure on R&D is assumed to
depreciate at 30% a year, buildings at 3.61% and plant and machinery at 12.64%.

                                     [Figure 1 here]

   Figure 1 shows how the tax treatment of R&D has changed over time. This
graph shows the tax component of the user cost of R&D for a typical R&D4 in-
vestment in Australia, Canada, France and the USA. These are the four countries
that had the most generous treatment of R&D. The tax component user cost
measures the generosity of the tax system in subsidising R&D (see appendix). In
general, the full user cost depends on differential inflation and interest rates, but
we have set the real interest rate to be 10 per cent across all countries and years
to highlight the tax element of the user cost. The user cost is weighted across
assets (90% current expenditure, 3.6% buildings, and 6.4% plant and machinery).
   4'Typical' means a domestic investment financed from retained earnings for a firm which is
not tax exhausted or hitting any maximum tax credit caps.


                                             6
A value of unity signals that the tax system is broadly neutral with respect to
R&D. This can occur if all R&D was fully written off and there were no special
tax credits.
   Taking any year in isolation, it is clear that large differences exist among
countries, a feature highlighted in previous studies. It appears that Canada has
the most generous treatment of RD, except during three years in the mid 1980s
when Australia gave a larger subsidy. Furthermore, in all of these countries the
tax treatment of R&D has become more generous since the early 1980s, although
there has been considerable turbulence. The relative position of countries has
moved around and there are substantial changes in the tax wedge on RAD due to
changes in tax policies. The mid to late 1980s was a period of particular change.
This turbulence illustrates the difficulty for firms considering long term investment
plans, that there may be considerable uncertainty about the permanence of fiscal
incentives.
   The reasons for the periods of large change in the cost of R&D vary across
countries. In Australia, the large drop in 1985 was due to the introduction of
a 150% 'superdeductibility' for R&D. The subsequent increase was due to the
lowering of Australia's statutory rate of corporation tax. The generosity of the
Canadian system is driven by the fact that the credit rate is relatively high on the
incremental amount of R&D. The fall in the cost of R&D in 1988 was precipitated
by the introduction of a second credit in Ontario (the province which we model
here). In France, the introduction of the credit in 1983 had much less effect
than the redefinition of the base (from a moving base to a fixed base and then
back again) which occurred between 1987-1990. Similarly in the USA, the base
re-definition in 1990 had a greater effect than the introduction of the credit in

                                          7
1981. These points illustrate that the statutory credit rate is not of over-riding
importance to the cost of R&D. The design and implementation of the schemes
(such as the definition of the base) and the effects of other parts of the tax system
(such as the statutory tax rate) are at least of equal importance in explaining the
trends over time.

                                  [Figure 2 here]

   Figure 2 shows the tax wedge in the four less generous countries. In these
countries the tax systems are broadly neutral to R&D (i.e., the tax wedge is close
to zero). There have not been many changes in the tax treatment of R&D in these
countries over this period. Japan occupies an intermediate position, however, as
the only country in this group which has an R&D tax credit although the UK
does also give an allowance for R&D capital expenditure.
   Another striking feature of Figures 1 and 2 taken together is that the range
of the user costs at the end of the period is greater than at the start. In 1979
the mean effective marginal tax wedge on the typical R&D investment was 0.953
with a standard deviation of 0.098. By 1994 the mean had fallen to 0.857 and the
standard deviation increased to 0.163

2.3. Heterogeneity of the Effects of the Tax System

One of the striking findings of the flourishing of micro-economic studies in the
last two decades is the huge heterogeneity between different firms. The way in
which the R&D tax credit creates heterogeneous and often perverse incentives
has been a key feature of the debate on the (un)desirability of R&D tax credits.
The heterogeneity emerges in many ways. First, unless there is a full refund then

                                          8
many firms will not be able to use the full value of the tax credit because they
do not have sufficient taxable profits (e.g. young firms or firms in recession).
Carryforwards and carrybacks will compensate for this to an extent depending on
interest rates and expectations of future taxable profits. Second, there are usually
caps limiting the maximum credit available. Third, the definition of the base
will affect firms in different ways. A moving base will mean that firms who are
intending to increase their R&D may be put off because their current increases
increase the size of the base which will limit their future tax rebates (Eisner et al,
1982).
   To illustrate the importance of heterogeneity, Figure 3 shows the distribution
of the user cost of R&D in the US over time. There is considerable heterogeneity
for most of the period. The reduction in the 1990s is due to moving from a
moving base to a fixed base in 1989. A similar graph for Canada is given in
Figure 4. This variation between firms is almost certainly an additional source of
uncertainty facing firms. It offers a potential source of identification in firm panel
studies of R&D.

                               [Figures 3 and 4 here]

3. Effectiveness of the R&D Tax Credit
There are two approaches to evaluating the effectiveness of any tax policy designed
to correct the insufficient supply of a quasi-public good. The first asks whether
the level of the good supplied after the implementation of the policy is such that
the social return is equal to the social cost. In this situation, that would involve
comparing the marginal return to industrial R&D dollars at the societal level to

                                          9
the opportunity cost of using the extra tax dollars in another way, for example,
in deficit reduction. This is a very tall order, and policy evaluation of the tax
credit usually falls back on the second method, which is to compare the amount
of incremental industrial R&D to the loss in tax revenue. The implicit assumption
in this method is that the size of the subsidy has been determined and that the
only question to be answered is whether it is best administered as a tax credit
or a direct subsidy. Obviously, this kind of benefit-cost ratio is only very loosely
connected with the magnitude of the gap between the social and private returns
to R&D, if at all. It might be that the social return from additional industrial
research is very high. If it is very high one may be willing to give up more tax
dollars than the actual research induced by the tax subsidy. On the contrary, if
the social return is only slightly higher than the private return, lowering the cost
of research might cause the firm to do too much.5 In this case, even though the
tax credit induces more industrial R&D than the lost tax revenue, it would not be
a good idea, because one could have spent that tax revenue on some other activity
which had a higher social return. Fortunately, the available evidence on the social
return to R&D suggests that the first case is more likely than the second.
   Most evaluations of the effectiveness of the R&D tax credit have been con-
ducted using the second method, that is, as benefit-cost analyses. We need to
calculate both the amount of R&D induced by the tax credit, and computing the
costs requires estimating how much tax revenue is lost due to the presence of the
credit. The ratio of these two quantities is the benefit-cost ratio; if it is greater
than one, the tax credit is a more cost-effective way to achieve the given level of
   5Some government policies towards R&D are explicitly aimed at reducing duplicative R&D
- for example, in the U. S., government sponsored consortia such as SEMATECH, as well as the
antitrust exemption contained in the National Cooperative Research Act of 1982.

                                            10
R&D subsidy; if it is less than one, it would be cheaper to simply fund the R&D
directly. This part of the paper critically reviews the methodology underlying
these evaluations and surveys the resulting evidence, including the small number
of studies that have been conducted using data from outside the United States.

3.1. Costs of R&D tax support
The first ingredient in doing a benefit-cost analysis of the tax credit is the compu-
tation of total cost. The total social cost consists of the net tax revenue loss due
to the credit plus the costs of administering it, both to the firm and to the taxing
authority. In practice, the cost computed has been simply the gross tax credit
claimed. At best this has been done by simply adding up the credits claimed by
the firms that use the credit (Mansfield 1986, Hall 1993), sometimes adding in
the unused credits that have been used to offset prior-year liabilities (GAO 1989).
Occasionally estimates have been produced relying only on representative or av-
erage firm behavior; this method is likely to produce erroneous results given the
extreme heterogeneity in the data. Either way, this type of analysis ignores the
fact that the existence and use of the R&D tax credit may have implications for
the overall tax position of the firm, so that the net change in tax revenue because
of the credit is not captured by simply adding up the credits. It is likely that
these other effects are relatively small, but by no means certain.
   The second omission in the conventional computation is the administrative cost
of the tax credit. The GAO Study of 1989, updated in 1995, makes it clear that
these costs can be high, but offers no estimate of their magnitude. Difficulties arise
in two areas: the definition of eligible R&D, which typically requires a distinction
between routine and innovative research, and may be more restrictive than the

                                         11
definition used by the firm's accountants, and the performance of research by
outside subcontractors. For example, the U. S. Internal Revenne Service appears
to have taken the position that the tax credit should flow to the organization
that will pay for the R&D "in the normal course of events," rather than to the
organization that bears the risk of the investment. Stoifregen (1995) argues that
these ambiguities in interpretation of the law also impose costs on the firms, in
that they will be unsure whether the R&D they are undertaking will fall within
the area delimited by the tax regulations as legitimate qualified expenditures.
The GAO reports that almost 80% of returns claiming R&D credits are audited
in the U. S. with an average net adjustment downward of about 20% of the credits
claimed.

3.2. The benefits of R&D support: Evaluation methods
Can the R&D tax credit stimulate as much research per dollar as funding the
R&D directly? Conceptually, measuring the amount of R&D induced by a tax
credit is a ceteris pan bus exercise, in which we attempt to ask the question: "How
much more R&D did firms do given the existence of a tax credit than they would
have done if there had been no credit?" The counterfactual is never observed,
and researchers fall back on a variety of methods to try to estimate the level of
R&D without the subsidy. We consider three evaluation methods.

3.2.1. Event and Case Studies

Event studies typically rely on the assumption that the event being studied (such
as the introduction of a tax credit) is a surprise to the economic agents it affects.
They are usually conducted using financial market data, although this is not


                                         12
necessary. The method involves comparing behavior before a surprise change in
policy is announced with behavior after the announcement in order to deduce the
effect of the policy change. In this instance, such a comparison can take the form of
comparing the market value of R&D-oriented firms before and after the tax credit
legislation was considered and passed, or of comparing R&D investment plans for
the same time period before and after the legislation (An example of the former
method is Berger 1993 and of the latter is Eisner, as reported in Collins 1983). A
problem with many of these studies is that other events are not conditioned out
(such as demand growth accompanying the policy change)
   A case study is essentially a retrospective event study. You simply ask the
senior managers of industrial firms how their R&D spending has been affected by
the introduction of an R&D tax credit (for example, Mansfield 1986). These are
often combined with an econometric analysis (e.g. Mansfield and Switzer, 1985
who looked at 55 Canadian firms). These have the advantage that (in principle)
the manager controls for other factors when she answers the question. The main
problem is that managers may not give the right answer to the question, for
subjective or perceptual reasons.6 Furthermore, event and case studies tend to be
focused on rather small samples of firms, due to the cost of collecting the data to
perform them.
   6There is a general tendency in surveys for managers to focus on their firm's (or their own
individual) idiosyncratic brilliance rather than general features of the economic environment as
the source of positive change.




                                              13
3.2.2. Natural Experiments: R&D demand equation with a shift pa-
      rameter for the credit.
Here one constructs as well as possible an equation that predicts the level of
R&D investment (rjt)   as   a function of past R&D, past output, expected demand,
perhaps cash flow and price variables, and so forth (different studies have different
conditioning variables - call these Xj). A dummy variable is included (C), equal
to one when the credit is available and zero otherwise. For example:


                                  a0 + 3C + 'xt +     u                         (3.1)

   The magnitude of the estimated coefficient of the dummy (/3) is equal to the
amount of R&D induced by the presence of the credit. If this exercise is conducted
using firm-level data (i    firm), the best method is to measure the availability of
the credit at the firm level, that is, taking account of the usability of the credit.
If it is conducted at the macro-economic or industry level, the identification of
the credit effect will generally come from the variation in R&D demand over time
(C = Ce).   (Examples: Eisner, Albert, and Sullivan 1993; Swenson 1992; Berger
1993; Baily and Lawrence 1992; McCutchen 1993). The advantage of this method
is its relative simplicity; it eliminates the need to perform the relatively complex
computations to determine the actual level of the tax credit subsidy for each firm.
The disadvantage is that the measurement is relatively imprecise, because there
is no guarantee that all firms are facing the same magnitude of credit at any
given point in time. In fact, we have seen how great the variation in the user
cost has been after the credit was introduced in Figures 3 (for the U. S.) and 4
(for Canada). In addition, if the variation in the credit dummy is over time, it is


                                         14
very possible that other forces which increase aggregate industrial R&D spending
(such as global economic conditions, trade, etc.) and that are not included in the
R&D equation may lead to a spurious conclusion about the effectiveness of the
tax credit. In other words the credit dummy is not separately identified from a
set of time dummies.

3.2.3. Quasi-Experiments: Price Elasticity Estimation.
This method is similar to the previous method, in that an R&D equation that
controls for the non-tax determinants of R&D is estimated, but in this case a
price variable - the user cost of R&D - that captures the marginal cost of R&D
is included in the equation (p). As with equation (3.1) lags may be introduced
into the explanatory variables. The estimated response of R&D to this price
variable is converted to an elasticity of R&D with respect to price. If the price
variable includes the implicit subsidy given by the tax system to R&D, this is a
direct measure of the response of R&D to its tax treatment (Examples: Hall 1993,
Dagenais et a!, 1998).


                               = o+           +    + uj                         (3.2)

   Even if the price variable does not contain a measure of the tax subsidy, it
is possibly to use the measured elasticity of R&D with respect to price to infer
the response induced by a tax reduction of a given size. This involves the step of
estimating the effect of a given policy change (such as an increase in the credit rate
on the user cost of R&D) which is a mechanical exercise given one's definition of
the price. The second step is using the estimates of the model to predict what will
happen to R&D following a change in the price. In the most simple case, holding

                                         15
all else constant, if we estimate a price elasticity of -0.5 and the effective marginal
R&D tax credit is .05, or a 5 percent reduction in cost, then the estimated increase
in R&D from the tax credit will be 2.5 percent (Examples: Collins 1983; GAO
1989; Mansfield 1986). Of course this is too partial, a reduction in costs will
also affect the firm's output and if output is in the equation, the full effects are
likely to be larger as output will rise as costs fall. There will also be possible
spillover effects, and so on. However, researchers have tended to focus on the
output-constant price effects (see below for more 'structural' approaches).
    The advantage of this method is that it is better grounded in economic the-
ory and estimates the price response of RSD directly. Thus it will be somewhat
more accurate than the previous method. Using the tax price elasticity of R&D
(the first variant) has a couple of disadvantages: First, because the firm benefits
directly from the amount of R&D qualified to receive the tax credit, it is possible
that it will relabel some expenses as R&D (legitimately or illegitimately) and the
"true" induced R&D will therefore be an overestimate. Secondly, and perhaps
most seriously, because the tax credit depends on a variety of firm characteris-
tics, such as its operating loss position, how much foreign income it repatriates,
and so forth, the R&D investment level and the tax price faced by the firm are
simultaneously chosen, and ordinary regression methodology is inappropriate in
this situation. For this reason, some researchers have relied on instrumental vari-
ables to estimate the price elasticity, with both the attendant loss of precision
in estimation and problems with finding appropriate instruments to identify the
endogenous variable.7
   7See Hall (1993) and Hines (1993) for examples. Possible instruments are the lags of the user
cost variables and the industry level defiators, as well as lagged values of firm characteristics in
the case of micro data.

                                                16
   The second variant of the quasi-experimental approach suffers from deeper
disadvantages. Absent variations in tax treatment across firms and time, one
is forced to use a constructed R&D price deflator as the price variable in an
R&D demand equation. These defiators typically are a weighted average of R&D
inputs, of which around half is the wages and salaries of technical personnel, and
the other half is some kind of research materials and equipment index. The only
real variation in this variable is over time. This is a very thin reed on which to rest
the estimation of the price elasticity of R&D demand; the estimates will depend
strongly on the other time-varying effects included in the model.
   We finish this section with some general methodological problems. First, the
theoretical justification of equation (3.2) is unclear. Some writers have argued for
a much more structural' approach to the R&D equation. This is more easily said
than done, however. Structural investment models for physical capital have had a
poor record of success in empirical testing whether of q-models, Euler equations or
Abel-Blanchard variety (see Bond and Van Reenen 1998, for a survey). Although
various attempts have been made to estimate these more structural forms none
have been conspicuously successful (e.g., Harhoff 1997; Hall 1992) . A simple way
of motivating the R&D investment equation is to treat it symmetrically to fixed
investment. If the production function can be approximated as a CES (constant
elasticity of substitution) then the first order condition under perfect competition
would have the following form


                                   = &o + /3Pt + 7Yit + u                                 (3.3)
   5FIall (1993) is the only one of the studies in Tables 3 and 4 to use an Euler equation model
for R&D investment demand, but even she is unwilling to trust the estimates and also reports
the simple double log specification of the equation as well.

                                              17
where g1, = the log(R&D stock), Yit            log(output) and p2 = log(user cost of
R&D). Under this model j3 = the Hicks-Allen elasticity of substitution. Constant
returns implies that 'y   1. The stock is generally calculated using the perpetual
inventory method where G = R + (1 — 6)G_1, capital letters denoting the levels
(not logs) of g and r, and 6 is the knowledge depreciation rate. Unfortunately,
unlike physical capital there is little information upon which to base the initial
condition in constructing this measure.
   Several studies specify the R&D equation in terms of a stock rather than a
flow measure (e.g. Shah 1994; Bernstein 1988). It is important to be aware of
this difference when examining the empirical studies as the stock will be much
higher than the flow. However, when the equation is specified in logarithms (as
it usually is) then the difference is not so clear. To see this assume that the R&D
stock grows at rate v, we have       = (1 + zi)G,_ so that


                                     =    (6 +
                                     =    (6+1/ic
                                          1 + iij)
and


                                 =   ln
                                          (6 + v
                                          (
                                           1 + iijJ +
                                 =

Substituting this equation into (3.3) gives


                               Qo + Pt + Jt + +                                (3.4)

                                              18
   This implies that we have to allow for firm fixed effects in the R&D equation,
but that otherwise the estimates will be approximately the same, whether we use
the log of the stock of R&D or its flow as the dependent variable.9 That is, as
long as R&D is growing at approximately a constant rate at the firm level and we
include fixed effects in the R&D equation, the interpretation of the coefficients is
the same as it was in equation (3.3).
   A deeper problem relates to the adjustment cost function of R&D. 'Reduced
form' approaches will usually use a general dynamic form of (3.4) to capture these.
The problem is that adjustment costs for R&D are likely to be large and this will
be reflected in a large value for the lagged dependent variable. Temporary shocks
to the price are unlikely to have very large effects and even permanent shocks
will take a long time before their full effect is felt. This is compounded by the
fact that R&D is characterised by large fixed and sunk costs so the linear form
of (3.4) may be inappropriate. At the least one might consider modelling the
decision to participate in R&D separately from the amount of R&D conditional
on participation (e.g. Bond, Harhoff and Van Reenen 1999).

4. Econometric Evidence
Since the preponderance of work has been done on the U. S. we focus first on the
results of this work before surveying the smaller number of international studies.
   90f course, the fixed effects will also control for many other variables which have been omitted
from the specifications such as firm specific knowledge depreciation rates, so they would probably
also be useful in the version with the stock of R&D.




                                                19
 4.1. Studies on the United States

 Table 2 presents a summary of the results of the many studies of the United States
 R&E tax credit that have been performed since its inception in 1981. In this
 table we report an attempt to ascertain two standardized results from these quite
 disparate studies: the price elasticity of R&D (for a typical firm in the sample)
 and some kind of estimate of the benefit-cost ratio of the credit. In many cases,
the data that would allow us to compute these numbers were not really complete
in the paper, and we were forced to give nothing, or a rough approximation to
the quantity desired. It is apparent from looking at the table that the first wave
of estimates (those using data through 1983) differ substantially from the second
(those using data through 1988 and later) in two respects. First, the early studies
tend to have lower or non-reported tax price elasticities of R&D; only the later
study by McCutchen of large pharmaceutical firms is an exception, and the R&D
equation in this study appears to be misspecified. Secondly, they are typically
not based on the publicly reported 10-K data maintained by Compustat, but on
internal U. S. Tieasury tax data, surveys and interviews, and, in one case, an
early Compustat file. This makes it difficult to ascertain whether the differences
in results are because the response to the credit varied over time, or because the
type of data used was substantially different.
   Unfortunately, the only early study that used a large set of firms from Corn-
pustat (Eisner, Albert, and Sullivan 1983), contains an R&D equation that is not
well-specified, and does not contain any variable to capture the effect of the tax
credit. Thus it is not possible to draw any conclusion about the incentive effect
from the regressions published in this report. In order to investigate results using


                                        20
 Compustat data in the earlier period, Hall (1995) re-estimated the equations iu
 Table 6 of Hall 1993 for the time period 1981-82 using ordinary least squares. She
found that the estimated tax price elasticity for this earlier period using Compu-
stat data was slightly lower than that using Compustat data for the entire
                                                                               1980s,
but still very significant. In either levels or growth rates, it is approximately -0.6
instead of the -0.85 that was obtained for the whole period. If we multiply this
elasticity times the weighted average effective credit rates for 1981 and 1982 shown
in Table 3 of Hall 1993, we obtain projected increases in R&D spending during
these two years of 2.1 and 2.3 percent respectively; consistent with the relatively
low increases reported by Eisner and Mansfield using survey data that covered
the same period.
   As indicated above, later work using U. S. firm-level data all reaches the same
conclusion: the tax price elasticity of total R&D spending during the 1980s is on
the order of unity, maybe higher. This result was obtained by Berger (1993) using
a balanced Compustat panel, Hall (1993) usiug an unbalanced Compustat panel,
Hines (1993) using a balanced Compustat panel of multinationals and a tax price
derived from the foreign income allocation rules for R&D rather than the credit,
and by Baily and Lawrence (1987, 1992) using aggregate 2-digit level industry
data. All of these researchers specified an R&D demand equation that contained
lagged R&D, current and lagged output, and occasionally other variables such as
cash flow. Hall and Hines used instrumental variable techniques to correct for
simultaneity in the equation.'°
   Thus there is little doubt about the story that the firm-level publicly-reported
R&D data tell: the R&D tax credit produces roughly a dollar-for-dollar increase
 '0Hall uses lags of the endogenous variables in a GMM estimator.

                                           21
in reported R&D spending on the margin. However, it took some time in the
early years of the credit for firms to adjust to its presence, so the elasticity was
somewhat lower during that period. Coupled with the weak incentive effects of
the early design of the credit, this low short run elasticity implied a weak response
of R&D spending in the initial years, causing researchers to interpret it as zero or
insignificant. Thus there is no actual contradiction in the evidence.
    However, most of the solid evidence we have to date rests upon the response of
total R&D spending to changes in the tax price of "qualified" R&E. This qualified
R&E typically accounts for anywhere from 50% to 73% of total R&D spending.
It also rests on rather shaky tax status data, where the effective tax credit rate
faced by the firm is inferred using information in the Compustat files on operating
losses and taxable income over the relevant years; where aggregate data is used, no
attempt has been made to correct for the usability of the credit. There is reason
to believe that inferring the qualified R&E spending by multiplying total R&Don
the 10-K by a common correction factor (such as 0.6) and inferring the tax status
by looking at the 10-K numbers is somewhat unreliable. The only study that
has used the true (confidential) corporate tax data is that by Altshuler (1989)
and unfortunately for our purposes here, it focuses on the weak incentive effect
implied by the credit design rather than evaluating the actual R&D induced.
   Basing our conclusions on the response of total R&D spending to a tax price
inferred from Compustat data may suffer from two quite distinct problems that
deserve further investigation: First, as discussed above, the estimates based on
public data may be quite noisy, and even misleading. Second, because these esti-
mates are based on the response of reported R&D to the credit itself, they may
overestimate the true response of R&D spending to a change in price. This is

                                        22
 sometimes called the "relabelling" problem. If a preferential tax treatment for
 a particular activity is introduced, firms have an incentive to make sure that
 anything related to that activity is now classified correctly, whereas prior to the
preferential treatment, they may have been indifferent between labelling thecur-
rent expenses associated with R&D as ordinary expenses or R&D expenses. There
is some suggestive evidence reported in Eisner, Albert, and Sullivan (1986) con-
cerning the rate of increase in qualified R&E expenditures between 1980 and
1981, when the credit took effect. Using a fairly small sample of firms surveyed
by McGraw-Hill, they were able to estimate that the qualified R&D share grew
greatly between 1980 and 1981, less so between 1981 and 1982. This is consistent
with firms learning about the tax credit, and shifting expenses around in their
accounts to maximize the portion of R&D that is qualified. It is also consistent
with the tax credit having the desired incentive effect of shifting spending toward
qualified activities, although the speed of adjustment suggests that accounting
rather than real changes are responsible for some of the increase.
   One way around the relabelling problem is to use a method of estimating the
inducement effect that does not rely directly on the responsiveness of R&D to the
tax credit. This is the method used in U. S. GAO (1989) and in Bernstein's 1986
study of the Canadian R&D tax credit. One takes an estimated price elasticity for
R&D, estimated using ordinary price variation and not tax price variation, and
multiplies this elasticity times the effective marginal credit rate to get a predicted
increase in R&D spending due to the credit rate. For example, if the estimated
short run price elasticity is -0.13 (as in Bernstein 1986), and the marginal effective
credit rate is 4 percent, the estimated short run increase in R&D spending from
the credit would be 0.5 percent. With a long-run elasticity of -0.5 (Bernstein

                                         23
and Nadiri 1989) and a marginal effective credit rate of 10 percent, the estimated
increase would be 5 percent. In practice. the difficulty with this method has
been that most of the elasticity estimates we have are based on a few studies
by Bernstein and Nadiri that rely on the time series variation of an R&D price
deflator that evolves as a fairly smooth trend and so is correlated with many
other changes in the economy." In addition, they are based on either industry
data from the 1950s and 1960s or a very small sample of manufacturing firms, so
they may not generalize that easily.
    It is unlikely that the R&D demand elasticity with respect to price is constant
over very different time periods or countries, so it would be desirable to have more
up-to-date estimates in order to use this method. Obviously, one can never be
sure that firms will actually respond to a tax incentive in the way implied by
the price elasticity and measured credit rate, but it would be useful to have this
method available as a check on the more direct approach using tax prices.

4.2. Non-U. S. studies

Few countries have performed as many studies of their incremental R&D tax credit
programs as the United States. There are several reasons for this: 1) vIost of these
schemes have been in place for a shorter time period. 2) They have relied on the
U. S. evaluations for evidence of effectiveness. 3) Internal government studies
may have been done, but these are hard to come by if you are not connected
with researchers within the government in question. The only studies we have
been able to find are displayed in Table 4. They cover Australia, Canada, France,
  11See also Goldberg (1979), Nadiri (1980), Cardani and Mohnen (1984), Mohnen, Nadiri and
Prucha (1990).



                                           24
Japan, and Sweden, although neither the Canadian nor the Swedish study are
currently applicable, as the tax incentives for R&D in these countries have changed
substantially since the studies were done.
   There have been several studies of Canadian data. Dagenais, Mohnen and
Therrien (1998) analyse Canadian firms using the substantial variation in the
R&D tax credit to construct a measure of the user cost. They estimate a gen-
eralised Tobit model for the R&D stock which allows the tax price to affect the
amount of R&D performed as well as whether firms conduct R&D at all. They
find a weakly significant effect on the former with a long run effect almost 20 times
the short-run effect. Through a simulation exercise they find that a one per cent
increase in the federal tax credit generates an average of $0.98 additional R&D
expenditure per dollar of tax revenues foregone.
   One of the most comprehensive and carefully done of these studies is that by
the Australian Bureau of Industry Economics. It is noteworthy that the conclu-
sions reached with respect to the tax price elasticity and benefit-cost ratio are
similar to those in the recent United States studies. The methodology used com-
pares the R&D growth rates for firms able and unable to use the tax credit for tax
reasons. This has the obvious disadvantage that assignment to a control group is
endogenous, and that the full marginal variation of the tax credit across firms is
not used, only a dummy variable. In general, the survey evidence that asks firms
by how much they increased their R&D due to the tax credit is consistent with
the econometric evidence.
   The French study by Amussen and Berriot (1993) encountered some data
difficulties having to do with matching firms from the enterprise surveys, R&D
surveys, and the tax records, so the sample is somewhat smaller than expected,

                                        25
and may be subject to selection bias. The specification they used for the R&D
demand equation includes the magnitude of the credit claimed as an indication of
the cost reduction due to the credit. If all firms faced the same effective credit rate
on the margin, it is easy to compute the tax price elasticity from the coefficient
of this variable. Unfortunately, this is typically not true in France, so that this
equation is not ideal for the purpose of estimating the tax price elasticity. Even
so, Asmussen and Berriot obtain a plausible estimate of 0.26 (0.08), which is
consistent with other evidence using similar French data and a true tax price.
   Few studies have attempted to systematically compare the effectiveness of
various R&D tax incentives across countries, partly because of the formidable
obstacles to understanding the details of each system. McFetridge and Warda
(1983) and Warda (1993) have constructed estimates of the cost of R&D for
large numbers of major R&D-doing countries. Like the Bloom et al (1998) study
discussed in section 2 they found that Japan, Germany, Italy, Sweden, and the
United Kingdom had the highest tax cost of R&D projects and the United States,
France, Korea, Australia, and Canada the lowest. Bloom, Griffith and Van Reenen
(1999) use the user-costs calculated over eight countries in section 2 to analyse the
effect on R&D. Like the micro studies they also find a long-run elasticity of about
unity but a very low short run elasticity (0.16). More interestingly they identify
significant effects of the foreign user cost of capital which they interpret to mean
that changes in R&D tax credits can stimulate firms into relocating their R&D
across borders. This raises a new dimension in the debate over the efficacy of tax
credits. If some of the estimated increase comes from multinationals relocating
their R&D laboratories it raises the question of tax competition over 'footloose'
R&D.

                                         26
    The central conclusion at present from studies in other countries is not different
from those using U. S. data: the response to an R&D tax credit tends to be fairly
small at first, but increases over time. The effect of incremental schemes with
a moving average base (France, Japan) is the approximately the same as in the
United States: they greatly reduce the incentive effect of the credit.

5. Conclusions

In this paper we have considered the tax treatment of R&D and its effect on
firm's decisions. Because it is expensed R&D is tax privileged compared to fixed
investment. There are also a host of special tax breaks, such as the US R&E credit
that further subsidise R&D activities. These have varied extensively over time
and across countries to a much greater extent than physical capital. Our sense
is that the tax treatment of R&D is becoming more lenient and it is likely that
countries will increasingly turn to the tax system and away from direct grants.
   One feature of the existing schemes is that they imply very heterogenous prices
facing firms. This variation is a useful source of identification of the effect of price
changes on quantity demanded, although there are still relatively few studies that
have used this. Taken as a whole there is substantial evidence that tax has an
effect of R&D performed, the most compelling evidence coming from the quasi-
experimental approach of calculating a user cost of R&D and estimating an explicit
econometric model. A tax price elasticity of around unity is still a good ballpark
figure, although there is a good deal of variation around this from different studies
as one would expect.
   Looking ahead there are several ways in which the literature could grow. First,


                                          27
expanding beyond the US to other countries is a trend which clearly needs to be
encouraged. International firm level datasets are becoming more widely available
and we would emphasis to policy makers the imperative of having more open,
objective, statistical evaluations of their policies. Secondly, there has been little
attempt to use the variation in tax prices as an instrument for R&D in examining
other variables of interest. For example we are interested in the question of the
productivity effect of R&D and whether the tax credit could be used as a quasi-
experiment to get better calculations of the return to R&D investments. Finally,
the issue political economy cuts through many of the issues here. Why and when
do government's introduce tax breaks? Are they reacting to policies in other
countries as the theory of tax competition suggests they will? Understanding the
process by which different policies are conceived and come to life is as important
as evaluating their effects once they are born and grown up.

References

 [11 Altshuler, Rosanne. 1989. "A Dynamic Analysis of the Research and Exper-
    imentation Credit." National Tax Journal XLI (1989): 453-66.

[2] Altshuler, Rosanne, and Henri Chaoul. 1990. "The Effect of Tax Policy on
    Returns to R&D in the Pharmaceutical Industry: A Methodological Review."
    New York: Columbia University (November 1990). Photocopied.

[3] Asmussen, Emmanuel, and Carole Berriot. 1993. "Le credit d-impot
    recherche, cout et effet incitatif." Paris, France: Ministere de 1'Economie
    et des Finances (Avril 1993). Photocopied.



                                        28
  [4] Australian Bureau of Industry Economics. 1993. R&D, Innovation and Com-
     petitiveness: An Evaluation of the R&D Tax Concession. Canberra: Aus-
     tralian Government Publishing Service, 1993.

  [5] Autenne, J. 1987. "Tax Incentives for Scientific Research Activities: Bel-
     gium." Bulletin for International Fiscal Documentation 41(1987): 407-9.

 [6] Baily, Martin Neil, and Robert Z. Lawrence. 1992. "Tax Incentives for R&D:
     What Do the Data Tell Us?" Washington, DC: Study commissioned by the
     Council on Research and Technology (January 1992). Photocopied.

 [7] .   1987.   "Tax Policies for Innovation and Competitiveness." Washington,
     DC: Study commissioned by the Council on Research and Technology (April
     1987). Photocopied.

 [8] Bell, John. 1995. "The Australian 150% Tax Concession for R&D." Paris,
     France: Presentation of the Australian Delegation to the OECD Ad Hoc
     Meeting on Fiscal Measures to Promote R&D and Innovation.

 [9] Berger, Philip. 1993. "Explicit and Implicit Effects of the R&D Tax Credit."
    Journal of Accounting Research 31(1993): 131-71.

[10] Bernstein, Jeffrey I. 1986. "The Effect of Direct and Indirect Tax Incentives
    on Canadian Industrial R&D Expenditures." Canadian Public Policy XII
    (1986): 438-48.

[11] Bernstein, Jeffrey I., and M. Ishaq Nadiri. 1989. "Rates of Return on Physical
    and R&D Capital and Structure of the Production Process: Cross Section


                                        29
     and Time Series Evidence." In Advances in Econometrics and Modelling.
     edited by B. Raj, 170-87. Amsterdam: Kiuwer Academic Publishers, 1989.

[121 —. 1988. "Interindustry R&D Spillovers, Rates of Return, and Production

     in High-Tech Industries." American Economic Review 78 (1988): 429-34.

[13] Bhagat, Sanjai, and Ivo Welch. 1993. "Corporate Research & Development
    Investments: International Comparisons." University of Colorado at Boulder.
    Photocopied.

[14] Bloom, N., Griffith, R. and Van Reenen, J. (1998) "Do R&D tax credits
    work? evidence from an international panel of countries 1979-1994", Institute
    for Fiscal Studies Working Paper W99/8

[15] Bloom, N., Chennells, L., Griffith, R. and Van Reenen. J. (1998) Helen
    Lawton-Smith (ed) The Economics of Regulation of High Technology Indus-
    tries Oxford: Oxford University Press

[16] Bond, S. and Van Reenen, J. (1998) "Econometric Models of Factor demand"
    mimeo, IFS

[17] Bond, S., Harhoff, S. and Van Reenen, J. 'Investment, R&D and financial
    constraints in Britain and Germany' Institute for Fiscal Studies Working
    Paper Series W99/8

[18] Bozeman, Barry, and Albert N. Link. 1985. "Public Support for Private R&D:
    The Case of the Research Tax Credit." Journal of PolicyAnalysis and Man-
    agement 4 (1985): 370-82.


                                      30
[19] —. 1984. "Tax Incentives for RSD: A Critical Evaluation." Research Policy
     13 (1984): 21-31.

[20] Brown, Kenneth M. 1985. "The R&D Tax Credit: An Evaluation of Evidence
     on its Effectiveness." Washington, DC: A Staff Study prepared for the Joint
     Economic Committee, U.S. Congress (August 13, 1985), No. 99-73.

[21] ,   ed.   1984. The R&D Tax Credit: Issues in Tax Policy and Industrial
     Innovation. Washington, DC: American Enterprise Institute, 1984. Carlson,
     George. 1981. "Tax Policy Toward Research and Development." Washington,
    DC: Office of Tax Analysis, Department of Treasury, OTA Paper No. 45
     (January 1981).

[22] Cohen, Linda R., and Roger G. Noll. 1991. The Technology Pork Barrel.
    Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution.

[23] Collins, Eileen. 1983. An Early Assessment of Three R&D Tax Incentives
    Provided by the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981. Vol. PRAReport 83-7.
    Washington, DC: National Science Foundation, 1983.

[24] Collins, Eileen L., ed. 1982. Tax Policy and Investment in Innovation. Wash-
    ington, DC: National Science Foundation, 1982.

[25] Corbel, Patrick. 1993. "Le Credit d'Impot-Recherche (C.I.R)." Paris, France:
    INSEE, Direction des Etudes et Syntheses Economiques (1993). Photocopied.

[26] Cordes, J. J. 1989. "Tax Incentives and R&D Spending: A Review of the
    Evidence." Research Policy 18 (1989): 119-33.



                                       31
[27] Cordes, Joseph J., Harry S. Watson, and J. Scott Hauger. 1987. "Effects of
    Tax Reform on High Technology Firms." National Tax Journal 40 (1987):
    373-91.


[28] Dagenais, M, Mohnen, P. and Thierrien, P. (1997) "Do Canadian Firms
    Respond to Fiscal Incentives to Research and Development?" Tilburg Uni-
    versity mimeo

[29] Deloitte, and Touche. 1990. "A Comparison of Tax Incentives for Perform-
    ing Research and Development in Canada and the United States." Ottawa,
    Ontario: Deloitte and Touche (1990).

[30] Dumagan, Jesus C. 1995. "Re-examining the Cost-Effectiveness of the Re-
    search and Experimentation Tax Credit." Washington, DC: Office of Business
    and Industrial Analysis, Economics and Statistics Administration, US Dept.
    of Commerce (May 1995). Photocopied.

[31] Eisner, Robert. 1989. "Tax Credits and Other Measures to Support Research
    and Technology." Prepared Testimony for U.S. House of Representatives,
    Committee on Science, Space and Technology, Subcommittee on Science,
    Research and Technology (May 18, 1989).

[32] . 1987. "Proposals to Increase and Extend the Research and Experimenta-
    tion Tax Credit." Prepared Testimony, Senate Committee on Finance, Sub-
    committee on Taxation and Debt Management, April 3, 1987. Photocopied.

[33] .   1985.   "The R&D Tax Credit: A Flawed Tool." Issues in Science and
    Technology 1 (1985): 79-86.


                                      32
[34]      .   1984.   "Research and Experimentation Tax Credit: Statement before the
       Subcommittee on Oversight of the Committee on Ways and Means of the
       House of Representatives. Ninety-Eighth Congress, Second Session, Serial
       98-102." Washington, DC (August 2-3, 1984). Photocopied.

[35] Eisner, Robert, Steven H. Albert, and Martin A. Sullivan. 1986. "The New
       Incremental Tax Credit for R&D: Incentive or Disincentive." National Tax
       Journal XXXVII (1986): 171-83.

[36] .        1983.   "Tax Incentives and R&D Expenditures." In Proceedings of the
       Conference on Quantitative Studies of Research and Development in In-
       dustry, edited by Ecole Nationale de la Statistique et de 1'Administration
       Economique and National Bureau of Economic Research, 375-466. Vol. 2.
       Paris, France: CNRS, 1983.

[37] Fullerton, Don, and Andrew B. Lyon. 1988. "Tax Neutrality and Intangible
       Capital." Tax Policy and the Economy 2 (1988): 63-88.

[38] .        1986.   "Does the Tax System Favor Investment in High Tech or Smoke-
       Stack Industries?" Economic Inquiry 34 (1986): 403-16.

[39] Goto, A., and R. Wakasugi. 1988. "Technology Policy." In Industrial Policy of
       Japan, edited by r Komiya, M. Okuno, and K. Suzumura. Tokyo: Academic
       Press, 1988.

[40] Grace, M., and S. Berg. 1990. "Multinational Enterprises, Tax Policy, and
       R&D Expenses." Southern Economic Journal 57 (1990): 125-38.



                                            33
[41] Griffith, Rachel, Daniel Sandier, and John Van Reenen. 1995. "TaxIncentives
       for R&D." Fiscal Studies 16 (1995): 21-44.

[42] Griliches. Zvi. 1992. "The Search for R&D Spillovers." Scandinavian Journal
       of Economics 94:29-47.

[43] Hall, Bronwyn H. 1995. "Fiscal Policy Towards R&D in the United States:
       Recent Experience." Paris, France: Presentation to the OECD Working
       Group on Fiscal Measures to Promote R&D, January 19, 1995.

[44]      1995 'Effectiveness of Research and Experimentation Tax Credits: Criti-
       cal Literature Review and Research Design' Report to Office of Technology
       Assessment, Congress of the United States

[45] .     1993.   "R&D Tax Policy During the Eighties: Success or Failure?" Tax
       Policy and the Economy 7 (1993): 1-36.

[46] Hall, R and D. Jorgenson (1967) Tax Policy and Investment Behaviour"
       American Economic Review 57 (June): 391-414

[47] Harhoff, Dietmar. 1994. "The Tax Treatment of R&D Expenditure."
       Mannheim, Germany: ZEW and University of Mannheim, Research Report
       No. 94-02. Photocopied (1994).

[48] Harhoff, Dietmar, and Heinz Koenig. 1992. "Recent Initiatives in Industrial
       Economics and their Implications for an Industry and Technology Support
       Policy." In Innovationsoekonomie und Technologiepolitik, edited by Frieder
       Meyer-Krahmer, 47-67. Heidelberg: Physica, 1992.


                                         34
[49] Heaton, Hal. 1987. "On the Bias of the Corporate Tax against High-Risk
    Projects." Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 22 (1987): 365-72.

[50] Himmelburg, C. and Peterson, B. (1994) 'R&D and internal finance: A Panel
    study of small firms in high tech industries' Review of Economics and Statis-
    tics, 76(1), 38-51

[51] Hines, James R. 1994. "No Place Like Home: Tax Incentives and the Location
    of R&D by American Multinationals." Tax Policy and the Economy 8 (1994):
    65-104.

[521 Hines, James R., Jr. 1994. "Taxes, Technology Transfer, and the R&D Activi-
    ties of Multinational Firms." National Bureau of Economic Research Working
    Paper No. 4932 (1994): 1-30.

[53] . 1993. "On the Sensitivity of R&D to Delicate Tax Changes: The Behavior
    of U.S. Multinationals in the 1980s." In Studies in International Taxation,
    edited by Alberto Giovannini, R. Glenn Hubbard, and Joel Slemrod, 149-94.
    Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press, 1993.

[54] Hiramatsu, Hirhisa. 1995. "Japanese Fiscal Measures to Promote R&D."
    Paris, France: Presentation of the Japanese Delegation to the OECD Ad
    Hoc Meeting on Fiscal Measures to Promote R&D and Innovation, January
     19, 1995.

[55] Hufbauer, Gary. 1992. "Appendix F: The Virtues and Vices of an Incremental
    Tax Credit." In U. S. Taxation of International Income: Blueprint for Reform,



                                       35
    edited by Gary Hufbauer, 243-51. Washington, DC: Institute for International
    Economics, 1992.

[56] Hughes, E., and D. G. McFetridge. 1985. "A Theoretical Analysis of Incre-
    mental Investment Incentives with and Application to the Case of Industrial
    R&D." Journal of Public Economics 27 (1985): 311-29.

[57] Huizinga, Harry. 1992. "The Tax Treatment of R&D Expenditures of Multi-
    national Enterprises." Journal of Public Economics 47 (1992): 343-59.

[58] King, MA and D Fullerton (eds) (1984), The Taxation of Income from Capi-
    tal: A Comparative Study of the United States, the United Kingdom, Sweden,
    and West Germany, University of Chicago Press.

[59] KPMG. 1995. Tax Treatment of Research and Development Expenses, Ams-
    terdam: KPMG International Tax Centre.

[60] Leyden, Dennis Patrick, and Albert N. Link. 1993. "Tax Policies Affecting
    R&D: An International Comparison." Technovation 13 (1993): 17-25.

[61] l'Huillery, Stephan. 1995. "National Systems of R&D Tax Credits." Report
    of the Ad Hoc Meeting on Fiscal Measures to Promote R&D and Innovation,
    OECD, Paris, January 19, 1995. CREI, Universite de Paris-Nord. Photo-
    copied.

[62] Link, Albert N. 1995. "Ad Hoc Meeting of Experts on Fiscal Measures to
    Promote R&D and Innovation: A Summary Report." Report of an OECD
    Working Group, January 19, 1995. University of North Carolina, Greeens-
    boro. Photocopied.

                                      36
[63] Long, William F., and David J. Ravenscraft. 1989. "The Record of LBO
    Performance." Brookings Institution: photocopied.

[64] Mairesse, Jacques, and Bronwyn H. Hall. 1995. "Estimating the Productiv-
    ity of Research and Development in French and U.S. Manufacturing Firms."
    Forthcoming in Wagner, Karin, and Bart Van Ark (eds.), International Pro-
    ductivity Comparisons. Amsterdam: Elsevier-North Holland.

[65] Mamuneas, Theofanis P., and M. Ishaq Nadiri. 1993. "Public R&D Policies
    and Cost Behavior of the US Manufacturing Industries." (1993). New

    York University: C.V. Starr Center for Applied Economics Research Report
    Number 93-44 (November, 1993).

[66] Mansfield, Edwin. 1986. "The R&D Tax Credit and Other Technology Policy
    Issues." AEA Papers and Proceedings 76 (1986): 190-94.

[67] —. 1985. "Public Policy toward Industrial Innovation: An International
    Study of Direct Tax Incentives for Research and Development." In The Un-
    easy Alliance: Managing the Productivity-Technology Dilemna, edited by
    Kim B. Clark, Robert H. Hayes, and Christopher Lorenz. Boston, MA: Har-
    vard Business School Press, 1985.

[68] —. 1984. "How Effective is the R&D Tax Credit?" Challenge 27 (1984):
    57-61.

[69] —. 1965. "Rates of Return from Industrial Research and Development."
    American Economic Review 55 (1965): 310-22.



                                        37
[70] Mamuneas and Nadiri (1995) Public R&D Policies and Cost Behaviour' of
    the US Manufacturing Industries' NBER Working Paper No. 5059

[71] Mansfield, Edwin, and Loren Switzer. 1985a. "The Effects of R&D Tax Cred-
    its and Allowances in Canada." Research Policy 14 (1985): 97-107.

[72] Mansfield, Edwin, and Lorne Switzer. 1985b. "How Effective are Canada's
    Direct Tax Incentives for R&D?" Canadian Public Policy 11(1985): 241-46.

[73] McCutchen, William M., Jr. 1993. "Estimating the Impact of the R&D Tax
    Credit on Strategic Groups in the Pharmaceutical Industry." Research Policy
    22 (1993): 337-51.

[74] McFetridge, Donald G., and Jacek P. Warda. 1983. Canadian R&D Incen-
    tives: Their Adequacy and Impact. Vol. Canadian Tax Paper No. 70. Toronto:
    Canadian Tax Foundation, 1983.

[75] Meyer-Krahmer, Frieder. 1990. "The Determinants of Investment in R&D
    and the Role of Public Policies." In Technology and Investment: Crucial
    Issues for the 1990s, edited by E. H. Deiaco and G. V. E. Deiaco, 167-84.
    New York: Columbia University Press, 1990.

[76] Mohnen, Pierre. 1990. "The Impact of Foreign R&D on Canadian Manu-
    facturing Total Factor Productivity Growth." Montreal, Quebec: UQAM
    CREPE Cahier de recherche no 58 (July 1990).

[77] Mobnen, P. Nadiri, M. and Prucha, I. (1986) "R&D, Production Structure
    and rate of return in the U.S., Japanese and German Manufacturing Sectors:


                                     38
       A Nonseparable dynamic factor demand model" European Economic Review
       30, 749-771

[781   Nadiri, M. (1980) "Contributions and Determinants of Research and Devel-
       opment Expenditures in the US Manufacturing Industries" in George von
       Furstenburg (ed) Capital, Efficiency and Growth Cambridge: Ballinger

[79] OECD. 1984. Science and Technology Policy: Review and Outlook. Paris,
       France: OECD/OCDE.

[80] .     1980.   The Measurement of Scientific and Technical Activities. General
       Guidelines for Statistical Summaries of Research and Experimental Develop-
       ment. Paris, France: OECD/OCDE.

[81] OECD (1991), Taxing Profits in a Global Economy: Domestic and Interna-
       tional Issues, Paris

[82] Penner, Rudolph G., Linden C. Smith, and David v1. Skanderson. 1994. "Ex-
       tending the R&D Tax Credit: The Importance of Permanence." Washington,
       DC: KPMG Peat Marwick LLP (November).

[83] Seyvet, Jeanne. 1995. "Le Credit d'Impot Recherche (CIR) en France." Paris,
       France: Ministere de l'Enseignement Superieur et de la Recherche. Presen-
       tation to the OECD Working Group on Fiscal Measures to Promote R&D,
       Januaru 19, 1995.

[84] Shah, A. (1994) "The Economics of Research and Development: How Re-
       search and Development Affects Production and Markets and is affected by
       Tax Incentives" World Bank, Policy Research Institute, Working Paper 1325

                                          39
[85] Stoifregen, Philip A. 1995. "Giving Credit where Credit is Due: A Brief
    History of the Administration of the R&D Tax Credit." Tax Notes 1995 (16
    January 1995): 403-16.

[86] Stoneman,    Paul. 1991. "The Use of a Levy/Grant System as an Alternative
    to Tax-based Incentives to R&D." Research Policy 20 (1991): 195-201.

[87] Swenson, C. W. 1992. "Some Tests of the Incentive Effects of the Research
    and Experimentation Tax Credit." Journal of Public Economics 49 (1992):
    203-18.

[88] Tillinger, Janet W., and Winston T. Shearon. 1991. "Asymmetric Informa-
    tion, Taxes, and Investment in Research and Development." Texas A&M
    University. Photocopied.

[89] U.S. Congress, ed. 1995. Statements from the Hearing on the Taxation of
    Research and Experimentation. Washington, DC: United States Senate Com-
    mittee on Finance, 1995.

[90] .   1993.   "Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act, Subchapter A, Part II (In-
    vestment Incentives), Subpart A (Research and Clinical Testing Credits)."
    Public Law 103-66.

[91] .   1992a.   "Competitiveness and Long-Term Tax Policy." Washington, DC:
    Proceedings of a Hearing before the Subcommittee on Taxation of the Com-
    mittee on Finance, U. 5> Senate, One Hundred Second Congress, Second
    Session (February 6, 1992), 5. Hrg. 102-644. .     1992b.   "Description and
    Analysis of Tax Provisions Expiring in 1992." Washington, DC: Report pre-

                                        40
    pared by the Staff of the Joint Committee on Taxation (January 27, 1992),
    JCS 2-92.

[92] .   1986.   "Tax Reform Act of 1986: Report of the Committee on Finance,
    U.S. Senate." Washington, DC: U.S. Senate, Report No. 99-313 (H.R. 3838,
    May 29, 1986). Photocopied.

[931 U.S. Department of the Treasury. 1983. "The Impact of the Section 861-
    8 Regulation on U.S. Research and Development." Washington, DC: U.S.
    Department of the Treasury Report (June 1983).

[94] U.S. General Accounting Office. 1989. The Research Tax Credit Has Stim-
    ulated Some Additional Research Spending. Vol. GAO/GGD-89-114. Wash-
    ington, DC: U.S. General Accounting Office, 1989.

[95] Warda, Jacek. 1994. Canadian R&D Tax Treatment: An International Com-
    parison. Vol. Report No. 125-94. Ottawa, Ontario: The Conference Board of
    Canada, 1994.

[96] Wozny, James A. 1989. "The Research Tax Credit: New Evidence on Its
    Effect." Proceedings of the Eighty-Second Annual Conference of the National
    Tax Association-Tax Institute of America 1989 (1989): 223-28.

A. Measuring the User Cost of R&D
The user cost of R&D is calculated using the standard approach of Hall and
Jorgensen (1967) and King and Fullerton (1984) and that was extended to the
international setting in OECD (1991) and Devereux and Pearson (1995). The
aim of this approach is to derive the pre-tax real rate of return on the marginal

                                       41
investment project that is required to earn a minimum rate of return after tax.
This will be a function of the general tax system, economic variables and the
treatment of R&D expenditure in particular.
    We consider a profit maximising firm which increases its R&D stock by one
unit in period one, then disposes of that unit in the second period. The tax system
affects the cost of making this investment in two ways. First, the revenue earned
from the investment is taxed at rate 'r. Second, the cost of the investment to the
firm is reduced by depreciation allowances and tax credits.
    Assuming that depreciation allowances are given on a declining balance basis
at rate and begin in the first period the value of the depreciation allowance
will be tq5t in period one, and in subsequent periods the value falls by (1 —
Denote the net present value of the stream of these depreciation allowances A7,

             Ad —               (1 — )+rt (1 —                      —   rt (1 + rt)
                              (1+rt)         (1+rd2                      (+r)
where   rt   is   the discount rate and the asset and country subscripts have been
omitted for simplicity.
    Similarly we can calculate the net present value of the tax credit, A, which
will depend on the type of tax credit available on R&D expenditure. The main
features that affect the value of a tax credit are whether the credit applies to total
or incremental expenditure, how the base level of expenditure is defined in the
incremental case and whether the credit is capped on a firm by firm basis.
    Under the assumption of perfect foresight and no tax exhaustion the net
present value of an incremental tax credit with a base that is defined as the
k-period moving average is

                                =         —
                                                E(i + rt)B+)                                (Al)
   '21n practice depreciation allowances generally begin in the second period, or are given at half
the rate in the first period. This is taken account of in the empirical application. Depreciation
allowances may also be given on a straight line basis, in which case the expression for A is
slightly different.

                                               42
   where 'r is the statutory credit rate, B+, is an indicator which takes the
value 1 if R&D expenditure is above its incremental R&D base in period t and
zero otherwise. If the credit has an absolute firm level cap, as in France, then A
is assumed to be as above for firms below the credit caps and zero for those above
the cap.
    The depreciation allowances and tax credits vary across types of asset, coun-
tries and time. We consider investment in the manufacturing sector into three
types of asset for use in R&D - current expenditure, buildings, and plant and
machinery. An important assumption in the modelling strategy used here is that
current expenditure on R&D is treated as an investment - that is its full value is
not realised immediately. We also assume that domestic investment is financed
by retained earnings.
   In an individual country, the user cost of a domestic investment in R&D for
each asset (indexed by j)   is   given by

                                   (1_ (A, + A)) [r + ö]
                        Pt =              )
                                         (1
                                                                           (A.2)
where 6 is the economic depreciation rate of the asset. The economic depreciation
rates used are 30% for current expenditure on R&D, 3.61% for buildings and
12.64% for plant and machinery. The domestic user cost of R&D for an individual
country is then given by


                                      PWjP1t                                (A.3)

    where vi3 are weights equal to 0.90 for current expenditure, 0.064 for plant
and machinery and 0.036 for buildings (see OECD (1991)). The tax component
of the user cost of R&D is constructed using a constant real interest rate across
countries and over time (10 per cent).

                                  rd —
                                 pit—
                                         (i — (A + A))
                                              (1—ri)

                                              43
                                                                            TABLE 1
                                                    The Tax Treatment of R&D around the World - G-7 Countries

Country                                           R&D           R&D Capital                        Base for         Carryback                          Special           Foreign R&D      R&D by
(Date               Definition of R&D           Deprec.           Deprec.         Tax Credit     Incremental           and            Credit       Treatment for         by Domestic      Foreign
Enacted)              for Tax Credit              Rate              Rate             Rate         Tax Credit       Carryforward      Taxable?          SMEs                 Firms          Firms


Canada           Frascati, excl. soc sci.        100%         100% or 20% DB         20%              0               3 yr CB          yes       40% to R=C$200K           expense       20% only?
(1960s)            marketing, routine                             20% ITC                                            10 yr CF                    grant if no tax liab.   no ITC, etc.
                       testing,etc.                             not buildings                                                                    35% cap eq ITC
                                                                                                                                                     up to $2M
France          Frascati, incl. patent dep.      100%              3-yr SL           50%        (R(-1)+R(-2))/2       5-yr CF           no               yes             no accel dep       ?
(1983)           contract R, excl. office      or 5 yr cap.    (not buildings)                      (real)          5-yr for OL      recapture      TC<50MFF             unless cons.
              expenses &support personnel                       accelerated                                        TC refunded                                             no credit
              incl. upgrades,SW, overhead
Germany       Frascati, incl. Development,       100%             30% DB             none            NA               1/5 yrs          NA          assistance via                         25% on
                improvements, software         cap. If acq.    4% SL - bldgs                                                                      cash grant/ ITC                        royalties
                                                                cash grants?
Italy            Frascati, incl. Software        100%           accelerated          none            NA                 NA              ?            yes, ceiling
                                               or 5 yr cap.


Japan         Frascati, incl. deprec of P&E,     100%           accelerated          20%        max R since 66         5-yr             no          6%R instead          6% credit for    20% on
(1966)        deferred charges benefit>1 yr    or 5 yr cap.    5% TC - bldgs      (max at 10%                     usual but credit                 (cap<Y100m)            coop with      royalties
                      incl. Software                                               tax liab.)                     limited to 10%                   6% for envir./        foreign labs
                                                                                                                                                        health
UK            no special definition; treated     100%              100%              none            NA               5-yr CF          NA                                                 25% on
                as an expense, however                          if "sci. res."                                                                                                           royalties


US             excl. contract R (for doer),      100%              3-yr.,            20%        avg of 84-88 R       3/15 yrs          yes           R/S 3% for           not eligible   same as
(July 1981)      rev. engineering, prod.                       15 yr. for bldgs                                                                       startups                           domestic
                improv., 35% contract R
                                                                                          TABLE 1 (cont.)

                                                  R&D             R&D Capital                             Base for         Carryback                        Special         Foreign R&D         R&D by
Country              Definition of R&D           Deprec.            Deprec.            Tax Credit       Incremental           and           Credit      Treatment for       by Domestic         Foreign
(Date Enacted)         for Tax Credit             Rate                Rate               Rate            Tax Credit       Carryforward     taxable           SMEs               Firms            Firms
Australia          Frascati, excl. soc sci,       150%              3-yr SL              none               NA              3/10 yrs         NA        ceiling; reduced     up to 10% of       no special
(July 1985)       some testing, marketing                        (not buildings)                                                                       credit for small      project cost      provisions
                    overhead, software                                                                                                                 R&D programs         incl in 1995?
Austria              Dev. & improv. of            105%            accelerated            none               NA               5 yr CF        NA
                    valuable inventions
Belgium                incl. Software              100%              3-yr SL             none               NA               5 yr CF        NA          10-15% addl
                                                or 3 yr cap.      20-yr - bldgs                                                                       capital deduction
Brazil             R&D in computer ind.            100%         like investment          none               NA               4 yr CF
                                                                                     100% of comp.
China (PRC)                  NA                                                          none

Denmark          Special tech programmes          100%?              100%                  ?                 ?               5-yr CF         ?
                   with EC researchers
India               scientific research           100%               100%                none               NA                  ?           NA                                   30-50% on royalties
                        or knowhow                                 except land
Ireland             scientific research           100%         100% (not related)     up to 400%?            ??                 ?            ??      TC ceiling of 525000          27% on royalties;
                       incl. software                            15% otherwise                                                                                               tax treaties
Korea                experimental and             100%          18-20% deprec            10%                  0                 ?            no          yes; special        10-16% on        no special
                   research expenditure                           5.6% - bldgs           25%               avg of                                     rules for startups       royalties      provisions
                                                                                                         last 2 yrs
Mexico                                            100%               3-yr SL             none               NA                  ?           NA
                                                                  20-yr -bldgs
Netherlands       W&S of R&D leading to            100%         like investment        12.5-25%              0              8-yrs CF         no      yes; ceiling on ITC          no tax on royalties
(1994)            prod. dev. (not services)     or 5 yr cap.                                                                                         max on R&D wages
Norway             prod. dev., capitalized         100%         like investment          none               NA               10-yr CF       NA                                    no tax on royalties
                         knowhow                cap if prod.                                                              (res. reserve)
Portugal                   usual                   100%                                  none               NA                   ?          NA                               does not           0-27% on
                                                or 3 yr cap.                                                                                                                   apply             royalties
Singapore          excl. soc. sci., quality     cap. except      deprec. as          addl deduction         NA                  ?           NA               yes
                       control, software        some R&D            usual               (200%)
South Africa          scientific research       100% for R     25% dep for cap.           none              NA                  ?           NA
                   development of tech.          cap. for D
Spain            excl. routine prod. improve.     amortize            100%             15%/30%        avg of last 2 yrs   5-yr CF - OL      NA                                   5-25% on royalties
                         incl. software          over 5 yrs       or depreciate     30%/45% on F.A.   (for higher rate)   3-yr CF - TC
Sweden                                             100%              30% DB              none                NA            tax liability    NA
(disc. 84)                                                      4% SL - bldgs
Switzerland                  none                  100%         like investment      subcontracted           ?               2-yr CF         ?                                    35% on royalties
                        incl. software          or 5 yr cap.                           research
Taiwan                       usual                 100%           deprec. as             15%            2% revenue           4 yr CF        NA                                  3.75-20% on royalties
                                                                    usual                20%            3% revenue
                                                                               Table 2
                                            Empirical Studies of the Effectiveness of the R&D Tax Credit - United States

Date of Study           1983                  1983                   1986               1992               1993           1987, 1992           1993              1993              1993               1996
                                         Eisner, Albert,                                                                  Baily and                                                                Nadiri and
Author(s)          Collins (Eisner)       and Sullivan             Mansfield          Swenson             Berger           Lawrence            Hall           McCutchen            Hines          Mamuneas


Period of Credit       1981:2               1981-82               1981-1983            1981-88            1981-88          1981-89           1981-91           1982-85           1984-89           1956-1988
Control period         1981:1                 1980                not relevant         1975-80            1975-80          1960-80?            1980            1975-80          not relevant      not relevant


Data source         McGraw-Hill       McGraw-Hill surveys      Stratified random     Compustat          Compustat      NSF R&D by ind       Compustat          IMS data        Compustat +
                       surveys        Compustat, IRS ind.           survey                                                                                     and 10Ks
Data Type             99 firms        ~600 firms for R&D           110 firms          263 firms          263 firms      12 2-digit inds.    800 firms        20 large drug 116 multinationals     15 industries
                                       3,4-digit ind for tax                          (balanced)         (balanced)                        (unbalanced)          firms


Methodology           (3) Event            (1) Dummy              (4) Survey         (1) Dummy             (1),(3)          (1),(2)        (2) Elasticity     (1) Dummy        (2) Elasticity       elasticity


                    Compare pre-         R&D equation                                                                                       Log R&D             Research       R&D demand
                   ERTA est. R&D      compared pre- and                                                                Log R&D demand demand eqn            intensity eqn by    eqn with tax
                    to post-ERTA      post-ERTA for R&D         Asked if R&D tax Log R&D demand        R&D intensity   eqn with tax price with tax price     strategic group price for sec 861-   cost function
                       spending        above/below base        incentive increased   equation            equation       or credit dummy        var.           with tax credit         8            approach


                                                                                                        Lag R/S, Ind.                                                         Dom. & for. tax
                                                                                                       R/S, Inv/S Ind. Lag R&D, current      Lag R&D,        Past NCEs,       price & sales,
                                      R&D lag 1&2, current                         Log S, change in      Inv/S, CF/S,   and lag output      current, lag    Divers., Sales,      Ind, firm
Controls                                & lag sales, CF                             LTDebt lag 1&2     Tobin's q, GNP       (logs)         output (logs)     %drug sales        dummies       output, public R&D


Estimated
 Elasticity             insig.                insig.                 0.35?                ?               1.0-1.5         0.75 (0.25)         1.0-1.5         0.28-10.0?          1.2-1.6            0.95-1
Estimated
Benefit-Cost            < 1.0                  NA                 0.30 to 0.60           NA                 1.74              1.3                2             0.29-0.35         1.3-2.00


                                                                                   Credit dummies                                                             Higher     Compares firms
                     Also used         Not a good                                     depend on                                                            response for     w and w/o
                       survey    experiment; too early,          Increases get         usability;        Usability         Tax price       Response       low CF firms;     foreign tax
                   evidence, OTA insuff. Control for TC,         larger as time    stratified by tax     measures       assumes firm is larger in 86-91; problem with eq credits - different
Comments            computations  poor functional form               passes             status          problematic        taxpayer      IV estimation nonhomothetic        experiment
                                                                                                                 TABLE 3
                                                                                          Studies of the of the R&D Tax Credit - Other Countries


Country                  Canada                Canada                      Sweden                Canada              Japan              Australia             Canada            G7 and Australia


Date of Study             1983                   1985                        1986                 1986                1988                1993                 1998                   1999
                       McFetridge              Mansfield                                                            Goto and           Australian            Bernstein           Bloom, Griffith
Author(s)              and Warda             and Switzer                   Mansfield            Bernstein           Wakasugi               BIE                                  and Van Reenen


Period of Credit        1962-82                1980-83                    1981-1983              1981-88              1980             1984-1994            1964-1992              1979-1994
Control period             NA                 not relevant                not relevant           1975-80                               non-users


Data source             Statistics         Stratified survey        Stratified random        prior estimates                        ABS R&D survey           Canadian            manufacturing
                         Canada                interview                    survey                                                    IR&D board          manufacturing           sector (panel
Data Type               aggregate        55 firms (30% of R)               40 firms               firms?                               >1000 firms             sector              estimates)



Methodology           (2) Elasticity          (4) Survey                  (4) Survey          (2) Elasticity                             (1), (4)            elasticity             elasticity
                     Use elasticity of     Asked if R&D tax         Asked if R&D tax          Multiply prior                      Log R&D demand eqn       cost function       R&D demand eqn
                       0.6 and tax        incentive increased      incentive increased      elasticity estimate                    with credit dummy         approach           with tax-adjusted
                      price of R&D             spending                    spending          times credit rate                      control/no control                              user cost


Controls                   NA              No control years,                  NA                                                   Lag R&D, Log Size           output          lagged R&D, output
                                           unclear if these                                                                             Growth,          other factor prices    country and time
                                          are total increases                                                                       tax loss dummy                                  dummies
                                            from tax credit                                                                        Gov support dummy


Estimated
 Elasticity                0.6                 0.04-0.18                     small                 0.13                                   ~1.0           0.14 in short-run       .16 in short-run
Estimated                                                                                                                                                 0.30 in long-run       1.1 in long-run
Benefit-Cost               0.60                0.38-0.67                   0.3 to 0.4           0.83-1.73                                0.6-1.0


Comments            Elasticity comes      Elasticity estimated           Increases get        Larger figure       increased R&D    Elasticity is comb.                            find effect of
                    from Nadiri(1980)     from McF&Warda                 larger as time      includes output         by 1%         of survey evidence                             tax credits on
                        "tentative"       tax cr. of 20% and                passes.              effects                               and control                             re-location decision
                                           obs. R increase                                                                           group analysis
See the text for a more complete description of methodologies (1)-(4).
       France                     Canada


         1993                       1998
     Asmussen               Dagenais, Mohnen,
     and Berriot                and Therrien


       1985-89                    1975-92



                           Canadian Compustat
 DGI, and MRT data           Statcan deflators
      339 firms                  434 firms



     (1) Demand                 (1) Demand
  R&D demand eqn            Log R&D stock eqn
   with log(credit)*          with log(credit)*
 Indicator for ceiling       Sample sel. Model


Logs of gov subsidy,       Log sales, log capital,
        size,             ind. R stock, lag R stock
size sq, concentration,         fixed effects
   immob per head



      0.26 (.08)                 0.40 (.25)


           ?                     0.98 (LR)


 Estimated elasticity     Includes a selection eqn
  is credit elasticity    for doing R&D; elasticity
 divided by elasticity    derived from stock est.
of tax price wrt credit     C-B includes output
                                                        Figure 1 - Tax Component of R&D user cost
                                                              Four Most Generous Countries

                                  1.10


                                  1.00
Price of R&D Relative to Output




                                                                                                USA
                                  0.90
                                                                                                                 France

                                  0.80


                                  0.70                                                                         Australia



                                  0.60
                                                                                                              Canada

                                  0.50


                                  0.40
                                         1979 1980 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994
                                                                               Year
                                                      Figure 2 - Tax component of the user cost of R&D
                                                               Four Least Generous Countries

                                  1.20


                                  1.10
                                          Germany
Price of R&D Relative to Output




                                  1.00    Italy
                                                                                                                   UK

                                  0.90                                                                            Japan



                                  0.80


                                  0.70


                                  0.60


                                  0.50


                                  0.40
                                         1979 1980 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994
                                                                                 Year
                                                        Figure 3
                                  Distribution of the Effective R&D Tax Credit - U.S.
          30.0

          25.0

          20.0

          15.0

          10.0
Percent




           5.0

           0.0

           -5.0

          -10.0

          -15.0

          -20.0

          -25.0
                  1980   1981    1982       1983   1984     1985    1986    1987    1988        1989       1990     1991
                                                                 Year

                           5th percentile      95th percentile     Median      First quartile          Third quartile
                                                               Figure 4
                                       Distribution of the Effective R&D Tax Credit - Canada

                    2

                   1.8

                   1.6

                   1.4
Tax Price of R&D




                   1.2

                    1

                   0.8

                   0.6

                   0.4

                   0.2

                    0
                         1975   1977        1979     1981            1983         1985       1987       1989     1991
                                                                       Year

                                 5th percentile    95th percentile          lower quartile   upper quartile    median
