                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             INVENTIVE ACTIVITY AND THE
                            MARKET FOR TECHNOLOGY IN THE
                               UNITED STATES, 1840-1920

                                        Naomi R. Lamoreaux
                                        Kenneth L. Sokoloff


                                         Working Paper 7107
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w7 107

                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 1999




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of theNational
Bureau of Economic Research.

©   1999 by Naomi R. Lamoreaux and Kenneth L. Sokoloff. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
©
  notice, is given to the source.
Inventive Activity and the Market for
Technology in the United States, 1840-1920
Naomi R. Lamoreaux and Kenneth L. Sokoloff
NBER Working Paper No. 7107
May 1999


                                           ABSTRACT

       The growth of the U.S. economy over the nineteenth century was characterized by a sharp
acceleration in the rate of inventive activity and a dramatic rise in the relative importance of highly
specialized inventors as generators of new technological knowledge. Relying on evidence compiled
from patent records, we argue that the evolution of a market for technology played a central role
in these developments. Across both individuals and geographic areas, the expansion of
opportunities to trade in patent rights was closely associated with increases in specialization at
invention, as well as advances in rates of invention more generally. The patent system is often
celebrated for the stimulus to invention provided by granting limited monopoly rights to inventors
for the use of their discoveries, but its specification of tradable assets in technology has also been

important.


Naomi R. Lamoreaux                                 Kenneth L. Sokoloff
Departments of Economics and History               Department of Economics
University of California, Los Angeles              University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477                         Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER                                           and NBER
lamoreaux@econ.ucla.edu                            sokoloff@ucla.edu
       One of the fundamental processes of economic development is the evolution of

ever more articulated markets that lower transactions costs, permit commodities to be

traded over longer distances, and encourage greater specialization by productive
resources. The importance of the phenomenon is evident in the extensive attention

economists have long devoted to the changes in the operation and structure of markets for

labor, capital, and products over time. There has to date, however, been only limited

examination of the market for technology. Given the significance for economic growth of

the generation of new technologies, and the recognition that inventive activity is not unlike

other investments in being responsive to material returns, systematic investigation of how

trade in technological information has been carried out is long overdue. Although the

reasons for this neglect are not entirely clear, the study of the market for technology has

perhaps been inhibited by notions that problems of asymmetric information make

contracting for technology in the market very difficult and costly, and that there are

substantial advantages to inventive activity being conducted within the same firms that

would commercially exploit the new knowledge. These largely theoretical conceptions

may have encouraged the impression that the scope for market exchange of technological

information is quite narrow.

        Although the idea that new technologies are typically produced within those firms

 that commercially exploit the discoveries may seem very reasonable in a context where

 large-scale R & D laboratories are common, this condition has not always held. The

 United States economy was characterized by high rates of invention and technological

 change over most of the nineteenth century — well before the widespread organization of
                                                                                                        2



these   sorts of in-house facilities.' One indicator of this is the record of patenting, which

began to grow very rapidly soon a1er the major reform of the patent law in 1836. Per

capita rates more than doubled during the 1840s, the 1850s, as well as during the 1860s.

From fewer than 30 patents per million residents of the United States per year during the

1 840s, the rate rose to over 300 by the early 1 870s, and peaked just above 360 in the early

1890s (see Table 1).2 Among the tens of thousands of patents granted over the nineteenth

and early twentieth century period were those of Cyrus McCormick, who obtained patents

for a reaper and other farm equipment; Gail Borden, who obtained patents for the

concentrating and preserving of milk and other foods; Thomas Edison, who obtained patents

for the incandescent light bulb, the phonograph, and motion pictures; Alexander Graham

Bell, who patented the telephone; the Wright Brothers, who flew the first airplane; Nicholas

Tesla, who worked out a system for transmitting electric power; and Lee de Forest, Reginald

 Fessenden, and others, who developed the technology for radio.
          Despite the obvious importance of many of the new technologies discovered,

scholars have seldom asked whether this enormous wave of creativity is consistent with

the conventional paradigm of where significant inventions emanate from, or sought to


             For an overview of the growth of in-house R&D, see David C. Mowery, "Industrial Research
 and Firm Size, Survival, and Growth in American Manufacturing, 192 1-1946: An Assessment," Journal
 of Economic History, 43 (Dec. 1983), PP. 953-80; and Mowery and Nathan Rosenberg, Technology and
 the Pursuit of Economic Growth (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1989), pp. 3 5-97. For specific
 examples, see Margaret B. W. Graham and Bettye H. Pruitt, R&D for Industry: A Century ofTechnical
 Innovation at Alcoa (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1990); David A. Hounshell and John Kenly
 Smith, Jr., Science and Corporate Strategy: Du Pont R&D, /902-1980 (New York: Cambridge
 University Press, 1988); Leonard S. Reich, The Making of American Industrial Research: Science and
 Business at GE and Bell, 1876-I 926 (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1985); and George Wise,
  Willis R. Whitney, General Electric, and the Origins of US. Industrial Research (New York: Columbia
 University Press, 1985).
           2
             Although the patenting rate has occasionally blipped up to surpass the peak of the early 1890s,
 this ceiling has essentially endured until very recently.
             See Thomas P. Hughes, American Genesis: A Century of Invention and Technological
  Enthusiasm, 1870-1970 (New York: Penguin, 1989), pp. 13-52.
                                                                                                    3



identify the conditions that made this period such a productive one for independent

inventors. Rather they have preferred to highlight developments that were unlikely to

have been major factors until the twentieth century: the rise of large-scale business

organizations and their founding of the in-house R & D laboratories in particular. In

contrast, our focus is on the evolution of institutions over the nineteenth century that

made it easier to trade in the rights to patented inventions — essentially a market for

patented technologies. There is, in our view, good reason to believe that it was the

expanded opportunities to trade in the rights to patented technologies that enabled the

independent inventors of this golden age to flourish, and that stimulated the growth of

inventive activity more generally. Early nineteenth-century inventors generally took

personal responsibility for the commercial development of their ideas, making it difficult

for them to focus exclusively on the generation of new technologies.4 As institutions

emerged to facilitate the sale or transfer of patent rights to other individuals or firms

better positioned to commercially exploit them, however, many inventors increasingly

took advantage of this avenue for extracting the returns to their efforts and concentrated

on inventive activity. In other words, the growth of market trade in patents raised the

returns to invention generally, and encouraged a division of labor whereby technologically

creative individuals increasingly specialized in their comparative advantage -- invention.

         We argue that the patent system was central to the evolution of this market for

technology, and suggest that the stimulus to invention provided by the patent system

 through its facilitation of trade in patented technological information has not always been


          "See B. Zorma Khan and Kenneth L. Sokoloff, " Schemes of Practical Utility': Entrepreneurship
 and Innovation Among 'Great Inventors' in the United States, 1790-1865," Journal of Economic Histo.'y,
 53 (June 1993), pp. 289-3 07.
                                                                                             4



fully appreciated. Throughout the paper, we employ patent records to explore and

establish the empirical association over the nineteenth century between the opportunities

to trade patent rights and both specialization at invention by individuals and levels of

inventive activity more generally. In addition to this quantitative evidence, we also draw

on anecdotal information, including archival records of patent lawyers, to illustrate some

of the mechanisms through which trade in patented technology was conducted. It is

evident that patent agents and lawyers often performed the functions of intermediaries in

the market for technology, matching inventors seeking to sell new technological ideas with

buyers eager to develop, commercialize, or invest in them. As we note, the local

character of this sort of trade in technological information may shed light on the

persistence of some geographic differentials in invention. Patent agents, attorneys, and

other intermediaries in this market concentrated first in areas or regions where inventive

activity had been high, such as in the Northeast and urban centers generally, and this may

have contributed to a self-reinforcing process or cycle whereby the early clustering of

patenting activity encouraged investments supporting a market for technology (such as the

establishment of patent agencies) , which in turn stimulated greater specialization and

productivity in invention, and so on.

        We also use a sample drawn from the Patent Office's manuscript records of patent

sales to examine more directly the emergence of intermediaries who were relatively

specialized in this market for technology, and the characteristics of those inventors who

dealt with such agents. The fmdings that the more specialized inventors tended

disproportionately to deal with the more specialized intermediaries, and vice versa, are

consistent with our view that the growth of the market for technology and higher levels of
invention, and especially specialization at invention, were mutually reinforcing and

developed together. It is well known that, in the case of financial markets, the

development of intermediaries not only solved the information problems associated with

matching those seeking investment capital with whose who had savings, but also raised the

levels of savings and investment in the economy. Our goal is to assess the extent to which

the emergence of intermediaries in the market for technology had the analogous effect of

boosting rates of invention and technological change.



                                                         II

        The U.S. patent system was created in accordance with the Commerce Clause of

the Constitution "to promote the progress of science and useful arts by securing to authors

and inventors the exclusive right to their respective writings and discoveries," and it

provided the institutional framework within which trade in technology evolved over the

course of the nineteenth century.5 Although similar in general structure to that in Britain,

the U.S. laws made a few salient innovations, which seem consciously directed at

stimulating inventive activity — and thus technological progress. Among them were much

lower registration fees, impersonal administrative procedures for handling applications,

 and the reservation for only the "first and true" inventor an exclusive property right to the

 new technology for a fixed term of years. These provisions extended the incentive of

 property rights to a broad range of inventors and inventions, and meant that inventors

 could reveal information about their devices and still be protected against the possibility

 that someone else would directly exploit their ideas without compensation. Another


          United States Constitution, Article 1, section 8, clause 8.
                                                                                                    6


important feature of the law was the requirement that patentees be individual men or

women; firms could not receive patents directly for inventions developed in their shops.

These individual patentees then had the option of exploiting their property rights

themselves, or they could sell (assign) or lease (license) them to others, whether

individuals or firms. Of course, the ability of patentees to fmd buyers or licensees for their

patents depended on the security of these property rights. Responsibility for enforcing

patent rights was left to the federal courts, and judges quickly evolved an effective set of

principles for protecting the rights of patentees and also of those who purchased or

licensed patented technologies. As a result, not only did thousands of inventors pay rather

substantial fees to obtain patents, but large numbers of individuals and firms paid even

greater amounts to purchase or license patent rights.6

        Although one purpose of the patent system was to stimulate invention by granting

creative individuals secure rights to their intellectual property, another was to promote the

diffusion of technological knowledge. One way in which the law stimulated such diffusion

was through public disclosure; all patentees were required to provide the Patent Office

 with detailed specifications for their inventions, and the result was a central storehouse of

 technological information that was open to all. Anyone could research others' inventions

 in the Patent Office files, and more convenient means of tapping this resource were soon

 developed. The Patent Office itself published periodic lists of patents awarded, and

 private journals, many of them owned by the leading patent agencies of the day, emerged


         6
           See B. Zorina Khan and Kenneth L. Sokoloff, "Patent Institutions, Industrial Organization and
 Early Technological Change: Britain and the United States, 1790-1850," in Technological Revolutions in
 Europe: Historical Perspectives, ed. Maxine Berg and Kristine Bruland (Cheltenham, UK: Edward
 Elgar, 1998); and Khan, "Property Rights and Patent Litigation in Early Nineteenth-Century America,"
 Journal of Economic History, 55 (Mar. 1995), PP. 58-97.
                                                                                                       7



to improve upon this service. One of the most important was Scientific American,

established in the 1 840s and published by Munn and Company, the largest patent agency

of the nineteenth century. Others included the American Artisan, published by Brown,

Coombs & Company; the American Inventor, by the American Patent Agency; and the

Patent Rights Gazette, by the United States Patent Right Association (which, despite its

name, functioned as a general patent agency). Serving national readerships, these journals

featured articles about major technological improvements, printed complete lists of patents

issued (often on a weekly basis), and offered to provide readers with copies of full patent

specifications for a small fee. They also included a variety of advertisements that

disseminated information about inventions (or how to profit from them), placed by patent

agents and lawyers soliciting clients, detective agencies specializing in patent issues,

 inventors seeking partners with capital to invest, patentees hoping to sell or license rights

 to their technologies, and producers of patented products trying to increase their sales.7

         Of course this intense interest by a broad spectrum of private parties in patented or

 patentable inventions (and their marketing) reflects a fundamental, if indirect, way in

 which the framers of the patent system sought to improve the spread of technology.

 From the very first patent law of 1790, there was explicit provision for the sale of patent

 rights, and both the courts and the U.S. Patent Office acted to facilitate such transfers. In

 doing so, the patent system not only increased the potential return to patentees, but also

 encouraged the flow of the new technological information to those positioned to put it to


          7Over time, specialized trade journals also emerged in industry after industry to keep producers
 informed about patents of interest. The Journal of the Society of Glass Technology, for example, provided
 detailed descriptions of all patents taken out in the United States and Britain that were relevant to the
 manufacture of glass. For discussion of patterns of inventive activity and technological change in this
                                                                                                         8



best use. The market for technology was to work in a manner not unlike those for other

valuable assets with specified and tradable property rights.

        Although patenting activity had been increasing beforehand, the pace of growth

appears to have accelerated markedly in the decades following the Patent Act of 1836.8

With this law, the U.S. adopted the examination system in use today, whereby each

application is scrutinized by technical trained examiners to ensure thatthe invention

constituted an original advance in the state of the art, and is otherwise deserving of a

patent. This toughening of the requirements led to an immediate decrease in the numbers

granted, but the change in the system had been intended to facilitate the enforcement of

legitimate property rights in technology by decreasing uncertainty about how the validity

 of a patent would stand up in court. One would expect such a change to be a net stimulus

 to patenting and trade in patent rights over the long run, and as suggested by the figures in

 Table 1, the most dramatic increases in the rate of patenting per capita in the history of

 the U.S. followed shortly afterward -- rising more than ten times from 1840 through

 1870. Not coincidentally, the numbers of patent agents and attorneys also began to

 mushroom in the late 1 830s and 1 840s, first in the vicinity of Washington and then in

 Boston and other cities of the Northeast where patenting rates were high.9 At first the

 primary function of patent agents and lawyers was to shepherd applications for patents


 industry, see Lamoreaux and Sokoloff, "Location and Technological Changein the American Glass
 Industry During the late Nineteenth and Early Twentieth Centuries," unpublished manuscript, 1998.
          8
            For a discussion of early-nineteenth century growth in rates of patenting, see Sokoloff,
 "Inventive Activity in Early Industrial America: Evidence from Patent Records, 1790-1846," Journal of
 Economic History, 48 (Dec. 1988), pp. 8 13-50.
            Some of the largest of these firms maintained offices in several cities, but others often linked
 themselves together through chains of correspondent relations (similar to those that characterized the
 banking system at the same time), providing their local clients with access to agents in Washington who
 were perhaps more specialized in their knowledge and/or could directly exploitthe information in Patent
                                                                                                        9



through the official review process and to defend previously issued patents in interference

and infringement proceedings, but as time went on they increasingly took on other roles in

the market for technology, including serving as intermediaries in the sale of patents.

        The reasons patentees had for selling offal! or a share ofthe rights to their

discovery varied with their circumstances. At first (prior to the emergence of a national

product market), most sales of patents involved separate transfers to firms in different

geographic markets, allowing inventors to extract returns over and above those they

earned through direct commercial development in their home districts. Others gave shares

to partners who provided capital to support the underlying inventive activity or the

 commercial development of the invention. Finally, many sold off their full rights to

 assignees who were better positioned to develop the new technology commercially. What

 is common to all of these forms of assignment was that the ability to trade property rights

 in technological information, based on the patent law and other institutions contributing to

 this market, encouraged greater specialization at inventive activity by the inventor.

         The destruction by fire of the building housing the Patent Office, also in 1836,

 prevents us from studying the sales (assignments) of patents prior to the change in the law

  enacted in that year. What is apparent from the surviving records, datingback to 1837,

  however, is that within a few years trade in patent rights attained a high volume relative to

  the numbers of inventions patented, and that the bulk of this early commerce in patented

  technologies involved attempts to obtain returns from inventions across a range of

  geographically distinct markets. During the 1 840s, there were many patent assignments

  filed with the Patent Office for each patent granted (3 to 6 times as many by our


  Office files, as well as to information on conditions relevant to patenting and the market for technology
                                                                                                       10



estimates), while 80 to 90 percent of the assignments registered with the Patent Office

were "geographic". The predominance of such assignments declined (below 30 percent by

the 1 870s) as improvements in transportation extended the geographic extent of product

markets, and the ratio of assignments to patents correspondingly decreased, but the total

volume of trade — as indicated by the number of assignment contracts filed with the Patent

Office — grew rapidly     over time.'° It is clear that an extensive market in patent rights

evolved alongside, if not together with, the dramatic increase in per capita patenting rates

that took place during the middle third of the nineteenth century.

        As is evident from Table 2, which is based on our work with a sample of

assignment contracts from 1871, 1891, and 1911, the ratio of assignments to patents

awarded continued in a declining trend -- to 0.83 in 1870-71, and 0.71 in 1890-91 and

19 10-11. Much of this decrease was due to the diminishing importance of geographic

assignments, but another factor was the shift over time toward greater use of licensing of

patents in lieu of secondary assignments. Since licensing contracts were not typically

registered with the Patent Office, we suspect that a more comprehensive measure of trade

in rights to patented technologies would reveal an increase over time (rather than a

decrease) in the volume of trade in patent rights relative to the numbers of patents (or the

stock of technological knowledge under patent protection)." The fall over time in the



more generally throughout the country.
         '° We benefit here from the legal requirement that all patent assignments had to be filed with the
Patent Office within three months in order to be legally binding. These characterizations and estimates are
based on the counts of the total number of assignments, and of various types of assignments, appearing in
the Digests for inventions patented by inventors whose last name began with the letter 'B'. They were
calculated from the assignments filed during January, February, and March of 1844, 1848, 1852, 1855,
 1862, 1866, and 1874.
            These ratios are not measures of the proportion of patents that were ever assigned, which we
cannot reliably calculate, but instead are estimates of the volume of assignment activity relative to
                                                                                                          11



relative frequency of assignments that were secondary is consistent with this

interpretation. Another secular trend manifested throughout the country was the dramatic

decline in the proportion of assignments that took place after issue, from 72.3 percent of

those concerned with patents granted to residents of the U.S in 1870-71, to 36.5 percent.

in 1910-11. The patterns suggest that as the market for technology developed, patent

assignments were arranged earlier (relative to the date the patent was awarded), more

likely to transfer rights for the entire U.S., and less likely to be secondary (have assignors

other than the patentee).'2

         A salient feature of the patterns of patent assignment presented in Table 2 is that

the regions with the highest ratios of assignments to patents (reported as an index, with

the national average set to 100 in each year) — New England, the Middle Atlantic, and

East North Central -- are also those that had long exhibited the highest rates of patenting

per capita (see Table 1) as well as the largest proportions of patents assigned at issue

(Table 3). The results indicate, accordingly, that these regions had especially extensive

trade in patent rights on a per capita (as well as a per patent) basis, and that high rates of

patenting and trade in patented technologies tended to develop together. The variation

across regions in how quickly patent assignments occurred also points to a more rapid

development of intermediation between buyers and sellers of patents in the regions with

higher rates of patenting per capita.




patenting activity. One cannot, accordingly, infer from the fall in these ratios that the proportion of
patents ever assigned also declined after 1870-71.
         12
            Part, but not all, of the decline in the proportion of assignments that occurred after issue was
due to the decrease in the prevalence of secondary assignments and to the longer periods of time between
the application for, and the granting of, a patent.
                                                                                            12



       Table 3 reports the proportion of patents in the cross-sectional samples that were

assigned at issue, as well as the frequency of various types of assignments, including those

going to companies. These data, drawn from the Annual Reports of the Commissioner of

Patents, are not as rich as the sample of assignment contracts in that they do not capture

information on assignments made after the issuance of the patent, but they are useful in

gauging what happened with a random set of patents. Both the total proportion of patents

assigned at issue and the fraction of assignments going to companies might reasonably be

considered measures of the extent to which the market in patented technologies had

developed, and indicate clear improvement over time. The two are correlated with each

other, and exhibit the same regional pattern as patenting per capita. New England is the

leader, with the Middle Atlantic a relatively distant second, and the East North Central

lagging a bit behind. Again, there appears to have been a strong positive association

across regions between the extent of trade in patents (on a per patent basis) and rates of

patenting per capita.

       As one examines the differences in the composition of assignments across regions,

and how they change over time, the figures in Table 3 seem to suggest a systematic

progression in how the market in technology evolved. At first, inventors not only came

up with new technological ideas but also developed and commercialized them — sometimes

by applying them to their own businesses, sometimes by selling partial rights to their ideas

to producers in different geographical markets, and sometimes by doing both. As the

market for technology expanded and matured, inventors seem to have employed it to

mobilize support for their activities. For example, during the early 1 870s assignments at

issue often involved the transfers of shares of patents to groups of individuals who were
                                                                                                         13



not coinventors, but who generally resided in the vicinity of the patentee, and it is likely

that these partial assignments compensated local partners for advances of capital to

support the development and commercialization of the inventions. Over time, however,

patentees increasingly relinquished all property rights to their inventions by the time of

issue, assigning their rights in entirety to companies. These types of assignments would

seem to reflect the most pronounced movement toward specialization at invention by

patentees, and the transition to this latter phase occurred most rapidly in the regions with

historically higher rates of patenting per capita and proportions of patents assigned, such

as New England.13

         The robust regional correspondence between the extent of the market in

technology and patenting should not be surprising. On one hand, investments in the

establishment of firms and institutions conducive to trade in patented technologies would

be expected to concentrate in areas where rates of invention were already high; such


            There were several kinds of relationships between patentees and assignees that led to
assignments to companies. The first, one that appears to have been predominant until late in the
nineteenth century, was when an inventor assigned his patent in an arm's length transaction to a company
with which he had no long-term association. A second kind of relationship involved an inventor
assigning his patent to the firm that employed him in a long-term association. This type of relationship
between patentees and assignees seems to have accounted for only a modest proportion of all assignments
to companies through the l920s. The third kind of relationship was when an inventor assigned his patent
to a firm he was an officer or other principal of. We have found strong evidence that this sort of
relationship became more common during the early twentieth century, especially among the most
productive inventors. These types of relationships between patentees and assignees have somewhat
different implications for the degree of specialization by patentees at invention, and for the relative
importance of a market in technology in obtaining that degree of specialization. Much remains unclear
however. Of particular interest is the third type of relationship. If the patentee had originally formed the
company as a means of raising capital for supporting his inventive activity, the interpretation of an
assignment would be different than if the company had made the inventor an officer as a way of tying
him to the firm. One would also like to know whether the company was an enterprise that exploited his
inventions in the course of its many other activities, or whether it was an enterprise that was relatively
specialized at inventive activity. This latter type of firm could extract income from inventions by
licensing or selling off the rights to other firms, or through sales of products embodied with the new
technology. See Naomi R. Lamoreaux and Kenneth L. Sokoloff, "Inventors, Firms, and the Market for
Technology in the United States in the Late Nineteenth and Early Twentieth Centuries," in Naomi R.
                                                                                               14



locations presumably offered the best prospects for returns to participating in the market

for technology. On the other, firms and institutions conducive to trading in this market

would stimulate greater specialization and productivity at invention nearby by increasing

the net returns inventors could expect from making a given discovery (accordingly

encouraging individuals with a comparative advantage to make appropriate investments in

invention, including human capital to augment their productivity at invention) and by

making it easier for inventors to raise capital to support their inventive activity. More

developed market institutions in a city or region would also attract individuals already

inclined to specialize at invention to move to the respective location. Greater

specialization by inventors, whatever the source, would in turn stimulate more investment

in firms and institutions involved in the patent trade. Such self-reinforcing processes

between high rates of invention and the evolution of the market for technology may well

have contributed to persistent and correlated regional differences in both rates of

patenting per capita as well as of assignment of patented technologies.

        Table 4, which uses the geographic distribution of patent attorneys in 1883 as a proxy

for access to the market for technology, provides ftirther support for the workings of these self-

reinforcing processes. The figures indicate that patent attorneys were overwhelmingly

concentrated in New England and the Middle Atlantic, where patenting rates had long been

much higher than elsewhere in the country. Even though less than 30 percent of the nation's

population resided in these two regions (8.0 and 20.9 percent respectively in 1880), they were

home to more than two-thirds of the patent attorneys in the U.S. outside of Washington D.C.

(exceeding their share of patents to U.S. residents as well). The impression that patent


Lamoreaux, Daniel M.G. Raff, and Peter Temin, eds., Learning By Doing in Markets, Firms, and
                                                                                                               15



attorneys and agents tended to set up their shops where large numbers of patents were

produced is further strengthened by the estimates of patenting per capita by urbanization class

within region reported in Table 5. Patent attorneys were highly concentrated in big cities,

which throughout our period generated many more patents per capita than did rural or less

urbanized areas within the same regions. Moreover, we wifi see below that trade in patents

was disproportionately conducted in big cities, not only relative to population but also relative

to the already disproportionate number of patents generated there.

         Finally, another approach to exploring whether patenting activity was related to

the expansion of trade in patented technologies is to examine whether the behavior of

inventors changed in the way theory would suggest as the market for technology evolved.

Specifically, one would expect individuals with a comparative advantage in invention to

increasingly specialize in that activity, realizing the returns to their discoveries by selling

off the rights to them, and, consequently, that the patents awarded would tend increasingly

to be received by specialized inventors. In Table 6 we subject this idea to a test of

consistency with the evidence, and fmd that the share of patents awarded to inventors with

long-term commitments to patenting did indeed increase dramatically over the nineteenth

century.14 The figures indicate that a major shifi occurred, especially during the period from

the early 1 840s to 1870 when the rate of patenting per capita exploded, with the proportion of

patents awarded to individuals who received ten or more patents over their careers rising from


Countries (Chicago: University of Chicago, 1999).
          14
             We obtained the estimates for 1870-71, 1890-91, and 1910-11 by selecting from our three cross-
sectional samples inventors whose last names began with the letter "B" and collecting information on all the
patents these inventors received in the twenty-five years before and after they appeared in the respective sample.
We then grouped the inventors according to the total number of patents they obtained over the fifty-year period
and calculated how all the patents in each cross-section were distributed across these groups. Finally, we
compared our results with data on career patenting for the period 1790-1842 compiled by Kenneth Sokoloff and
                                                                                                          16



below 5 percent in the three early cross-sections to 25 percent or more in the three cross-

sections between 1870 and 1911. The early 1 800s were a democratic era of invention, when a

broad segment of the population was acquainted with the basic elements of the technology in

use, and the typical inventor accounted for only one or two patents over his or her lifetime in

the course of carrying out his trade. The rapid expansion of the market for patents that began

during the second third of the nineteenth century, however, made it easier to extract returns

from technological discoveries by selling off patent rights, and coincided with the emergence of

a class of inventors who were relatively specialized at inventive activity as well as a rise in rates

of patenting overall.

                                                        III

        Thus far, we have highlighted two distinct types of aggregate or regional patterns

that are consistent with the view that the growth and general contour of inventive activity

over the mid- to late-nineteenth century was associated with the evolution of a market in

patented technologies. First, we noted how very substantial growth in patenting per capita

during the middle of the century was realized during roughly the same period that trade in

patents expanded greatly, and how these developments coincided with a dramatic increase

in the prominence of highly specialized inventors among patentees. Second, a variety of

indicators of this market in technological information were strongly correlated across

geographic areas with patenting per capita.

         Although the evidence for an empirical association between inventive activity and

the development of the market for technology is impressive, the hypothesized linkage

between productivity or specialization at invention and the practice of selling off patent rights


Zorina Khan, "The Democratization of Invention During Early Industrialization: Evidence from the United
                                                                                                   17


must be explored at the level of individual inventors to gain both more confidence in and a

better understanding of the patterns in the data. In Table 7, we present three cross-sectional

regressions, estimated over the cross-sectional samples of patents from 1870-71, 1890-91, and

1910-11. The dependent variable is the log of the number of patents awarded to the patentee

in the respective two-year periods, and the independent variables include dummies for the

region in which the patentee resided, whether he resided in an urban county or a major

metropolitan center, the sector in which the patent was classified, the log of the annual rate of

patenting per capita in the patentee's home county, and a set of dummies for whether the

patent was assigned at issue and for categories of assignments. The key result is that even after

controlling for location and the sector with which the invention was concerned, patentees who

assigned their patents to companies were awarded more patents per year on average

throughout our period — in each of the three cross-sections. Because the great majority of

assignments at issue not going to companies seem to have involved transfers of shares of the

respective patent to local partners or suppliers of capital, this finding is quite consistent with the

idea that the patentees who tended to sell off the full rights to their inventions were the most

specialized and productive at invention. The inventors who maintained a share of their patent

may not have been anymore specialized at invention than patentees who did not assign, and

indeed there was no statistically significant difference between those who assigned their

patents to individuals and those who did not relinquish the rights to their inventions until 1910-

11. By then, with technology more complex and costly to develop, patentees who lacked

partners or associations with companies, or whose inventions did not attract quick buyers,




States, 1790-1846," Journal of Economic History, 50 (June 1990), pp. 363-78.
                                                                                                       18



were probably at a serious disadvantage in maintaining major commitments to inventive

activity.

            Several other results from the regressions also lend support to our argument. Most

directly, the finding that patentees residing in counties with high rates of patenting per capita,

urban counties, and in New England or the Middle Atlantic — all areas with evidence of a better

developed market for technology -- filed significantly more patents than those located

elsewhere is consistent with our notion that the most productive inventors were attracted to

opportunities to trade the rights to their discoveries. Moreover, our view that the increasing

complexity of technology over time encouraged inventors to invest in human capital useful in

carrying out inventive activity, and to specialize accordingly, is supported by the coefficients on

the dummy variables for the sector in which the patent was intended. After controlling for

other variables, patentees in manufacturing, energy, and transportation received more patents

than those working in other sectors, and both the magnitude and statistical significance of these

differentials increased over time.

        The cross-sectional regressions are interesting, but there is a question of how well

specialization or productivity at invention can be measured from information on patenting

activity in only one or two years. In order to obtain a more accurate measure, we constructed

a data set composed of the records of patenting activity over fifty years for 561 patentees. The

561 individuals consisted of all of the patentees in our randomly-selected cross-sectional

samples for 1870-71, 1890-91, and 1910-11, whose family names began with the letter 'B';

hence we refer to this as our 'B' sample.'5 We traced each of these patentees in the Annual


            15
           More patentees had family names beginning with 'B' than with any other letter. On average,
they account for roughly 11% of patents filed. More information about the construction of the data set is
provided in the note to Table 6.
                                                                                                 19



Reports of the Commissioner of Patents both back and forward twenty-five years to assemble

what we refer to as the "career" record of patenting. In total, the 561 patentees received 6057

patents over their respective "careers" of filly years, with each patent record being an

observation in the data set, and career totals and characteristics of the respective patentee

linked to each of his patents.

        In Table 8, we report descriptive statistics on the "career" records of the patentees

included in this sample, for each of the particular cross-sections from which the 561 patentees

originally appeared and by whether and to whom the patent was assigned. In the upper panel

of the table, the averages of the total number of patents received by the patentee over his

career, of the number of years between his last patent and first patent, and of the proportion of

all patents received over his career that were assigned at issue, were computed over the 561

patents of the 561 patentees that were originally included in the cross-sectional samples; the

lower panel contains the statistics computed over all 6057 patents. The two sets of figures are

in a sense analogous to unweighted and weighted averages of the patentee characteristics, but

are not the same because a single patentee can have different patents counted in different

assignment categories.

        The most striking and robust finding is that in all three "cohorts", patentees who

assigned their rights away at issue to companies had very different careers of inventive activity

than other groups of patentees — especially those who did not assign. They received many

more patents over time, were active at generating patentable inventions for a much longer

period, and assigned away a high proportion of the patents they were awarded. The stark

contrasts are evident as early as the 1870-71 cohort of patentees, who were active long before

the large-scale R & D laboratories of the twentieth century. The means computed over
                                                                                                    20



patentees (patents) indicate that those who assigned their patent to a company at issue received

30.0 (35.9) patents over their careers on average, whereas those who did not assign, those who

assigned away only a share of their patent, and those who made full assignments to individuals

were granted 8.0 (20.0), 5.4 (19.3), and 5.3 (27.3) patents respectively. The average lengths of

career spanned 25.5 (26.6) years for patentees assigning to companies, as opposed to 13.2

(21.5), 10.6 (20.7), and 12.0 (26.1) years respectively for the other three groups of patentees.

The findings that inventors who assigned away their patent rights to companies were more

specialized and productive at invention over their careers holds across different cohorts,

measures, and weighting schemes, and thus provides support to the idea that the evolution of

the market for technology encouraged the emergence of a class of highly productive inventors

who relied on the sale of their patents to extract the returns to their efforts.

        Patentees making full assignments at issue to individuals were more productive at

invention than their counterparts who either didn't assign their patents at issue or only assigned

away a share of their rights to individuals. Because their decisions to sell off all of the their

rights suggest that they too were relatively specialized at inventive activity, this class of

patentees is an analytically important group, in that they allow us to distinguish the

characteristics of inventors who sold off their patents in full to individuals from those who

made full assignments to companies — a significant distinction for those who question whether

assignments at issue from patentees to companies were typically conducted at arm's length.

When the comparisons are based on means computed over all patents (lower panel), or on the

overall average of individual patentees (pooling all three cohorts), inventors who sold off their

rights entirely to individual assignees do indeed seem to have been more specialized and

productive at patenting over their careers. The results are not robust to the within-cohort
                                                                                                2

means reported in the upper panel, but given the small number of individual inventors who

made full assignments to individuals (7, 6, and 6 in the three cohorts respectively), these

estimates, based on one patent per inventor, may not be meaningful.

        In general, the small number of observations in some cells might make one cautious in

drawing firm conclusions, and especially about changes over time. Nevertheless, the results

overall, including the differences in the means and distributions of observations between the

two panels, seem to suggest that there were two rather sharply differentiated classes of

inventors. The first was composed primarily of individuals who tended to retain control of the

relatively few patents they received over a rather short careers at invention. These occasional

inventors had little involvement with the market for technology. The other class of inventors,

in contrast, had careers that were largely shaped by the market. They assigned away a high

proportion of their inventions, to either companies or individuals, and were quite focused on

generating patented inventions — receiving many patents over careers at invention that extended

over several decades. Most prolific patentees fell into this second category, and it would seem

reasonable to argue on the basis of these data that the market for technology played a central

role in the processes and organization of inventive activity during this era.

         Multivariate analysis allows us to examine these patterns more carefully, by controlling

for other factors that might be expected to be associated with the productivity of an inventor

over time and the length of his career. Table 9 reports the results for two sets of regressions

estimated over all 6057 patents, employing the log of each of these measures of specialization

 at invention respectively as the dependent variable. The independent variables include dummy

 variables for the region of the patentee, the degree of urbanization in the county of his

 residence, and for the cohort (or cross-section) that the patentee in the 'B' sample was drawn
                                                                                                  22



from. The other independent variables are defined as the proportion of career patents that

were assigned fully at issue to individuals other than the patentee, the proportion of career

patents that were assigned at issue to companies, and interaction terms between the variable for

the proportion assigned to companies and the two respective dummy variables for the 1890-91

and 1910-11 cohorts of patentees. The intercept represents a patentee, residing in a rural

county of the Middle Atlantic and drawn from the 1870-7 1 cross-sectional sample.

        The regressions provide further substantiation of the patterns noted in the discussion

of the descriptive statistics. Patentees who made full assignments at issue of their patents,

whether to companies or individuals, received many more patents over their careers, assigned

higher proportions of their patents, and had much longer careers than other classes of

patentees. The estimated point coefficients on the proportion of patents assigned to companies

are very large, and the inclusion of interaction terms with the year-cohort dummies indicates

that the strength of these associations (both in terms of size and statistical significance) did not

change all that much over time (cohorts). The implication is that inventors who relied on the

sale of the rights to their patents followed very different career paths from those who retained

the rights to commercialize their inventions themselves (or with partners), and were more likely

to be highly productive at invention over their careers. It is striking that this pattern is already

evident in the 1870-71 cohort, suggesting that this association between trade in patent rights

and high productivity as an inventor likely developed rather early. The coefficients imply that

inventors who assigned to companies typically accounted for more patents, and had slightly

longer careers, than those who made full assignments to individuals, but the differences

between these two classes of patentees pale relative to those that between them and the other

two classes — patentees who did not assign or those who assigned away only a share of their
                                                                                                       23


rights. Whether an inventor used the market for technology to extract the returns to his

inventive effort by making full assignments before issue seems clearly to have been the most

powerful correlate with productivity at patenting over his career.'6

        Also of relevance to our general hypothesis are the findings that patentees residing in

urban counties, and especially in counties with cities of 100,000 or more, produced

substantially more patents over their career (and had longer careers, in the latter case) after

controlling for other characteristics. Similarly, patentees residing in the regions with persistently

higher levels of patenting per capita and assignment activity, like New England, the Middle

Atlantic, and the Middle West, had higher numbers of career patents. These patterns are

consistent with the view that the more productive or specialized inventors were attracted to

locations where the market for technology was better developed or especially active. Finally,

the coefficients on the cohort dummies suggest that inventors from the 1890-91 and 1910-11

cohorts were more productive at patenting over their careers, and had longer careers, than

those from the 1870-71 cohort. This is in general consistent with the notion that the increasing

amounts of investment in human capital required to be an effective inventor was leading to

greater specialization at invention over time, but precisely when these measures of long-term

 commitment are estimated to peak depends upon the other variables controlled for.

         Skeptics might object that the observation that patentees who assigned their patents at

 issue to companies received so many more patents on average, and had longer careers, was due

 not to inventors using the market for technology to facilitate their specialization at invention,

 but rather to their being employees of the companies in question. In such a case, the


         16
            One simple way of illustrating this point is to see how the explanatory power of the regressions
 increase substantially when the independent variables reflecting the proportions of total patents assigned
 (and the proportions assigned in a particular manner) are included.
                                                                                                     24



appearance of higher productivity of patentees who assigned away the rights to their inventions

might simply be attributable to firms underwriting the cost of the patent applications, and thus

be misleading about the extent of arm' s-length transactions. Although these is a serious caveat

that deserves careful evaluation, the finding that inventors who made frill assignments to

individuals were also highly productive and had long careers at invention tends to undercut the

force of the objection, because it seems implausible that these individual assignees were long-

term employers of the inventor. That the association between full assignment and specialization

at invention was apparent as early as 1870-71 also makes it difficult to believe that the patterns

was attributable to assignments within firms — between inventor-employees and employers.

Moreover, in other work, we carried out a rather extensive investigation of the relationships

between the patentees in the 'B' sample and their assignees, drawing on information retrieved

about their places of work and job titles, and found that the most highly productive inventors

were generally not employees of the companies they assigned their patent rightsto.'7 Instead

this class of inventors behaved entrepreneurially, selling their patents to different assignees, and

to firms other than their employers. It was not until the turn of the twentieth century, that the

nature of the market for technology began to change again, with a decrease in the proportion

 of arm' s-length transactions and a corresponding increase in the assignments made at issue by

 patentees who were officers or other principals in the companies specified as assignees. This

 decline during the early decades of the twentieth century in the independence of the most

 productive inventors from the companies to which they assigned their patents is an extremely

 interesting phenomenon. Why the change occurred is not yet clear, but it does not negate our




         '   We report on this investigation in Lamoreaux and Sokoloff, "Inventors, Firms, and Markets".
                                                                                                25



finding that the market for technology had supported the rise of an important class of highly

specialized independent inventors long before the spread of large-scale R & D laboratories.

        In summary, the analysis of how the productivity at patenting and other

characteristics of inventors varied with their use of the market for technology contributed

strong, if circumstantial, support for our argument that the development of trade in patent

rights encouraged creative individuals to specialize in invention, with positive

consequences for the pace of technological change more generally. In the next sectionof

the paper we explore the evolution of a set of institutions that was central to this trade —

intermediaries — and examine whether the patterns of services they provided are consistent

with our interpretation. If the ability to extract returns from invention by selling off patent

rights was crucial to the organization of highly productive inventors, then one would

expect such individuals to be disproportionately associated with intermediaries who were

more specialized at trading in the market for technology and more effective at carrying out

transactions (or making deals) therein.



                                               Iv

        Although patentees, assignees, or essentially anyone could act as a middleman in

organizing the sale of a patent, there is reason to believe that the efficiency of such

 exchanges improved over time as intermediaries who were relatively specialized in

 particular segments of the market for technology emerged. Judging from the records of

 the assignments filed with the Patent Office, inventors had already begun to employ

 intermediaries by the 1 840s, when multiple assignments of a single patent to distinct

 geographic areas were a common practice. These intermediaries were most often local
                                                                                                      26


attorneys or businessmen who knew what kinds of patents were likely to be salable in their

districts. As assignments became national in scope, however, other means of marketing

patents had to be developed. Moreover, the relations between patentees, assignees, and

intermediaries also had to change as inventive activity became more and more costly and

the province of increasingly specialized individuals. Agents in outlying areas were no

longer very useful. Patentees now needed intermediaries who were able to tap into

networks of businessmen and firms operating in national markets, provide them with

information about what types of inventions were in demand, and help them raise capital to

support their inventive activity. Alternatively, patentees or assignees could play the role of

intermediary themselves. Although many did, there were problems with this approach.

Not only was marketing or searching for a patented invention resource-consuming

(distracting inventors, say, from more creative tasks in which they presumably had a

comparative advantage), but such part-time agents were probably less efficient at

intermediation than specialized agents because of scale economies associated with

investment in information acquisition and reputation building.'8

         Indeed, over time, the role of intermediary came increasingly to be played by

patent agents and lawyers. The ostensible function of these specialists was, of course, to

help inventors navigate through the Patent Office's application process and, in the case of

 lawyers, to defend their clients' patents in interference and infringement proceedings. In

the course of their business, however, patent agents and lawyers obtained a great deal of

 information about participants on both sides of the market for technology. Buyers used


          18
            A more comprehensive discussion of the issues related to the organization of intermediation is
 provided in Naomi R. Lamoreaux and Kenneth L. Sokoloff, "Intermediaries in the U.S. Market for
 Technology, 1870-1920," working paper, 1999.
                                                                                                       27


them for assistance in evaluating the merits of inventions they were interested in

purchasing, and through repeat dealings with such customers, these specialists obtained a

great deal of information about the kinds of patents firms were interested in buying as well

as personal insight into the character of the people involved. Inventors used patent agents

and lawyers to file applications, giving them advance information about technologies about

to be patented. In addition, inventors frequently developed long-term relationships with

their patent agents that encouraged them to try out new ideas on these specialists.'9

        In theory, intermediaries specialized in the market for technology should have

lowered costs in trading patents and expanded the extent of this market. In so doing, the

growth of these intermediaries would accordingly stimulate a greater commitment of

resources to inventive activity by inventors and by society at large. If this hypothesis were

correct, however, and there were fixed costs to an inventor and specialized agent

establishing a relationship (such as becoming familiar with each other's work), then one

would expect that the patentees dealing with specialized agents would be more productive

over time than those utilizing other kinds of intermediation, and conversely that the

specialized agents would disproportionately be dealing with the most specialized and

productive inventors. This pattern of matching would arise because the more specialized

inventors would have more to gain from selling his patents through a more efficient or




         19
            For example, when Joseph Arbes, a fur manufucturer in New York City who also invented
sewing machines, came up with an idea for a blind stitching machine that would use a flat sided needle,
he immediately dispatched a sketch of the needle to his patent attorney, William E. Knight, for a
judgment as to its potential patentability. He had not even experimented with the needle on a sewing
machine at that point, and both the casualness with which he made the request and the primitive state of
his invention at that time suggest that he had an ongoing relationship with his attorney, who acted in part
 as a sounding board for his ideas. See Lamoreaux and Sokoloff, "Intermediaries".
                                                                                           28



lower-cost intermediary, and such specialized intermediaries would seek out clients who

would bring them a lot of valuable business.

       The rise of specialized intermediaries in the trade in patents is but one, albeit

fundamental, aspect of the development of the market for technology over the late

nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. It is one, however, whose effects can be

systematically studied by using information on the assignment contracts registered with the

Patent Office. Clerks in that office maintained a chronologically-organized registry that

included the full texts of the assignment contracts. They also kept a Digest (also

organized chronologically but in separate sets of volumes distinguished by the first letter

of the surname of the patentees in the registry), which included a summary of the basic

details of each assignment as well as the name and address of the "correspondent" to

which all correspondence from the Patent Office was to be addressed. We believe that

these correspondents were not only primarily responsible for the performance of the legal

tasks associated with drawing up and maintaining the records for their assignment

contract, but often served as intermediaries between the buyers and sellers.2°

        We constructed a sample from this source by collecting the information on all of

the assignment contracts filed with the Patent Office during the first three months of 1871,

1891, and 1911 for patents whose inventors had surnames beginning with the letter 'B.'

Because some of the contracts covered more than one patent, we sometimes focus on the

individual patent assigned as the unit of analysis, and sometimes on the individual

assignment contract. Overall, the sample encompasses 286 contracts (involving 437

patents) from 1871; 423 contracts (858 patents) from 1891, and 614 contracts (880
                                                                                                     29


patents) from 1911.21 In order to more fully examine how the type and characteristics of

patent assignments varied across different kinds of inventors, we retrieved for each of the

assigned patents in our sample, a five-year history of all patents received and assigned (at

issue) by the respective patentee, using the year the assigned patent was granted as the

mid-year (thus, we looked two years back, and two forward, from the base year).

        Each assignment contract (and the patents it included) were categorized by the

identity of the respective correspondent. Working with lists of patent agents and lawyers

from 1883 and 1905, we distinguished correspondents (generally individuals, rather than

firms) who were formally registered with the Patent Office in at least one of these two

years as a separate (and likely the most specialized on average) class of intermediaries.

Correspondents who were either the patentee, the assignor, or assignee of the patent

specified in the contract were grouped together in a second category of intermediaries. A

third category consisted of third parties who did not appear on either of the two lists of

registered agents we relied on, but it seems likely that some of the correspondents so

classified would have been identified as registered patent agents if we had rosters for more

years. Finally, the 'unknown' category of correspondents includes those cases where no

correspondent was listed in the Digest. These cases were almost entirely due to the patent

in question being assigned together with a patent issued to an inventor whose surname

began with a letter other than 'B'.


        20
            As will be evident from the data presented below, a substantial and increasing proportion of
the correspondents were registered with the Patent Office as patent agents or lawyers.
         21
            Our analysis treats as contracts cases where a single contract assigned multiple patents from
the same assignor to the same assignee, as well as instances in which several assignments dealing with the
same patent were evidently signed and filed with the Patent Office at the same time. Hence, assignments
filed together in which patentee Smith assigned his patent to Jones in the first one, and then Jones
assigned to Bums in a second assignment, were treated as falling under the same contract.
                                                                                                         30



       In Table 10 we present descriptive statistics computed over the assignment

contracts for each of the correspondent classes in 1871, 1891, and 1911. As is

immediately evident, the relative prominence of registered patent agents in the trade of

patent rights increased over time. They served as correspondents for 26.1 (29.7) percent

of the patents (contracts) assigned in 1871, with their shares increasing to 42.7 (51.8)

percent in 1891, and to 55.7 (58.1) percent respectively in 1911. Another way of gauging

the changing composition of correspondents is to focus on the continuous decline in the

proportion of patent assignments mediated by one of the principals (patentees, assignors,

or assignees)—from 33.0 (33.9) in 1871 to 11.2 (9.5) percent in 1911. It is clear from

these figures that third-party intermediaries were already dominant in this market for

patented technologies by 1871, and that the share of the trade carried out through

relatively specialized agents increased over time.

        That registered agents were indeed relatively specialized intermediaries is indicated

by the higher numbers of assignment contracts they handled, as compared to the record of

correspondents inthe other categories. For example, in 1871 the average registered agent

served as the correspondent on 2.36 of the contracts included in our sample, whereas the

averages for principals and unregistered third parties are 1.05 and 1.26 respectively. These

 figures, of course, greatly underestimate the total number of assignments handled annually

 by the correspondents, as they are based on only a small subset of all contracts (3 months

 of assignments for patents whose patentees had surnames beginning with the letter 'B').22

        The use of registered patent agents was especially prevalent in those segments of

 the trade in patents where greater effort or specialization by intermediaries would seem

         22
              Patentees whose surnames began with 'B' accounted for roughly 11 percent of all patents.
                                                                                                      31



likely to have been beneficial, if not essential. One example is that registered agents were

much more likely to have been involved in assignment contracts made before the issuance

of the patent, which required involvement at an earlier and more delicate stage of inventive

activity, than were other types of correspondents. In 1871, 61 percent of the assignment

contracts handled by registered agents were entered into before issue, as opposed to 8 and

23 percent respectively for those where the correspondents were principals or other third

parties.23 This stark difference implies that registered agents were indeed providing a

higher quality of intermediary service, one that we normally associate with better

developed markets — sales were being effected earlier or more quickly. Another reflection

of registered agents being more specialized than other intermediaries is their greater

orientation toward the more extensive (national) market, and less involved with

assignments pertaining to a specific geographic area. As early as 1871, fully 89 percent

of the contracts for which the correspondent was a registered agent were national,

compared to 70 percent for unregistered third parties and 51 percent for principals. Patent

agents were also more likely to be involved in primary, as opposed to secondary,

 assignments and were increasingly so over time.24 Finally, while inventions generated by

 patentees residing in major metropolitan centers were generally much more likely to be

 assigned than those discovered elsewhere, they were especially likely to be handled by

 registered agents. Large cities, with their much higher patenting and assignment rates, as

         23
             This result is robust to controlling for whether the assignment was primary or secondary, as
 well as for the characteristics of the patentee.
          24
             Although we lack systematic information about the prevalence of licensing, there are many
 indications that the volume of licensing increased substantially over time relative to patent assignments.
 Since registered agents were generally leaders in developing new forms of contracts, their lower
 propensity to handle secondary assignments may be due to a higher propensity to be involved in licensing.
 We base our judgment about how progressive registered agents were on their much earlier adoption of
                                                                                                       32


well as their disproportionate share of very productive inventors, were the hubs of the

market for technology, and the particular prominence of registered agents in sales of

patents conducted there constitutes fttrther evidence that they were a rather distinctive and

more specialized class of intermediaries.

        Consistent with what we have argued above, assignments by inventor-employees

to large firms do not seem to play a much of a role in accounting for the growth over time

in, and patterns of, use of patent agents. For example, the reported percentages of the

patent assignments going to companies (as opposed to individuals), show that the trend

over time toward assigning patents to companies accounted for very little of the change in

the composition of correspondents. This inference follows from the rather small

differences between the fraction of patent assignments handled by registered agents that

went to companies (28, 39, and 61 percent in 1871, 1891, and 1911 respectively) and the

fractions of those handled by principals to the assignments (24, 28, and 55 percent in the

respective years) as well as by unregistered third parties (20, 48, and 42 percent).

Moreover, the differences we have observed in the characteristics of patentees using

different types of correspondents are robust to controlling for whether the assignments

was made to a company or an individual.

        A more direct test of the idea that the rise of specialized intermediaries made a

difference for the organization and levels of inventive activity is to compare those

patentees who used registered agents to intermediate in the sales of their patent rights,

with patentees who either organized their assignments themselves or relied on other

principals (assignors or assignees) to do so. If patent agents did indeed offer some


stylized forms of assignment contracts — forms that ultimately became nearly universal — than other types
                                                                                             33



advantage in trading patent rights, such as more efficient (higher quality service)

intermediation or lower transactions costs, one would expect that the inventors who

developed relationships with them would be those who were both more specialized at

patenting and more inclined to extract the returns to their efforts by selling off the rights to

their inventions. As Table 10 indicates, such a pattern did develop over time. In 1871, the

average five-year total of patents awarded to patentees whose contracts were handled by

registered agents was roughly similar to the numbers for patentees who had used other

types of correspondents, but the former group did assign a higher fraction of their patents

at issue over those five years. By 1891, however, the more specialized inventors were

clearly disproportionately matched with the more specialized intermediaries. On average,

patentees whose patents were sold by registered agents received 6.61 patents (4.90 if

computed over contracts), as compared to 3.65 (3.43) and 5.80 (5.17) for those whose

patent assignments were arranged by principals or unregistered third parties. They also

had the highest rates of assignment. These contrasts grew even more striking over time.

By 1911, inventors whose patents were assigned through registered agents were again the

most productive or specialized — with 6.92 (5.06) patents over five years, as compared to

2.28 (2.04) for those whose patents were assigned by correspondents who were principals.

        In summary, the examination of the assignment contract data yields strong

evidence that the rise of registered patent agents reflected the emergence of more

specialized intermediaries in the market for technology, and was indeed associated with

improvements in the quality of intermediation. Although this follows from the obvious

success of registered agents in the competition with other intermediaries, as judged by


of correspondents.
                                                                                                     34


changes fri their market share over time and higher market share in places with high

inventive activity, their superior services in intermediation are perhaps best illustrated

through how quickly they were able to sell a patent relative to its date of issue. Given that

registered agents provided better intermediation, it is not surprising that the most

productive and specialized inventors came to be highly disproportionately represented

among their inventor clients. Inventors who were specialized at invention and depended

on selling off the rights to their patents to extract the returns to their efforts would

naturally be most concerned with obtaining high quality (or lower cost) intermediation.

The improvement in intermediation, in turn, reinforced the focus of inventors on

generating patentable inventions. Both the association of the more specialized inventors

with the more specialized agents, as well as the greater speed of closing assignment deals

is consistent with the impression that patent agents frequently had long-term relationships

with their major clients such that they could begin the process of matching buyers with

sellers, even before patents were applied for.25



                                                   V


        Major increases in rates of invention as well as dramatic growth in the relative

importance of highly specialized inventors as generators of new technological knowledge

were among the fundamental changes in the patterns of inventive activity that occurred in


        25
            Drawing on other sources of evidence, we examine the relationships between patent agents and
their inventor clients in Lamoreaux and Sokoloff, "Intermediaries in the U.S. Market for Technology,"
and fmd that many did maintain long-term associations and were often involved in marketing inventions
well before they were patented. The observations that patentees with historically high patenting and
assignment rates disproportionately dealt with registered agents and made assignments before issue are
also consistent with our view.
                                                                                                       35


the U.S. during its early stages of economic growth. Although conclusively demonstrating

causality is difficult, we have argued that an active market for technology evolved over the

nineteenth century, and that it played a central role in these developments. Relying on

records pertaining to patents and their sales, we have shown not only that there was a high

volume of trade in patented technologies, but also that such commerce and patenting

activity were closely associated with each other. Indeed, a broad variety of evidence

seems consistent with what theory would suggest, that improvements in the capabilities to

trade in technology would stimulate increases in specialization at invention by those with a

comparative advantage in that activity, as well as increases in rates of invention more

generally.26

        One of the most basic tests of our hypothesis was to examine how the pace and

organization of invention varied with trade in patented technologies over time and place.

As we would expect, they grew together during the critical middle third of the nineteenth

century between the 1836 change in the patent law, which strengthened the property rights

of patentees and their assignees, and 1870. Rates of patenting per capita on a national

basis boomed, increasing more than ten times, alongside a proliferation of patent agents,

periodicals focused on inventions, and other institutions conducive to trade in

technology. Moreover, employing several different measures of the extent of this market,

we found that that the patenting rates were highest, and increased the most over time in

regions like New England and the Middle Atlantic, where it was most developed. What

seems to have happened is that the institutions of the market evolved most rapidly in areas


        26
           It seems quite reasonable to assume in this context here that the demand for patented
inventions is downward-sloping, if not elastic as well. The increase in rates of invention would be
expected to be highly concentrated in those geographic areas with an improved capability to trade patents.
                                                                                             36


where rates of invention were high, and the resulting improvements in the capabilities for

trading in patents in turn stimulated higher rates of patenting — both by resident inventors

as well as those who moved in to take advantage of the greater opportunities available in

such locations. These mutually-reinforcing processes likely contributed to the marked

pattern of geographic persistence in relative levels of inventive activity that extended over

the nineteenth and into the twentieth century.

       Another level of tests pertained to the behavior of individual inventors. The logic

of our view that the emergence of the market for technology stimulated increases in

specialization at invention, and in invention overall, suggests that the most productive

inventors would be disproportionate sellers of the rights to their inventions, and that their

relative importance in the generation of inventions would have grown with the

development of the market for technology. The results here were again consistent with

the general hypothesis. Patentees who assigned away the full rights to their patents, and

especially to companies, were more productive at patenting than their counterparts who

did not throughout the period under study. Furthermore, the proportion of patents

accounted for by inventors who were relatively specialized at invention increased sharply

with the expansion of trade in patents and the acceleration of patenting that took place

over the middle third of the nineteenth century. Overall, the evidence seems to indicate

that a substantial group of inventors took advantage of the improving market for

technology to specialize more in the generation of patentable inventions, and that the rise

of these specialized inventors contributed powerfully to the general increase in patenting

per capita. No doubt the enthusiasm with which they embraced this strategy for making

the best of their talents, as well as the changing environment for trading in patents, was
                                                                                                          37


partially attributable to the greater investments in human capital that were becoming

increasingly necessary for those engaged in inventive activity as technology grew more

complex over time.

        Finally, we subjected our interpretation to yet more scrutiny by examining whether

the most productive inventors were the most sensitive to incremental improvements in the

market for technology. If they were indeed particularly specialized at invention, and thus

dependent on trading away the rights to their patents, one would expect them to have been

especially attracted to advances which improved the efficiency of carrying out such

transactions. Although the development of the market for technology encompassed many

distinct changes that are difficult to study with any precision, we sought to test the notion

by examining whether it was the most productive inventors who were most inclined to use

specialized intermediaries like registered patent agents or attorneys in selling off their

patents. The emergence of such intermediaries, though admittedly quite heterogeneous,

could reasonably be considered an institutional change that led to a better articulated and

integrated market for patents, and the observation that they did disproportionately deal

with inventors who produced more patents is consistent with our view.27

         The patent system is often celebrated for the stimulus to invention it provides by

granting limited monopoly rights to inventors for the use of their discoveries. Although

this effect is certainly substantial, the strong association of patenting with trade in new


         27
            Some patent agencies, like Munn and Company, appear to have had a high-volume business,
focusing more on helping large numbers of patentees obtain patents, and less on the time-intensive
marketing of specific inventions. Other agencies, or individual agents, appear to have provided higher
quality service to a smaller number of clients. Although both classes of agents were in some sense
specialized, it is the latter type of intermediary that was probably most likely to be dealing with the highly
specialized and productive inventors. See Lamoreaux and Sokoloff, "Intermediaries in the U.S. Market for
Technology", for an extensive discussion of the activities of specific patent agents.
                                                                                            38


technological knowledge over the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, suggests

that its specification of tradable assets in technology was another fundamentally important

way in which the patent system has stimulated inventive activity. In establishing a basis

for extensive trade in the rights to new technological knowledge, the patent system not

only enhanced the potential returns to particular inventions, but also facilitated the

realization of economies to specialization at invention by independent inventors or small

enterprises. Although some have been skeptical of the feasibility or extent of arms-length

transactions of this sort, it is clear that they were very common through the nineteenth

century and that access to, or involvement in, a market for technology had a profound

impact on the patterns of inventive activity. It remains to be determined why the

independence of the most productive inventors appears to have declined during the

twentieth century, at least until recently.28 However, the evidence we have examined

suggests this change in the organization of inventive activity was unlikely to have been due

to high costs in transacting over technology. Other possible explanations, such as

advantages large enterprises may have had in raising capital or improvements in personnel

management which facilitated the realization of economies of specialization by individual

inventors within large firms, seem deserving of investigation.




        28
             See   Lamoreaux and Sokoloff, "Inventors, Firms, and Markets".
                                       TABLE 1

    ANNUAL PATENTS RECEIVED PER MILLION RESIDENTS, BY REGION
                           1840-1911


                       1840-49    1850-59    1860-69    1870-71     1890-91    1910-11
New England              55.5      175.6      483.3      775.8       772.0      534.3
Middle Atlantic          51.7      129.4      332.3      563.4       607.0      488.6
EastNorthCentral         16.6       57.3      210.3      312.3       429.9      442.3
WestNorthCentral          9.5       22.9       95.4      146.5       248.7      272.0
South                     5.5        15.5      26.0       85.8       103.1      114.4
West                                24.8      164.5      366.7       381.6      458.4
U.S. Average            27.5        91.5      195.7      325.4       360.4      334.2

Notes and Sources: The rates have been computed from cross sectional samples of
patents drawn from the Annual Reports for the Commissioner of Patents for 1870-7 1,
1890-91, and 1910-11, and from information provided in the introduction to the Annual
Report for 1891. The regional classifications are based on those employed by the Census,
except that Maryland, Delaware, and the District of Columbia are included in the Middle
Atlantic for the 1840s, 1850s, and 1860s, but in the South for the later periods.
                                                          TABLE 2

                            DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS ON ASSIGNMENTS MADE BEFORE
                                        AND AFTER ISSUE OF PATENTS


                                                             1870-71              1890-91              1910-11


         New England
            Assignment to Patenting Index                      115.1               109.5                132.4
            % Assigned After Issue                              70.4                31.2                 30.1
            % Secondary Assignments                             26.6                14.8                 12.0
            % Geographic Assignments                             17.1                0.8                  0.0

         Middle Atlantic
            Assignment to Patenting Index                      100.7                 94.8               116.3
            % Assigned After Issue                              70.9                 44.4                37.9
            % Secondary Assignments                             33.3                 16.4                11.0
            % Geographic Assignments                             19.1                 1.9                 0.7

         East North Central
            Assignment to Patenting Index                       96.3               118.1                104.9
            % Assigned After Issue                              77.7                 48.5                32.8
            % Secondary Assignments                              18.1                18.4                11.8
            % Geographic Assignments                            34.3                  5.7                 1.8

         West North Central
           Assignment to Patenting Index                        90.7                110.1                 73.5
           % Assigned After Issue                               77.4                 48.6                 42.6
           %SecondaryAssignments                                32.3                 19.2                 11.0
           %Geographic Assignments                              41.9                 13.0                  2.6

          South
             Assignment to Patenting Index                      60.0                 68.9                 68.0
             % Assigned After Issue                             74.4                 42.3                 48.2
             %SecondaryAssignments                              27.9                 11.3                 19.1
              % Geographic Assignments                          20.9                  6.2                  2.5

          West
            Assignment to Patenting Index                      150.0                 67.2                 81.5
            %Assigned After Issue                               59.1                 57.4                 36.0
            % Secondary Assignments                             22.7                 11.4                 10.4
            %GeographicAssignments                              18.2                  7.4                  1.2

          Total Domestic
             Assignment to Patenting Index                     100.0                100.0                100.0
             % Assigned After Issue                             72.3                 44.1                 36.5
             % Secondary Assignments                            27.8                 16.4                 12.0
             % Geographic Assignments                           22.8                  4.6                  1.2

              Assignments to Patents Ratio                       0.83                0.71                 0.71
              Number of Contracts                                794                1,373                1,869

Sources and Notes: Our sample consists of all assignment contracts filed with the Patent Office during the months of January
1871, January 1891, and January 1911. These contracts are recorded inLiber" volumes stored at the National Archives.
There are a total of about 4,600 contracts in our sample. Only those involving assignors that resided in the United States are
included in this table. The assignment to patenting index is based on the ratio of assignments originating in the respective
regions (given by the residence of the assignor) to the number ofpatents filed from that region in 1870, 1890, and 1910
respectively. In each year the index has been set so that the national average equals 100. The percentage of secondary
assignments refers to the proportion of assignments where the assignor was neither the patentee nor a relative of the patentee.
The percentage of geographic patent assignments refers to the proportion of assignments where the right transferred was for a
geographic unit smaller than the nation.
                                        TABLE 3

                ASSIGNMENT OF PATENTS BY REGION, 1870-1911


                                          1870-71         1890-91          1910-11
New England
  % of Patents Assigned                    26.5 (340)      40.8 (321)       50.0 (264)
  % of Assignments to Company              33.3            56.5             75.0
   %ofAssignmentstoGroupthat               48.9            32.1             14.4
       Includes Patentee
Middle Atlantic
   % of Patents Assigned                   20.6 (645)      29.1 (669)       36.1 (710)
   % of Assignments to Company             22.6            50.8             72.7
   % of Assignments to Group that          44.4            35.4             18.8
       Includes Patentee
East North Central
   % of Patents Assigned                   14.7 (340)      27.9 (505)       32.3 (660)
   % of Assignments to Company             12.0            47.5             68.1
   % of Assignments to Group that          70.0            41.1             21.6
       Includes Patentee
West North Central
   % of Patents Assigned                    9.0 (67)       21.8 (202)       17.5 (285)
   % of Assignments to Company              0.0            36.4             46.0
   % of Assignments to Group that          83.3            56.8             42.0
       Includes Patentee
South
   % of Patents Assigned                    6.4 (140)      25.0 (216)       22.7 (322)
   % of Assignments to Company             11.1            33.3             34.2
   % of Assignments to Group that          77.8            57.4             53.4
       Includes Patentee
West
    %ofPatents Assigned                     0.0 (31)       25.4 (118)       21.4 (271)
    % of Assignments to Company               —            20.0             41.4
    % of Assignments to Group that                         73.3             44.8
       Includes Patentee
All Patents, Including Foreign
    %ofPatentsAssigned                     18.5 (1,618)    29.1 (2,201)     30.5 (2,816)
    % of Assignments to Company            23.7            47.2             64.8
    % of Assignments to Group that         50.3            40.6             25.2
       Includes Patentee

Notes and Sources: These estimates were computed from the three cross-sectional
samples described in the text. The numbers of observations in the respective cells are
reported within parentheses.
                                        TABLE 4

         GEOGRAPHIC DISTRIBUTION OF PATENT ATTORNEYS, 1883

                                                                    Percent of Attorneys
                                                                          Outside
Region                       Number            Percent of Total       Washington, DC

NewEngland                      90                    16.6                  21.6

Middle Atlantic                195                   35.9                   46.9

East North Central             104                    19.2                  25.0

Washington, DC                 127                   23.4                     —

West North Central              13                     2.4                   3.1

South                            7                     1.3                   1.7

West                             7                     1.3                   1.7

Notes and Sources: U.S. Patent Office, Names and Addresses of Attorneys Practicing
Before the United States Patent Office (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office,
1883). All individual listings receive equal weight, including partnerships. The South
does not include Washington, DC.
                                                             Table 5
    PATENTING RATES AND SHARES OF PATENTS AND POPULATIOI, BY REGION AND URBANIZATION
                                                   •                                                                       .
                                1870-1871                              1890-1891                       1910-1911
                      Patents      % of       % of           Patents     % of       % of     Patents     % of       % of
                        Per       Patents    Popuki-           Per      Patents    Popula-    Per       Patents    Popula-
                      Million                  lion         Million                 lion     Million                lion
New England
  No City               438.5       6.7        5.0           382.4       3.1         3.0     336.7        1.8        1.8
  25,000              1,039.2      11.0        3.4           989.9       9.4         3.4     667.2        3.9        2.0
  100,000                                      —             870.2        1.0       0.4      552.4        4.3        2.6
  250,000             1,875.9       4.1        0.7          1,250.1      2.7         0.8     594.8        1.4        0.8
  TOTAL                 775.8     21.8         9.1           772.0       16.2        7.6     534.3       11.4        7.2
Middle Atlantic
  No City               295.6      13.0       14.3           280.6       6.7         8.7     289.7        4.9        5.7
  25,000                603.9       3.6        1.9           681.9       6.6         3.5     409.4        5.6        4.5
  100,000             1,009.0      4.8         1.5           795.2       3.0         1.4     481.2        1.8        1.2
  250,000             1,137.4     18.7         5.3           943.5       18.0       6.9      644.0       18.6        9.6
  TOTAL                 563.4     40.1        23.1           607.0      34.4       20.5      488.6       30.8      21.1
East North Central
  No City               237.8      15.2       20.8           240.2       10.4      15.8      227.1        7.5       11.0
  25,000                889.8      4.2         1.5           703.8       3.6         1.9     443.0        3.9        2.9
  100,000               724.2       3.6        1.6           763.0       2.2         1.0     789.3        2.6        LI
  250,000                                      —            1,139.4      9.6        3.0      850.9       12.4        4.9
  TOTAL                 312.2     23.0        23.9           429.9      25.8       21.7      442.3      26.4        19.9
West North Central
  No City               129.4      3.6         9.0           168.4       5.4       11.7      194.7        5.6        9.5
  25,000                239.9      0,2         0.2           300.6       0.7        0.8      351.2        1.3        1.2
  100,000                                      —             588.9        1.7        1.0     568.3        1.3       0.7
  250,000               293.3      0.8         0.9           938.4       2.0        0.8      623.8        2.3       1.2
  TOTAL                 146.5      4.6        10.1           248.7       9.8       14.3      272.0       10.4      12.7
South
  No City                53.2      4.8        29.0            63.5       5.0       28.2       74.7        5.9      26.6
  25,000                266.4      0.9         1.1           452.5       2.3         1.8     334.0        2.7       2.7
  100,000               563.8       1.4        0.8           434.2       0.8        0.7      310.3        1.2        1.3
  250,000               492.8       1.3        0.9           421.8        1.0       0.8      307.9        1.0        1.1

  TOTAL                  85.8       8.4       31.9     '•
                                                             103.1       9.0       31.5      114.4       10.8      31.7
West
  No City               263.3       1.1        1.5           265.3       2.4         3.3     283.2        3.8        4.5
  25,000                                       —             452.5        1.0       0.8      612.7        1.3        0.7
  100,000               876.4       1.1        0.4             —                             591.1        2.1        1.2
  250,000                                      —                                             977.2
                                                            1,056.9       1.4        0.5                  2.9        1.0
  TOTAL                 366.7       2.2        1.9           381.6       4.8         4.5     458.4       10.2        7.5


Notes and Sources: The estimates were computed from the sample. The observations are classified by geographic area:
counties with no city of 25,000 residents or larger; counties with the largest city between 25,000 and 100,000; counties with
the largest city between 100,000 and 250,000; and counties with more than 250,000 in the largest city.
                                                                                                            66


                                                  TABLE 6

                 DISTRIBUTION OF PATENTS BY PATENTEE COMMITMENT TO

                                           PATENTING, 1790-1930


                                           Number of "Career" Patents by Patentee

                  1 Patent       2 Patents        3 Patents     4-5 Patents     6-9 Patents     10+ Patents
                     %              %                %               %               %               %

1790-1811           51.0            19.0            12.0             7.6             7.0             3.5

1812-1829           57.5            17.4             7.1             7.6             5.5             4.9

1830-1842           57.4            16.5              8.1            8.0             5.6             4.4

1870-1871           21.1            12.5              9.9           15.8            11.8           28.9

1890-1891           19.5            10.3             10.3           10.3            13.8           35.9

1910-1911           33.2            14.3              8.2            9.8             9.4           25.0

Sources and Notes: The figures from 1790 to 1842 are drawn from Kenneth L. Sokoloff and B. Zorina

Khan, "The Democratization of Invention During Early Industrialization: Evidence from the United

States, 1790-1846," Journal of Economic History, 50 (June 1990), Pp. 363-78. The figures for the latter

years were computed from a longitudinal data set constructed by selecting all the patentees in the cross-

sectional samples (see Table 2 for a description) whose family names began with the letter "B" and

collecting information on the patents they received during the twenty-five years before and after they

appeared in the samples. This data set contains information on 6057 patents granted to the 561 "B"

inventors.
                                                      TahIe7
              REGRESSIONS WITH           NUMBER OF PATENTS AWAEJ ED TO THE PATENTEE
                                       AS THE DEPENDENT VARIABLE


                                                      1870-71                1890-91               1910-11

  Intercept                                          -0.205 (0.18)          -1,107 (0.19)         -1.030 (0.16)

  Region of Patentee:

       New England                                    0.114 (0.05)          0.165 (0.049)          0.180 (0.04)
       Mid Atlantic                                  0.116 (0.04)           0.133 (0.04)           0.117 (0.03)
       West North Central                            -0.079 (0.08)          0.011 (0.05)          -0.039 (0.04)
       South                                         0.027 (0.06)           0.037 (0.05)           0.029 (0.04)
       West                                          -0.138   (0.11)        -0.175 (0.06)         -0.089 (0.04)
       Foreign                                       0.279    (0.20)         1.187 (0.19)          1.104 (0.16)
  Urban County                                       0.033 (0.04)           0.168 (0.04)           0.128 (0.04)
  Metropolitan Center                                0.042 (0.04)           -0.008 (0.04)         -0.0 14 (0.03)
  Sector:

       Energy                                        0.086 (0.05)           0.184 (0.05)           0.160 (0.05)
       Manufacturing                                 0.089 (0.04)           0.0 17 (0.05)          0.109 (0.04)
       Transportation                                0.0 19 (0.06)          0.147 (0.05)           0.144 (0.05)
       Construction                                  -0.022 (0.06)          0.018 (0.06)           0.104 (0.06)
       Miscellaneous                                 0.002 (0.08)           -0.132 (0.07)          0.019 (0.06)
  Patent Assigned                                    -0.042 (0.05)          0.024 (0.04)           0.096 (0.04)
  Assigned to Companies                              0.784 (0.09)           0.304 (0.06)           0.293 (0.05)
  Assigned Out of State                              0.608 (0.10)           0.161 (0.10)           0.015 (0.15)
  Assigned to Companies Out of State                 -1.033 (0.20)          0.217 (0.13)           0.103 (0.11)
  Log (Patenting Rate)                               0.058 (0.03)           0.188 (0.03)           0.161   (0.02)

  N                                                    1,599                 2,164                  2,781

  R2                                                    0.13                  0.16                   0.14

Notes and Sources: The dependent variable is the log of the number of patents awarded to the patentee in the year in
question. The intercept reflects the record of a patentee responsible for an unassigned agricultural/food processing
patent from a rural county in the East North Central region. See the note to Table 10.
                                       TABLE 8

         DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS ON THE CAREERS OF PATENTEES
                          IN THE "B" SAMPLE

                              1870-71        1890-91      1910-11        Total

                                         Means Computed Over Patentees
Not Assigned at Issue
   Ave. No. of Patents           8.0             10.0        6.4           7.9
   LengthofCareer(Yrs.)         13.2             14.7       11.1         12.7
   CareerAssign.Rate(%)          8.3             11.5        9.2           9.6
   Number of Patentees           121              117       178           416
   Percent of All Patentees     84.6             63.9       75.7         74.2

Share Assignment
   Ave.No.ofPatents              5.4             11.1        2.6          6.9
   Length of Career (Yrs.)      10.6             13.5        8.1         11.0
   Career Assign. Rate (%)      67.1             75.3       87.5         76.7
   Number of Patentees            13               19         14           46
   Percent of All Patentees      9.1             10.4        6.0          8.2

Full Assign. to Individual
   Ave.No.ofPatents              5.3             29.0        3.0         12.1
   LengthofCareer(Yrs.)         12.0             18.3        5.3         11.9
   Career Assign. Rate (%)      52.1             74.1       76.4         66.7
   Number of Patentees             7                6          6           19
   Percent of All Patentees      4.9              3.3        2.6          3.4

Full Assign. to Company
    Ave. No. of Patents         30.0             23.7       32.6         28.0
   LengthofCareer(Yrs.)         25.5             21.7       23.5         22.6
   Career Assign. Rate (%)      62.1             70.7       80.9         75.2
   Number of Patentees             2              41          37           80
   Percent of All Patentees      1.4             22.4       15.7         14.3
                                    TABLE 8 cont.

         DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS ON THE CAREERS OF PATENTEES
                          IN THE "B" SAMPLE

                                1870-71       1890-91     1910-11       Total

                                          Means Computed Over Patents
Not Assigned at Issue
   Ave. No. of Patents            20.0         39.7         38.2         33.7
   LengthofCareer(Yrs.)           21.5         28.2         26.0         25.6
   Career Assign. Rate (%)        14.2         23.5         22.0         20.4
   Number of Patents              900          1264        1053         3217
   PercentofAllPatents            80.0          50.1        43.8        53.1


Share Assignment
   Ave. No. of Patents            19.3         40.5         24.4        30.7
   Length of Career (Yrs.)        20.7         27.5         25.6        25.4
   CareerAssign.Rate(%)           39.9         66.5         62.8        59.4
   Number of Patents                75          156          108         339
   Percent of All Patents          6.6              6.2      4.5          5.6

Full Assign. to Individual
    Ave. No. of Patents           27.3          76.5        39.2        58.6
   LengthofCareer(Yrs.)           26.1          30.6        28.3        29.2
   Career Assign. Rate    (%)     40.3          77.0        70.9        67.9
   Number of Patents                82          224          74          381
   PercentofAilPatents             7.3              8.9      3.1          6.2


Full Assign. to Company
   Ave. No. of Patents            35.9          62.5       135.6        101.8
   Length of Career (Yrs.)        26.6          32.9        35.1        33.9
   CareerAssign.Rate(%)           53.3          78.0        85.5        81.3
   Number of Patents                73          880         1168        2121
   Percent of All   Patents        6.5          34.9        48.6        35.0
                                     TABLE 9

REGRESSIONS WITH CAREER TOTAL OF PATENTS AND LENGTH OF CAREER
                 AS THE DEPENDENT VARIABLES


                                Log of Number of         Log of Years from First to
                                 Career Patents            Last Patent Plus One

                             (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)      (5)       (6)

Constant                   2.311      2.274    2.267     2.824     2.811    2.808
                           (0.05)    (0.04)    (0.04)    (0.03)    (0.03)   (0.03)

Prop. of Career Patents     0.370     1.027    0.957     0.111     0.326     0.301
   Assigned Fully to       (0.11)    (0.10)    (0.10)    (0.07)    (0.07)   (0.07)
   Individuals at Issue

Prop. Assigned Fully to                1.854    1.774              0.605     0.605
   Companies at Issue                 (0.04)   (0.06)              (0.03)   (0.04)
   Interaction with Year
       of Sampling:

       1890-91                                 -0.198                       -0.097
                                               (0.05)                       (0.04)
       1910-11                                 0.283                        -0.068
                                               (0.06)                       (0.04)
Region of Patentee:

   New England             0.187     -0.120    -0.077     0.106    0.006     0.021
                           (0.04)    (0.04)    (0.04)    (0.03)    (0.03)    (0.03)

   Middle West             0.244      0.303    0.306     -0.090    -0.070   -0.070
                           (0.04)     (0.03)   (0.03)    (0.02)    (0.02)    (0.02)

   South                   -0.293    -0.104    -0.079    -0.111    -0.049   -0.040
                            (0.07)   (0.06)     (0.06)    (0.04)   (0.04)   (0.04)

   West                    -1.501    -0.961    -0.916    -0.731    -0.554   -0.540
                            (0.09)    (0.08)   (0.08)     (0.06)   (0.06)   (0,06)

   Foreign                 -0.676    -0.533    -0.529    -0.380    -0.332   -0.333
                           (0.09)    (0.07)    (0.07)    (0.05)    (0.05)   (0.05)
Urban County                   0.106      0.144    0.154      0.020     0.031     0.034
                               (0.05)    (0.04)    (0.04)     (0.03)    (0.03)    (0.03)

Metropolitan Center            0.474      0.23 8   0.227      0.147     0.070      0.067
                               (0.05)    (0.04)    (0.04)     (0.03)    (0.03)    (0.03)

Sampled in 1890-91             0.739     0.197     0.293      0.370     0.193      0.228
                               (0.04)    (0.04)    (0.04)     (0.03)    (0.03)     (0.03)

Sampledinl9lo-11               0.835     0.046     -0.056     0.375     0.118      0.085
                               (0.05)    (0.04)    (0.05)     (0.04)    (0.03)     (0.03)

N                               6057      6057       6057      6057      6057       6057

R2                              0.19      0.38      0.39       0.08      0.14      0.15


Notes and Sources. These regressions were estimated over all of the individual patent
observations contained in our "B" sample. This sample was collected by gathering
information on all of the patents filed over fifty years by 561 patentees randomly drawn
from cross-sections for 1870-71, 1890-91, and 1910-11. The variables pertaining to
behavior over the careers of the patentees were calculated from the fifty-year totals for
the respective inventors. The constant refers to a patent received by a resident of a
county in the Middle Atlantic without a city of 25,000 or more inhabitants. Urban
counties had cities of greater than 25,000, and metropolitan centers had cities of greater
than 100,000. This patentee was sampled from the 1870-71 cross-section, and his record
of patenting was compiled by searching the previous twenty-five years and the next
twenty-five years. The regression coefficients are reported with standard errors in
parentheses.
                                    TABLE 10

             DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS ON PATENT ASSIGNMENT,
                   BY CORRESPONDENT TYPE, 1871-1911


                                                 Patentee,    Third
                                    Registered   Assignor,   Party but
                                      Patent        or         not
1871                                  Agent      Assignee    Registered Unknown
Number                  Patents        114          144        126        53
                        Contracts       85           98         82        21

%ofTotalNumber          Patents       26.1         33.0        28.8      12.1
                        Contracts     29.7         33.9        29.4       7.0

Proportion Assigned     Patents        0.47        0.09        0.18
   Before Issue         Contracts      0.61        0.08        0.23

Proportion Secondary    Patents        0.35        0.33        0.32      0.85
   Assignments          Contracts      0.20        0.31        0.30      0.80

Proportion National     Patents        0.89        0.53        0.71
   Assignments          Contracts      0.89        0.51        0.70

Proportion Assigned     Patents        0.28        0.24        0.20      0.66
   to Company           Contracts      0.25        0.16        0.20      0.48

Prop. Where Patentee    Patents        0.46        0.28        0.40      0.32
   inCounty With        Contracts      0.39        0.31        0.35      0.38
   City of >100,000

Patentees' Ave. 5-Yr.   Patents        3.90        3.73        3.35      4.69
   Total of Patents     Contracts      2.45        3.10        3.27      3.05

Patentees' Ave. 5-Yr.   Patents        1.47        0.88        0.80      0.88
   Total of Patents     Contracts      1.08        0.64        0.88      0.70
   Assigned at Issue

Ave. No. of Contracts
   Assigned by          Contracts      2.36        1.05        1.26
   Correspondent
                                      TABLE lOcont.

             DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS ON PATENT ASSIGNMENT,
                   BY CORRESPONDENT TYPE, 1871-1911


                                                      Patentee,    Third
                                       Registered     Assignor,   Party but
                                         Patent          or         not
1891                                     Agent        Assignee    Registered Unknown
Number                  Patents           336            188        235        69
                        Contracts         219             89         88        27

%ofTotalNumber          Patents           42.7          21.9        27.4       8.0
                        Contracts         51.8          21.0        20.8       6.4

Proportion Assigned     Patents           0.44          0.15        0.32      0.24
   Before Issue         Contracts         0.52          0.18        0.40      0.37

Proportion Secondary    Patents           0.20          0.31        0.37      0.81
   Assignments          Contracts         0.13          0.25        0.23      0.78

Proportion National     Patents           0.91          0.78        0.86
   Assignments          Contracts         0.94          0.72        0.78

Proportion Assigned     Patents           0.39          0.28        0.48      0.68
   to Company           Contracts         0.41          0.27        0.45      0.52

Prop. WherePatentee     Patents           0.51          0.45        0.55      0.58
   in County With       Contracts         0.46          0.45        0.48      0.52
   City of >100,000

Patentees' Ave. 5-Yr.   Patents           6.61          3.65        5.80      5.45
   Total of Patents     Contracts         4.90          3.43        5.17      3.00

Patentees' Ave. 5-Yr.   Patents           4.29          1.10        3.50      3.65
   Total of Patents     Contracts         3.39          1.27        3.43      1.74
   Assigned at Issue

Ave. No. of Contracts
   Assigned by          Contracts         1.77          1.07        1.24
   Correspondent




   I11CU vy             '.OIIL1tt.L        I. IL        !.U'        I.L'f
includes information on all such patent assignments filed with the Patent Office during
the months of January through March for 1871, 1891, and 1911. Because some contracts
involved the sale or transfer of more than one patent, and some encompassed multiple
transfers of the same patent (such as the sale of a patent from A to B, and then another
transfer of the patent from B to C), we report one set of figures computed over all patents
assigned and another set computed over all contracts. For every patent in our sample of
assignments, we compiled a five-year record of all of the patents received bythe
patentee, using the year of the assigned patent as the central year. From this record, we
 computed the total number of patents the patentee received over the five years and the
 total number of these patents that he assigned at issue. We categorized each assignment
 contract (and the patents it included) by the identity of the person to whom all
 correspondence about the assignments was to be addressed. Working with lists of patent
 agents and lawyers from 1883 and 1905, we distinguished correspondents who were
 formally registered with the Patent Office in at least one of these two years as a separate
 class of intermediaries. Correspondents who were principals to the contract (either the
 patentee, the assignor, or the assignee of one of the patents involved) were grouped
 together in a second category of intermediaries. A third category consisted ofthird parties
 who did not appear on either of the two lists of registered agents that we relied upon. It
  seems likely, however, that we would have been able to identify some of these
  correspondents as registered agents if we had rosters for additional years. Finally, we
  include an "unknown" category that is primarily composed of cases where multiple
  patents were assigned together and where the details of the contract were summarized in
  the record of another patentee whose family name began with a letter other than "B"—
  and was thus in another Digest volume.
