NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

GOVERNMENT AS A DISCRIMINATING
MONOPOLIST IN THE FINANCIAL
MARKET: THE CASE OF CHINA

Roger H. Gordon
Wei Li

Working Paper 7110
http://www.nber.org/papers/w711o

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 1999

We thank Campbell Harvey and Jim Wang for comments and suggestions, Michael Wu and Yan Yu for
research assistance. Wei Li acknowledges the financial support from the Center for Business Education and
Research at Duke University. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©

1999

by Roger H. Gordon and Wei Li. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two

paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given

to the source.

Government as a Discriminating Monopolist
in the Financial Market: The Case of China
Roger H. Gordon and Wei Li
NBER Working Paper No. 7110
May 1999

JELNo. G28,H25
ABSTRACT
To date, China has maintained a variety of restrictions on its financial markets. In addition

to imposing capital controls and regulating interest rates, the government controls both the set of
firms that can sell equity on the domestic or foreign stock markets, and the amount they can sell.
China is unique in that foreigners pay much less than domestic investors for intrinsically identical

shares.
In this paper, we show that these characteristics of the Chinese financial market are consistent

with a government choosing regulations to maximize a standard type of social welfare function. The
observed policy of charging much higher prices for equity sold to domestic than to foreign investors

can simply reflect the more inelastic demand for equity by domestic investors.
Under certain conditions, these regulations are equivalent to income taxes on business and

interest income. The pattern of tax rates is not qualitatively different from those commonly
observed elsewhere, particularly in other countries with capital controls. Given the ease with which
firms and individuals can evade income taxes, however, indirect taxation through restrictions on the

financial market may serve as an effective alternative.

Roger Gordon
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER

rgordonumich. edu

Wei Li
Fuqua School of Business
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
wei.li@duke.edu

1 Introduction
The emerging Chinese financial market exhibits many puzzling features. China, like a number

of other countries, imposes ownership restrictions on foreigners seeking to acquire shares
in domestic firms. Much more unusual, however, is the fact that China also restricts the
amount of shares that can be purchased by domestic investors. Uniquely, foreign investors in
China pay much less than domestic investors for intrinsically identical shares.1 Not only are
domestic—owned shares more expensive than foreign—owned shares but their price is much
more volatile than the price of equivalent shares owned by foreigners (World Bank. 1995).
In addition to restricting share purchases. the Chinese government has also imposed
capital controls. in principle preventing domestic investors from investing abroad. Given
these controls and the high Chinese savings rate, the interest rate available in China has
been much lower than that available abroad. The government also prevents nonstate firms
from having their shares listed in the public exchanges. In addition. the government puts
pressure on the banking system to lend primarily to state enterprises, with little regard for
financial considerations.
In this paper, we argue that all of these observations can be consistent with a government
choosing regulations that maximize a standard type of social welfare function. The observed
regulations all aid the government in collecting revenue from both foreign and domestic
investors. Due to risk aversion, domestic and foreign demand for domestic securities should
be downward sloping — investors need more attractive terms to induce them to concentrate
their portfolios further on any one security. The government as a result certainly has an
incentive to restrict the supply of domestic shares available to foreign investors, in order to
extract monopoly rents from these investors.2 The government can use equivalent regulatory
restrictions to collect revenue from domestic investors, though it may be less aggressive in
exploiting its monopoly power here to the extent that it cares about individual welfare as
well as government revenue.

Within our paper, the only assumed untaxed outlet for domestic savings is investments
Examples of countries where ownership restrictions also exist, but where foreigners pay a premium for
owning domestic shares, include Finland (Hietala, 1989), Thailand (Bailey and Jagtiani, 1994), Switzerland
(Stulz and Wasserfallen, 1995), and Mexico (Domowitz, Glen and Madhavan, 1997). On the effects of foreign
ownership restrictions, see also Stulz (1981), Errunza and Losq (1985), Eun and Janakiramanan (1986). and
Errunza and Losq (1989) among others. On the Chinese domestic price premium, see Bailey (1994), World
Bank (1995), Su (1997) and Fernald and Rogers (1998).
2This point is not new. See, for example, Gordon and Varian (1989). Stulz and Wasserfallen (1995) argue
that value-maximizing firms would do the same if, due to market imperfections, they face downward-sloping
demand curves for their ownership shares.

1

in nonstate firms.3 The government may try to limit the resulting revenue loss by trying to
make this untaxed alternative less attractive, e.g. by preventing nonstate shares from being
traded on the exchanges.

Since foreign investors can much more easily find "greener pastures" elsewhere. their
demand for domestic assets will be price elastic relative to that of domestic investors. The
optimal policy is therefore to price discriminate by segmenting domestic and foreign markets.
Since domestic investors' demands are less elastic, the government will charge them a higher
price for domestic shares as long as the government does not put too much weight on their
welfare. These implications are consistent with the stylized facts from China.

This paper is related to Stulz and Wasserfallen (1995), which shows that domestic entrepreneurs should price discriminate between domestic and foreign investors when the demand function for domestic shares differs between domestic and foreign investors. Their
model explains why Swiss firms want to impose foreign ownership restrictions and why foreign investors pay higher prices. Using a similar framework, Domowitz et al. (1997) offer an
explanation for why Mexican firms impose foreign ownership restrictions and why foreign investors pay higher prices. In our paper, the government, not each individual firm, has market
power in the financial markets. By imposing investment barriers, the government can raise
share prices and lower the interest rate in order to reduce the cost of capital for financing
government-owned firms and its own budget deficit. In order to capture the governments
influence on share prices and interest rates, this paper develops a general equilibrium model
to analyze the government's intervention in the financial economy.
This paper is also related to other works on the Chinese financial market. Bailey (1994)
and World Bank (1995) argue that differential liquidity in the two markets helps explain the
foreign discount observed in China. Since fewer firms are offered to foreign investors, these
markets have a lower capitalization and hence require a higher liquidity premium. However.
this argument does not explain why the government chooses to list fewer firms on foreign
markets than on domestic markets. Fernald and Rogers (1998) is perhaps closest to our paper.
Its explanation of the domestic price premium rests on the observation that Chinese investors
have far fewer investment alternatives and in particular face a lower deposit interest rate.
which they use as their discount rate. However, Fernald and Rogers (1998) do not explain
why the government wants to restrict domestic individuals' investment opportunities in order
to keep the domestic interest rate lower than that prevailing in the international financial
market.
3Unlike in state firms, when the government restricts equity investments in the nonstate sector, the nonstate
firms rather than the government keeps the revenue.

2

Why are the regulations so much different in China than elsewhere? An important part
of our answer is that the Chinese government may find it more difficult than other countries
do to collect revenue through taxes rather than through restrictions on the financial market.4
Restrictions on nonstate firms and investments abroad make sense because these alternative
investments are more difficult to tax, even implicitly. Another part of our answer is that the
Chinese government, in setting policy, may put more weight on government revenue relative
to the welfare of investors than do other governments.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 gives a brief description of the
Chinese financial economy and the puzzles that this paper attempts to explain. Section 3
describes the basic assumptions of our model, derives the characteristics of the market equilibrium. and examines the equilibrium government policy. In Section 4. we provide a discussion
of our results.

2 The Institution
Before the reforms that started in 1978, capital markets did not exist in China. Private
ownership of capital was prohibited. Monetary savings from individuals were deposited in the
People's Bank and they accounted for less than six percent of GDP in 1978 (State Statistical
Bureau, 1997).

The reforms since 1978 have greatly transformed China's economy. The lifting of the
ban on private businesses has brought about an explosive growth of China's nonstate sector.
Most of the private or quasi-private firms were self-financed. Private business investment has
become a viable alternative savings vehicle for individuals.
Domestic individuals' access to foreign capital markets continues to be limited by currency non-convertibility and by administrative barriers. Since the reforms, however. China
has opened up to both foreign direct investment5 and foreign portfolio investment.6 While
foreigners are not yet allowed to participate in China's fixed income securities market the
Chinese government has successfully floated foreign currency denominated bonds in overseas'
markets.

Interest rates on domestic bank deposits have remained low by international standards.
4We show below that the restrictions on domestic ownership of equity shares are closely equivalent to a
corporate tax on the profits of these firms.
51n 1996, foreign owned subsidiaries in China accounted for 25 percent of domestic investment, produced
13 percent of output, 32 percent of exports and 11 percent of tax revenues (World Bank, 1997).
6Foreign shares were first listed as B-shares on Shanghai and Shenzhen Stock Exchanges in February 1993.
and as H-shares on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange (HKSE) in July 1993.

3

As Figure 1 shows, the real interest rates for one-year savings deposits were often negative.
The domestic interest rate is also considerably lower on average than the foreign borrowing
cost that the government faces.7 The difference between the foreign borrowing cost and
the domestic interest rate, which averages 2.8% over the period between January 1987 and
October 1998, represents an implicit tax on domestic savings.
Despite low domestic interest rates, there has been a rapid increase in individual savings.

which may be attributed to the rapid increase in income, the expected rapid aging of the
population, and the anticipated increase in future uncertainty as the economy becomes more
market-oriented. By 1996, individual bank deposits alone accounted for 56 percent of GDP
(State Statistical Bureau, 1997). The large bank deposits coupled with a sizable implicit tax
on bank deposits implies that the implicit taxes from domestic bank depositors alone would
be worth over 1% of GDP per year between 1987 and 1998.
The implicit tax revenue was badly needed, as the reform made it much more difficult
for the government to collect tax revenue. Between 1978 and 1995, budgetary revenue fell
precipitously from 35 percent of GDP to 11 percent. State owned enterprises contributed 71
percent of government revenue (net of subsidies) during this period, even as their share of
industrial output dropped below 50 percent (State Statistical Bureau. 1997). However, tax
evasion even by state enterprises has become a major problem.

To tap the rapid rise in individual savings to finance the budget deficit. the Chinese
government resumed the issuance of domestic debt in 1981. Initially, individuals were required

to invest in these bonds. The government shifted to placing bonds through the market in
1988.

Given the drop in funding from the government, state enterprises experimented with sell-

ing stocks directly to the public in 1984, in order to raise financing. Unofficial secondary
trading of stocks began shortly thereafter. Share trade was legalized with the formal recognition of the Shanghai Stock Exchange (SHSE) and the Shenzhen Stock Exchange (SZSE)
in 1990 and 1991. By January 1999, the number of listings reached 862 with a market
capitalization of US$232 billion (International Finance Corporation, 1999).
The Chinese stock market exhibits some unusual features when compared to mature
financial markets.
1. The government through its regulatory bodies controls both the listing of new enterprises and the value of new stock issued.
7Foilowing Giovannini and de Melo (1993) and Li (1998), the foreign borrowing cost is constructed as the
sum of the Euro-currency USS one-year interest rate (ECUSD1Y in Datastream) and the ex post 12-month
ahead depreciation rate of the official RMB relative to the U.S. dollar.

4

2. There is a high degree of market segmentation. In addition to non-transferable government shares, corporate legal person shares (subscribed by state-owned units), and
employee shares, tradeable shares can be issued in two ownership categories:

• A Shares or domestic individual shares can be subscribed by and traded only
among domestic investors, A-shares dominate China's equity market in both size
and level of activity.

• B and H Shares or foreign shares can only be subscribed by and traded among
foreign investors. B-shares are listed on domestic exchanges and H-shares are listed

on overseas exchanges (Hong Kong, New York, London and Singapore). Foreign
shares bear the same ownership rights as A-shares.

3. A-shares are traded at a substantial premium over the corresponding foreign shares:
see Figure 2. Among all firms that listed both domestic and foreign shares between
January 1993 and November 1998, the average ratio of A-share prices to foreign share
prices was 3.16.8

4. Share prices in A-shares market are much more volatile than in foreign-shares markets.9 This can be seen from Figure 3 which plots A-share and B-share price indices in
SHSE and SZSE. Although not shown here, A-shares are also more volatile than their
corresponding H-shares.

5. Fewer firms are listed in foreign markets. In Feburary 1999, of all 862 firms listed
on China's stock exchanges, 835 issued A-shares, while only 107 issued B-shares. An
additional 43 firms issued H-shares. A total of 98 firms were cross-listed on both Ashares and B/H-shares markets.
6. However, given that a firm is dual-listed on both domestic and foreign markets. the
government often permits more tradeable shares to be floated on the foreign than on
the domestic markets. For the 98 dual-listed firms on November 30, 1998, A-shares
accounted for an average of 15.6% of total outstanding shares while foreign shares
accounted for 29.4%. The rest of the outstanding shares, which were non-tradeable.
were held by the government, state-owned institutions and employees.
81t is interesting to note that this price ratio started to decline in late 1993 when some high-ranking Chinese
officials called for capital account liberalization and for merging A- and B-shares (South China Morning Post.

March 2, 1994). After July, 1994, the decline was quickly reversed when the government announced that
separate markets would remain, and that new share issues would be restricted.
9The sample standard deviation of daily percentage changes in price is 3.7% for Shanghai A-shares index.
2.1% for Shanghai B-shares index, 2.9% for Shenzhen A-shares index and 2.1% for Shenzhen B-shares index.

5

7. All listed enterprises have been state-owned.
Each year, the new share issue quota is determined jointly by the State Council Securities

Policy Committee, the State Planning Commission and the Central Bank as part of the
annual investment and credit plan. In 1993, for example, the A-share quota was set at 5.5
billion yuan and the B-share quota was US$100 million.'0 The quota is then divided among
provinces. Each regional securities authority then invites enterprises to request a listing, and
makes a selection based on firm performance and regional development objectives. Enterprises
requesting a foreign share listing are also required to obtain approval from the Ministry of
Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation (MOFTEC). Once an enterprise is approved for
listing by its regional government (and MOFTEC), final approval is virtually automatic.

3 The Model
In an attempt to make sense of the above observations, we develop a simple model of a
one-period economy which consists of a home country (domestic) and the rest of the world
(foreign). The economy produces a single tradeable good." The home country is open
asymmetrically: it welcomes foreign investments, but prevents domestic individuals from
owning foreign assets12
The home country has two real sectors: a state-owned sector consisting of S enterprises

initially owned by the government, and a nonstate sector. Each firm is represented by an
investment project. Let K8 denote the investment in state enterprise s and KN the investment
in nonstate enterprises. The random ex post sizes of these firms are then 95K8 and O,K,v.
where f and 9N are normally distributed.
The government controls a variety of policies. To begin with, the government sets the
interest rate r on bank deposits and government bonds. The government also controls the
number of shares in each state firm that can be purchased by either domestic investors (Ashares) or foreign investors (B-shares).
We assume that the foreign market offers a riskiess asset with a return r. It also offers a
diversified portfolio of risky assets, including investments in all countries other than China.
Let * denote the random returns on this diversified portfolio. Foreign individuals have free
'°Yuan is the basic monetary unit of China's currency, renminbi. In December 1993. the swap market
exchange rate was US$1 = 8.70 yuan.
"To begin with, we assume a fixed exchange rate between the domestic and the foreign currenc . We will
discuss the implications of exchange rate risk below.
'2See below for a discussion of when this restriction would be chosen.

6

access to the foreign market. Domestic individuals are barred from owning foreign assets.
The government itself, however, has access to the riskiess asset in the foreign market.
Both the government and the individuals are rational and risk averse. Each individual
maximizes his own expected utility of wealth, taking as given the various policies chosen by
the government. The government's objective is to maximize a standard type of social welfare
function equal to the sum of the expected utilities of domestic residents plus the expected
welfare from government revenue. In choosing policies, the government uses individuals
optimal portfolio choices to forecast how savings and asset prices will be influenced by its
policies. Below we use backward induction to characterize the equilibrium. We start with
individuals' portfolio choices and derive domestic and foreign demands for the equity of
Chinese state enterprises, for any given set of policy choices for the government. We then
solve for the optimal policies of the government.

3.1 Domestic Individuals
At the beginning of the period, each individual decides how to divide his initial wealth W
between the domestic riskiess asset, D, risky investment in the nonstate sector. KA,. and
risky investment in equity (A-shares) of each state enterprise s, KA5. The individuals budget
constraint is
K,, + D1 + P'AKAZ =

1)

where PA = (PAl.... PAS) is the vector of prices per share of state enterprises in the Ashares market, and KA = (KAII,... , KA) is the vector of corresponding shares owned by
individual i. His uncertain end-of-period wealth is

= (1 + r)D + ONKN +

(2)

where 0s is a vector of random returns. The domestic individual chooses KN and KA.
allowing D1 to adjust according to the budget constraint, so as to maximize the following
expected utility function:

EU(W) =

e_hj(EW,_5hVar)]

7

(3)

Here h is individual i's constant—absolute—risk—aversion parameter, and E is an expectation
operator. The resulting first order conditions can be expressed as:
EON — (1

+ r) = hiCov(ON, i')

EO — (1 + '-)PA = hCov(9s, W)

(4)
(5)

The individual invests up to the point where the expected excess return on each risky asset
equals the risk premium.
Dividing both sides of (4) by h, substituting in (2), and summing over i, we can derive
the aggregate investment in the nonstate sector as

KN = h'aT2 [EiT — (1 + r) —

hCov(ON, OS)KA]

(6)

KA is the aggregate demand for A-shares, h1 =
where KA
hf'. and o =
Var(ON). Here h can be interpreted as the individuals' aggregate absolute risk aversion. The
optimal investment is proportional to the risk-adjusted excess return from the investment.
Dividing both sides of (5) by h, summing over i, and then substituting in (2) and (6).
we can solve for the market clearing prices for A-shares:
PA

—

SN

——
1

r (ss — ESNaN2NS) KA

(7)

where 13sN = Cov(Os, ON)/a, is the vector of A-shares' betas relative to the available non= Var(Gs) and EsN = Cov(s, 9iv) = Evs. It can easily be verified that
state asset,
ss — sNa2vs = Var(Os — /3s'ON) = Var(sION) is a positive definite square matrix.

This implies that the demand curve for each A-share stock is downward sloping: investors
must be offered a lower price to induce them to invest further in a particular A-share stock.
In (7), the risk discount on the price of each A-share can be decomposed into two parts.
The first part is represented by the second term. Here, SN is a measure of the risk from
owning A-shares arising from their covariance with the return on the available nonstate share.
The first two terms in (7) thus measure the maximum price that a domestic individual is
willing to pay for the first share of each state enterprise. The third term in (7) measures the
additional risk discounts on A-share prices for that component of the risk from A-shares that
is uncorrelated with the return on the nonstate shares.

8

3.2 Foreign Individuals
Each foreign individual j starts with wealth W. He must decide how to allocate his wealth
between the foreign riskiess asset, D, a diversified portfolio of foreign equity, K, and ownership shares of each state enterprise s listed on the domestic B-shares market, KB5. His
budget constraint equals

D;+K;+PKB=w;

(8)

P)

where PB = (PB1.... ,
is the vector of share prices of state enterprises in the B-shares
market. The individual's end of period random wealth is thus

W=(1+r*)D+9*K7+OFSKBj

(9)

Foreign investors thus face a problem similar to that of the domestic investors. Under
the analogous assumptions about the utility function as above, it easily follows that the
market—clearing price for B shares equals

PB

—

SF

(;

— — +r* (ss — ESFF2EFS) KB
1

(10)

where 135F = Cov(Os, 0*)/Var(6*) is the vector of B-shares' betas relative to the international

market portfolio. f is a measure of the aggregate absolute risk aversion of foreign investors.
before. the first two terms represent the maximum price
and SF Cov(05. 6*) =
that a foreign individual is willing to pay for the first B-share, while the last term measures
the costs of bearing the added risks from further investments in B-shares.
While the equations determining the two sets of market clearing prices, PA and PB. have
the same functional forms, the parameters are very different. Because of these differences in
the demand functions between foreign and domestic investors for shares in state enterprises.
the government will have an incentive to segment the market in order to price discriminate.

's As

3.3 Government
At the beginning of the period, the government is endowed with liquid assets L and 100
ownership of the state sector with an initial capitalization K0. To finance the expansion
of state enterprises, the government can invest its liquid assets, issue domestic debt D at
the riskless rate r, issue foreign debt D* at the riskiess rate r, and issue new equitY shares

9

of each of the state enterprises, KA and KB. Let K denote the aggregate new investment
in each of the firms in the state sector. Then the amount of foreign borrowing required to
balance the government's budget is

D*=t!SK_L_D_PFAKA_PKB,

(11)

where ts is a vector of ones of length S.
Equilibrium in the domestic riskiess asset market implies that the supply of domestic debt
must equal the demand:

D=EWi_KN_PKA

(12)

Equilibrium in the stock market implies that the supply of shares must equal demand. so

KA = K2 and KB =

K.

The government's wealth at the end of the period is

WE _(l+r*)JY_(1+r)D+Is(K_KA_KB+Ko)
= (O — (1 + r*)t)KG + (1 + r*)L +
+ (TX — r)D + (1 + r*)[(P/ — t)KA + (P — L's)KBJ

(13)

where (13) is obtained by substituting in (11), and where KG K — KA — KB measures the
new investment whose return accrues to the government. The first term in (13) measures
the government's investment income net of its opportunity cost of funds. (1 + TX). fl the
international financial market. The second and third terms in (13) measure the value of the
government's endowments at the end of the period. The last two terms can be interpreted
as the implicit taxes that the government collects from domestic and foreign investors. The
implicit taxes collected from the domestic bond market are simply, (r* —r)D. The government
also collects implicit taxes from the equity market. Since a share is defined as a financial claim

to income generated by one yuan of capital investment in Chinese enterprises, the implicit
tax on any share equals P — 1.
We assume that the government maximizes the following social welfare function:

.XEU(W)+EUc(WG)

(14)

where EUG(WG) = _Ee_hG'G. Here, A measures the relative weight the government puts
10

on the utility residents receive from private consumption, relative to that received from
government expenditures.
In what follows, we first consider an interior Nash equilibrium in which both A-shares and
B-shares have positive net supply, and the government is a net borrower in the domestic bond
market, so that D > 0. We will then consider "corner solutions," and describe the conditions
under which the net supplies of enterprises' shares and government bonds are positive.
The government chooses its own new investment, KG, the riskless interest rate, r, and
the supply of shares, KA and KB, in order to maximize its expected utility, while allowing
the riskless borrowing in the international bond market, D*, to be determined by its budget.
The resulting first-order conditions are:
E05 — (1 + r*) = hGCov(6S, W)
—

(1

—

(15)

Acj) (D — (1 + r)AKA)

/

ap

PA+(1—)a2)—KA1— It\

= (r* —

(16

ôKj\ r — r
=ts
8KA) 1+r

(17)

PB+BKB=tS,

(18)

where c (hEU:(W))/(hGEUG(WG)) measures the ratio of the marginal utility of income
to individual i relative to the marginal utility of income to the government.
Equation (15), describing the optimal value of KG, takes a standard form. The expected
return on government investments in the state sector simply has to exceed the risk-free rate
of return available abroad by enough to compensate for the added risk.
In equation (16), describing the first-order condition for r. an increase in r implies an
implicit payment from the government to each individual in proportion to their existing bond
holdings, D. In addition, the resulting drop in market clearing prices for equity lowers the
payments from each individual to the government in proportion to their equity holdings KA,.
The welfare cost of the combined transfer is proportional to the difference in welfare weights
(1 — Ac) between the government and individual i. Offsetting these welfare costs, individuals

will reduce their investments in nonstate assets when r rises, providing an efficiency gain
proportional to the implicit tax rate (r* — r) on other assets.
This first-order condition can be rewritten as follows, using previous results:
—

r

+ (1 — h)(EON — 1
2—

11

—

hawW)

h(c./h)

where ah =
is the weighted average marginal utility of income weighting by the
inverse of each individual's risk aversion, w = (1 — a)/(1 — .\ckw), and cw =
cW/W
equals the weighted average marginal utility of income weighting by each individual's wealth.
Note that the expression (1 — Aaw) measures the net welfare gain from taking W/T4' from
each individual i and transferring it to the government. For simplicity in interpreting the
results. we will assume from now on that w = 1, which holds as long as individuals invest
equal fractions of their portfolios in each asset.13 Under this assumption, the optimal value
of r is a weighted average of r and EON — 1— hoW, with a higher weight on r* the more the
government cares about individual welfare. The expression EON — 1 —
measures the
risk adjusted rate of return in the nonstate sector if domestic individuals invest all of their
endowments in the nonstate sector. It therefore represents domestic individuals minimum
required rate of return for buying any bonds from the government. The government issues
bonds to domestic residents (D > 0) as long as this value is less than r.
Equations (17) and (18) equate the marginal revenues collected from selling an extra share
of the state sector in the A-shares and B-shares markets to the opportunity cost of funds
invested in the underlying capital. The extra term in equation (17) captures any changes in
D that occur as a result of selling more KA. If KN and each KA5 are perfect substitutes. so
that 3KN/aKAS = —1. then this added term disappears. If K falls by less. however, then
purchases of D fall when KA increases, causing a loss in government revenue.
Using equations (7) and (10) to determine the response of prices to new share issues.
equation (6) to determine the change in KN, and equation (19) to characterize the optimal
r. we can write the government's optimal share prices as

PA =

1

(Es—hWCov(s,p..j)
(1 —
I
1+T

2—)\ah \

p3 = .5 (E9

—

/3SF(EO

—

(1

+ T*))

1+r

+

)c,) +

1+r*

1+T Jj
j-s

(20)

(21)

LS)

The first term inside the large parentheses in each equation equals the maximum price that
domestic/foreign residents will pay for the first share in any firm, for domestic investors
when their portfolio is entirely invested in nonstate firms while for foreign investors when
their portfolio simply contains no equity in Chinese firms.'4 The second term inside the
13Note that w = 1 if aw = Qh This equality holds if hW1 = hW. Given this assumption, the government
cannot redistribute among individuals through changing relative asset prices.
"The maximum price for domestic residents can easily be confirmed by solving the investors' first-order
conditions for D and KA1, evaluated at D3 = 0 and KA1 = 0.

12

parentheses equals the revenue the government can earn instead by selling these investors a
riskiess bond and investing the proceeds abroad.

Clearly, the expressions for PA and PB are very different, so that the government in
general has an incentive to segment the two markets, as it has done. What can be said.
though, about the relative sizes of PA and PB?
One key expression affecting the optimal policies is (1 — )ah), which measures the social

gain from transferring a dollar from individuals (divided among individuals in proportion
to their wealth) to the government. When this expression is zero, so that the government
has no incentive to raise revenue from individuals, then it can quickly be shown that r =
and PA = ts are the optimal policies, so that there would be no distortions in the domestc
financial market. However, equation (21) remains unaffected, so that the government would
stil] take advantage of its market power when selling shares to foreign investors. Therefore.
when Aah = 1. we conclude that PB > PA, as long as there is any market abroad for Chinese
shares.
In contrast. when )¼ = 0, so that the government cares only about maximizing tax revenue.
then the equations provide a strong presumption that PA > PB. To begin with. now r <r.
so that the second terms in equations (20) and (21) support this forecast. In addition. foreign
investors have much more attractive outside options than do domestic investors. Even without
access to Chinese government bonds and stocks, foreign investors can still invest in bonds
and stocks anywhere else in the world, whereas Chinese investors can only invest in Chinese
nonstate firms. Therefore, there would be a strong presumption that the first terms in the
two equations. measuring the maximum price that each set of investors would pay for the
first share in state firms. also reenforce the forecast that PA > PB.
More formally. sufficient conditions can be derived as follows. Using the first-order condition for the investment by foreigners in foreign shares, the first term in equation (21) can
be shown to equal
E05 — fW*Cov(Os,OF)[(K*/W*)

+/35F(KB/W)]

1 + r*

(22)

Compare this expression with the first term in equation (20). To begin with, the denominator

is larger since r* > r. Plausibly, state firms have a higher covariance with the returns on
foreign firms than with the return on nonstate firms,'5 in itself reducing PB relative to PA.
In addition, it is standard to assume increasing relative risk aversion, so that fW* > hW.
'5Nonstate firms are typically small new entrants in the service or transportation sectors while both state
firms and foreign firms are typically large manufacturing enterprises.

13

further reducing PB. However, the final difference between the two equations, the term in
brackets in equation (22), should be less than one, pushing in the opposite direction. Since
only a trivial fraction of foreign assets are invested in China and since the net supply of
foreign bonds is zero, this expression should be very close to one, so not be sufficient to
outweigh the other differences between PA and PB. We then conclude that PA > PB when

=0.
Equations (20) and (21) also imply that PA will be more volatile than PB when .\ = 0.
In particular, new information affecting E85 will change PA by more than PB as long as
r < r*.
Under what conditions will the government choose to sell shares of formerly state-owned
enterprises? Combining equations (10) and (21), we solve for the optimal share issuance to
foreign investors,

KB

-

max IOs, {Var(sO*)][EOs SF(E6
2

- (1+

r*))

- (1+ r*)Ls]

(23)

where O is a vector of 0's of length S. We see that shares will be sold to foreigners if the
maximum price that foreigners are willing to pay for the first share in a firm, is greater than
the cost of the underlying capital, or
E05 — I3SF(E6 —
1 + r*

(1

+ r*))

>t

(24)

The difference between the maximum price and the underlying cost represents the gain from

trade between the government and foreign investors. Since the gain from trade is shared
equally between the two parties (see (21)), the government would choose to sell some shares
to foreign investors as long as the gain is positive. However, that the Chinese government
wants to invest in the firm does not necessarily imply that foreign investors are willing to pay
enough to cover investment costs, given the differences in the other risks that each faces. In
equilibrium, some state-owned enterprises may not be listed on the foreign exchange.
Similarly, we derive the optimal share issuance to domestic investors from (7) and (20) as

KA = max

I
c1Os,

In

[Var(Ost6N)]1[EOs-sN(E9N - (1+r*)) -(1
(2

—

Aah)h

+r*)ts]l

-

(2o

doing so, we find that PA are low enough to induce some purchases by domestic investors

14

as long as

E65 — 135N (EON (1 H- r*)) >

(26)

1 + r*

Comparing the left-hand expression here with that in (24), we find that shares are more likely

to be issued to domestic investors than to foreign investors if ,@SN <i3 SF and EON <E9.
There is a strong presumption that
I3SN

—

Cov(s,O*)

Cov(8s,ON)
2
aN

2

—

(27)

As argued above, the return on state firms are likely to be more correlated with the returns on
foreign firms than with those on nonstate firms. In addition, the variability of an investment

in nonstate firms is likely to be higher than that of an investment in a portfolio of foreign

firms.'6 Together, these imply that SN <SF.
We also expect that EON < EO. Domestic investors face a lower opportunity cost of
funds than foreign investors, r vs. r*, so would be willing to invest in lower return projects.
That domestic residents invest a much smaller fraction of their assets in nonstate firms than
foreign investors do in foreign firms also suggests that the expected return is less attractive.
In equilibrium, some firms will be listed on both domestic and foreign exchanges. For
these firms. a comparison of (23) and (25) reveals that we cannot ascertain theoretically
whether more shares would be floated on foreign or domestic market. On the one hand. we
expect that f <h and Var(OS6*) <Var(Os ION) which would raise KB relative to K4. On
the other hand, we expect that I3SF > I3SN and EO* > EON, which would lower KB relative
to KA.
A graphical interpretation of the analysis is presented in Figure 4, where a single firm is
dual-listed on both domestic (A-share) and foreign (B-share) exchanges. The domestic investors' demand curve, depicted in the left panel, starts from at a higher level and drops more
quickly as the supply of shares increases, than does the demand curve of foreign investors.17
The underlying cost of capital, which equals 1, is represented by the horizontal line v = 1.
In this example, both domestic and foreign markets for the firm's shares exist. By segment'6Nonstate firms are mostly recent start-ups, and start-ups face much higher risks than ongoing firms.
In addition, holdings of nonstate firms will not be well diversified, if only due to government restrictions
preventing their being listed on the exchanges. The diversification available abroad can substantially lower
the variability of investments in a portfolio of foreign shares.
'7The relative levels of the intercepts are implied by our assumptions about the maximum prices that
domestic vs. foreign investors are willing to pay for a share, while the relative slopes are implied b' our

assumption that Var(Os*) <Var(8sN),
15

ing the two markets, the government sets the optimal price for each market by equating its
marginal revenue for selling shares in that market to the underlying cost of capital. Since
their demand curve is steeper and starts at a higher level, domestic investors pay a higher
share price than foreign investors. However, because the domestic demand curve is steeper
than the foreign demand curve, the government may well choose to issue fewer shares to
domestic than to foreign investors.

So far, the government has been assumed to have no control over the nature of the
investments available to domestic residents in the nonstate sector. The government may
have

many indirect means of affecting these investments, however. For example. it can raise
a by making trade in nonstate shares more difficult. It can also reduce EON by making it
difficult for nonstate firms to gain access to bank loans, land, electricity, and other inputs
controlled by the government. It may also be able to restrict explicitly the amount of nonstate
investment that occurs, in the limit banning nonstate activity entirely as it did prior to the
reforms.

If A =

0,

the model does imply that the government would want to ban all nonstate

investments

it can then simply seize the wealth of domestic residents. As A increases, the
extent of restrictions should ease. The most efficient restrictions would limit the amount of
investment, without affecting the efficiency of the investment that does occur. Remaining
wealth is then entirely "capitive." However, if the government can only affect nonstate investments indirectly, by reducing the expected return or raising the risk of nonstate investments.
these interventions would still be used unless A is large enough.
To see this, note from (19) that these policy changes reduce the optimal domestic interest
rate. so raise the implicit tax rate on domestic individuals. From (26) we also see that these
policies increase the optimal number of state firms sold to domestic investors as long a.s
/3SN > 0 and EON > (1 + r*). In addition, if 8Var(OsIOjv)/5a = 0, these policies raise the
optimal share issuance for all listed firms in the domestic market, further enlarging the tax
base. These policies thus unambiguously raise implicit tax rates and enlarge the tax base by
making the non-taxed investment alternatives less attractive to domestic investors. Due to
market segmentation, these policies have no impact on foreign investors. Individuals obviously
lose both directly from the restrictions on nonstate activity and indirectly from the resulting

changes in implicit tax rates. To the extent that the government cares about domestic
individuals' welfare (A > 0), it would set these policies optimally to balance the marginal
gains in tax revenue against the marginal excess burden borne by domestic individuals. If
Aaw = 1, however, the government simply wants to maximize efficiency, so would impose no
restrictions on nonstate activity.
16

So far, we have also assumed that the real exchange rate between domestic and foreign
currencies is fixed and that the Chinese government pays no risk premium for international
borrowing. How do our results change when exchange and sovereign risks are taken into
account?
Because of capital controls and market segmentation, domestic individuals' portfolio
choice decisions will not be affected by these risks. The demand functions for domestic
equity and government bonds derived in Section 3.1 remain valid.
Foreign investors, however, now face exchange rate risk from owning Chinese shares.
Consequently, foreign investors in firm s in China earn a random real return per-share of
9, denominated in foreign currency, where the difference between O and O is the random
appreciation of the yuan relative to the dollar during the period. Exchange rate risk increases
the variance of Chinese stocks for foreign investors, given the presumption that poor firm

performance is associated with a depreciation of the currency. From (10), we find that
exchange rate risk lowers the maximum price that foreigners are willing to pay for Chinese
equity to the extent that Cov( — 9, 9') > 0, and makes foreign demand more inelastic since
Var(G — 6s16*) > 0. As a result, both the optimal price and the optimal foreign holdings of
Chinese equity fall due to exchange rate risk.
Exchange rate risk also affects the cost to the Chinese government of borrowing abroad.
Given that its debt has been denominated in the foreign currency, the size of the repayment
in RMB the government needs to make is now random. If this random repayment is denoted
by i, then the net cost of foreign debt now equals E* — hGCov(7*, We). If the exchange
rate tends to depreciate when the Chinese economy is doing badly, then the covariance is
negative, raising the cost of foreign funds.
Sovereign risk, however, has an offsetting effect. To the extent that China defaults on its
foreign debt when conditions are bad enough, then the covariance of the actual repayment
with IG becomes less negative, and may even change sign. Effects of exchange rate risk and
sovereign risk together on the cost of foreign borrowing are therefore ambiguous.
So far, we have also assumed that Chinese residents are not allowed to invest abroad in
either foreign bonds or foreign equity. Consider the impact on the government's objective
function if domestic residents were allowed to invest a unit of wealth in foreign bonds. This
investment would replace a unit of investment in domestic bonds, and leave unaffected the
amount invested in equity in either nonstate or state firms, given constant absolute risk
aversion. The resulting gain in social welfare arising from the increase in individual utility
would equal Aa,(r* — r), while the loss in government revenue would equal (r* — r). As long
as 1 > )aw, so that the government prefers to transfer revenue from individuals to itself. it
17

will try to prevent domestic residents from purchasing foreign bonds.
The case for banning purchases of foreign equity is less clear. While individuals gain from
the expanded investment opportunities, government revenue falls due to the "capital flight."
If A = 0, so that the government is only concerned about maximizing government revenue.
then it would clearly choose to ban such investments abroad. In contrast, if Aaw = 1, so that
the government cares only about efficiency, then it would want to give domestic residents the
opportunity to diversify their portfolios by investing abroad. As A increases, restrictions on
investments in foreign shares should gradually ease.

4 Discussion
If the types of restrictions on the financial market observed in China are consistent with the
government maximizing some measure of social welfare, why are many of these restrictions
so unusual? One explanation implicitly given above is that the Chinese government may
put an unusually small weight on the welfare of domestic residents, so be willing to impose
larger efficiency costs at the margin in order to raise an additional unit of government revenue
than other governments are. Probably a more important explanation, however, is that these
restrictions take a different form in other countries.
In particular, many of the restrictions within the model would be perfect substitutes for
standard types of tax policies. Consider, for example, the impact of imposing a tax on interest
income from bonds at rate t, so that r*(1 — t) = r. With this tax in place. the government
can issue domestic bonds with an interest rate equal to the international rate. r. and still
maintain the same allocation described above. If the tax can be imposed on purchases of
foreign bonds as well, then there would be no need to prevent domestic residents from buying
foreign bonds.
Similarly, consider the implications of imposing a corporate income tax at rate r on the
earnings of state firm s. If 1 — = 1/PAS, then the government can maintain the desired
allocation while eliminating all restrictions on new share issues, so that the market clearing
price of new shares simply equals the opportunity cost of the underlying capital. To see this.

note first that equation (5) remains satisfied at the previous allocation, except that each
individual will now need to purchase KA3/(1 — r) shares in order to replicate the amount
of risk borne in the optimal allocation found above. The government, however, now bears
the added risk from the random tax revenue TSOSKAS. If K falls by rKA/(1 — r5) to
compensate, so that the government bears the same risk as before, then it is straight-forward
to check that government revenue, as described in equation (15). is entirely unchanged by
18

this shift from regulations to taxes. The previously optimal allocation remains feasible, and
is still optimal.

Note that when the optimal PAs varies by firm, so does the optimal tax rate r5. In
particular, as seen in equation (20), the government should charge a lower price for shares
(or impose a lower tax rate) on firms whose returns have a higher covariance with the return
from the nonstate sector. For these firms, given that nonstate firms are a closer substitute.
taxes create a larger behavioral response and so a larger excess burden at the margin.'8
For example, in most countries the main untaxed sector analogous to the nonstate sector is
owner-occupied housing. In this context, our results imply that the effective tax rate on firms
providing rental housing should be lower than that on other types of firms.
Similarly, charging a price P25 for shares in firm s sold to foreign investors is equivalent
to imposing a tax rate
on the profits of these firms. Our results on the relative sizes of
PA and P2 can then be reinterpreted to describe the differences in the optimal tax rates on
firms owned by domestic vs. foreign investors.
The government's inability within the model to gain revenue from investments in the
nonstate sector is equivalent to the assumption that this sector cannot be taxed. Small firms
are difficult to tax in all countries, given that there is no effective outside monitoring of
their cash flows. While we have made the extreme assumption that these firms are entirely
untaxed. the qualitative story would remain the same even if they could be taxed. but at a
lower effective rate than applies to state firms.
Within our model, the Chinese policy of charging domestic residents a higher price than
foreign residents for equity shares is equivalent to imposing a higher tax rate on profits
received by domestic residents than foreign residents, This pattern of relative tax rates is in
fact quite common, though it is by no means universal. In the U.S., for example. corporate
profits are subject to the same corporate tax rate regardless of who owns the profits. Both
domestic and foreign residents also face further U.S. taxes on the dividends and capital gains
that are derived from these profits. However, foreign owners of U.S. equity normally face
much lower U.S. tax rates on dividends and capital gains than do U.S. owners.19
In contrast, a number of countries have dividend imputation schemes that provide for a
rebate to domestic residents for some or all of the corporate taxes paid on income distributed
as dividends. These rebates are rarely available to foreign investors. With the rebate. the
18See Piggott and Whalley (1996) for a similar argument, dealing with the taxation of substitutes for home
production.
19Tax rates on foreign residents vary by the nationality of the investor, due to the wide variety of provisions

in bilateral tax treaties. Commonly the tax rate on dividends and capital gains is set at 15%, which is the
lowest statutory personal tax rate. See Hines and Willard (1992) for further information.

19

combined personal and corporate taxes faced by domestic residents can easily be less than
those faced by foreign residents, implying a pattern of rates quite different from that observed
in China.
One natural explanation for the differing relative tax rates on domestic vs. foreign investors is differences in the ease with which domestic investors can evade domestic taxes on
their capital income by investing abroad. China bans such investments abroad. A number of
developed countries have also imposed analogous restrictions on domestic residents, hindering if not banning their investments abroad. Gordon and Jun (1993), provide evidence that
taxes on the dividend income received by domestic residents tend to be very high in countries
where such controls are in place, and that they drop dramatically when these controls are
removed. For example. Australia, France, Italy, Japan, and Sweden all had some form of
capital controls during the 1980's, all these countries have since eliminated these controls.
and in each case tax rates fell shortly thereafter.
Even if the Chinese use of a higher tax rate on domestic than on foreign investors is not
uncommon, their use of restrictions on the financial market rather than tax policy to raise
revenue is very unusual. Why? The administrative costs in China of raising revenue from
shareholders is almost surely much lower when regulations rather than taxes are used
monitoring the amount of new share issues is much easier than monitoring financial profits
period by period. However, rationing of new share issues is equivalent to corporate income
taxes only under very restrictive assumptions. In particular, the government receives the
revenue in both cases only if it owns the new shares that are issued, so can treat the increased
price as government revenue. If the government did not own all the firm's shares when the
policy is decided on, then existing owners receive a capital gain when restrictions on new share
issues are employed, yet they would suffer a capital loss if new taxes were instead imposed.2°
As a result. the more shares that are owned privately, the more attractive taxes will appear
relative to regulations.21 Corporate income taxes also have administrative advantages when
the government taxes the labor income of residents, since the corporate tax discourages
individuals from reclassifying their labor income as corporate income in order to avoid labor
income taxes.22

In summary, the model in this paper suggests that the types of restrictions that China
20The capital gain with regulations comes at the expense of investors who hope to be buying shares in the
future, while the capital loss with taxes reflects the added tax revenue received from taxing existing as well
as new investments.
21This reflects, however, a time inconsistency in optimal policies, since taxes and regulations are equivalent
if fully anticipated.
22See, for example, Gordon and Slemrod (forthcoming) for evidence.

20

has imposed on its financial market, leading to segmented markets with much higher prices
for shares owned by domestic than by foreign investors, are consistent with its maximizing

a standard type of social welfare function. These restrictions are equivalent to imposing
taxes on firm income, and imply a pattern of relative tax rates that is broadly consistent
with those observed in many other countries. However, the use of implicit taxation through
regulatory restrictions, rather than use of explicit taxes, is much more unusual and likely to
be a temporary phenomenon.

References
Bailey. W. (1994). Risk and return on China's new stock markets: Some preliminary evidence.
Pacific-Basin Finance Journal 2: 243—260.

Bailey, W. and Jagtiani, J. (1994). Foreign ownership restrictions and stock prices in the
Thai capital market, Journal of Financial Economics 36: 57—87.
Domowitz, I., Glen, J. and Madhavan, A. (1997). Market segmentation and stock prices:
Evidence from an emerging market, Journal of Finance 52(3): 1059—85.

Errunza. V. and Losq. E. (1985). International asset pricing under mild segmentation: Theory

and test. Journal of Finance 40:

105—24.

Errunza, V. and Losq, E. (1989). Capital flow controls, international asset pricing, and
investors' welfare: A multi-country framework, Journal of Finance 44: 1025—37.

Eun. C. S. and Janakiramanan. S. (1986). A model of international asset pricing with a
constraint on the foreign equity ownership, Journal of Finance 41: 897—9 14.
Fernald. J. and Rogers, J. H. (1998). Puzzles in the Chinese stock market. Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System, International Finance Discussion Papers Number 619.
Giovannini, A. and de Melo, M. (1993). Government revenue and financial repression. Artierican Economic Review 83: 953—63.

Gordon, R. G. and Varian, H. R. (1989). Taxation of asset income in the presence of a world
securities market, Journal of International Economics 34: 2107—2138.

Gordon, R. H. and Jun, J. (1993). Taxes and the form of ownership of foreign corporate
equity, in A. Giovannini. R. G. Hubbard and J. Slemrod (eds), Studies in International
Taxation, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp. 13—44.
21

Gordon, R. and Slemrod, 3. (forthcoming). Are 'real' responses to taxes simply income
shifting between corporate and personal tax bases?, in J. Slemrod (ed.), Atlas Shrugged.

Hietala, P. T. (1989). Asset pricing in partially segmented markets: Evidence from the
Finnish market, Journal of Finance 44: 697—718.

Hines, J. R., Jr. and Willard, K. L. (1992). Trick or treaty? bargains and surprises in
international tax agreements.
International Finance Corporation (1999). Emerging stock markets factbook.
Li. W. (1998). Optimal financial repression: Theory and evidence from China. Duke University.

Piggott. 3. and Whalley. 3. (1996). The tax unit and household production. Journal of
Political Economy 104:

398—418.

State Statistical Bureau (1997). China Statistical Yearbook 1997, China Statistical Publishing
House.

Stulz. R. M. (1981). On the effects of barriors to international investment. Journal of Finance
36: 383—403.

Stulz. R. M. and Wasserfallen, W. (1995). Foreign equity investment restrictions, capital
flight, and shareholder wealth maximization: Theory and evidence. Review of Financial
Studies 8: 1019—1057.

Su. D. (1997). Ownership restrictions and stock prices: Evidence from Chinese markets.
University of Akron.

World Bank (1995). China: The emerging capital market—volume II: Detailed technical
analysis, Report 14501-CHA, World Bank.
World Bank (1997). Old Age Security: Pension Reform in China, China 2020, World Bank.
Washington D.C.

22

/

/

Ex Post foreign borrowing cost(one ,var)

1
\\

\

I

Domestic one-)ear deposit rate

Year-on-year growth rate of the CPI

Figure 1: Comparing one-year domestic deposit rate and the government's cx post foreign borrowing cost with domestic
inflation rate, 1987-98. The government's ex post foreign borrowing cost is constructed as the sum of the Euro-currency
US$ one-year interest rate (ECUSD1Y in Datastream) and the cx post 12-month ahead depreciation rate of the yuan
relative to the U.S. dollar. Data source: Datastream.

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

——--.,

Jul-93

,

Jan-94

Jul-94

Jan-95

Weighted average price ratio (left scale)

Jul-95

Jan-96

Jul-96

Jan-97

Jul-97

Sample size (right scale)

Jan-98

Weighted average price ratio (left scale)

Jul-98

0

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

160

180

200

Figure 2: Weighted average premium of A-shares prices over the correspondingB-shares prices. Market value of tradeable
shares in each firm was used as the weighting variable. The maximum sample contains 98 dual-listed firms. The number
of (lilal—listed firms grew from 19 in January 1993 to 98 in November 1998. Data source: Datastream and China Securities
Regulatory Corninission.

Jan-93

0

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

500

450
400

SlwaI A-ifs,..

350

gx (2P21/92=1 00)

300

250

200

150
SMn

100

8-ifsrss puce frdsx (2/21/92=100)

50

0
1/1/92

9/1/92

5/1/93

1/1/94

9/1/94

5/1/95

1/1/96

9/1/96

5/1/97

1/1/98

9/1/98

250

Sf., thin A-sfs. ics Wd.x (10/5/92=100)

200

150

100

50
8hsnsn B-sfwss pfle. dsx (10/5/92100)

0
9/1/92

5/1/93

1/1/94

9/1/94

5(1/95

1/1)96

9/1)96

5/1/97

1/1/98

9/1/98

Figure 3: A-shares and B-shares price indices (daily) in SHSE and SZSE. Source: Datastream.

25

PA(KA)

V

=1

K

PB

P

BKB

Figure 4: Stock market equilibrium under price discrimination. The underlying cost of capital, which equals 1, is represented by the horizontal line v 1. Domestic investors' demand curve, depicted in the left panel, starts from at a higher
level and drops more quickly as the supply of shares increase. By segmenting the two markets, the government sets the
optimal price for each market by equating its marginal revenue from selling shares in that market to the underlying cost
of capital.

PA

P

