                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                  EQUITY AND RESOURCES:
                                 AN ANALYSIS OF EDUCATION
                                     FINANCE SYSTEMS

                                           Raquel Fernández
                                           Richard Rogerson


                                          Working Paper 7111
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w71 11

                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 1999




We wish to thank Richard Romano and Eli Berman and seminar participants at the University of Iowa,
University of Michigan, Boston University, and NYU as well as at the NBER Public Economics Conference
on Education Finance and the Florida University Conference on Education Policy, for helpful comments.
Both authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from their respective NSF grants and the first author
also thanks the CV Starr Center for support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©   1999 by Raquel Fernández and Richard Rogerson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Equity and Resources: An Analysis
of Education Finance Systems
Raquel Fernández and Richard Rogerson
NBER Working Paper No. 7111
May 1999
JELNo. H4,12

                                           ABSTRACT

       Over the last few decades many US states have made large changes to their systems of
financing K-12 education with the explicit objective of providing more equitable educational
opportunities. There has been relatively little accompanying analysis, however, examining how these
changes might affect the total sum of resources dedicated to education and whether indeed increased
equality is a likely outcome. We analyze five different education finance systems: local, State,
foundation, power equalizing with recapture (PER) and power equalizing without recapture (PEN).
       We find that finance systems can have very large effects on both resources devoted to
education and equity. Our calibration suggests that total spending on education may differ by as
much as 25% across systems. The trade-off between equity and resources, however, is not monotone.
Although spending in a local system is typically greater than that in either the State system or PER,
total spending is typically highest for the foundation and PEN systems, both of which reduce
inequality of educational resources substantially relative to a local system.
        We also rank systems in welfare terms by carrying out an expected utility calculation. We
find that PER consistently ranks best, though it provides fewer resources to education than the
foundation and PEN systems, and falls well short of the state system in terms of equity. Additionally,
we find that the PER system is remarkably popular among these alternative finance systems--we
prove analytically that for an important subset of preferences PER will win in majority voting
comparisons with each of the other systems.


Raquel Fernández                                          Richard Rogerson
Dept. of Economics                                        Dept. of Economics
New York University                                       University of Pennsylvania
New York, NY 10003                                        Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER                                                  rogerson@econ.sas.upenn.edu
fernande@fasecon.econ.nyu.edu
1. Introduction
Publicly financed education is a pervasive feature of modern economies. Even a
casual look at education spending patterns across either states within the US or
across countries, however, reveals substantial variation in both spending on public
education and its distribution across students. This may be thought to be in large
part a result of the rules which impact on education spending—what we will call
the education finance system.
     Education finance systems differ significantly across states within the US as
well as across countries, and are the subject of much controversy. Over the last few
decades many US states have made dramatic changes to their systems of financing
K-12 education with the explicit objective of providing more equitable educational
opportunities. There has been relatively little accompanying analysis, however,
examining how these changes might affect the total sum of resources dedicated to
education and whether indeed increased equality is a likely outcome.
     Central to understanding how a school finance system affects the sum and
distribution of education resources is an analysis of the mechanisms through which
it transfers resources across individuals and distorts incentives to devote funds to
education. The objective of this paper is to study these mechanisms in a simple
general equilibrium model and to perform a calibration exercise to assess their
quantitative significance. In order to do so we use a standard model of local
public finance in which there are a large number of families that are heterogeneous
with regard to income and are perfectly sorted into homogeneous communities.
The education finance system sets down the rules that govern how revenues are
raised and distributed across communities for education spending. A defining
characteristic of our approach is that the key parameters of the education finance
system are determined by a political economy system—in our case, by majority
vote. This model seems the natural starting point for a comparison of systems.
Its simplicity allows us to highlight the basic forces at work, yet is also hopefully
rich enough to incorporate many of the elements essential to the issue.
   The paper examines the implications of several prototypical education finance
systems for resources devoted to education, their distribution across children, and
welfare. Some of the questions we ask include, What are the trade-offs across
systems between equity and efficiency? Is there a systematic relationship between
resources devoted to education and equity? Which groups benefit and which lose
when one system is adopted over another?
   We analyze five different finance systems: local, State, foundation, power
equalizing with recapture and power equalizing without recapture. A system of
pure local finance involves no transfers of resources across districts; each district
determines its own level of spending on education. In a pure State system, all stu-
dents receive equal funding and districts are not allowed to increase spending over
that level. A foundation system offers all districts a guaranteed minimum amount
of support per student, but allows individual districts to tax themselves should
they wish to supplement this guaranteed amount. In a power equalizing system
with recapture (PER), districts use a common tax base to generate revenues for
education. Hence, a given tax rate generates the same revenue for all districts,
independent of the district's underlying characteristics. In a power equalizing sys-
tem without recapture (PEN), districts with tax bases that exceed the specified
common base use their own higher base to generate revenue for education.
    We find that finance systems can have very large effects on both resources
devoted to education and equity. Our calibration suggests that total spending on
education may differ by as much as 25% across systems. The trade-off between
equity and resources, however, is not monotone. While spending in a local system
is typically greater than that in either the State system or in the power equalizing
system with recapture, total spending is typically highest for the foundation and
power equalizing without recapture systems, both of which reduce inequality of
educational resources substantially relative to a local system.
    We also rank systems in welfare terms by carrying out an expected utility
calculation. Once again, the trade-off between total resources and equity is not
simple. We find that the power equalizing system with recapture is consistently
rated the best in this utility comparison, though it does not do as well in terms
of total resources compared to foundation and PEN systems, and falls well short
of the state system in terms of equity. Relative to a local system, PER offers
roughly the same total resources but brings about a large reduction in inequality.
Additionally, we find that the PER system is remarkably popular among these
alternative finance systems—we prove analytically that for an important subset of
preferences PER will win in majority voting comparisons with each of the other
systems.
    Our work is closely related to several papers. It builds directly on the work
initiated by Inman (1978) who was among the first to carry out a quantitative
comparison of education finance systems in the context of an explicit model. A
key difference between his work and ours is that his abstracted from political
economy issues. In using a political economy approach to contrast education
finance systems we continue the work begun in Fernandez and Rogerson (1995ab,

                                         2
1996, and 1998). Several others have also examined education finance issues
using a political economy approach. Glomm and Ravikumar (1992) and Silva
and Sonstelie (1995) contrast state and local finance systems, whereas Nechyba
(1996) and de Bartolome (1997) study foundation systems. Epple and Romano
(1996a) and Glomm and Ravikumar (1998) examine how private education affects
spending on public education.
    There is also a growing empirical literature devoted to examining how changes
in state-level education finance systems affect education spending, including Downes
and Shah (1994), Loeb (1998), Hoxby (1998), Evans, Murphy, Schwab (1997,
1998), Manwaring and Sheffrin (1997), and Card and Payne (1998). Hoxby's
work is perhaps most relevant since she also focuses on the mechanics through
which finance systems affect the incentives for individuals to spend on education.
Her analysis, however, uses a reduced form empirical approach to understand how
a given system with specified parameters will affect education spending. In con-
trast, our analysis stresses the general equilibrium interactions and the political
economy issues that determine the key parameter settings within a given finance
system. An advantage of the simplicity of our model is that it allows us to obtain
analytical results and to do welfare comparisons of the various systems. This
seems like an important first step before proceeding to ask how the incorporation
of different factors, undoubtedly. significant in reality, affect our results.
    Although their paper is not specifically on education finance, it is of interest to
contrast our results with Epple and Romano (1996b). They consider the provision
of a private good and examine three regimes: market provision only, government
provision only, and government provision supplemented by the private market
system. Although they have in mind a good such as health care which can be
provided by the government yet supplemented privately, their framework is similar
to ours. They assume that with any government intervention, majority vote
decides the level of the proportional tax used to finance the private good, as
do we. Thus, for the three systems in common in our analysis, we obtain the
same theoretical results. Our theoretical analysis adds to theirs by examining two
additional systems—PER and PEN—which are central to our welfare and majority
voting results. In addition we focus on the issue of equity and, most importantly,
we provide a quantitative assessment of the five systems.
    An outline of the paper follows. In Section 2 we provide analytical character-
izations of the five finance systems. Section 3 calibrates the model and provides
a quantitative comparison of these systems. Section 4 examines the robustness of
our onc1usions. Section 5 concludes.

                                          3
2. A Theoretical Analysis of Alternative Finance Systems
2.1. The Model
The analysis of the effects of different financing systems is a complex undertaking.
As noted previously, the impact of a particular education-finance system will in
general depend upon the details of the system's rules and their interaction with
the state and local tax systems, on the distribution of income, on the way in
which tax rates, spending, and other key variables are chosen, on the distribution
of employment, commercial property, and housing locations, etc. Here we choose
to abstract away from many of these important elements, in order to concentrate
primarily on the interaction of the financing system with the distribution of income
and the endogenous determination of the system's parameters.
    The model we present is extremely simple. The economy consists of a contin-
uum of agents, with population normalized to one, and with identical preferences
over a private consumption good c (the numeraire) and over the child's education,
q. These preferences are given by

                                          u(c)+v(q)                                         (2.1)
where u and v are both increasing and concave with u'(O) = v'(O) = 00.1
   In order to calibrate our model, we will need to specify preferences. We will
assume that these are given by
                                  CU
                                  — + A—       A > 0, a <0                                  (2.2)
                                  a
and when our more general preferences do not yield an unambiguous theoretical
result, we will refer to these.
    Agents are assumed to differ only in their initial endowment of income, y,
whose cumulative distribution is described by F(y), and whose mean, , is as-
sumed to be greater than its median, , i.e. F(t) > 0.5.
    The amount or quality of education received by a child is assumed to be solely
a function of spending (E) per student (N) which, without loss of generality, we
assume is linear, i.e.
    'With the appropriate (single-crossing) assumptions, our results can easily be extended to
more general preferences U(c, q), where U is strictly increasing and quasi concave. We present
the case of separable preferences as it simplifies the algebraic exposition. We indicate throughout
the assumptions required for the more general class of preferences.


                                                4
                                                                                         (2.3)
To focus the analysis on the different incentives associated with alternative school
financing schemes, we assume that peer effects and parental attributes do not af-
fect school quality.2 In order to further simplify matters, we restrict our attention
to proportional taxation of income.
    The consequences of a finance system are likely to depend on the degree of
sorting of individuals into different districts.3 We focus on one extreme (which
is standard in much of the public finance literature)—perfect sorting—which allows
us to abstract from issues of distribution within a community in order to focus
on distribution across communities. Thus, districts consist of individuals with
the same level of income, implying no disagreement at the district level over
the preferred levels of consumption and education. Each district i therefore is
associated with a level of income y2. We assume that all children attend public
schools in the district in which they live.
    With the exception of a pure local finance system, the remaining education
finance systems require the determination of key state level variables. For exam-
ple, a foundation grant system requires the foundation amount to be determined,
a state system requires that the level of funds devoted to education to be chosen,
and both power equalizing systems require the common base to be specified. At
a district level, how preferences vary across individuals is irrelevant in our model
since perfect sorting implies no disagreement over district level variables. At the
state level, however, different individuals will prefer different outcomes. Undoubt-
edly there is a complex political economy that aggregates individual preferences
into a collective outcome. We have very little faith, however, in our knowledge
and ability to model that reality. Instead, we follow what we consider to be a
useful tradition in political economy, and attempt to capture some component of
how heterogeneous preferences map into aggregate outcomes by assuming that
these variables are determined by majority vote. We think that this serves as a
useful benchmark.
   2Several authors have studied peer effects. See de Bartolome (1990) for a survey of the
empirical literature and a theoretical model incorporating peer effects. See also Benabou (1993,
1996), Durlauf (1995), Epple and Romano (1996a, 1998), and Caucutt (1997) for other studies
incorporating peer effects.
         Fernandez and Rogerson (1996, 1998b) and Fernandez (1997) for an analysis of local
public finance systems with heterogeneous communties.



                                               5
2.2. A Local Finance System
This is a system with no redistribution. Although currently no state has a purely
local system, local finance plays an important role in providing revenue for edu-
cation and it is of interest to understand the implications of this extreme system.
Furthermore, this system corresponds to Tiebout's (1956) model of public good
provision in which (static) efficiency is achieved by individuals who "vote with
their feet" so as to end up in homogeneous communities that tailor their provi-
sion of local public goods to exactly match the demands of their residents.4
    In a local finance system, each district chooses a tax rate t. to fund the entirety
of its education expenditures. Thus,


                                      qi =    try,                                        (2.4)
                                      c=      (1   —
                                                       t)y,
where t solves

                               max u((1 — t)y2)        + v(ty)                            (2.5)
Thus, each district's tax rate t is given by the first-order condition:

                               —u'(y2(1 — t2)) +     v'(ty) = 0                         (2.6)
that equates the marginal utility from consumption to that from education.
    It will be of interest further on to know how district tax rates depend on
income. Using the implicit function rule on (2.6) yields:

                                     dt UC — v"qj                                         27
                                     dy.     (u" + v")y
whose sign depends on u"cj — v"qj which, for the preferences specified in (2.2),
gives sgri(dt/dy) = sgn(-y — a). In our calibration we will focus our attention on
the case of a = 'y, which implies an invariant district tax rate with a local finance
system.5
   40f course, no such perfectly stratified equilibrium may be possible since lower-income indi-
viduals may wish to reside with higher-income individuals for redistributional reasons. Segrega-
tion into homogenous communities may be obtained, however, by zoning and other restrictions
(see Fernandez and Rogerson (1997a) and Hamilton(1975)).
         the case of non-separable preferences, the sign of dt/dy depends on the sign of      —



                                              6
2.3. A State Finance System
The extreme opposite of the local finance system is what we call the "State sys-
tem". Under this system all districts receive the same per capita revenue for
education and are restricted to using only these funds for education (equivalently,
one may think of this as a system with only one district). For those who argue
that equity is achieved only by providing equal resources for all children, this is
the natural system to consider.6
    Education spending is assumed to be financed by a proportional tax on income,
-r8, so that


                                      Cj   = (1—r)y2                                       (2.8)
                                              q=Y1a
We assume that r, is the outcome of majority vote (i.e. T must be preferred to
any other tax rate in a pair-wise comparison by at least 50% of the voters).
   To determine the majority-vote equilibrium value of the tax rate we need to
understand how individual preferences vary over this variable. An individual's
preferred tax rate is the solution to:

                                max n((1 — Y8)yj) + v(3i)                                  (2.9)
yielding the first-order condition

                             —u'((lTs)yi)yi + v'(r3)p = 0                  (2.10)
As indicated by (2.10), the State system changes the implicit relative price of
education from one to yj/i, i.e. the relative price now increases with individual
income.
   Note that individual preferences are single-peaked in r, ensuring the existence
of a majority-voting equilibrium. To determine the identity of the median (and
hence decisive) voter, we need to know how the preferred tax rate varies with
income. Using the implicit function rule on (2.10) yields:
Uqqq + Ucq (q — c).  For homothetic preferences (as in our calibration), this implies that the tax
rate is invariant across districts.
   6Caiifornia's landmark State Supreme Court ruling against the constitutionality of its previ-
ous (foundation) system in combination with Proposition 13 led to the adoption of this type of
system (see Fernandez and Rogerson (1995a) and Silva and Sonstelie (1995) for an analysis).


                                               7
                                      d-r3   —   ___________
                             dy u"y2 + v",u2
whose sign is that of —(u"c + u'). For the preferences specified in (2.2), this
expression is given by —ac1 which is positive given our assumption of a
o. Note that our assumption on preferences implies that indifference curves are
single-crossing in (, q) space and that the slopes of these curves are increasing in
income (henceforth we will use the acronym ISC to refer to this characteristic).
This turns out to be an extremely useful property. It implies that if an individual
with income j prefers a (T, q) bundle to another (T', q'), and if 'r > r' and q> q',
then all individuals with y > y2 prefer the first bundle as well. If, on the other
hand, the first bundle has a lower r and q, then all individuals with y <j prefer
it to (r', q'). Henceforth the assumption the preferences satisfy ISC (as they do
for the preferences specified in (2.2)) will be maintained.
    Thus, the equilibrium tax rate must satisfy (2.10) for the voter with the median
income level, i.e., yj = . The mediah voter's ability to tax mean income rather
than her own lower income implies that in equilibrium she (and all other agents
with income lower than the median) will obtain a greater q under a State relative
to a local system. This does not imply that these individuals are better off under a
State system, as the median voter will be imposing her own preferred (and higher,
given 2.2) tax rate rather than the rates preferred by lower-income individuals.
The median voter though, and by continuity those in some interval around the
median, will be better off. Another implication is that all individuals with income
higher than the mean will be worse off in a State relative to a local system. Not
only do these individuals not obtain their preferred tax rate, but they must also
tax a lower base than their own. Again, continuity implies that there will be an
interval of individuals with income lower than the mean that strictly prefer the
local system to the State finance system.

2.4. A Foundation System
Many state constitutions contain clauses requiring them to guarantee an "accept-
able" minimum level of education for all its residents. Foundation systems are
a natural attempt to deal with this responsibility. In this system districts are
   7For non-separable preferences, the sign of (2.11) is given by the sign of Uqc(l —r)p—U—Uc.
Requiring this to be positive is equivalent to requiring the slope of indifference curves (in (r, q)
space) to be increasing in income.


                                                  8
required to tax at some minimum level, Tf, in exchange for some guaranteed base
level of expenditures per student—the foundation grant f. We assume that this
tax is used to fund the foundation grant, yielding

                                            f=                                      (2.12)
   Unlike in the State system, however, a district can choose to augment its
education expenditures by further taxing its own district income. Thus, letting t2
denote the district level tax, we have:8


                                    C2   = (1 — t2 — Tf)yj                          (2.13)
                                    qi =     f+ty
    As in the State system, the foundation tax rate (and thus the foundation grant
level) is chosen by majority vote. We assume that tax rate decisions are made
in two stages. In the first stage, majority vote at the state level determines the
foundation tax. In the second stage, districts make their district tax choice.
    To solve for the equilibrium tax rates we start with the district tax decision.
Given a state-wide foundation tax rate outcome,       a district's preferred tax rate
is the solution to:

                max u((1 —          —                              t2 0
                               t2        1)y2) + v(Tfu + t2y2),                     (2.14)
yielding the first-order condition

                    —u'((l — t2 — -r1)y2)y2 + v' (r1ji +     ty)y 0                 (2.15)
with strict equality for t2 > 0.
   Next, we find the state-wide foundation tax by solving for an individual's
preferred tax rate as a function of individual income, i.e., we solve:

             rn u((1 — t(rf) — Tf)yj) + v(r1 + t(r1)y), Tf 0                        (2.16)
yielding the first-order condition:

                                     + v'ji + (—u' + v')y2t <0                      (2.17)
   8   de Bartolome (1997) for an alternative formulation of a foundation system.



                                                 9
which, using (2.15) gives:

                      —u'(l —   t   —
                                        Tf)yj)yj + v' (Yf /1 + ty)ji < 0                  (2.18)
with strict equality for r1 > 0.
     Note that if an individual's preferred foundation tax is positive (i.e. U1j =
v'ji), then (2.15) can only be satisfied for y2 < p. So, individuals with income
greater than the mean must have a preferred foundation tax rate of zero. A
similar argument can be used to show that all individuals with income lower than
the mean have a preferred district tax rate of zero (conditional upon obtaining
their preferred foundation tax rate).
    The intuition for the above results is clear: All individuals with income below
the mean prefer to finance their education entirely via the foundation grant (in
fact, these individuals' preferred foundation tax rate is the same as their preferred
tax rate under the state system). This redistributes from those with income above
the mean to those below the mean. Individuals with income greater than the
mean, on the other hand, prefer zero redistribution and to finance their education
solely via the district tax (i.e., their preferred foundation tax rate is zero and,
were they to obtain this tax, their district tax would be the same as under a local
system) Y
    The fact that preferred foundation tax rates are the same as preferred State
system tax rates for all individuals with income below the mean (and zero for all
those above the mean) implies that the median voter under a foundation system
is of lower income then the median voter in the State system; all individuals with
income greater than the mean have preferred tax rates of zero and for all others
the preferred foundation tax is increasing in income. Consequently, the median
voter in this system, y1, is determined by

                                    F(,a) — F(1)      = .5                                (2.19)
   Which system will generate greater expenditures on education—Foundation or
State? The foundation system clearly will have lower per capita state government
expenditures (i.e., foundation grant level) than under a State system, i.e., <r8.
This follows from the fact that the foundation median voter has lower income
than the State system medianvoter, implying a lower preferred tax rate on mean
        logic of this result does not depend on any particular specification of preferences.




                                               10
income.10 Thus, poorer individuals will have lower expenditures on education
under the foundation system. Total expenditures under the State system need
not be greater, however, since the foundation system allows topping up, which the
State system does not. Thus, a priori, which system dedicates greater resources
to education is ambiguous.
    To determine which individuals will choose to top up the equilibrium founda-
tion grant with district spending, note first that all individuals with income lower
than y will set t. 0. Furthermore, all individuals with y,          but smaller than
some level , find the foundation tax rate lower than what they would prefer but
nonetheless are unwilling to supplement the foundation grant with additional dis-
trict taxation (since for them u' > v'). Lastly, all individuals with income greater
than will set a positive district tax as given by (2.15) (with strict equality). The
income level     is implicitly defined by:
                                       —
                                           Tf)y) = v'(r1)                              (2.20)
where 'i-1 solves (2.18) (with strict equality) for y2 = jr.

Proposition 1. Topping up begins at an income level lower than the mean, i.e.,
y<I.L.

    Proof: In equilibrium, u'((1 — r1))           = v'(1). Now, for all y >         y, were
their expenditures on education solely the foundation grant, these individuals
would have u'(y(l — r1))y < v'(r1ii)i. Combining these two expression yields
u'(y(l — 7f))//L < u'((1 — r1)), which is feasible only if <
    Who prefers a foundation system to a State or local system? Individuals
with income below y7 (and an interval of individuals above this level) prefer the
foundation system to the State system. Both systems redistribute by taxing
mean income, but the foundation system has a state-level tax rate closer to their
preferred one since y < implies r <               r.
                                           The opposite preferences hold for
individuals with income in an interval around . All individuals with income
greater than the mean share the same preferences: they prefer the foundation
  1O fact, as demonstrated by Epple and Romano (1996b), independently of how preferred
tax rates vary with income, government expenditures will always be at least as large in a
government only system. In comparison with a State system, under a foundation system all
voters with income greater than the mean have a preferred tax of zero (i.e. lower than before),
whereas the preferences of all other individuals are unchanged. Thus, the median voter will
have either the same or a lower preferred tax rate.


                                             11
system as it imposes a lower state tax rate (i.e., less redistribution) than the
State system and allows them to top up. Below we show formally that a majority
of individuals prefer the foundation system to either local or State.
Proposition 2. A majority of individuals prefer a foundation to a State or local
system.
   Proof: Consider first the vote between a foundation and a State system. All
individuals with yj ,u strictly prefer a foundation system as it would allow
them to obtain the same q as under the state system but more cheaply given that
r <r and y. > t. Furthermore, all individuals with y2 yf strictly prefer the
foundation system, since by revealed preference yf prefers the bundle (-1-f, f) to
(r3, q8) and, given that the first bundle is smaller in both components than the
second, ISC implies that this ranking is shared by all individuals with income
lower than     Since 1 — F(i) + F(lf) .5, continuity of preferences and income
implies that more than 50% of the pqpulation prefers a foundation to State.
    Consider next the vote between a foundation and a local system. Note that
a possible outcome under a foundation system is r = 0, i.e., the equivalent of
a pure local system. Thus, the choice of a strictly positive in a foundation
system allows us to conclude that by revealed preference, a majority must strictly
prefer a foundation system to a local system.11 I

2.5. A Power Equalizing with Recapture System (PER)
Several court cases have challenged existing education finance systems by noting
that unequal district tax bases gives rise to unequal access to education, the equal-
ity of which they argue their State constitution guarantees. In particular, they
have argued that equal access to education cannot be obtained if districts that tax
at the same rate obtain unequal resources. Power equalizing systems, originally
introduced into the education finance debate by Coons et al. (1970), were the
natural outgrowth of this argument. These systems give districts access to the
same tax base. In this section we explore the implications of a power equalizing
system with recapture (PER henceforth) in which the tax base is determined en-
dogenously and all districts are required to tax this common base (unlike a system
without recapture, which we explore in the next section).
   In a PER system, each district finances education by taxing its own base at
some chosen rate t. The revenue generated by doing so is independent of the
  11See also Epple and Romano (1996b).

                                         12
district's tax base, however, and instead is determined by the level of the common
tax base ZR. Thus,

                                      qj = tjZR                             (2.21)
    The difference between aggregate expenditures on education and the amount
raised by each district is assumed to be funded by a state-wide tax TR on income.
Thus TR must satisfy:

                            TRI =
                                      f
with private consumption in each district given by:
                                                    —
                                                        y)f(y)di            (2.22)


                                           —        —
                                 Cj   (1       t2       TR)Yi               (2.23)
   Note that the state tax need not be positive (i.e., (2.22) may imply a negative
tax rate) since districts with income greater than ZR contribute a net positive
amount of t(y — ZR) to the funds available for other districts. This is slightly
problematic since it raises the issue (absent in other systems) of what should be
done with the potentially excess funds. One possibility is to redistribute these
funds in proportion to individual income. While we report on the result of such
a scheme further on, we were more persuaded by the alternative approach of
constraining individuals to tax bases that yield a non-negative TR• This has the
attractive feature of ensuring that the choice of tax base is not the result of the
desire to redistribute income for private consumption rather than for education
(the latter being the focus of our study), i.e., it ensures that individuals do not
choose a low tax base so as to obtain a negative state income tax rate. Hence, we
impose TR 0.
   As in the foundation case, we can think of choices being made in two stages.
In the first stage, agents vote on the level of the common tax base. In the sec-
ond stage, districts choose their tax rates. Thus, individuals face the following
maximization problem:

                         max u((1 —   t    —
                                                  + v(tZR)
                                               TR)Yj)                       (2.24)
                              s.t. (2.22) and TR 0
yielding, after some substitutions, the first-order conditions:

                      —u'((l —   ti — TR)Yi)Yi + v'(tZR)zR = 0              (2.25)

                                           13
                              v'(tjzR)[—zRr'R+tj] 0                           (2.26)
where (2.26) is a strict equality if YR> 0. The first equation gives an individual's
district income tax for any given tax base level.12 The second gives the individual's
preferred tax base level subject to the requirement that the state income tax
implied by that base be non-negative. Note that (2.26) incorporates information
obtained from (2.25) and that calculating r requires use of (2.22) and (2.25).
    Using the implicit function rule on (2.25) we can find how, for a given zR, the
district tax rate varies with income:

                                     !_
                                     dy
                                         —
                                             u"y? +   v"z
                                                                                          227
                                                                                           .


implying, as with the preferred state tax rate under the State system, that district
tax rates are increasing in income.
   We cannot guarantee that our pieferences are single peaked Ill ZR. We are
assured, nonetheless, of the existence of a majority vote equilibrium since prefer-
ences can be shown to be single crossing in (r, ZR) space. To see this, note that
the slope of an individual's indifference curves is given by
                                   d'r
                                  —Li = v'(tZR)t. > 0                                    (2.28)
                                  dzR            Uy
and differentiating (2.28) with respect to y yields after using (2.27), (2.25), and
some algebra:

                                           =                >0                           (2.29)
Thus any two indifference curves of any two individuals with different incomes
cross only once, and the slope of an indifference curve through any (r, ZR) point is
increasing in income. This guarantees that the individual with median income is
the decisive voter since any greater and feasible (r, ZR) bundles would be blocked
by those 50% with income lower than the median and any smaller and feasible
bundle would be blocked by those 50% with income greater than the median.'3
   12Note that when choosing a district tax rate, the individual ignores the effect of this on TR
since any one district's choice has a negligible effect on the total fimds needed.
   13See Roberts (1977) and Meltzer and Richard 1981).



                                               14
        For many specifications, preferences are sufficiently single-peaked with respect
    to ZR so that if a majority of individuals are effectively constrained in their pre-
    ferred value of ZR by the non-negativity restriction on the state tax rate, the
    outcome of majority vote will be ZR = Z* where z solves

                                                            =0
                                      ft(z* — y)f(y)di                                      (2.30)

    Proposition 3. Z* > p.
       Proof: Let t be j'5 choice of district tax rate given a tax base of level z,
    with t being the rate chosen by an individual with income y. = z. Note that any
    individual with income yj <Z is imposing a burden on taxpayers of the amount
    t2(z — yj); any individual with yj > Z is reducing the burden on taxpayers by the
    amount t (y2 — Z). Hence,

4                                                          /11
                     TR[L   = J t4(z — y4)f(y)di — Jzt4(y2 — z)f(y4)di
                                 rz
                            <
                                J     tz(Z_Yi)f(Yi)di_Jz t(y4—z)f(y4)di
                            =
    which   is non-positive if Z .       The strict inequality follows from our assumption
    on preferences that guarantees that district tax rates are increasing in income (see
    2.27).' Thus, for z u, it follows that TR <0 and thus Z* > iI

    Proposition 4. PER is preferred by a majority over a State system.
        Proof: Note that (ZR = Z,             =   0) is a feasible outcome under PER. Fur-
    thermore, it is preferred by all to the equilibrium outcome under a State system
    since z > 1u, 7R < r implies that any individual can obtain q under PER more
    cheaply than under the State system. Now, the equilibrium bundle (Z*, TR) is by
    revealed preference majority preferred to (z*, 0). By transitivity, therefore, PER
    is preferred by a majority to a State system. II


                                                                                        -
      '4Note that any preferences that imply indifference curves whose slope is increasing in income
    in (t2,q) space, i.e. any preferences that satisfy the condition in footnote (??), yield  > 0.


                                                  15
Proposition 5. If in equilibrium ZR z, then PER is preferred by a majority
to a local or foundation system.

    Proof: All individuals with y < z (i.e., a majority) prefer PER to a founda-
tion or local system as PER allows them to obtain the same q as under either of
those systems but at a lower cost given that Z* > Yz implies that they can tax a
higher tax base than their own at a zero state income tax (since TR = 0).
    We cannot extend the result above to the case of an unconstrained outcome
(i.e., ZR > Z', TR > 0) under PER, however. Although by revealed preference
a majority prefers the equilibrium bundle to (z*, 0), this may not be the same
majority that prefers Z* to a foundation or to a local system. In fact, ISC guar-
antees that all individuals with y2 prefer the equilibrium bundle to (z*, 0),
but we can oniy be sure that individuals with y2 Z* prefer (Z*, 0) to either the
foundation or local system. Therefore a transitivity argument cannot be used as
was done in the case of Proposition 4. Note that a foundation system may be pre-
ferred to PER by relatively wealthy individuals since it allows them to tax their
own income (rather than lower common tax base) to obtain additional resources
for education over the common foundation grant level. Individuals with income
lower than the median, on the other hand, may prefer the foundation system over
PER despite the lower tax base and the uniform tax rate, since the state tax rate
under PER may be too high. Similarly, because of the state tax burden in PER,
it can no longer be argued that all those with irccome below Z* must prefer PER
over a local system.
    In our calibration we end up specifying preferences as - + Ac, a < 0. For
these preferences, for the large variety of a values we experimented with, the
equilibrium outcome under PER is always constrained yielding ZR             Z* (i.e.,
        0). Hence, were individuals with these preferences given to choose among
the four education finance systems discussed so far, propositions 4 and 5 imply
that a majority would favor PER over all others.
    It is also of interest to examine how each qj will differ across systems for this
family of preferences. Given that the tax base under PER will be Z* (i.e., TR = 0)
which is greater than the tax base of t available under the State system, it follows
that all individuals with income greater than some y', y' <, will obtain a greater
q2 under PER than under a State system. Comparing PER with a foundation
system, ZR > /2 implies all y E [yj', Z*] obtain a greater qj under PER, as do an
interval of individuals with income lower than and an interval with income
greater than Z*. Relative to a local system, all individuals with y2 < z will have

                                         16
a greater qj under PER; all those with income greater than z" will have a greater
qj under the local system.

2.6. A Power Equalizing System with No Recapture (PEN)
Lastly, we turn to an analysis of a power equalizing system that, unlike the pre-
vious case, allows individuals with income greater than the common base to tax
their own income, so that

                              qi =       tiZNY ZN
                                    ty2     Yi>ZN                          (2.31)

where ZN iS the common tax base. This system (PEN hereafter) is somewhat of
a hybrid between the foundation system and the PER system, in that while it
does not guarantee any particular level of education spending per student, it does
guarantee the tax base which districts can use to generate education spending.
   We assume, as in the previous case, that the required education funds are
generated by a state income tax, TN, so that private consumption is given by:

                                 C2 = (1 — t2    —
                                                     TN)Yi                   (2.32)
and the state tax rate must satisfy the budget constraint:

                            TN/2 =
                                     JYj<ZN t(ZN — y)f(y)di                  (2.33)
Note that, unlike the previous case, TN is strictly positive for any ZN > y since
higher-income individuals no longer automatically redistribute simply by taxing
themselves to provide for their own education.
   As before, we can think of the choice over ZN and t2 as occurring in two stages,
with majority vote over ZN followed by individual choice over the district tax rate.
Individuals therefore face the following maximization problem:

                    maxu((1 —
                    ZN,tj
                                 t   —
                                         rj)y2) + v(t max{ZN, y2})           (2.34)
                            s.t. TN f     JYi<ZN
                                                   t(ZN — y)f(y)di
The maximization problem over t is not problematic; it simply depends on
whether the (at that stage given) value of ZN 1S greater or smaller than the indi-
vidual's district income. Thus, the first-order conditions are:


                                            17
                  —u'((l —   t   —
                                     TN)Yi)Yi +   v'(ty)y = 0, y > ZN                (2.35)
and

                 —u'((l — ti — TN)Yj)Yj + v'(tzN)ZN = 0,         'j < ZN             (2.36)
   Unfortunately, the maximization problem over ZN iS generally not single peaked.
Even if the state income tax rate is convex in ZN, individuals will tend to have
a local maximum at ZN = y (or equivalently at ZN = 0) and at some ZN > y2.
Thus, the existence of a majority vote equilibrium is not guaranteed, although
for all the parameter values we study equilibrium always exists. The first-order
condition for an interior maximum for ZN yields, after substituting (2.36),

                                 v'(tZN)[—Ty + t} = 0
where calculating        requires (2.33), (2.35) and (2.36). It is easy to show that
TN is increasing in ZN.

Proposition 6. A majority of individuals (weakly) prefer PEN to a local system.

   Proof: Note that a feasible outcome under PEN iS ZN = y which is equivalent
to a system with no redistribution, i.e., a local system.'5 Hence any outcome
ZN > y indicates that a majority strictly prefers PEN to a local system and an
outcome of ZN = y indicates that a majority is indifferent.
    For the same common tax base level of ZR ZN = Z (given Z <v), the state
tax rate required to fund education expenditures is greater under PEN than un-
der PER. To see this, note that (2.25) and (2.36) imply that when faced with the
same common tax base Z, were the state tax the same under both systems, all
individuals with y, <Z would choose the same district tax rates under both sys-
tems. Since under PER individuals with y2 > Z contribute to the funds available
whereas under PEN they do not, it follows from concavity of the utility function
that TR(Z) < TN(Z) (where r(Z) indicates the state tax rate required to fund
education under system j, j = (PER,PEN), given a tax base of z).
    For the proposition that follows, it is important to note that if faced with a
choice between (ZR, TR) under PER and (ZN, TN) under PEN, then all individuals
  15Note that all values of ZN E [O,y] are equivalent; they all imply no redistribution and a
state tax rate of zero.

                                              18
with y. min{zR, ZN} need compare only the utility that they obtain from each
bundle to determine which system they prefer. By way of contrast, the preferences
of individuals with yj > min{ZR, ZN} depend not solely on the two bundles but
also on the system, as PEN allows them to tax their own income whereas PER
does not.

Proposition 7. A majority of individuals prefer PER over PEN if ZN > ZR.

   Proof: To begin, note that if min{zN, ZR} , then these systems are
equivalent and hence must have ZN = ZR.; thus all would be indifferent be-
tween the two systems. If min{ZN, ZR} < , note first that ZN ZR implies
'1N > TR(ZN) TR(ZR). But under a PER system, by revealed preference, the
median voter (weakly) prefers (ZR, TR) to (ZN, TR(ZN)). Since the first bundle is
weakly smaller in both components than the second, ISC implies that all indi-
viduals with y. <7 also prefer (ZR, TR(ZR)) to (ZN, TR(ZN)). But (ZN, TR(ZN)) is
strictly preferred by all to obtaining, under PER, (ZN, TN). Since for all y < ZR
only the choice of bundles matters, this implies that at least 50% of individuals
strictly prefer PER to PEN.16I
    It is also easy to show that a majority of individuals prefer PER to PEN if
the outcome under PER is Z*.

Proposition 8. A majority of individuals prefer PER over PEN if ZR = Z*.

   Proof: By Proposition 7, if ZN Z*, PER is majority preferred to PEN. If,
on the other hand, ZN <Z*, all individuals with yj z prefer PER to PEN since
the former allows them to obtain the same qj as under PEN but at a lower cost
since ZN <Z* and TN TR = 0. Since Z* > ji, these individuals are more than
50% of the population. II
   Hence, we have shown that PER is majority preferred to PEN for all cases
save if ZN < ZR, ZR  Z*, and YR> TN In such a case PEN may be preferred
to PER. To see why note that we can no longer use the single-crossing logic to
argue that all individuals with y > would prefer (ZR, TR) under PER to (ZN, TN)
under PEN. Some of these individuals are able to tax their own base under PEN
and not under PER. Consequently, for these individuals a simple comparison of
the two bundles that ignores the system that generated them is insufficient. For
  16Note that the logic of this argument is independent of whether the choice imder PER is
constrained by the non-negativity requirement.

                                           19
the purposes of our quantitative work, this ambiguity is not problematic since our
calibrations always yield ZR = z, and hence PER is majority preferred to PEN
by Proposition 8.

3. Quantitative Results
In this section we report the results of a quantitative comparison of the five
education-finance systems. As discussed in the previous section, each finance
system has distinct implications for total spending on education and its distrib-
ution across students. Our objective is to obtain some sense for how large these
differences might be in a reasonably parameterized version of the model.

3.1. Functional Forms and Parameter Values
We begin by choosing functional forms and assigning parameter values. The mod-
el's structure is extremely parsimonious—we need to specify only the distribution
of income and preferences over consumption and quality of education.
    One possible choice for the income distribution is to use households' income
distribution for a typical year. If one interprets the model-period as corresponding
to the entire schooling period of a child, however, then presumably it is income
over a longer time span that is relevant to the decision makers. Of course, if
parents are unable to borrow against their own future income then some measure
in between annual and lifetime income is the correct one. Rather than take a
stand on the degree of imperfection in the capital market, we use lifetime income
and later report results using annual income in our section on sensitivity.
   Fullerton and Rogers (1993) estimate the distribution of lifetime household
income for the US using data from the PSID for the years 1970-1987. They
compute mean lifetime income for each decile (subdividing the lowest and highest
deciles each into two groups) for both pretax income as well as income net of
taxes and transfers. We used both measures in our analysis, but found that the
results did not differ in any significant way. Consequently, we only report results
for the case of income net of taxes and transfers. Table 1 displays the income
distribution.




                                        20
                                         Table 1
                              Lifetime Income Distribution
                           Percentile Mean Lifetime Income
                                         (000's of 1986 dollars)
                             0—2                   217
                            2—10                   355
                            10—20                  433
                            20—30                   515
                            30—40                   565
                            40—50                   665
                            50—60                   735
                            60—70                   814
                            70—80                   911
                            80—90                   1028
                             90 — 98                1305
                            98 — 100                1734
                           Source:   Fullerton and Rogers (1993)

   This distribution has a mean of $738,310 and a median of $665,000 (implying
a mean to median ratio of approximately 1.1), and a variance of log income equal
to .17. Note that relative to a distribution of annual household income (with a
typical ratio of mean to median of 1.2 and variance of log income of approximately
.36), this distribution displays less variance.
   In the theory section we considered preferences that had the characteristic
that the slope of indifference curves (in the relevant price and q space) were
increasing in income. Anticipating our calibration, we often focused on preferences
of the form - + A, a < 0. In our simulations we further restrict this class of
preferences by imposing a = 'y, i.e., we impose an income elasticity of one. The
motivation for this restriction comes from an examination of longer-run trends in
education spending. Over the last twenty-five years, spending on K-12 education
as a fraction of personal income has remained roughly constant despite roughly
a doubling of real personal income.'7 In our model, for all the education finance
systems we considered, the requirement that a proportional shift in the income
distribution (holding fixed the education finance system) keep constant the share
of income spent on education requires that preferences be homothetic. If one
  17See Fernandez and Rogerson (1997b) for an examination of this issue. This fact is, o course,
thstinct from the issue of how spending on education varies cross-sectionally with income.


                                             21
furthermore imposes separability, it requires that preferences be of the above
form with a =
    With the above specification of preferences, there are only two parameters
to choose, A and a. For any given finance system, total resources spent on
education are increasing in the parameter A. We choose A so as to generate a
 "reasonable" share of total income devoted to education. For US states, the ratio
of expenditures on K-12 education to personal income ranges from around 3.2%
to 6.2%. We set A such that the share of total income devoted to education under
a foundation system is 5%. We choose the foundation system as our benchmark
system for the calibration exercise since we think it probably best approximates
the "average" existing system. As discussed in our sensitivity analysis, however,
our results are not sensitive to choosing other values for the expenditure share
within this range, or to choosing a local system as the benchmark.
    How to determine the value of a is less obvious. The additional restriction
imposed in (2.2) of a non-positive value of a is motivated by theoretical and em-
pirical considerations. On the theoretical front, as shown in the previous section,
in a State system preferred state income tax rates are non-decreasing in income
only if a is non-positive. Moreover, in a PER system, education expenditures
would be negatively correlated with income if a were positive. To us, this sug-
gests that requiring a to be non-positive is a reasonable restriction.19 On the
empirical front, we consider three pieces of information. First, Fernandez and
Rogerson (1995a) model California's pre-Serrano system as a foundation system
and find that a — .2 does the best job of fitting the distribution of expenditures
across districts. Second, the parameter a has implications for the price elasticity
of education expenditures. In a survey of the empirical literature that attempts to
estimate this elasticity, Bergstrom, Rubinfeld and Shapiro (1982) report a range
of estimates between —0.5 and _0.25.20 These imply values of a between —2 and
—1. Finally, under a foundation system, as described in more detail below, the
value of a influences the cross sectional distribution of education spending across
districts. One statistic that captures this is the cross-sectional elasticity of edu-
   '8Equilibrium allocations, of course, are unaffected by monotone transformations of the utility
function
    '9Additionally, in a richer model with endogenous stratification of income types into commu-
nities, this condition is required to ensure that richer communities have higher quality education.
See, for example, Westhoff (1977) and Fernandez and Rogerson (1996).
   20
           qualification that should be noted about these estimates is that they come from data
on total spending and marginal tax prices. In systems with substantial amounts of aid given
inframarginaily this may seriously bias those estimates.


                                               22
cation spending with respect to district-level income. There is a large literature
that estimates this elasticity, and though the range of estimates is substantial,
the vast majority lie between .4 and .8 (see Bergstrom et al. (1982) for a survey
of these estimates). As shown below, this suggests that a lies between 0 and —2.
In light of this information, we calibrate our benchmark model to a = —1, and in
our sensitivity analysis we examine a values between 0 and —3.
    In light of the discussion above, henceforth preferences will be described by:

                                                         a0                                  (3.1)

3.2. Calibration Results
In this section we report the results of our calibration. Table 2 summarizes several
features of the allocations generated by each of the education finance systems.

                                             Table 2
                              Comparison of Systems, a =          —1


                           LOCAL STATE FOUND PER PEN

                   E/Y        .048        .046         .050       .049    .057
                    CV         .41          0           .35        .20     .25
                   95:5       3.68        1.00         2.48       1.86    2.11
                    qy        1.00        0.00          .71        .48     .54

    For each system, Table 2 reports the fraction of total income devoted to educa-
tion (E/Y), the coefficient of variation of spending across students (CV), the ratio
of spending per pupil at the 95th percentile relative to that at the 5th percentile
(95:5), and the cross-sectional elasticity of education spending with respect to in-
come (qy).21 Not reported in the table are the power equalizing factors (the z's)
for PER and PEN. These are 1.08 and 1.40 times mean income, respectively. As
mentioned previously, under PER ZR = z requiring a state tax of zero, whereas
under PEN a state-level income tax rate of TN = .015 is required to fund the
power equalizing system.
  21TJijs elasticity is the regression coefficient on log income that results from regressing log of
education spending on a constant and log income.



                                                 23
    There is substantial variation across systems in both total resources and the
distribution of resources across students. For example, the highest spending sys-
tem (PEN) generates almost 25% more spending on education than does the lowest
spending system (State). And even excluding the State system, which by defini-
tion provides equal resources to all students, the system with the most inequality
 (local) has a coefficient of variation that is nearly double the corresponding figure
for the PER system.
    Note that Eqy is equal to one for the local system. This follows directly from
the restriction on preferences that allows the model to match the longer-run data.
Under a local system, homothetic preferences imply that each district allocates the
same fraction of income to education. In the cross section, therefore, education
spending and income move one for one in percentage terms. This also implies that
under local finance the coefficient of variation is the same for the distribution
of education spending across districts as for the distribution of income across
districts.
    Given that these systems yield large variations in both total resources and the
distribution of resources across students, it is natural to ask whether the choice of
system can be portrayed as a simple trade-off between resources and equity. For
example, the local system provides more resources than does the State system,
but also generates much greater inequality in resources per student. The results
in Table 2 show, however, that there is no simple trade-off.. In particular, the
relationship between resources and inequality is not monotone—in fact, the two
systems with intermediate amounts of inequality (foundation and PEN) generate
the greatest resources allocated to education.
   Table 3 below examines in more detail how the allocation of education spending
varies across districts under the different finance systems. The table gives the
entire profile of education resources (relative to economy-wide mean income) by
district. This information is also presented in Figure 1, which illustrates the
distribution of education resources by percentile group.




                                         24
                                    Table 3
                  Distributions of Education Spending a = —1
            Income Pct. LOCAL STATE FOUND PER PEN
               0—2          .0142      .0460     .0340    .0279 .0314
              2 — 10        .0232     .0460      .0340    .0354 .0398
              10 — 20       .0284     .0460      .0340    .0390 .0439
              20—30         .0337     .0460      .0342    .0424 .0477
              30 — 40       .0370     .0460      .0374    .0443 .0499
              40 — 50       .0435     .0460      .0437    .0479 .0540
              50 — 60       .0481     .0460      .0481    .0502 .0566
              60 — 70       .0533     .0460      .0531    .0527 .0594
              70 — 80       .0596     .0460      .0593    .0556 .0627
              80 — 90       .0673     .0460      .0667    .0589 .0665
              90—98         .0854     .0460      .0842    .0659 .0841
             98—100         .1135     .0460      .1113    .0753 .1118
               E/Y          .0483     '.0460     .0500    .0493 .0568
                CV            .41        0         .35     .20     .25

    One way of contrasting the different spending patterns is by examining the
extent to which the different education finance systems achieve greater equality
by "leveling up" or "leveling down" relative to the most unequal distribution—that
generated by the local system. It should be kept in mind (and we will return to
this in the welfare section), however, that we are not examining the cost involved
in increasing the equality of education resources (e.g., the extent to which taxes
are borne by the poor or by the rich). Thus, greater resources for education does
not imply an increase in welfare.
    The foundation and PEN systems achieve greater equality primarily by level-
ing up. To see this, note that for the top 30% of the population all three systems
(local, PEN and foundation) deliver basically the same resources. However, foun-
dation provides significantly more resources to the bottom 20% of the population
than does local, and PEN provides significantly more resources than local to the
bottom 70% of the income distribution. In contrasting foundation and PEN, note
that foundation provides more resources to the bottom 2% of the income distrib-
ution, whereas PEN provides substantially more to everyone else below the 80th
percentile. So, while it is true that foundation and PEN both involve leveling up
relative to the local system, the mechanics of this leveling up differ significantly
between the two systems.


                                        25
    State and PER, in contrast, achieve greater equality through a combination
of leveling up and leveling down, with the difference between the two being that
State implies a much greater degree of compression. In particular, while State
provides fewer resources for education for the top 50% of the income distribution
than any of the other systems, it also provides more resources than all other
systems for the bottom 40%. Under PER, the bottom 60% of the distribution
receive substantially more resources than under a local system, whereas the upper
30% all receive substantially less.
   Contrasting PER with foundation, one observes that while the foundation
system provides more resources to the very poorest 2% and the richest 40% of
the population than does the PER system, the latter provides more educational
resources to the remaining 58% of the population. PEN, on the other hand,
provides more educational resources to all income groups than PER.

3.3. Welfare Analysis
In this section we examine the welfare implications of the five different finance
systems. Of course, in economies with heterogenous agents and without lump-
sum transfers, welfare comparisons pose some difficulty since any aggregate welfare
measure depends on the weight placed on the utilities of different agents. With
this caveat in mind, we carry out the following "behind-the-veil-of-ignorance"
welfare comparison. For each system, we compute the expected utility that an
agent would obtain if, under that system, her income were a random draw from
the actual income distribution. Note that this welfare criterion is equivalent to
a utilitarian welfare function (i.e., one that places equal weight on all agents'
utilities).
    We provide a measure of welfare differences which is not affected by affine
transformations of the utility function. Using the foundation system as the bench-
mark for our utility comparison, we compute the factor (1+) by which the entire
income distribution would have to be scaled in the foundation system in order for
the expected utility in that system to equal the level obtained under the alterna-
              j
tive j (where is local, State, PER, or PEN).22 That is, we solve:

                  ((1 — 'rf   —
                                  t)y2(1 + L)yk
EUF(L)                                            + A((tiYi + f)(1 + )c f(y1) = EU3
                                                             a
____________________________                                                   (3.2)
 22S also Fernandez and Rogerson (1998b).

                                            26
yielding:

                             1 + = (EU/EU(L)y/a                               (3.3)
The district tax rates in expression (3.2) are those from the foundation system.
It should be noted here that, given (3.1), the district and state tax rates in the
foundation system are invariant to proportional increases in the income distribu-
tion.
    Table 4 displays the results of our welfare comparisons.

                                      Table 4
                            Welfare Comparisons (1 + L)

                   LOCAL STATE FOUND PER PEN
                     .989       .997     1.000     1.002 .998
    An immediate result from Table 4 is that the local system is dominated by all
the other education finance systems (note that a value of 1 + z greater than one
indicates that agents obtain a lower expected utility under a foundation system
than under the alternative). We emphasize that any welfare gain over the local
system in particular does not reflect efficiency gains ex post (i.e., once agents'
identities or income levels have been determined); the allocation generated by
the local system is in fact Pareto efficient in this sense. Rather, these gains
reflect the fact that resources are being reallocated from wealthier to less wealthy
individuals or equivalently, that the variance of the consumption and quality of
education distributions are being diminished. These gains are weighed against the
fact that each of the systems introduces some distortion into the economy. Table
4 allows us to conclude that relative to a system without any redistribution (i.e.,
the local system) the benefits from the redistribution implicit in the other four
systems outweigh the costs of the distortions in every case.
    The main conclusion from Table 4 is that PER dominates all systems whereas
the foundation system dominates the local, State, and PEN system. It is of
interest to note that although PEN offers greater educational resources to all
individuals than does PER, it is nonetheless dominated by PER. This is because
of the cost of financing PEN. Whereas under PER the tax base chosen implies a
state tax rate of zero, all tax bases under PEN imply a positive state tax.
    It should be noted that the welfare differences are not particularly large—PEN
and State, for example, differ by .1% of total income. This is due in part to the

                                        27
fact that education comprises only 5% of income—if we were to scale our welfare
differences in proportion to the size of the education sector, then the difference
between, for example, PER and local is more than 25% of the size of the education
sector!23

3.4. Determining the Choice of Finance System by Majority Vote
Table 5 reports the majority voting outcomes across systems. To read the table,
note that the row and column headings report which two systems are being com-
pared under pairwise voting, with the entry in the corresponding box reporting
which system wins. As the table indicates, the power equalizing system with re-
capture (PER) wins against all alternatives and the foundation system beats all
alternatives except PER. Local loses to all alternatives. Thus, perhaps somewhat
surprisingly, both our "behind-the-veil-of-ignorance" welfare criteria and majority
voting yield the same outcome-PER is the preferred system.
                                      Table 5
                             Voting Comparison, a =       —1
                         LOCAL STATE FOUND PER PEN
             LOCAL         -  STATE FOUND PER PEN
             STATE         -     -  FOUND PER STATE
             FOUND           -                      -      PER FOUND
               PER                                  -       -   PER
               PEN                                  -

   The popularity of PER is itself not surprising. By proposition 4, PER is
preferred to a State system. Furthermore, recalling that for our calibration we
obtain zR z, propositions 5 and 8 imply that PER is majority preferred to a
local, foundation or PEN system.

4. Sensitivity
This section explores the robustness of our findings to alternative values of a,
alternative income distributions, and to relaxing the non-negative state tax rate
constraint in PER. We also investigated (but do not report on the details) the
  23Another factor underlying our small welfare numbers is that our analysis is static. See
Fernandez and Rogerson (199Th, 1998b) for an analysis of why dynamic considerations may
produce much larger welfare differences.

                                            28
sensitivity of our findings to using systems other than the foundation for calibra-
tion and to ratios of E/Y in the neighborhood of 5%. These were found to have
no impact on our results.

4.1. Alternative Values of a
As discussed earlier, empirical work suggests a values in the range between 0 and
—2. We chose a = —1 for our benchmark calibration. In this subsection we
examine other values of a and show that our main findings are not sensitive to
its exact value within the range suggested by empirical work. Before presenting
these results it is perhaps worthwhile to discuss briefly how changes in a affect
key variables. Central to this is an understanding of how changes in a affect the
preferred tax rates that govern redistribution. Table 6 is instructive in this regard.
                                      Table 6
                   Preferred State Tax Rates, ,        State System
           IncomePct. a=0 a=—.5 a=—1 a=—2 a=—3
               0—2         .043     .032        .026       .022       .020
              2 — 10       .043     .037        .034       .030       .028
             10—20         .043     .039        .037       .034       .033
             20—30         .043     .042        .040       .038       .037
             30—40         .043     .043        .042       .041       .040
             40—50         .043     .046        .046       .046       .046
             50—60         .043     .047        .048       .048       .048
             60—70         .043     .048         .50       .051       .052
             70—80         .043     .050        .053       .055       .056
             80 — 90       .043     .052        .056       .059       .061
             90 — 98       .043     .056        .062       .069       .072
            98 — 100       .043     .061        .071       .082       .088
    This table shows, for different values of a, the preferred state tax rates for
each income group under a State system. Note that, for each a, the value of A is
chosen so that total spending on education under a foundation system is equal to
5% of income, as in our benchmark calibration. As a increases in absolute value,
the distribution of preferred tax rates spreads out; preferred tax rates decrease for
individuals with income below the mean and the reverse happens for those with
income above the mean (preferred tax rates for those in the 40-60th percentiles
are relatively constant for a < — .5). A similar "spreading-out" of preferences
occurs under the foundation and power equalizing systems.

                                           29
    With this in mind we next turn to an examination of how the equilibrium
state tax rate    j= s, f, R, N varies across systems with a. For PER and PEN,
alongside the tax rate we also report the equilibrium values of z that result (these
are reported as multiples of mean income).

                                       Table 7
                       Dependence of r Ofl a, j = s, f, R, N
                          STATE FOUND PER        PEN
                a =0       .043  .043 0 1.00 0.000 0.00
               a = —.5     .046  .037 0 1.05 0.014 1.29
               a = —1      .046  .034 0 1.08 0.015 1.40
               a = —2      .046  .031 0 1.11 0.015 1.42
               a = —3      .046  .029 0 1.12 0.014 1.42
   A few patterns emerge from Table 7. Note first that as a decreases the foun-
dation grant falls (recall that the foundation grant is given by 'ru). Since the
amount of leveling up that occurs in a foundation system relative to a local sys-
tem is determined by the size of the foundation grant, one may expect smaller
reductions in inequality relative to a local system as a decreases. Under the State
system, the fact that the median voter's preferred tax rate is fairly constant (see
Table 6) gives the result of a fairly constant state tax rate as a decreases. Under
PEN, there is a large switch in outcome associated with different values of a. For
values of a close to zero (not shown), the outcome under PEN is equivalent to a
local system. Majority vote results in ZN = 0, hence all districts tax only their
own district income to obtain funds for education. For more negative values of
a, the value of z increases at first dramatically (as the system jumps from a local
outcome to a large value of z), and then stays more or less constant.
    Table 8 provides the analogous information as in Table 2 for a range of values
of a. Note that a = 0 (i.e., log preferences) is a special case. For this specification
of preferences all individuals have the same preferred district tax rates in the local
system and the same preferred state tax rate in the State system. Moreover, these
rates are equal. Thus the local and State system yield the same total resources to
education, but with very different distributions since in the local system district
spending is proportional to district income, whereas in the state system it is
proportional to mean income.



                                          30
                                    Table 8
                              Comparison of Systems
                             LOCAL STATE FOUND PER PEN
            a =0      E/Y      .043       .043      .050      .043   .043
                       CV       .41         0        .23        0     .41
                      95:5     3.68       1.00      1.73      1.00   3.68
                      Eqy      1.00       0.00       .38      0.00   1.00

           a=   —.5   E/Y      .047       .046      .050      .048   .057
                       CV       .41         0        .32       .13    .22
                      95:5     3.68       1.00      2.20      1.51   1.88
                       Eqy     1.00       0.00       .61       .32    .44

           a —1 E/Y            .048      .046       .050      .049   .057
                       CV       .41        0         .35       .20    .25
                      95:5     3.68      1.00       2.48      1.86   2.11
                      Eqy      1.00      0.00        .71       .48    .55

           a = —2 E/Y          .049      .046       .050      .050   .055
                       CV       .41        0         .37       .26    .30
                      95:5     3.68      1.00       2.79      2.29   2.50
                       qy      1.00      0.00        .79       .64    .69

           a = —3 E/Y          .049      .046       .050      .050   .054
                       CV       .41        0         .38       .29    .32
                      95:5     3.68      1.00       2.96      2.54   2.73
                       Eqy     1.00      0.00        .83       .72    .76

    A similar situation holds for PER. With log preferences, all individuals prefer
                                                               i
the same ZR, yielding the (unconstrained) outcome of ZR = and hence a state
tax rate of zero. Note that although the state tax rate is zero, the district tax rate
chosen is the same as the state tax rate would be under a State system. Hence
PER and State are identical for these preferences. Lastly, as discussed previously,
the outcome of majority vote for log preferences under PEN yield a local system.
Hence the aggregate, but not distributional implications for these four systems are
the same. The foundation system, on the other hand, generates greater aggregate
spending on education. To see why, note that the fact that all individuals with
income below the mean share the same preferences under the State system implies

                                         31
that the median voter in the foundation system will impose the same state tax
rate as under the State system. Thus, all individuals with income below the mean
will obtain the same education funds as under the State system, but individuals
with greater income will top up, yielding a greater E/Y than under the State
system.
    Otherwise, with the exception of the a = 0 case, the patterns that emerge are
the same for each of the values of a considered. The ranking of systems in terms
of resources devoted to education, or the coefficient of variation of education
spending across students is the same for all values of a. Moreover, while the
exact magnitudes of differences across systems do depend on the value of a, these
differences are very similar for a between — .5 and —-2. Qualitatively, as a becomes
smaller in absolute value, differences in total resources across systems become
somewhat larger and differences in distributions across students become somewhat
smaller.
    Turning next to the welfare comparisons, Table 9 displays the results for dif-
ferent values of a.
                                     Table 9
                           Welfare Comparisons (1 + L)
                  a    LOCAL STATE FOUND PER PEN
                  o      .995       .999        1.000    .999   .995
                —.5      .992       .998        1.000   1.001   .997
                 —1      .989       .997        1.000   1.002 .998
                 —2      .984       .995        1.000   1.004 .998
                 —3      .979       .992        1.000   1.005 .998
    Once again the results are not very sensitive to the value of a: except for a = 0,
PER dominates all systems whereas the foundation system dominates the local,
State, and PEN system for all values of a. The discontinuity at a = 0 occurs since
at this value all individuals with income below the mean are indifferent between
PER and the foundation system, whereas individuals with income above the mean
prefer the ability to top up available in the foundation system. All other majority
vote results between systems are unchanged from what we reported in Table 4.
For more negative values of a, the welfare differences across systems are larger.

4.2. Alternative Income Distributions
As discussed earlier, which income distribution would be most appropriate to use
in our calibration—lifetime income, annual income, or something in between—is

                                           32
unclear. We chose to calibrate to lifetime income, but here we report findings
based on calibrating to the distribution of annual income. For this exercise we
take a discrete approximation to a log-normal distribution. Whereas the lifetime
income distribution implied a variance of log income equal to .17, we now set this
parameter equal to .36. Table 10 reports some results for a = —1.0. This value of
a implies a value of Eqy equal to .70, which is almost identical to the corresponding
value of .71 for the a = —1 case with the lifetime income distribution.
                                          Table 10
                      Comparison Using Annual Income, a = —1

                                 LOCAL STATE FOUND PER PEN

                  E/Y              .048        .045        .050      .049     .058
                   CV               .53         0           .45       .26      .34
           Welfare (1 + )          .982        .995       1.000     1.004 .997
    Basically, the results are very similar to those reported earlier. Relative to
the calibration to lifetime income, all systems (save State) yield distributions of
resources across students that have higher coefficient of variations. This reflects
the increased variance of the underlying income distribution (recall that under
local finance the distributions of income and spending have identical coefficient of
variations). Furthermore, the range of spending and the welfare differences across
systems increases.24

4.3. PER With A Surplus
Previously we restricted the PER system to non-negative values for TR This
meant that the education finance system was not allowed to generate a surplus.
In all of our simulations reported above, this constraint was binding—i.e., TR was
always equal to 0 in equilibrium. How do our results differ if we remove this re-
striction and we allow the surplus to be rebated in proportion to income? Much of
the conclusions remain the same with one exception—spending on education drops
significantly. For example, for a = —1, the reduction is about 12%, making PER
the system with the lowest resources devoted to education. Majority voting over
  24We also explored the extent to which our results are affected by using a relatively coarse
grid for the income distribution by trying out progressively finer discrete approximations to a
log normal distribution. This had minimal effect on the results and hence is not reported.

                                             33
the power equalizing factor results in a value of ZR equal to .86 times mean income,
and everyone receives a rebate from the state government of more than 1%. The
reduction is spending is approximately uniform across the income distribution,
as the coefficient of variation for education spending is roughly unchanged as a
result of removing the restriction. Somewhat surprisingly, this drop in spending
on education does not affect the welfare conclusions reported earlier. However, we
think the main finding here is a cautionary note that if education finance systems
are allowed to generate resources that can be used elsewhere, there is a definite
danger that resources will be channeled away from education.

5. Conclusion
In this paper we used a political economy approach to analyze five different ed-
ucation finance systems. In addition to analytically characterizing the outcomes
generated by each system, we also carried out a calibration exercise to assess the
quantitative significance of the differences across systems. We found that the
choice of system can have a very large impact on total resources allocated to ed-
ucation, as well as how those resources are distributed across students. A key
findingis that the problem of choosing an education finance system from among
this set cannot be portrayed as providing policy makers with a simple trade-off
between equity and efficiency. With respect to generating spending on education,
we find that this is done by those systems with intermediates degrees of redis-
tribution. We also show that a power equalizing system with recapture (PER)
yields the greatest social welfare (using a utilitarian welfare function) and that
PER would be chosen above all the other systems were they subject to choice by
majority vote.
    Our model was purposefully simple in order to explore the trade-offs between
equity and total resources to education, highlighting the fact that different in-
comes imply both different preferences and implicit prices for education across
individuals and finance systems. This approach, unlike most of the other liter-
ature in this field, allowed us to obtain both analytical and quantitative results
regarding the five finance systems. The next step would be to incorporate sev-
eral other dimensions that would allow the model to capture other elements that
may be important in reality. How robust are our results, to the existence of a
private alternative. The model already gives some insight into this question. For
example, a pure local system is equivalent to a system of private education and
PEN can be interpreted as the outcome of a PER system with private options.

                                        34
Alternatively, a foundation system can be interpreted as the outcome of allowing
a voucher program with private alternatives under the State system. Another fac-
tor that should be examined is how the results would be modified by the existence
of property (especially non-residential property) in a property-tax based system.
Our majority vote analysis ignores any transition questions as there are no state
variables in our analysis. The introduction of housing prices that vary with the
education finance system would introduce winners and losers in dimensions other
than that related to education resources. Other questions to be explored include
imperfect stratification of individuals into communities, more complex political
economy than that given by majority vote, and the dynamic implications of the
different systems We leave these important explorations for future work.




                                      35
References
 [1] Benabou, R., "Workings of a City: Location, Education, and Production,"
     Quarterly Journal of Economics 109 (1993), 619-652.

 [2]                     ,    "Heterogeneity,   Stratification, and Growth," American
       Economic Review 86(3) (1996), 584-609.

 [3] Bergstrom, T., D. Rubinfeld and P. Shapiro, "Micro-Based Estimates of Do-
     mand Functions for Local Public Expenditures," Econometrica 50 (1982),
       1183-1205.

 [4] Card, D. and A. Payne, "School Finance Reform, the Distribution of School
     Spending, and the Distribution of SAT Scores," NBER (Cambridge, MA)
     Working Paper No. 6766, 1998.
 [5] Caucutt, B., "Education Policy When There are Peer Group Effects," mimeo,
       1997.

 [6] Coons, J., W. Clune III and S. Sugarman, Private Wealth and Public Edu-
     cation, Belknap Press of Harvard University, Cambridge, 1970.
 [7] de Bartolome, C., "Equilibrium and Inefficiency in a Community Model with
     Peer Group Effects," Journal of Political Economy 98 (1990), 110-133.

 [8]                      , "What Determines State Aid to School Districts. A Pos-
       itive Model of Foundation Aid as Redistribution," Journal of Policy Analysis
       and Management 16 (1997), 32-47.
 [9] Downes, T. and M. Shah, "The Effect of School Finance Reforms on the Level
     and Growth of Per Pupil Expenditures," mimeo, Tufts University, 1994.
[10] Durlauf, S., "A Theory of Persistent Income Inequality", Journal of Eco-
       nomic Growth 1 (1), (1996), 75-93.
[11] Epple, D. and R. Romano, "Ends Against the Middle: Determining Public
     Service Provision When There are Private Alternatives," Journal of Public
       Economics 62 (1996a), 297-325.

[12]                       "Public Provision of Private Goods," Journal of Politi-
                             ,
       cal Economy 104 (1996b), 5 7-84.

                                            36
[13]                         , "Competition Between Private and Public Schools,
       Vouchers, and Peer Group Effects," American Economic Review 88 (1998),
       33-62.

[14] Evans, W., S. Murray and R. Schwab, "Schoolhouses, Courthouses and State-
       houses after Serrano," Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 16(1),
       (1997), 10-37.

[15]               ,    "Education-Finance Reform and the Distribution of Education
       Resources," American Economic Review 88(4), (1998), 789-812.
[16] Fernández, R., "Odd versus Even: Comparitive Statistics in Multicommunity
     Models," Journal of Public Economics 65(2), (1997), 177-192.
[17] Fernández, R. and R. Rogerson, "Education Finance Reform and Invest-
       ment in Human Capital: Lessons from California," NBER (Cambridge, MA)
       Working Paper No. 5369, 1995a.
[18]               , "On the Political Economy of Education Subsidies," Review of
       Economic Studies 62(2), (1995b), 249-262.

[19]               ,    "Income Distribution, Communities and the Quality of Public
       Education," Quarterly Journal of Economics 111(1), (1996), 135-164.
[20]               ,    "Keeping People Out: Income Distribution, Zoning and the
       Quality of Public Education," International Economic Review 38(1); (1997a),
       23-42.

[21]               ,    "Education Finance Reform: A Dynamic Perspective," Journal
       of Policy Analysis and Management 16(1), (1997b), 67-84.
[22]               , "The Determinants of Public Education Expenditures. Evi-
       dence from the States, 1950-1990," mimeo, 1998a.

[23]               ,    "Public Education and Income Distribution: A Dynamic Quan-
       titative Evaluation of Education Finance Reform," American Economic Re-
       view 88 (1998b), 813-833.

[24] Fullerton, D. and D. Rogers, "Who Bears the Lifetime Tax Burden?," Brook-
     ings Institution, Washington, D.C., 1993.


                                           37
[25] Glomm, G. and R. Ravikumar, "Public versus Private Investment in Human
     Capital: Endogerious Growth and Income Inequality," Journal of Political
    Economy 100 (1992), 813-834.
[26]                      , "Opting Out of Publicly Provided Services: A Majority
       Voting Result," Social Choice and Welfare 15(2), (1998), 187-199.
[27] Hamilton, B., "Zoning and Property Taxation in a System of Local Govern-
    ments," Journal of Urban Studies 12 (1975), 205-211.
[28] Hoxby, C., "All School Finance Equalizations Are Not Created Equal,"
       NBER (Cambridge, MA) Working Paper No. 6792, 1998.
[29] Inman, Robert P., "Optimal Fiscal Reform of Metropolitan Schools: Some
    Simulation Results," American Economic Review 68(1), (1978), 107-122.
[30] Loeb, S., "Estimating the Effects of School Finance Reform: A Framework
    for a Federalist System," mimeo, 1998.
[31] Manwaring, R. and S. Sheifrin, "Litigation, School Finance Reform, and Ag-
     gregate Educational Spending," International Tax and Public Finance 4(2),
     (1997), 107-127.
[32] Meltzer, A. and S. Richard, "A Rational Theory of the Size of Government,"
     Journal of Political Economy, 89, (1981), 914-927.
[33] Nechyba, T., "A Computable General Equilibrium Model of Intergovernmen-
     tal Aid," Journal of Public Economics 62 (1996), 363-397.
[34] Poterba, J., "Demographic Structure and the Political Economy of Public
     Education," Journal of Policy Analysis arid Management 16 (1997), 48-66.
[35] Roberts, K. "Voting Over Income Tax Schedules," Journal of Public Eco-
       nomics, 8, (1977), 329-340.
[36] Silva, F. and J. Sonstelie, "Did Serrano Cause a Decline in School Spending?",
     National Tax Journal 48 (1995), 199-215.
[37] Tiebout, C., "A Pure Theory of Local Expenditures," Journal of Political
       Economy 65 (1956), 416-424.
[38] Westhoff, F., "Existence of Equilibria in Economies with a Local Public
       Good," Journal of Economic Theory 14 (1977), 84-112.

                                        38
                                      Distributions of Education Spending
0.1200


0.1100


0.1000


0.0900


0.0800
                                                                                                              LOCAL
                                                                                                              STATE
0.0700
                                                                                                              FOUND
                                                                                                              PER
0.0600                                                                                                        PEN



0.0500


0.0400


0.0300


0.0200


0.0100


0.0000
         0-2   2-10   10-20   20-30      30-40   40-50       50-60   60-70   70-80   80-90   90-98   98-100
                                                    Income Pct.




                                                         Figure 1
