1.

Introduction

The U.S. health care system is organized around markets.1 There has, however, been ongoing
concern about the functioning of these markets, so much so that some have despaired of these
markets working at all. The policy response to this concern has been disjointed. Health care
markets are subject to many regulations and interventions. Some of these policies have
attempted to substitute regulation for competition, regulating entry and investment (certificate of
need laws, health planning) or price (all-payer regulation). At the same time, health care markets
have been subject to antitrust enforcement. Recent years have seen a shift away from regulatory
policies and toward competition. Antitrust policy towards health care markets has become much
more vigorous since the early 1970s. Antitrust is intended to ensure the efficient functioning of
these markets. As a consequence, competition and antitrust policy have become prominent issues
in U.S. health policy.
Economic research is vital to addressing issues of competition and antitrust in health care.
This includes issues of market definition and detecting anti-competitive conduct. In rule of
reason cases, where benefits are weighed against costs, it includes measuring the loss of
consumer welfare resulting from a particular practice against any gains in consumer welfare
resulting from it.
In this chapter we consider research issues in the analysis of competition and the
application of antitrust to health care markets.2 We outline our views on the analytical issues and
review the relevant literatures both from health economics and industrial organization and
antitrust generally. Our focus is mainly on hospitals and interactions between hospitals and
insurers. This is due, in part, to where there has been antitrust activity. Physician markets have
been for the most part very unconcentrated, and as such have not lent themselves to the kinds of
anti-competitive conduct the antitrust laws prohibit.3 Although issues of competition and
antitrust in pharmaceutical markets are fascinating and important, they differ in some
fundamental ways from markets for health care services, and as such, we exclude them from this
chapter.4
In what follows we first provide some background on antitrust and health care. We then
discuss distinctive features of the health care industry, then proceed to horizontal and vertical
issues in antitrust. Finally, we present a set of recommendations for future research.
2.

Background

The major antitrust statutes of the United States are the Sherman Act (1890), the Clayton Act
(1914), and the Federal Trade Commission Act (1914).5 The Sherman Act prohibits attempts to
restrain trade and attempts to monopolize. Sections 2 and 3 of the Clayton Act prohibit price
discrimination, tying, or exclusive dealing that substantially lessen competition or create a
monopoly. Section 7 prohibits mergers or other combinations that could reasonably be expected
to reduce competition or create a monopoly. The Federal Trade Commission Act created the
Federal Trade Commission and prohibits unfair methods of competition which affect interstate
commerce. An important law directly relevant to health care is the McCarran-Ferguson Act

1

(1948), which exempts the business of insurance from the antitrust laws if regulated by the state
(excepting actions such as boycott, intimidation, or coercion).
Antitrust issues in health care have only been an issue where markets are relied upon to a
large degree to determine prices and quantities (and other characteristics) of health care services.
Thus antitrust enforcement has been relevant only in the United States for the most part, since
most other countries have relied mainly on the public sector for price or quantity determination.6
Active application of the antitrust laws to the health care sector in the U.S., however, can only be
dated to the late 1970s and early 1980s.
Up until 1975 the courts fluctuated on the application of antitrust to the professions.7 The
debate was whether the “learned professions,” such as law and medicine, were subject to the
antitrust laws. For example, in FTC v. Raladam Co., 283 U.S. 643 (1931) it was suggested that
medical practitioners “follow a profession and not a trade.” On the other hand, the Supreme
Court ruled in 1943 that the American Medical Association had violated the antitrust laws by
helping the District of Columbia Medical Society to deny staff privileges to physicians in the
Group Health Association of Washington, D.C., an early HMO (American Medical Ass’n. v.
United States, 317 U.S. 519 (1943)).
In a landmark case in 1975, the Supreme Court decided in Goldfarb v. Virginia State Bar
(Goldfarb v. Virginia State Bar, 421 U.S. 773 (1975)) that there was no “learned professions”
exemption from the antitrust laws. Since that time there has been extensive antitrust enforcement
in health care. Sixteen health care cases have been decided by the Supreme Court in the period
following Goldfarb. Many more cases have been decided by lower courts. A number of these
have struck down activities by medical associations, such as parts of the ethical codes of the
American Medical Association and other professional associations which ban advertising,8
associations setting fee schedules for their members, 9 associations prohibiting members from
certain practice forms (notably HMOs), 10 and associations imposing restraints related to
standards setting.11 The courts have also seen cases involving mergers, denial of staff privileges,
exclusive dealing, most-favored-nations contracts, market allocation, and joint ventures (see
Miles, 1998, Volume 2 for extensive detail).
In the rest of this chapter we focus on the types of behavior that have both been most
relevant in health care antitrust and, in our judgment, are most amenable to economic analysis.
We begin in the next section by discussing whether the health care industry is different with
regard to implications for the optimality of competition. In section 4 we consider hospital
mergers. Section 5 covers monopsony power and foreclosure, and section 6 contains our
conclusions.
3.

Is the health care industry different?

The economic justification for antitrust enforcement is that competition maximizes social
welfare. While in most industries the link between competition and social welfare is (or seems to
be) direct, it is not obviously so in health care. Health care markets are usually thought to differ
from textbook competitive markets in a number of important ways. Health care markets are

2

characterized by multiple imperfections, in large part deriving from the uncertainty and
asymmetry of information between buyers and sellers that are inherent in the nature of health and
medical care [Arrow (1963), Pauly (1978), Gaynor (1994)]. As a consequence, questions of
social welfare must be decided in the context of the second-best. This implies not only that
competition may not be second-best, but that as a consequence, antitrust laws should not be
enforced in health care markets, or possibly enforced differently in health care than in other
markets. Indeed, a common claim has been that health care markets are so fundamentally
different from other markets that meaningful competition is either an impossibility or
counterproductive. As a consequence, adherents of such views have been in favor of extensive
government regulation or production in health care and hostile to the application of antitrust to
health care.12 It should, however, be pointed out that there are few real world markets that satisfy
the requirements for a textbook perfectly competitive market. Most markets are characterized by
some imperfections, and in many markets the deviations from the requirements for perfect
competition are substantial. The antitrust view is that all markets are special, and that while
competition in health care markets should be examined in light of its special character, so should
competition in any other market.
In what follows we consider the differences between health care markets and other
markets and discuss what is known about the implications of these differences for the optimality
of competition in health care markets.
Health care markets differ from textbook markets in the following major ways: the
product is differentiated, information is imperfect, there is extensive government regulation, and
many firms are not-for-profit. We discuss the general issues associated with these differences
and review the health economics literature on these specific imperfections and their implications
for the desirability of competition in health care markets.
3.1

Differentiated product

Health care is a differentiated product. Health care is a service and all services are by their nature
inherently heterogeneous and non-retradable. A haircut, an auto repair, a will preparation, are never
the same thing twice.13 Further, these products can only be purchased by direct interchange with
the seller, thus they cannot be retraded among consumers. This is even more true of made to order,
or customized, services, e.g., a fashion makeover, music lessons, catering, investment advice, or
representation in divorce proceedings. This certainly applies to health care services, from those
which are routine, such as check-ups, to those which are specific to the patient (i.e., made to order,
or "customized"). Further, preferences are heterogeneous. Some patients will prefer extensive
explanation and discussion of their case, others would prefer the bare minimum. Some will prefer
"Cadillac" or "gold-plated" treatment, whereas others will only wish to pay for only that which is
adequate or necessary, the "Ford" or "Chevrolet" treatment. This may also be the case with
immutable seller characteristics (or those which cannot be changed ex post, like "putty-clay"
investment, e.g., a physician’s board certification, medical school degree, or a hospital’s religious
affiliation or neighborhood location). Individuals may prefer physicians of a particular age, sex,
race, or ethnic background, or with a particular appearance (tall, short, brown hair, blue eyes,
conservatively dressed, fashionably dressed, hip, etc.). Some may prefer a general practitioner for

3

their primary care, while others may favor a board certified internist. Similarly, some may prefer a
Catholic or Jewish hospital, a hospital with extensive landscaping or modern architecture.
Satterthwaite (1979, 1985) has stressed the idiosyncratic nature of preferences in the physician
services market in particular.
It is this combination of a heterogeneous product with heterogeneous preferences which is
key. As Satterthwaite has argued persuasively, this bestows the seller with market power.
Patients choose sellers who produce the type of services and have characteristics which best match
their preferences. The fact that patients choose sellers who give them the highest utility gives
sellers market power, since switching to another seller will reduce a patient's utility. The less
substitutable are sellers for one another, the greater the degree of market power, i.e., the lower is the
elasticity of demand a seller faces. In the case of physicians, since the vast majority of physicians
are located in urban markets with many other physicians, the market can be characterized as
monopolistically competitive.15,16 In the case of hospitals, since most hospital markets are
characterized by a relatively small number of hospitals interacting over a long period, this implies a
differentiated product oligopoly. These are powerful paradigms which can help to explain observed
patterns in these markets. In particular, this implies that we should expect sellers to possess power
over price in these markets, even absent any form of anti-competitive behavior. Health care
markets do not seem to be fundamentally different in this regard from other markets with
substantial product differentiation.
14

Competition may or may not be optimal in markets with product differentiation. The
theoretical literature on monopoly and product quality and monopoly and product variety does not
provide strong guidance. In general, anything can happen. Competition (monopoly) can result in
too little quality or variety, too much, or just the right amount [Spence (1976), Dixit and Stiglitz
(1977), Salop (1979), Anderson et al. (1992)]. The intuition is as follows. Competition may
underprovide product variety, since competitive firms cannot capture the consumer surplus from
additional variety. It thus may not be profitable for competitive firms to offer a product which has
positive social value. A monopolist, however, may do so, due to its ability to extract consumer
surplus. On the other hand, competition may overprovide product variety. In a competitive market,
part of the profit from offering a new variety will come from "stealing demand" from other firms.
A firm deciding whether to offer a new variety will not take into account this external effect and
thus too much product variety may be offered in a competitive equilibrium. Whether product
variety/quality is optimal, insufficient, or excessive depends on whether and which of these two
effects dominates.17,18
Further, if price is fixed by regulation, then competition can lead to excessive product
differentiation, as in models of non-price competition in the (price) regulated airline industry
[e.g., Douglas and Miller (1974), White (1972), Van der Weide and Zalkind (1981)]. Some have
claimed that, due to insurance, hospitals do not (or did not) compete on price to attract patients,
but rather compete solely on quality or facilities to attract patients (or doctors, who then bring
patients with them). This has been called the "medical arms race" [Robinson and Luft (1985)].19
This has some plausibility for hospitals prior to the 1980s (although the empirical evidence is
weak), since most hospitals were reimbursed on the basis of costs and patients were both heavily
insured and unrestricted in their choice of health care provider. This notion of competition

4

leading to excessive product differentiation and higher prices through a medical arms race has
been influential in at least one antitrust case, in which the judge declared “[H]ospital rates are
lower, the fewer the number of hospitals in an area.”20
What all of this means is that economic theory does not give general guidance to
appropriate antitrust policy in markets with significant product differentiation. In this regard health
care is no different than many other markets. It is clear that price fixing reduces social welfare.
There is little else in the domain of antitrust policy that is clear in general from economic theory.
Mergers resulting in increased market power, price discrimination, attempts to deter entry, and
attempts to reduce competition may either reduce or increase social welfare. While it may be
possible to agree that attempts to reduce entry or eliminate competitors such as limit or predatory
pricing21 are “unfair” and should not be allowed, the welfare effects of such practices will depend
on the specifics in each case.
It is worth pointing out, however, that the antitrust enforcement agencies only concern
themselves with short-term anti-competitive impacts. The 1984 Merger Guidelines (U.S.
Department of Justice, 1984) specifically state that anti-competitive impacts are of concern for only
two years. If product characteristics are fixed for the short term, then the only competitive concern
is price competition. Price competition is clearly optimal when product characteristics are fixed
and no entry or exit occurs.
3.2.

Imperfect information

It has long been understood that the structure of information is critical for understanding health care
markets [Arrow (1963)]. What is critical is uncertainty and, more importantly for the issues here,
asymmetries in information. The important asymmetries lead to moral hazard in health insurance,
adverse selection in health insurance markets, and agency problems in health care markets. What is
critical here is the extent to which these information problems either impair the workings of health
care markets so that competition is ineffective, or are exacerbated by increases in competition. We
review these issues as associated with each of these imperfections, in turn.
3.2.1. Moral hazard in health insurance
Consumer uncertainty about illness and its associated losses leads to a demand for health insurance.
However, since it is difficult to verify the exact nature of the illness and the appropriate treatment,
there is an asymmetry of information between the consumer and the insurer leading to moral
hazard.
One of most important imperfections in health care markets is the moral hazard effect on
consumption due to health insurance [Arrow (1963), Pauly (1968), Zeckhauser (1970)]. The vast
bulk of health care bought and sold is covered by insurance. This means that the consumer of the
service himself pays only a small fraction of the cost, while the majority is reimbursed by thirdparty payers. Insuring individuals against risk reduces the price they face for medical care,
thereby inducing excessive consumption. Since moral hazard induces excessive consumption, it
might seem that market power on the part of firms selling health care services could improve

5

matters by restricting output [Crew (1969), Frech (1996), Pauly (1998)]. Indeed, for a fixed
insurance policy for which there is excess consumption of health care goods and services at the
competitive (marginal cost) price, raising the price of health care goods and services above the
competitive level increases welfare.22
It turns out, however, that if the insurance market is competitive, then setting price at
marginal cost in the health care product market is always second-best optimal [Gaynor et al.
(1998)]. The insurance market will sell insurance policies that maximize consumer welfare
conditional on prices in the health care product market.
Another form of moral hazard is the decreased incentive for consumers to search for the
lowest price [Newhouse (1978)]. In general, however, insurance may lead consumers to search
less, or more, in equilibrium [Dionne (1984)].23 The presence of insurance will tend to lead to
greater dispersion in prices. It is possible that consumers may search more because the increased
dispersion in the price distribution means that there is a bigger potential payoff to search, since the
expected gap between the current price and the lowest price is larger. On the other hand, since
consumers pay only a small fraction of the expense, the payoff to search may still not exceed the
costs. The emergence of highly price responsive buyers of health care in the form of managed care
plans can be thought of as an institutional innovation in response to this problem.
Therefore in health care markets insurance may lead to quality being the salient competitive
factor (as in the medical arms race story). In this case, search may focus entirely on quality.
Dranove and Satterthwaite (1992) show that if there is imperfect information about both price and
quality then in the case where only information about quality is improved (beyond the level
required for first-best quality), both price and quality increase to supra-optimal levels. This result is
suggestive of what might happen in health care markets, but not definite, since there is no insurance
in the Dranove and Satterthwaite formulation.
Dranove and Satterthwaite (1992) also show that it is possible for increased price
information to either decrease or increase welfare. If only information about price is improved
(beyond the point necessary for first-best quality), it is possible that consumer welfare will decrease.
Price will fall, benefiting consumers, but firms’ margins fall enough that quality decreases, causing
a net decrease in consumer welfare. It is also possible for the welfare effect of the price decrease to
outweigh that of the quality decline, thus resulting in an increase in welfare.
This result occurs in a setting where consumers pay the full price for their purchases. It is
not clear that improved information about price will lead to a significant price decrease in health
care markets where consumers are heavily insured. Hibbard and Weeks (1989) provide evidence
that increased information on prices has little effect on consumers’ decisions, in large part due to
insurance coverage. Nonetheless, the Dranove and Satterthwaite result may occur in the presence
of highly price-responsive managed care plans. Indeed, much of the concern over managed care
seems to be due to a perceived emphasis on price at the expense of quality.
3.2.2. Adverse selection in health insurance markets

6

Another form of information asymmetry between consumers and insurers is when consumers are
of different risk types known to themselves but not to insurers, leading to adverse selection in
health insurance markets. This is another well-known imperfection in health care markets. The
classic paper by Rothschild and Stiglitz (1976) shows that competitive insurance markets may
fail in the face of adverse selection. When individuals know their risk types but insurers don’t,
an equilibrium in which both types are pooled in a single insurance contract does not exist. A
separating equilibrium may exist in which high risk individuals purchase complete insurance,
while low risk individuals purchase incomplete insurance. This equilibrium will not exist if
there are “sufficiently few” high risk types. Stiglitz (1977) analyzes the equilibrium insurance
contracts offered by a monopolist in the face of adverse selection. He shows that a pooling
equilibrium does not exist in the case of monopoly either. In the separating equilibrium the high
risk individuals purchase complete insurance. Low risk individuals either purchase partial
insurance or no insurance. The terms of low risk individuals’ contracts are such that they are
indifferent between purchasing insurance and having no insurance.
The welfare comparison between competition and monopoly in insurance markets based
on the Rothschild-Stiglitz analysis is unclear.24 Competition is suboptimal, but monopoly may
be no better. Further, there are other theoretical analyses in which competition does not pose a
problem for existence [Spence (1978), Miyazaki (1977), Riley (1979), Wilson (1977), Cave
(1986)]. Another issue is that it is possible that the Rothschild-Stiglitz assumption of an
immutable risk type known to the individual is not plausible. Some recent evidence indicates
that, while there is some persistence among individuals in their health expenditures, this only
lasts at most for 4 or 5 years [Eichner et al.(1997)]. In consequence, the normative implications
for competition in real world health insurance markets is unclear.
The empirical evidence on the functioning of health insurance markets is mixed. First, it
appears that insurers do not price differentially by risk, either because of transactions costs or
regulations banning such practices. As a consequence, most analysts are more concerned with
favorable selection by insurers (this is often referred to as “cream skimming” or “cherry
picking”) seeking out good risks and avoiding bad risks, than with adverse selection by
individuals [Pauly (1986), Newhouse (1996)]. Second, while it appears there is risk selection in
terms of enrollment in HMOs versus conventional insurance plans [Hellinger (1996), Newhouse
(1996)], there is also evidence pointing to consumer persistence in their choice of insurance plans
[Neipp and Zeckhauser (1986), Madrian (1994), Royalty and Solomon (1997)].
3.2.3. Agency problems in health care markets
The product in this market is not a typical service in that sellers (physicians) do not provide only
medical care, or treatment, but also diagnosis and advice. The physician is hired to make a
diagnosis and provide advice on the appropriate course(s) of action. This, in and of itself, is not
unique to health care markets. Repair services generally have this characteristic. An auto
mechanic diagnoses a car problem and provides a recommendation for action.25 Appliance
repairmen operate in the same way. Stockbrokers or financial advisers diagnose an individual's
financial situation and advise them on investment strategies and on particular investments. Taxi
drivers are told the destination of the passenger and allowed/requested to choose the route. The

7

purchase of such services has been analyzed under the literature known as "games of
persuasion."26
Such games have the following information structure. The consumer observes a symptom
(engine knocking, pain in the side). The consumer observes only the symptom, but does not know
the nature of the problem. There is some probability, known to all, that the problem is a serious
problem, with an expensive treatment/repair and some probability it is minor (inexpensive
treatment). The expert can observe (let's say with certainty) whether the problem is serious or
minor, and can perform both the expensive and the inexpensive treatments.27 The consumer prefers
the appropriate treatment/repair, but cannot observe the problem. Thus, the consumer's choice can
only be based on a report that has been sent strategically by the doctor. There is an asymmetry of
information between the buyer and seller, and thus an agency relationship. This creates the
possibility for the seller to misrepresent the nature of the consumer's problem to him. An incentive
to do so exists when the more expensive repair is also more profitable.
This problem has been referred to in the health economics literature as “induced demand”
and is another frequently mentioned imperfection in health care markets. While deductively it is
plausible that physicians exploit their role as agents to induce some demand from their patients, it
is not clear whether this is an empirically significant phenomenon.28 The empirical literature on
this topic suffers from such severe methodological flaws that it does not provide useful evidence
on either the existence or magnitude of this effect [see the chapter by McGuire in this Handbook
or Gaynor (1994) or Frech (1995, Chapter 5) for discussion].
The relevant issue here is whether competition leads to more or less inducement. One of
the most common attempts to test for demand inducement by physicians takes the form of
regressing price against the number of physicians per capita (and controls). The notion is that if
the market is competitive, the presence of more physicians implies a greater supply and hence a
lower price. Demand inducement, by contrast, is hypothesized to occur in the following way.
Entry of more physicians implies a reduction in demand per physician on average. Physicians
will thus induce demand to increase their incomes. While this “model” and its empirical testing
suffer from severe flaws, what concerns us here is the relationship of inducement to competition.
A number of models with profit maximizing physician firms produce the result that
competition reduces or eliminates inducement. Stano (1987) constructs a model in which profit
maximizing physician firms choose prices and inducement levels. Stano shows that, so long as
entry increases the price elasticity of demand facing the physician firm and marginal inducement
costs are constant, entry reduces inducement.29 Stano’s model does not allow physician firms to
leave the local market and move to another one in response to entry. Since exit from a local
market does not imply (necessarily) exit from the industry, the only losses from relocation to a
new market are the sunk costs of entering a local market, which for physicians are the costs of
building a practice. If exit from the local market is a viable strategic choice, exit may further
reduce the attractiveness of inducement as a response to entry.
Consider also the following simple competitive model. Physician firms maximize profits.
They have constant marginal costs and fixed capacities. The firms have different marginal costs.

8

They enter a market when their variable profits exceed the (common) fixed cost of entry. Price is
set at the intersection of supply and demand schedules, keeping in mind that supply becomes
vertical at industry capacity. Then as demand in a market grows firms will enter in (inverse)
order of their marginal costs. Even if firms price at marginal cost, then markets with more
physicians will have higher prices. This leads to a positive correlation in equilibrium between
price and entry, but implies nothing about demand inducement.
If physician firms are not profit maximizers, but utility maximizers, then it may be
possible that income effects can lead to increased inducement in response to entry. However, to
our knowledge there are no papers that have analyzed precisely this situation. McGuire and
Pauly (1991) find that a monopolist only engages in inducement in response to a (regulated) price
decrease if income effects outweigh substitution effects. There is some weak evidence for the
existence of income effects in physician labor supply [see Sloan (1975), Hurdle and Pope (1989),
Lee and Mroz (1991), Rizzo and Blumenthal (1994)]; however, the results of Rizzo and
Blumenthal (1994) show that the substitution effects of a wage change outweigh the income
effects by a wide margin. Thus, even if physicians maximize utility (rather than profit) the
available evidence is not consistent with an increase in inducement in response to entry and price
decreases. While it seems likely that some inducement exists due to asymmetric information and
agency problems [Darby and Karni (1973)], neither theory nor current evidence indicate that
competition is likely to increase distortions from this market imperfection, but rather just the
opposite.
3.3.

Government regulation30

Health care markets are characterized by extensive regulation. Regulations cover market entry
(physician licensure, hospital certificate-of-need regulation), pricing (hospital all-payer
regulation, insurance premium regulation), product offerings (insurance mandates), and the
activities of not-for profit firms (community benefit requirements). Some regulations are not
intended to replace competition, but rather to augment it. Regulations like physician licensure or
requirements for full information disclosure on insurance coverage are intended to protect
consumers who may be poorly informed. Regulations such as these do not affect the desirability
of competition.
Other regulations, such as all-payer regulation, are intended to replace market
determination of price. Whether competition is beneficial in the presence of such regulations
may depend on what particular constellation of regulations are present. For example, when
hospitals’ prices are controlled by regulation (e.g., all-payer regulation), then competition may
occur over services and well could result in supra-optimal levels of service adoption. Certificateof-need regulation may be an optimal response to this situation (the evidence, however, is that
certificate-of-need regulation has not been effective). Another example is mandated community
rating of premiums for insurance firms, i.e., insurers must charge a single premium to all
consumers based on expected losses in the community. It is certainly possible that in this case
competition among insurers may take the form of competing for the good risks, i.e., favorable
selection, as discussed previously. Such competition is inimical to welfare. The solution may be
regulations designed to combat this phenomenon, or removal of the original price regulation.

9

Situations like these, however, rarely become the concern of antitrust enforcement. Usually state
government does such extensive regulation and this usually supercedes the antitrust laws under a
doctrine known as "state action immunity."
3.4.

Not-for-profit firms

A distinctive institutional characteristic of the health care sector in the United States is the
presence of not-for-profit firms. In particular, the hospital sector is dominated by not-for-profit
firms. This has led to two issues about the desirability of competition in hospital markets. One
question is whether not-for-profit hospitals exercise market power. The alternative that has been
advanced is that not-for-profit hospitals seek to maximize the welfare of the community in which
they are located, and thus do not exercise market power if given the opportunity. This argument
was very influential in a recent court decision to allow the merger of the two largest hospitals in
Grand Rapids, Michigan.31 The second issue is the impact of increased competition on charity
care provided by hospitals. Hospitals, particularly not-for-profit hospitals, provide a lot of
charity care to indigent patients. To the extent that such care is financed out of profits, increased
competition may reduce charity care. While it is true that financing charity care via monopoly
profits is inefficient, charity care which is lost due to increased competition may not be replaced,
due to the vagaries of politics. We take these issues up in the next section.
4.

Hospital mergers

We now turn to a discussion of hospital mergers. Hospital mergers are both one of the most
prominent areas of antitrust enforcement in health care and an area where economic analysis
plays a critical role. We first provide an overview of the enforcement process and outcomes in
section 4.1. In section 4.2 we discuss market definition. Sections 4.3 through 4.5 contain a
discussion of merger analysis, focusing in particular on the effect of not-for-profit status. In
section 4.6 we review the empirical evidence relevant to hospital mergers.
4.1. Enforcement
4.1.1. Process
Hospital mergers are covered by the same antitrust laws as are mergers in other industries. In
particular, Section 1 of the Sherman Act and Section 7 of the Clayton Act forbid mergers which,
in the words of the Clayton Act, “may be substantially to lessen competition, or to tend to create
a monopoly”. Typically enforcement of the antitrust laws with respect to hospitals works as
follows. Section 7A of the Clayton Act requires, in the case of large acquisitions (and hospital
mergers are normally large for these purposes), that the merging parties inform the Department of
Justice (DOJ) and the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) of their intent to merge. The firms must
then wait thirty days, during which time the DOJ and FTC investigate the proposed merger.
During this thirty day period, the agencies may issue a request for additional information
to the merging firms, requiring the firms to produce information relevant to the competitive
impact of the proposed merger. At this time also, the agencies decide which of them is to pursue

10

the matter. The merging firms are then required to wait twenty days after they have complied
with the request for additional information before they may consummate the merger.
During this time, the relevant agency may seek a preliminary injunction in federal court to
prevent the merger. If the agency is the DOJ, it will seek a preliminary and permanent
injunction, typically; whereas, if the agency is the FTC, it will seek a preliminary injunction,
pending a trial-like administrative proceeding within the FTC before an administrative law judge.
If the agencies fail to obtain a preliminary injunction, the merger can proceed. If the agencies fail
to obtain a preliminary injunction, they may still pursue a trial in federal court (DOJ) or the
administrative procedure (FTC) in order to force the firms to divest; however, this is not typically
done. A decision at the district court stage may be appealed to the circuit court and to the
Supreme Court. A decision in the administrative proceeding may be appealed to the full Federal
Trade Commission and then to circuit court and to the Supreme Court.
This process may end in a number of ways. Most commonly, the relevant agency takes
no action. The agency may also offer to allow the merger, provided that the merging firms agree
to some conditions, (for example divestiture of some assets). If the merging firms agree, a
consent decree or consent order is the outcome. If the agency decides to try to stop the merger, it
must go either to court or to an administrative proceeding, to obtain an order either to enjoin the
merger or to force the merged firms to divest. We review (briefly) the decisions in the eleven
cases that we know of in which the process has run all the way to a decision in this last stage.
4.1.2. Framework for analysis
In deciding whether or not a merger is illegal under the Clayton or Sherman Acts, the courts and
the enforcement agencies go through a fairly routinized sequence of steps. We follow Miles
(1998) in describing the sequence as a six-step process.32 The steps are:
1.

Definition of the relevant product market.

2.

Definition of the relevant geographic market.

3.

Identification of the competitors in the relevant product/geographic market.

4.

Calculation of market shares of the competitors and Herfindahl index of
concentration.

5.

Calculation of merging firms’ post-merger market share and the post-merger
Herfindahl, and determination of the likely competitive effect of the merger.

6.

Consideration of any factors which mitigate or exacerbate anticompetitive
effects.33

In the definition of the relevant market, both product and geographic, the idea is to find
the smallest group of products for which there are not close substitutes. A product is to be

11

included in the relevant market if buyers could easily substitute to it in response to a price
increase of the merging firms. In addition, a supplier is to be included in the relevant market
either if it does produce the same product, or does not produce the relevant product currently, but
could easily come to produce it. The Merger Guidelines articulate a test of market definition
which, at least in principle, can be implemented. The Guidelines say that the relevant market,
both product and geographic, is the smallest market in which the sellers, acting as a cartel, could
profitably implement a “small but significant and nontransitory price increase.” They later go on
to say that, most often, this means a 5% increase for the period of at least one year.
Once market definition is completed, market shares and concentration indices are
straightforward to calculate. There is ambiguity in the hospital industry regarding the proper
variable for calculating market shares. Proposals include total revenues, inpatient revenues,
beds, admissions, and patient-days. Choosing among these alternatives does not seem to make a
substantial difference in the outcome of the calculations. Once the various indices have been
calculated, the analyst looks at the post-merger market share, the pre and post merger HerfindahlHirschmann Index (HHI),34 and the change in the HHI, as well as other evidence (testimony of
competitors and third party payers, for example) in order to determine the likely competitive
impact of the merger. No firm standard appears to exist for a concentration index threshold.
However, there are guidelines. The Supreme Court (U.S. v. Philadelphia National Bank et al.
(1963, 374 U.S. 321)) has found that a post-merger market share of 30% is high enough to make
a merger presumptively illegal. The Merger Guidelines say that a merger which increases the
HHI by 50 or more points and results in an HHI of more than 1800 is likely to be anticompetitive
and that a merger which increases HHI by 100 or more points and results in an HHI of more than
1000 is also likely to be anticompetitive.
If this evidence and the testimony of competitors and third party payers is strong enough,
the merger is presumptively illegal, and the merging firms must present evidence that there are
other (non-concentration related) reasons that the merger will have pro-competitive effects. The
most common such defense is the efficiency defense. Merging firms argue that they will achieve
cost savings by the merger, which will be passed along to consumers in the form of lower prices.
Another defense is the failing firm defense, in which the merging firms argue that, without the
merger, one of the firms will fail, so that the merger itself will not result in fewer firms (that there
will be fewer firms anyway). To make this defense the firms must establish not just that one firm
is failing but that there are no other potential buyers for the failing firm. In addition, firms may
argue that entry into the market is fast and easy, so that an attempt at supra-competitive pricing
will be defeated by entry of new firms.
In hospital merger cases, other defenses have been attempted. Hospitals have argued that
they are in a closely regulated industry, and that the government will not permit them to behave
in an anti-competitive way. Hospitals have claimed that, since they are not-for-profit firms, they
will not behave in an anti-competitive way. Hospitals have claimed that, since there is no price
competition in the first place, there is no competition to be protected. Hospitals have also argued
that competition in the hospital industry is a bad thing, and that getting rid of it is therefore
beneficial to consumers. The analyst must then weight these considerations against the potential

12

harms associated with less competition to decide whether the merger will benefit consumers or
not.
4.1.3. Outcomes to date
Table 1 presents a list of cases. We denote the cases by the name of the city in which the
merging hospitals were located.35 For the cases the government lost, we provide our reading of
the primary reason for the decision. For the sake of brevity, in what follows we generically say
“court” where we could mean court, or administrative law judge, or full Federal Trade
Commission, since different cases are decided by different entities, depending on the
circumstances, as discussed in the preceding section. When the government has prevailed, it has
managed to convince the court on steps one through six above.36 As can be seen from the table,
the government has prevailed in five of the eleven cases, but, before its 1998 victory in Poplar
Bluff, had not prevailed in a case since 1991.
[INSERT TABLE 1 HERE.]
In order to gain some insight into the key questions in these cases, with an eye towards
identifying where economic research can provide valuable input, we will proceed through the six
steps outlined above, summarizing as we go the typical method that the court uses in its analysis.
In defining the product market in which hospitals compete, courts have typically used a
“cluster market” approach. So, a typical product market definition is “general acute care hospital
services.” However, outpatient care was included in the product market in the Roanoke decision.
Later, in the calculation of market shares, this product market definition means that inpatient
revenue, beds, or inpatient days for all services are treated as a "single product" for the purpose
of measuring market share.
As is discussed, for example, by Baker (1988), this cluster of services approach is likely
to overstate the size of the relevant market if the component parts of the cluster are not easily
substitutable in demand or supply and if the various hospitals in the relevant geographic market
produce the various component services in differing proportions. For example, consider two
hospitals, one of which specializes in cardiac care and another in oncology, and suppose that
resources are not easily and quickly fungible between these two uses on the supply side. These
two hospitals will appear to be competitors in “general acute care hospital services”; whereas
they are really operating in totally separate product markets. This is acknowledged to some
extent by the courts, as there are some variations in the product market definitions. Some courts
have divided the product market into primary/secondary and tertiary inpatient care (Roanoke,
Long Island, Poplar Bluff) or into primary and general inpatient care (Grand Rapids).
Geographic market definition has most often relied heavily upon the Elzinga-Hogarty
(1973) technique of analyzing shipments data in order to infer the boundaries of geographic
markets [Morrisey et al. (1988)]. Using this technique, a putative market is expanded until it
encompasses a geographic area large enough so that sales from sellers outside the area to buyers
inside the area are small and sales from sellers inside the area to buyers outside the area are also

13

small. In other words, the geographic market is expanded until "imports" and "exports" are a
small proportion of total sales. In hospital cases this is typically measured by flows of patients
(inpatient discharges is the actual measure used) out of and into the area. There are no
universally applied cutoffs for these criteria, although the courts follow Elzinga and Hogarty in
calling a cutoff of 10 percent a "strong market" and a cutoff of 25 percent a "weak market.” This
exercise is regarded by the courts as a starting point in market definition. Additional evidence
which the courts typically consider are the admitting and referral patterns of physicians, overlap
in physician admitting privileges among hospitals, claims by executives of hospitals on whether
they consider themselves to be competitors, planning documents of merging and non-merging
hospitals, and claims by third party payers about their ability to defeat potential price increases by
shifting their patients over geographic space.
Notwithstanding the similarity in the courts’ approaches and what appear to be fairly
similar facts, there is a great deal of heterogeneity in the outcomes of the market definition
process. Geographic markets have been found to be as small as a single county, with a single
city as a relevant submarket (San Luis Obispo) to as large as 19 counties (Roanoke) or to include
hospitals as far away as 100 miles from the merging hospitals (Dubuque). Several issues come
up repeatedly in the disputes over market definition.
First, it is typically found that patients flow from outlying areas into a central city. The
hospitals then argue that this militates for including hospitals in rural areas in the relevant
market. The government argues that these flows do not establish demand substitutability
between rural and urban hospitals, since people flowing from rural to urban areas are seeking
different care (are in a different product market, essentially) than are the people staying in the
rural area. Alternatively and relatedly, the government argues that the hospitals in the urban area
are differentiated from the rural hospitals by reputation, quality, breadth of services, etc. (again,
essentially an argument that they are in a different product market). Sometimes the courts accept
this argument (Rockford, San Luis Obispo, Grand Rapids, Poplar Bluff) and sometimes they do
not (Joplin, Dubuque, Roanoke, Long Island, Ukiah).
Second, the relative importance of managed care and physician loyalty in steering patients
to providers is frequently disputed. The government typically claims that since physicians admit
to few hospitals (near their offices) and since patients are very loyal to their physicians,
geographic product differentiation is extremely important and, therefore, it would be very
difficult for managed care plans to channel demand away from local hospitals in response to
price increases. The hospitals argue that managed care has great power to channel patients and
would do so in response to a price increase. 37 Again, sometimes the courts find that patients are
tightly tied to their local doctor and hospital (San Luis Obispo, Chattanooga, Rockford, Poplar
Bluff) and sometimes the courts find that they are easily directed to distant hospitals by financial
incentives and selective contracting (Joplin, Dubuque, Ukiah, Long Island).38
The calculation of market shares and HHI proceeds once the relevant market has been
decided. The shares are usually based upon such things as beds, admissions, revenue, or patientdays, and differing choices among these measures do not produce noticeably different results, at
least in the decisions where more than one of them are presented. Table 2 presents values for

14

post-merger share, post-merger HHI, and change in HHI for mergers in which these figures could
be gleaned from the decision. In all cases the market definition settled upon by the court was
used.
[INSERT TABLE 2 ABOUT HERE.]
With few exceptions these markets are very concentrated, the merging firms would
command a large market share post-merger, and the HHI would increase a great deal as a result
of the merger.39 For the most part, the government theorizes that anticompetitive effects will
take two forms. First, transaction prices paid to managed care organizations will rise with the
increase in market power caused by the merger. Second, quality of care will fall, as hospitals
gain market power in their competition for patients whose payers pay a fixed, non-negotiable fee
(Medicare and Medicaid). With the exception of Roanoke, it is reasonably clear that in all of the
mergers in the table the government met its prima facie case for anticompetitive effects, using
either the market share test or the standards in the merger guidelines. Of the cases in the table,
the government lost in Grand Rapids, Joplin, and Roanoke.
Hospitals in merger cases argue that there will be efficiencies from the merger. These
claimed efficiencies typically are to result from consolidated operations, savings on
administrative expenses, improved management practices, elimination of duplicative facilities
and equipment, and, sometimes, via the elimination of cost-increasing competition (“medical
arms racing”). In hospital merger cases, as in antitrust cases in general, the efficiency defense is
very hard to make successfully. Cost savings are usually speculative and disputed. Neither the
realization of the cost savings nor the passing along of the savings to consumers is easily
enforceable. Courts usually regard the efficiency defense with skepticism.
In hospital merger cases, courts have sometimes found the efficiency claims plausible. In
the Grand Rapids case, the District Court’s decision in Augusta, the Roanoke case, the Long
Island case, and the Ukiah case, the courts found that the mergers would generate significant
efficiencies. These courts found both that there would be operating efficiencies from the
consolidation of laundry, administration, and similar functions and that there would be savings
associated with reducing non-price competition. In the Roanoke case, the court found that
“hospital rates are lower, the fewer the number of hospitals”; in the Grand Rapids case, the court
found that the merger would serve to end the “medical arms race” which was previously
occurring; in the Augusta case the court found that the merger would eliminate wasteful
duplication of services caused by “a desire among those who administer hospitals to have
expensive equipment because other hospitals have it.” In the Ukiah case, the administrative law
judge found that hospital costs were lower in one hospital than in two hospital towns and that this
was indicative of wasteful non-price competition.
In cases involving the merger of not-for-profit hospitals, the merging parties often argue
that their not-for-profit status makes it unlikely that they will exercise any market power which
they gain. Again, there is heterogeneity in courts’ willingness to accept this argument. The
decisions range from the District Court in Augusta saying “The board of University Hospital is
quite simply above collusion,” to Judge Posner in HCA vs. FTC (1986, 807 F2d 1381) saying “no

15

one has shown that [nonprofit status] makes the enterprise unwilling to cooperate in reducing
competition . . . which most enterprises dislike and which nonprofit enterprises may dislike on
ideological as well as selfish grounds” and the court in Rockford which found that the two
nonprofit hospitals in that case had, in fact, colluded in the past. The court in the Grand Rapids
case found the not-for-profit defense quite persuasive. It referred repeatedly in its opinion to
Lynk (1995a) and to an analysis done by Lynk on behalf of the defendants (see Lynk and
Neumann, 1999 for similar analysis using the same data), which find that not-for-profit hospitals
do not mark up their prices in concentrated markets, and remarked repeatedly on the
unchallenged nature of the findings. It is worth noting as well that the government’s only success
in recent years has come in Poplar Bluff, where both hospitals in the proposed merger were forprofit, so that this defense did not arise.
We now turn to a discussion of what we see as the principle points on which economic
scholarship would be useful in improving the analysis of merger cases. We will consider in turn,
market definition, the effects of merger on competition, the effect of ownership status on
competition, and the efficiency defense.
4.2.

Market definition

4.2.1

Background and issues

In hospital merger cases, it seems apparent that market definition is the most important issue.
When the government has succeeded in convincing courts to adopt its preferred product and
geographic market, it has typically won (the leading exception being the Grand Rapids case).
Market definition is always an important component of antitrust cases, with the party seeking to
block a proposed merger, often the government, arguing for a narrow market and therefore fewer
competitors and the merging parties arguing for a broad market with correspondingly many
competitors. In the 1997 Horizontal Merger Guidelines (Department of Justice and Federal
Trade Commission, 1997) the FTC and DOJ have articulated a test for market definition.40 The
Guidelines are explicit that market definition considers only demand substitution and not supply
substitution. A market is the smallest group of competing firms such that they could, acting in
coordination (the guidelines say a "hypothetical monopolist"), raise their prices by more than 5%
profitably41 for at least one year (DOJ and FTC, 1997). This market definition may, in principle,
be implemented by an analyst in possession of the full demand system faced by the relevant
universe of hospitals (Scheffman and Spiller, 1987; see also Froeb and Werden, 1992).42 Many
methods for market definition have been proposed. Here we describe those that have been
employed in analyzing hospital markets.43 In the next section we describe a proposed method for
hospital market definition using commonly available data.
There are two important dimensions of market definition in hospital merger cases,
product market and geographic market. As we discussed above, the product market is typically
taken to be “general acute care inpatient hospital services” or some functional equivalent.
Hospitals are thought to have little market power, in practice, in outpatient care, since there are a
large number of actual competitors and since entry into this market is relatively easy. By
definition, only hospitals are in the market for inpatient care. As was discussed previously, this

16

definition is problematic. Economic product market definition depends on both demand and
supply substitutability. There does appear to be some substitutability in demand between
inpatient and outpatient care, as, for example, one effect of Medicare PPS is thought to have been
the substitution of outpatient and home health for inpatient care (Eldenburg and Kakapur, 1997;
Kenney, 1991; ProPAC, 1995).44 On the supply side, treating aggregate inpatient services as a
product is not likely to be problematic if there is easy substitution on the supply side among
different categories of inpatient care or if hospitals provide inpatient care of different types in
relatively fixed proportions.45 Both theoretical and empirical research is needed in this area.
The determination of the geographic market has been subject to more research. A
common method of market definition in antitrust cases has been the analysis of “shipments data.”
In many states, there are detailed discharge data detailing the residential location and hospital
chosen by each hospital inpatient. It is possible, through the use of such data, to define markets
using the method of Elzinga and Hogarty (1973).46 The market is defined by increasing the size
of the potential market until some threshold for both exports (termed LOFI = “Little out from
patient inflows
) and imports ( termed LIFO = “Little in from outside”
inside” ≡ 1−
patients treated in area
patient outflows
≡ 1−
) is crossed. No threshold is universally applied, but 75% and 90%
patients from the area
are focal numbers in court decisions, since they appear in Elzinga and Hogarty (1973, 1978).
The Elzinga-Hogarty market definition method is attractive since it can be calculated in a
fairly straightforward way with commonly available discharge data; however, this method suffers
from theoretical shortcomings. As has been detailed by Werden (1990, 1981), an ElzingaHogarty market may overstate or understate the true size of the market. The producers in two
markets may be very close substitutes for one another, though no product flows between them, if,
for example, their products are very close substitutes and are priced similarly. In this case, no
product will flow between the putative markets (since consumers economize on transport costs).
As the putative markets are not truly distinct, were the producers in one putative market to
increase their prices, product would flow between them. Conversely, producers in two different
markets may be selling widely differentiated products, so that there are considerable flows
between the markets caused by consumers seeking out their more preferred products. However,
this does not imply that the producers are in the same market, since their products are widely
differentiated and therefore the price of one product in one market does not effectively constrain
the price of the other product in the other market. This issue arises often in hospital markets
when a large “tertiary care” hospital providing a wide range of services draws patients from
outlying areas, which are served by much smaller “primary care” hospitals. Though there is flow
between the two markets, there may not be much in the way of substitution possibilities between
the products produced in the two markets.
In the scholarly literature, a wide variety of market definition techniques have been
employed, with considerable controversy concerning appropriate methodology. These market
definitions have included the Elzinga-Hogarty method discussed above. Another method is the
“fixed-radius” technique (Robinson and Luft , 1985; Gruber, 1994) in which a hospital’s market
is defined to be an area 5 or 10 or 15 miles in radius around the hospital. Still another type is the
17

“variable radius” technique Melnick et al., 1992; Gruber, 1994) in which a hospital’s market is,
in essence, a weighted average of fixed radius markets, where the weights come from observed
or predicted market shares in zip codes. The most common definitions are political or census
divisions such as counties, Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSA), Health Services Areas (HSA),
urbanized areas, etc. (Romeo et al., 1984; Lynk, 1995a; Dranove et al., 1992).
There has been relatively little work in providing either theoretical or empirical
justification for these choices. There are exceptions, however. Phibbs and Robinson (1993)
attempt to validate fixed radius limits with variable radius measures. Makuc et al. (1991)
validate their aggregates of political subdivisions with Elzinga-Hogarty measures. Dranove and
Shanley (1989) criticize both fixed radius limits and political subdivisions, showing that even
relatively carefully defined political division measures suffer from problems. All of these
methods also are subject to Werden's critique, since they do not take account of price and
substitution possibilities.
4.2.2

A proposed method

We now briefly outline what one would like to do in order to measure geographic hospital
markets, and then discuss why this procedure has not been feasible to date.
Suppose there are three hospitals pricing, as the Guidelines suggest, Bertrand47 at
P1 , P2 , P3 and producing quantities, Q1 , Q2 , Q3 at constant marginal costs, c1 , c 2 , c3 . We wish to
know if firms 1 and 2 are in the same market, as defined by the Guidelines. The firms price as:

Pi = c i − Q i

(4.1)

∂Q i
∂Pi

∂Qi
is both demand and residual demand, by the Bertrand assumption. Now, following
∂Pi
the Guidelines, imagine a hypothetical cartel of firms 1 and 2. Pricing by the cartelized firms is
at:
Here,

P1 = c1 − Q1

P2 = c 2 −

Q2

∂Q1
∂P1

∂Q2
∂P2

− (P2 − c 2 )

∂Q2

− (P1 − c1 )

∂Q1

∂Q1
∂Q2

∂P1

(4.2)

∂P1

∂P2

(4.3)

∂P2

18

The above two equations, the structural demand equations Qi (P1 , P2 , P3 ) , and the assumption of
constant P3 suffice to solve for the new, cartelized P1c , P2c and Q1c , Q2c . Also, the average price
increase from the hypothetical cartelization can be calculated as:
P1c Q1c + P2c Q 2c

−

P1 Q1 + P2 Q2

Q +Q
Q1 + Q 2
P1 Q1 + P2 Q 2
Q1 + Q 2
c
1

c
2

(4.4)

The Guidelines suggest that if the price increase is at least 5%, then the two firms are in the same
market.48 If not, then a 3rd firm is added, and so on. Notice that this method (the method of the
guidelines) is subject to the “reverse cellophane fallacy” critique detailed by Froeb and Werden
(1992).49

This method requires that the researcher be in possession of the full demand structure
facing firms. This typically requires knowledge of a very large number of cross-price elasticities
of demand, and absent some method for reducing this curse of dimensionality, market definition
along these lines is likely to be problematic. As a simple example, consider the following
constant elasticity market demand curve for product j,
ln (q j ) = α j + ∑ η jk ln ( p k ) + ε j ,

(4.5)

k

.
where η jk is the elasticity of good j with respect to the price of good k. If there are N goods there
will be N2 elasticity parameters to estimate.50 This can potentially be a very large number. There
are, however, promising avenues for addressing this curse in hospital markets. In what follows
we describe a method for estimating demand using data on individual patient choices that allows
us to overcome this curse of dimensionality and use demand estimates to define markets.
Since the choice of which hospital to patronize is discrete, it is natural to structure the
demand for hospital services using discrete choice models (McFadden, 1974, Berry, 1994, Berry
et al., 1995). The utility to patient i of consuming care at hospital j is:
Uij =δ j −αpj −γdij +εij .

(4.6)

In this notation, δ j is the mean utility (“quality”) of hospital j 51, p j is the price of hospital j’s
services, d ij is the distance from patient i’s residence to hospital j, and ε ij is the idiosyncratic
part of consumer i’s evaluation of hospital j. It is well documented that the physical distance
from a patient’s residence to a hospital is a major determinant of choice of hospital. In fact, there
is a moderately large literature on the subject (see Burns and Wholey, 1992, Garnick et al., 1989,
and references therein).

19

A consumer chooses hospital j if the utility derived from going there is higher than any
other alternative (we ignore outside goods, although it would not be hard to include them). The
parameters of the utility function in equation (4-6) can be estimated using data on individual
consumer choice of hospital. Market share for hospital j is the probability of an average
consumer choosing hospital j. Market demand for product j is the product of its market share and
the number of consumers in the market. Cross-price elasticities can then be calculated from
market demand. Note that if we assume that the ε ij are distributed Type I extreme value (logit)
this requires estimating only a single parameter on price, and thus avoids the dimensionality
problem. This approach to addressing the curse of dimensionality is discussed, for example, by
Berry et al. (1995).
In practice hospital choice is a complex combination of the consumer’s choice of health
plan, the health plan’s choice of providers to contract with, the consumer’s choice of physician,
and the consumer-physician-health plan choice of whether and where to admit the consumer.
The choice model above implicitly combines all of these. Modeling all of these choices
simultaneously is probably too demanding, but it would be useful in practice to interact whatever
health plan or physician variables are available with the above characteristics.
In additive random utility models such as the one above, in which ε ij is independent
across consumers, implausible substitution patterns among products at the consumer level are
generated. In particular, the slope of demand in both own and rival’s price are dependent only
upon choice probabilities. That is, two products with identical choice probabilities will have
identical own-price slopes and identical cross-price slopes with all other products. In the case of
logit demand, the slope of the demand for product j in its own price is − αs j (1 − s j ) , where s j is
product j’s choice probability. Furthermore, the slope of j’s demand curve in the price of another
product, k, is αs k s j , where s k is product k’s choice probability. Clearly if another product, l, has
the same market share as j then it will have identical own price and cross-price effects.
These undesirable properties of the individual level demand curves carry over to the
market level demand curves faced by firms if consumers are identical (except for realizations of
ε ij ). However, if there is consumer heterogeneity and there are interactions between consumer
and firm characteristics, then the undesirable properties need not carry over to market demand
curves. In this case, d ij , the distance from the consumer to the firm, is such an interaction. It
arises from the interaction of a consumer characteristic (location) and a firm characteristic
(location). The consequence of this is that hospitals which are physically closer to one another
will be better substitutes than are hospitals further apart. For more complete discussion of these
issues, see Berry (1994) and Berry et al. (1995).
It is easy to see, in a simple example, that the tie between market shares and substitution
patterns is broken by including the interaction. Suppose that there are three locations, 1, 2, 3.
Hospital A is in location 1 as are a share λ1 of consumers. Hospital B is in location 3 as are a
share λ3 of consumers. The remaining share λ 2 of consumers are located between the two

20

hospitals at location 2. The locations are arranged on a line with one mile separating location 1
from location 2 and one mile separating location 2 from location 3:
A
1

B
2

3

If the ε ij are distributed type I extreme value, γ = 1 and δ A = δ B = 0 (so that choice only
depends on distance and price), then the unconditional choice probabilities of hospitals A and B
are:
s A = λ1 s1 A + λ 2 s 2 A + λ3 s 3 A

(4.7)

s B = λ1 s1B + λ 2 s 2 B + λ3 s 3 B

(4.8)

where s1A is the conditional probability of A being chosen by consumers in location 1, and so on
for the other conditional probability terms.
The conditional probabilities s1A , s 2 A , s3 A have the usual multinomial logit form, so that
the derivatives are:
∂s A
= −α (λ1 s1 A (1 − s1 A ) + λ 2 s 2 A (1 − s 2 A ) + λ3 s3 A (s 3 A ))
∂pA
∂s A
= α (λ1 s1 A s1B + λ 2 s 2 A s 2 B + λ3 s 3 A s 3 B )
∂ pB

(4.9)

These two expressions are equal in absolute value (only because there are only two
hospital choices, however, i.e., 1-s1A=s1B, and so on).
As discussed by Berry (1992) and Berry et al. (1995) the problems in the market level
substitution patters arise in additive random utility models because all price effects are
determined by a single price parameter, α , and the vector of choice probabilities (or,
equivalently, the product-specific mean utility levels, δ ). Our point is that the above slopes are
not dependent only upon the choice probabilities, s A , s B . They are also dependent upon λ .
Evaluating at p A = p B , s 2 A s 2 B is greater than either s1A s1B or s3 A s3 B , so that any re-allocation of
consumers from location 2 to locations 1 and 3 would decrease the slope of hospital A’s demand
curve with respect to either p A or p B . Thus, with geographically distributed consumers and
hospitals, the particulars of the distribution of consumers and firms affects substitution elsticities
directly (not only via market shares), so that the one to one correspondence between market
shares and substitution elasticities is broken.
Since d ij is an interaction effect, the distribution of the d ij in the population is relevant to
the slopes of the demand curves, especially since d ij will not be independent across choices.

21

Obviously, with more hospitals and locations, one would see more interesting effects of the d ij as
hospitals closer to one another in geographic space would be better substitutes than would
hospitals further apart.
Assuming that a consistently estimated model of the above type is available, all of the
relevant demand elasticities, including own and cross-price elasticities may be calculated. This
will allow us to perform the test described above in order to establish the size of the market.
Additionally, if we possess cost information and are willing to make assumptions about (or have
measurements on) price-setting in the market, we can simulate the effects of merger. Indeed,
there is a recent literature concerning the use of “unilateral” theories of market power in
differentiated products industries (Werden and Froeb, 1994, Baker, 1997, Werden, 1997). To
evaluate product market aspects of market definition (say primary vs. secondary vs. tertiary)
additional interactions, either explicitly on consumer characteristics or implicitly via random
coefficient modeling, would be needed.
These techniques, potentially at least, offer the ability to assist with product as well as
geographic market definition. By including hospitals’ characteristics, both measured and
unmeasured, in interaction with consumer characteristics, both measured and unmeasured, in U ij ,
it is possible to evaluate the “locations” in both geographic and product space of various
hospitals. This would allow for substitution among providers to differ based upon (for example)
“tertiary-ness” or “quality” and based upon the patient population under examination. Using
such a model, it would be possible to evaluate whether or not patient flows from rural to urban
areas truly represent substitution possibilities or just variation in the perceived product market
location of hospitals.
The analysis described above requires that the demand system for the hospitals be
estimated correctly. In particular, the parameter on price must be estimated correctly. Demand
systems of roughly this type have been estimated in the hospital choice literature (see Burns and
Wholey, 1992, and Garnick et al., 1989 and references therein). The chief difficulty with using
the estimates from these studies for the purposes described above is that there are significant
econometric problems with the estimation of the coefficient on price, leading most researchers to
regard these coefficient estimates as highly suspect. There are two main sources of econometric
difficulties.
First, the price data typically used in such estimations are list prices, or “charges.” These
prices are not the prices faced by the relevant decision-makers. To the extent consumers are the
relevant decision-makers, they are insulated from prices by insurance, which often pays all or
most of the costs of a hospital stay. To the extent that health insurance plans are the relevant
decision-makers (through their choice of provider network), charges mismeasure the prices they
face, since managed care plans typically negotiate substantial discounts from list charges, or
negotiate reimbursement schemes with hospitals which are not directly based upon charges. At
best, these two facts mean that there is substantial measurement error in the price variable, and
(intuitively, at least) this tends to bias α toward zero.52

22

Second, standard discrete choice techniques encounter significant problems when there is
substantial unmeasured quality, specifically if there is correlation across consumers in the
idiosyncratic portion of consumers’ evaluations of providers. If in addition to being unobserved
to the analyst these variations in quality are (at least partially) observable to patients (e.g.,
through experience, the experience of friends, or the evaluations of their physicians), then there is
good reason to believe that unmeasured (by the analyst) quality enters systematically into
consumer decision-making.53 Since hospitals will take into account consumers’ perceptions of
quality in their price-setting behavior, hospitals’ prices will be correlated with unmeasured
quality [see Berry et al. (1995) for this argument developed fully]. Again, reasoning intuitively,
one would expect high unobserved quality hospitals to be able to charge higher prices and to,
nevertheless, receive "unexplainably" high demand. This is likely to lead to a negatively biased
estimate of α .
Both of these influences on α are in the same direction (assuming that α is positive);
thus, we should expect conventional discrete choice techniques to underestimate the (absolute
value of) elasticity of demand facing hospitals. In the hospital choice literature, measures of
price α are frequently found to be negative or to have implausibly small positive values. Luft et
al. (1991) estimated structural demand elasticities facing California hospital for Coronary Artery
Bypass Graft surgery, using a hospital choice model like the one described above. They found
own-price elasticities of demand for this service in the neighborhood of -1. This estimated
elasticity leads to very high predicted markups for hospital care for any standard equilibrium
model of price-setting. Given the low level of accounting profits generated by hospitals, such
markups seem implausible.54
The solution to both of these problems is instrumental variables estimation. The issue, as
always, is finding suitable instruments. In the section 4.3 we develop a model of hospital price
and quality setting. Identification of a hospital pricing equation based on the theoretical model is
discussed in section 4.3.3.
4.2.3. Managed care and market definition
As mentioned in section 4.1, the impact of managed care on geographic markets has emerged as
a critical issue in a number of hospital merger cases. The standard intuition has been that
managed care will expand the size of hospital geographic markets as a result of their aggressively
shopping on price. An alternative story is that since managed care plans compete for consumers
based in part on their provider networks, competitive pressures will lead to their networks being
more inclusive that imagined by the standard intuition. Thus there may be little or no impact of
managed care on the size of the hospital geographic market. As was mentioned previously,
research by Mobley and Frech (1997) that shows no significant impact of managed care coverage
on observed consumer travel for hospital services in California is presumably consistent with this
story.
Consider the following structure for examining this issue. Each insurer faces a demand
for its services as a function of its price (the premium), benefits (coverages, cost-sharing,
rationing mechanisms, etc.), provider network, and other factors that shift demand, such as the

23

distribution of consumer distances to hospitals, other hospital characteristics, consumer risk
aversion, etc.55 Their costs will depend on wages and other factor prices, the characteristics of
the insurance product, and the prices they pay providers.
Insurers will choose premia, benefits, and hospitals for their networks to maximize
profits. This will result in a derived demand for each hospital by each insurer which is a function
of the number and characteristics of covered the lives of the insurer, the probability that the
hospital is in the insurer’s network, and the probability that various competing hospitals are in
the insurer’s network. This will yield a derived demand system for hospitals in a managed care
environment.
Note that all insurers do not have to be managed care plans. An insurer's network can
include all hospitals, as in conventional insurance. Assuming it is feasible to do so, estimating
this system will provide own and cross-price elasticities of hospital demand, which can then be
employed for the purposes of market definition as described in the preceding section.56
Examining the effect of managed care on hospital market definition would amount to simulating
the effects that changes in managed care’s market share will have on market boundaries.
This description is not intended as a blueprint for analysis in this area, it simply provides
a starting point in terms of a framework for thinking about the issue. In particular, identification
must be derived from a fully specified structural model of the insurance and hospital markets.
4.3.

Mergers, conversions, and ownership status

In the next few sections we outline a general structure for thinking about hospital competition,
ownership, mergers, and conversions. The structure is used to analyze parts of the hospital
competition literature and its relevance to antitrust policy.
Hospitals sell products that are differentiated on a number of dimensions. Hospitals have
their physical plant in distinct geographic locations, and consumers are known to value hospitals
that are close to their homes. Hospitals have different religious affiliations. They are
differentiated in the breadth of product line they offer, in the technological sophistication of their
services, in the quality of the “hotel” services they offer, in their use and deployment of staffing,
in their mortality rates, and probably in other dimensions as well. It seems reasonable, therefore,
to model hospital competition and hospital mergers using models of differentiated oligopoly (see,
for example, Hausman and Leonard, 1997, Werden, 1997, Anderson et al., 1992, Baker and
Bresnahan, 1985).
An added complexity in the case of hospitals is that many hospitals are not-for-profit
organizations. A literature has grown up around the idea that hospitals, unlike other firms, do not
maximize profits, but rather some utility function, possibly reflecting the preferences of the board
of trustees, the administrators, the employees more generally, or the physician staff (Newhouse,
1970, Pauly and Redisch, 1973, Lee, 1971, Sloan and Becker, 1982, Philipson and Lakdawalla,
1997).

24

We present a simple theoretical model of hospital behavior in order to focus our
discussion of hospital mergers. This model is not fully general, and one should keep this in mind
in reading it. Each firm owns and operates a single hospital. Hospitals maximize a utility
function, U (π , Q, a ) . π are the profits earned by the hospital, Q is the quantity of output
produced by the hospital, and a are characteristics of the output produced by the hospital. We
are intentionally vague about the interpretation of a . It may be quality, charity care,
technological sophistication, educational activities, “status,” or some other attribute of hospital
services hospital administrators care about.57 To ease exposition, we will simply refer to a as
quality throughout, however. In pursuit of their goals, hospitals choose the quantity of their
output and the characteristics of their product, taking into account that they are acting in a market
in which other firms are present.
Hospitals are assumed to produce products differentiated (potentially) by a and by
location. Demand facing hospital i is represented as P i = D i (Q i , a i , Q −i , a −i ) . Using a
characterization of the equilibrium of the game and solving out for other firms actions (see Baker
i
and Bresnahan (1987), for example), we may write firm i’s residual demand, D , as

(

(

)

(

)

)) .

(

P i = D i Q i , a i = D i Q i , a i , Q −i Q i , a i , a −i Q i , a i

(4.10)

The elasticity of residual demand is a function of demand elasticity, cross-demand
elasticities, and the elasticities of the response functions of rivals, as perceived by the firm:
D1i =

∂Di
∂Q i

+ ∑ j ≠i

∂ D i ∂Q j
∂Q j ∂Q i

+ ∑ j ≠i

∂ D i ∂a j

+ ∑ j ≠i

∂ D ∂a

∂a j ∂ Q i

(4.11)
D2i =

∂D
∂a

i

i

+ ∑ j ≠i

∂ D ∂Q

j

∂Q

i

i

j

∂a

i

j

∂a j ∂ a i

Following the conjectural variations empirical literature, is sometimes convenient to rewrite
these as follows, so that rQ is the firm’s "conjectural variation" arising from a quantity change
and ra is the conjectural variation arising from a quality change58:
D1i =

∂Di 
∂ D i ∂Q j
1 + ∑
j ≠i
∂Q i 
∂Q j ∂Q i

∂ Di

D2i =

∂D 
∂ D ∂Q

i 1 + ∑ j ≠i
∂a 
∂Q j ∂a i

∂D

∂Q i

+ ∑ j ≠i

∂ D i ∂a j

+ ∑ j ≠i

∂ D ∂a

j

∂a

i

∂a j ∂Q i

∂Di  ∂Di
 =
1 + rQ
∂Q i  ∂ Q i

(

)
(4.12)

i

i

j

∂a

i

i

i

j

Hospitals solve:

25

∂a

∂D  ∂D
=
1 + ra
∂a i  ∂ a i
i

i

(

)

max Q ,a U (π , Q, a )

π = pQ − C (Q , a )

(4.13)

s.t. π ≥ π L
where we assume that π L is a lower bound on hospital profits and that the functions U and C are
typical well behaved utility and cost functions.
The first-order conditions for a maximum can be easily manipulated to yield:
P = C1 −

U2
− QD1
U1 + λ
(4.14)

C 2 = QD2 +

U3
U1 + λ

Here the subscript on C1 denotes a partial derivative with respect to its first argument, quantity.
λ is the LaGrange multiplier on profits. Assuming that C 22 is positive, we may rewrite these as:
P = C1 −

U2
− QD1
U1 + λ
(4.15)

U3


a = f  QD 2 +
, Q  ,
U1 + λ 

where f is increasing in its first argument.
Economists typically have strong priors on the form of U in for-profit firms. In
particular, setting U (π , Q, a ) = π (and dropping the profit constraint) yields familiar first-order
conditions:
P = C1 − QD1
(4.16)

a = f (QD2 , Q )

Notice that the difference between the NFP and FP first-order conditions for price is simply the
U2
term −
. Assuming that U2 is positive (NFPs derive positive utility from quantity), then
U1 + λ
U2
we can think of NFPs as FPs with "lower costs," i.e., "NFP marginal costs" are Cˆ 1 = C1 −
U1 + λ

26

(see Philipson and Lakdawalla (1997) for a fuller development). Thus, ignoring quality, we
expect lower prices and higher quantities for NFPs than for FPs, due to the positive utility NFPs
derive from quantity. We do, in fact, observe that NFP prices are lower on average than FP
prices.
For the most part, we will drop the LaGrange multiplier on profits (assuming that the
profit constraint does not bind). Furthermore, it will be convenient frequently to “linearize” the
problem by imposing strong functional form assumptions. When convenient, we will treat the
“slopes” of demand and residual demand curves, QD1 , QD2 , and the “conjectures” rQ , ra as if they
were parameters (possibly varying across firms and markets with covariates), rather than
functions of firms’ choice variables.
4.3.1. Implications of the model: conversions
Conversions are not directly relevant for antitrust purposes; however, we consider them since we
believe that studying them can shed light on the alleged differences between for-profit and notfor-profit institutions and these differences can be relevant for antitrust purposes.
To understand the likely effects of conversion from not-for-profit to for-profit status, it is
useful to look in detail at the components of the first-order conditions determining price and
quality for not-for-profit (NFP) and for-profit (FP) firms:
P = C1NFP −

(

U2
− QD1 1 + rQNFP
U1 + λ

)
(4.17)

(NFP)
a= f

NFP 


U3
NFP
+
, Q
 QD2 1 + rQ
U1 + λ 


(

)

(

P = C1FP − QD1 1 + rQFP

(FP)
a= f

FP

)
(4.18)

(QD (1 + r ), Q)
2

FP
Q

The change in price and quality caused by the conversion breaks out into several
components. To keep the discussion simple, we approximate changes in price as below. We
suppress discussion of quality, since it is similar.
∆P ≅ (C1FP − C1NFP ) +

U2
− QD1 (rQFP − rQNFP )
U1

27

(4.19)

The price change resulting from the conversion has three components. The first
component, (C1FP − C1NFP ) , captures any efficiency gained in the conversion. If for-profit
enterprises have lower (marginal) costs, say because of administrative scale economies related to
large for-profit chains, economies related to “better” management, or to changes in the quality or
quantity of service provided (i.e. decrease in a or Q), then this effect will tend to reduce the price
charged by the enterprise. The second component,

U2
U1

, reflects the differences in goals between

the for-profit and not-for-profit enterprises. The for-profit values output only to the extent to
which output increases profit; whereas the not-for-profit firm values output per se. Since the
NFP values output per se, it has added incentive to lower price in order to increase output. The
third component, QD1 rQFP − rQNFP , captures any differences which may exist in the reactions of

(

)

firms in the market to a for-profit or not-for-profit firm. If other firms in the market, for
example, find it easier to collude with for-profit firms for whatever reason, this will be reflected
in rQFP − rQNFP > 0 .
3.4.2. Implications of the model: mergers
As we discussed above, courts have often found that the not-for-profit status of hospitals
involved in mergers weighs in favor of the merger, and some courts have given this factor very
great weight (Grand Rapids, and the District Court in Augusta). In addition, scholarly
commentators have put forward the proposition that mergers between not-for-profits should be
treated differently [Kopit and McCann (1988), Lynk (1994), (1995a)] than those between forprofits.
We examine the effects of a merger between two hospitals in the same market using a
residual demand curve approach. Key issues in this industry revolve around asymmetries in the
behavior of FP and NFP firms and how these asymmetries affect the price and quality of product
after the merger. Here, we assume that the two firms (each with its single hospital) merge but
keep both hospitals open. They may realize cost savings, and they set prices and qualities
cooperatively after merging.
Consider firms 1 and 2 and write their demand curves to emphasize their roles:

(

P 1 = D 1 Q 1 , a 1 , Q 2 , a 2 , Q −1,2 , a −1,2

(

)

P 2 = D 2 Q 1 , a 1 , Q 2 , a 2 , Q −1,2 , a −1,2

(4.20)

)

As before, using whatever is the relevant solution concept for the market, solve out for all other
firms’ choices as a function of the choices of firms 1 and 2:

28

(

)

(

(

)

(

P 1 = D 1 Q 1 , a 1 , Q 2 , a 2 = D 1 Q 1 , a 1 , Q 2 , a 2 , Q −1, 2 Q 1 , a 1 , Q 2 , a 2 , a −1,2 Q 1 , a 1 , Q 2 , a 2

P =
2

D 2

(Q , a , Q
1

1

2

,a

2

) = D (Q , a , Q
2

1

1

2

2

,a ,Q

−1, 2

(Q , a , Q
1

1

2

2

)

,a ,a

−1, 2

(Q , a , Q
1

1

2

,a

))
2

))

(4.21)

The residual demand curves of the two firms are thus
Dˆ 1 Q 1 , a 1 , Q 2 , a 2 and Dˆ 2 Q 1 , a 1 , Q 2 , a 2 . Pre-merger prices are given by:

(

)

P1 = C11 −

(

)

U2
− Q1 D11
U1

P 2 = C12 −

(4.22)

U2
− Q 2 D32
U1

(4.23)

Presumably the post-merger firm will also seek to maximize some objective function
which contains variables other than profits. However, the theoretical literature of which we are
aware provides little guidance as to how the merged entity should evaluate and trade off its
objectives. In the sequel, we assume that the merged firm’s utility function is identical to the
separate firms’, but that its arguments are the sum of the individual firm's arguments.59 This
appears to be sensible for profits and quantity, but (given the vagueness with which it is
interpreted) may or may not be sensible for a .60 In addition, although we allow economies by
permitting the merged firm’s cost functions to differ from the separate firms’, production in the
two facilities is assumed to be non-joint. The new, post-merger firm maximizes:
max Q 1 ,Q 2 ,a1 ,a 2 U (π 1 + π 2 , Q 1 + Q 2 , a 1 + a 2 )
~
~
π 1 + π 2 = p 1Q 1 + p 2 Q 2 − C 1 (Q 1 , a 1 ) − C 2 (Q 2 , a 2 )
s.t. π 1 + π 2 ≥ π~ L

(4.24)

~

In the sequel, we will use U to denote the utility function evaluated at the new, merged, profit,
~
quantity, and quality. The post –merger cost function at hospital i is denoted Ci . Post-merger
prices and qualities are given by:
~
~ U
~
~
P1 = C11 − ~2 − Q 1 D11 − Q 2 D12
U1

(4.25)
~

U
~ ~
~
a1 = f  Q1 D12 + Q 2 D22 + ~3 ,Q 1 +Q 2 


U1



29

~
U
~
~
~
P 2 = C12 − ~2 − Q1 D31 − Q 2 D32
U1
~

U
~ ~
~
a 2 = f  Q1 D14 + Q 2 D42 + ~3 , Q1 + Q 2 


U1



For FPs, the same equations may be written, but with the terms involving utility functions
omitted in both the pre- and post-merger price and quality equations.
The question of interest is whether one should expect NFPs to have substantially different
post merger behavior than FPs regarding price and quality changes. Assuming that the degree of
collusion among the other firms and the merging firms does not change with the merger, the
price changes for FP and NFP hospitals are:
NFP

~
U
U
~
~
~
∆P 1 = C11 − C11 − ~2 + 2 − Q 1 D11 − D11 − Q 2 D12
U1 U1

(

)

(4.26)
~
U
U
~
~
~
∆P 2 = C12 − C12 − ~2 + 2 − Q 2 D32 − D32 − Q 1 D31
U1 U1

(

FP

(

)

)

~
~
~
∆P 1 = C11 − C11 − Q 1 D11 − D11 − Q 2 D12

(

(4.27)

)

~
~
~
∆P 2 = C12 − C12 − Q 2 D32 − D32 − Q 1 D31

For FP hospitals, the price change for firm 1 consists of an “efficiency” component
(potentially tending to reduce price), C~11 − C11 , reflecting any savings in marginal costs realized by
the merger and a “competitive” component (tending to increase price), − Q 1 (D~11 − D11 ) − Q 2 D~12 ,
reflecting the fact that the merged firm internalizes the effects of each hospital’s output decision
on the output of the other hospital.
As in the case of conversions, if there is a difference in FP’s and NFP’s ability to realize
reductions in marginal costs due to merger, then this generates differences in the price changes
which mergers bring about. Setting this point aside, the principal difference in the price change
terms is

~
U2 U2
− ~
U1 U1

. To assess the impact of this term on the competitive impact of merger, we

consider several cases.

30

The simplest case is one in which the NFPs have linear utility functions:

(

)

U π , Q, a = α 1π + α 2 Q + α 3 a .

In this case,

~
U2 U2
− ~ =0
U1 U1

and the price increases one would expect

from FP merger and NFP merger are equal. So, the fact that hospitals place value on dimensions
other than profit is not a compelling reason, in and of itself, for expecting FP and NFP pricing to
react differently to merger.
What if the NFPs do not have linear utility functions? In this case, one should expect
NFP firm 1’s price increase to be higher (lower), than that for FPs if

(π 1 + π 2 , Q 1 + Q 2 , a 1 + a 2 ) than it is at (π 1 , Q1 , a 1 ) .61

U2
U1

is lower (higher) at

This condition is, roughly, that the marginal
utility of output should fall more slowly than the marginal utility of profits as the scale of output
and profit rises. What precise shape a NFP's utility function has is obviously an empirical issue
(which we address below), but, so long as profit constraints are not binding, a claim that there is
a difference in price increases between a FP and NFP merger amounts to a claim about
complicated curvature properties of the NFP's utility function and/or residual demand curve. The
important issue, then, to be addressed when thinking about NFP mergers is whether or not NFPs'
marginal utility of profit falls more sharply than do their marginal utility of quantity62 and the
curvature properties of the demand curve.63

4.3.3. Identifying the model
From the previous sections we know that (ignoring any differences in FP and NFP production
technology and in the responses of competitors to FP and NFP actions) the behavior of NFPs
with respect to mergers will differ from the behavior of FPs only if the ratios

U2 U3
,
U1 U1

are non-

constant. It is, therefore, of interest to ask whether one should expect these ratios and their
variance with differing levels of price and quality to be identified.
The NFP’s pricing and quality equations are:
P = C1NFP −

(

U2
− QD1 1 + rQNFP
U1

)
(4.28)

a= f

NFP

(

)


U3 
 QD2 1 + rQNFP +
, Q
U1 


To facilitate discussion, we linearize C1NFP and
as exogenous):

31

U2
and drop the quality equation (take a
U1

′
C1NFP = δ 0NFP + δ 1NFP Q + δ 2NFP a + δ 3NFP W

(4.29)
U2
= µ 0 + µ1π + µ 2 Q + µ 3 a
U1

where δ , µ are parameter vectors and W is a vector of input prices. Substituting into the pricing
equation we get:

(

)

(

′
P = δ 0NFP + δ 1NFP Q + δ 2NFP a + δ 3NFP W − µ 0 + µ1π + µ 2 Q + µ 3 a − QD1 1 + rQNFP

(

) (

) (

)

(

)

′
P = δ 0NFP − µ 0 + δ 1NFP − µ 2 Q + δ 2NFP − µ 3 a + δ 3NFP W − µ1π − QD1 1 + rQNFP

)

(4.30)

Let’s assume that we have an estimated demand system (this would require W to have at
least two elements), so that we may view D1 , D2 as data.
In the pricing equation, the separate identification of the scale effect (δ 1NFP − µ 2 ) and the

(

)

market-power effect 1+ rQNFP has been treated elsewhere extensively (Bresnahan, 1989). This
application introduces three new identification issues. First, firm profits appear in the pricing
equation, second, quality appears in the pricing equation, and, third, the intercept and the slopes
on Q and a are mixtures of cost function and utility function parameters.
Strategies for the identification of all of these will obviously depend upon data. There are
fairly rich data sources available for hospitals, collected by both state and federal governments.
These data sources permit the estimation of demand systems for hospital services (as discussed
previously), cost functions for hospitals (see the discussion below under efficiencies), and
(accounting) profit functions (Hoerger, 1991). Furthermore, as in many other industries,
imperfect measures of price, based upon average revenue or “list” prices, can be constructed (see
the discussion below in the structure-conduct-performance section). So, we proceed below as if
demand, cost, price, and profit estimates are readily at hand. Depending upon how quality is
interpreted in a particular application, it is either readily measured or measured with difficulty
and noise (see the discussion on this issue in section 4.4.2.). Again, we proceed as if estimates
are readily in hand.
We can speak in general about the identification of the pricing equation. Later, we will
take up the separation of utility and cost function parameters. The constant and coefficients on
W are obviously identified. The coefficients on Q and D1Q are identified as long as there is a
shifter of demand and a (price) rotator of demand, (Bresnahan, 1989). Similarly, the coefficient
on a will be identified by a (quality) rotator.
The most problematic variable is π . Two difficulties exist here. First, as in other
industries, measures of economic profits are rarely available, and the measures of accounting
32

profits may be poor proxies (Fisher, 1983). Second, it is not immediately obvious that π is
identified separately from Q . Profit is determined by:
π = PQ − C( Q, a )

(4.31)

If the profit function meets the usual conditions for a neoclassical profit function, then
absent arbitrary functional form restrictions, all shifters of C (input prices, fixed factors) are also
present in the marginal cost functions. Furthermore, Q is already in the pricing equation and P is
affected by Q and a, both already in the pricing equation. So, the coefficient on profits would
seem not to be identified. There are a few possible strategies. Obviously, functional form
restrictions are one. Another is to introduce fixed costs with (at least one) separate shifter into
the cost function. A third possibility is to introduce an additional source of revenue, say returns
from an invested endowment, into the profit function to provide exogenous variation in profit.
The second and third possibilities are potentially viable strategies. Fixed costs are a very
significant component of hospital costs. Likely candidates for separate fixed cost shifters are
factors affecting the cost of capital, like interest rates, bond ratings, etc., construction costs, and
certificate of need regulations. Data are available on all of these factors and have been used in
health economics research, although not in this context. Again, these revenues are usually
documented in hospital databases.
Second, we turn to the separation of cost and utility function parameters. It is of evident
and obvious scholarly interest to separate these two effects, but it is not of evident and obvious
regulatory interest to do so. If there is sufficient information in the pricing equation, as
estimated, to simulate the effects of a merger, then there is little reason for a regulator interested
primarily in the effects of the merger on price to take up the separation of cost and utility
parameters. The question of whether NFP’s reduce prices less because they have lesser scale
diseconomies or because they have marginal utility of output which falls more slowly than their
marginal utility of profit is irrelevant if price is the variable of interest to the regulator.
As is immediately apparent by inspecting the pricing equation, and as is definitionally
true by the lack of separate identification, the separation of utility and cost function parameters is
irrelevant to the question of pricing. To see this, consider two NFP firms, identical in all respects
but that firm 1 has utility and cost parameters δ 01 , δ 11 , δ 21 , δ 31 , µ 01 , µ11 , µ 21 , µ 31 while firm 2 has utility
and cost parameters (δ 01 + ε 0 ), (δ 11 + ε 1 ), (δ 21 + ε 2 ), δ 31 , (µ 01 + ε 0 ), µ11 , (µ 12 + ε 1 ), (µ 31 + ε 2 ) . Obviously, these
two firms will choose identical prices, pre and post merger. So, a regulator interested in price
and quality alone would disregard the separate information even were it to be provided.64
However, there are several strategies for separate identification. The most apparent is to
estimate the cost function along with the pricing equation. In this way, the cost function
parameters would be identified by the cost function estimation and the utility function parameters
by the pricing equation. The other apparent way would be to assume that the cost functions of
FPs and NFPs are identical. Under this assumption, the cost function parameters would be
identified by the pricing equations of the FPs (since the utility function parameters drop out), and

33

the utility function parameters of the NFPs would be identified from differences in pricing
behavior between FPs and NFPs.
4.4.

Empirical evidence on hospital competition and mergers

There have been a large number of studies relevant to hospital merger analysis and hospital
competition generally. There are excellent reviews elsewhere (Dranove and White, 1994, Frech,
1996). We present a selective summary of some relevant research findings.
In practice, researchers have sought to identify the pricing and quality equations using
structure-conduct-performance (SCP) regressions. The idea in these studies is to use some
measure of market structure, say the Herfindahl-Hirschmann index (HHI), as a proxy for some of
the terms in the pricing equation, as:

(

) (

) (

)

(

′
P = δ 0NFP − µ 0 + δ 1NFP − µ 2 Q + δ 2NFP − µ 3 a + δ 3NFP W − µ1π − QD1 1 + rQNFP

)
(4.32)

D1 rQNFP = D1 rQNFP (HHI )

π = π (HHI )

In practice, reduced forms of these equations are usually estimated, and the price and quality
equations are not usually estimated together. The equations usually have approximately the
following appearance:
P = β 0 + β 1Q + β 2 X D + β 3W + β 4 HHI
(4.33)
a = γ 0 + γ 1Q + γ 2 X D + γ 3W + γ 4 HHI
where XD represents demand shifters.
Sometimes there is an interaction between HHI and a dummy variable for ownership
status. Presumably, this dummy represents differential effects of HHI on r for FP and NFP
hospitals, the fact that π (HHI ) appears in the NFP and not the FP equation, and the fact that the
constant, Q-slope, and a-slopes are different.
Using HHI in this way is problematic. First, the use of HHI in a pricing equation is
known to be justified in the homogenous-goods Cournot model of competition and other indicia
are known to be appropriate in other models of conduct (Schmalensee, 1989 and citations
therein). In the Cournot model, however, the coefficient on HHI provides information on the
shape of the demand curve, not on the conduct of pricing (which is already assumed to be
Cournot). Since the issue one is trying to address with a SCP regression is the relationship
between structure and conduct, running a regression which prejudges conduct and provides
information on demand properties conditional on that prejudgment is not ideal. Second, the HHI
is endogenous to conduct, both because high prices attract entry and because differences in

34

demand and cost conditions (often not fully accounted for in the pricing specification) affect both
prices and the number of firms that will “fit” in a market (Evans et al., 1993). Third, the HHI is
affected by the distribution of market share among firms. A firm with unusually low costs (thus,
in many models high market share) will cause the HHI to be large and is likely to cause P to be
lower (Bresnahan, 1989, Schmalensee, 1989 and, relatedly, Demsetz, 1974 and Peltzman, 1977).
Fourth, even a true relationship between HHI and price need not reflect differential conduct. If
market average MC varies with HHI, then price could vary even as conduct remains the same.
This relationship could arise in a number of ways. If bigger markets have more firms and these
firms operate at different scales in bigger markets and there are scale economies, a relationship
may exist between HHI and price which has nothing to do with conduct. If bigger markets have
more firms (with more “draws” on the unobservable components of marginal cost) and low-cost
firms have a disproportionate impact on prices, then price and HHI could be related without an
HHI-conduct linkage (Bresnahan, 1989).
In short, the use of the Herfindahl index to assess the likely impact of mergers imposes
implicit assumptions about the nature of the product, the nature of the competitors, the nature of
conduct, and the nature of entry/exit decisions. When these assumptions are satisfied, of course,
the technique potentially provides information about the effect of mergers on prices. When they
are not, the technique does not. This is true of every technique, of course, so that it is not the
imposition of assumptions which is troublesome, but the simultaneous implicitness and
inflexibility of the assumptions which is problematic. In practice, since the assumptions are
implicit, their applicability to the market at hand is not often discussed nor are they readily
discussed. Furthermore, it is not apparent how to incorporate industry and market specific
knowledge from outside the data or how to modify the approach when any particular implicit
assumption is false.
The primary competing paradigm to SCP at present is that of the “New Empirical
Industrial Organization.” This technique differs in a number of ways from SCP (see discussion
in Bresnahan, 1989). NEIO studies typically involve making explicit assumptions about
production technologies, demand, and conduct. The assumptions typically leave enough
parameters free so that the data identify such things as important cost function, demand function
and conduct parameters. Furthermore, the assumptions differ from study to study and are
tailored to the industry at hand. The strengths of the approach are, first, the explicitness of the
economic assumptions, and, second, the ability to tailor assumptions to particular industries.
This facilitates evaluation both of how relevant the analysis is to the chosen industry and how
failure of the assumptions to hold is likely to affect the conclusions drawn.
A weakness of the approach is that conduct is typically measured holding industry
structure constant (literally, not via covariates). This has two downside implications. First,
evaluating the effect of a change in structure, say by a merger, typically requires additional
assumptions. For example, Baker and Bresnahan (1985) evaluate the effect of mergers among
brewers by assuming that the conduct of the non-merging parties is not affected by the merger,
and only the two merging parties take account of the change in market structure. Werden (1997)
evaluates the effect of mergers by assuming that his markets are characterized by differentiated
product Bertrand competition. Second, it is difficult to integrate cross-sectional variation across

35

markets in structure into the analysis. For some attempts to remediate this problem see
Bresnahan and Reiss (1991), Sutton (1991), and Berry (1992). There are also rhetorical
weaknesses of this family of techniques . First, explicit assumptions are more readily criticized,
so that it may be in a researcher’s private interest to avoid them. Second, estimation techniques
are frequently complex, making their explication, especially to nonspecialists, more difficult.

4.4.1. Structure-conduct-performance: price
The first set of findings we present concerns hospital price-concentration studies. In this branch
of the literature, some measure of price is regressed upon some measure of market concentration.
The studies are differentiated in their operationalization of price (average revenue per discharge
or per inpatient day is probably the mode), in their operationalization of concentration (some
kind of Herfindahl or adjusted Herfindahl is probably the mode), in their study time period, in
their study population, in their market definition, and in their control variables. However, it is
not a completely misleading summary to say that the studies each regress price on a Herfindahl
index, market covariates, hospital covariates including output, and dummy variables for
ownership type.
Here, we present a tabular summary of the findings of a number of studies. In each of
these studies, we used the results to analyze a “standard merger case” (SMC). In the SMC, there
is a market consisting of five identical hospitals, each with a 20% market share, each not-forprofit. We consider a merger of two of the hospitals, and assume that in the new market
configuration the new hospital will have a market share of 40%, will have twice the output that it
had before, and that the other three hospitals will continue to have market shares of 20%. Thus it
is straightforward to calculate the effect on the merging hospitals’ prices, given a coefficient on
the Herfindahl index and a coefficient on (log) output. For studies which use beds as a control
variable, we consider two 218-bed hospitals merging and consider both the change in the
Herfindahl and the change in bed size in the calculation (see Keeler et al., 1999). For many
studies we have had to take some liberties in order to present the results in this standard format.
For example, some studies use number of hospitals rather than HHI to operationalize structure: in
those cases, we consider a decrease from five to four hospitals.
[INSERT TABLE 3 ABOUT HERE]
Several things are apparent from the table. First, the empirical basis for drawing
inferences about hospital mergers from SCP studies is quite narrow. Five of the eight studies we
examine use California data, and only one covers the entire United States. The other interesting
pattern is that the estimated effect of the merger is increasing in the recency of the data. The
correlation between the estimated effect size and the year of the data is 0.22 (it is 0.68 without
the DL and LN studies). Finally, the California studies display stronger merger effects, in
general, than do the non-California studies. Since California has had more rapid and complete
penetration of managed care than have other states, one might wonder whether managed care
penetration is associated with increases in the strength of the association between price and
concentration. There is suggestive evidence in several papers that high HMO penetration tends

36

to decrease prices and to increase the association between the HHI and price (Simon and Shin,
1993, Dranove et al., 1993, Melnick et al., 1992).
In addition to this work, there is a small body of work examining the association of
concentration and price, differentiated by the ownership of the hospital. The theory has been
advanced that not-for-profit organizations will not exercise any market power which they might
come to posses, by dint of their different objectives [Kopit and McKann (1988), Lynk (1995a),
(1994), FTC v. Butterworth (1996, 946 F.supp 1285), FTC v University Health (1991-1 Trade
Cases ¶69,444)]. As discussed previously, the courts have, in some cases, accepted this
reasoning. There are five papers that we know of which specifically address this point. Again,
with some loss of information in the interests of greater clarity, we present the results of these
studies in tabular form. In this table, we consider the effects of the SMC, this time differentiating
by ownership classification.
[INSERT TABLE 4 ABOUT HERE.]
All of these studies with the exception of LN use California data. There are a number of
differences among these studies, however. The studies use different years of data. The Lynk and
DL results are based upon 1989 data, while KMZ use several years (the results above are for
1994), SS use 1993, and LN use 1995 data. The studies also differ on market definition, the
product markets examined, hospitals included in the analysis, and whether the LHS variable is
logged. DL, SS, and KMZ provide discussions of their differences with Lynk. LN discuss
differences between Lynk, DL, and KMZ. The message of these discussions is that each of the
differences in technique and data accounts for some of the differences in measured effects. As
we mentioned above, the absence of explicity assumptions mapping empirical technique,
economic assumptions, and outside knowledge makes it quite difficult to evaluate the relative
merits of the various empirical procedures.
4.4.2. Structure-conduct-performance: non-price
The empirical literature in the area of non-price competition is also largely of the SCP variety.
This research falls into a number of categories, depending on what non-price attribute is
measured and what normative spin is imparted to the results.
The medical arms racing (MAR) branch of the literature generally regresses some
measure of input use or of costs on some measure of concentration.65 The idea is that less
concentrated markets induce hospitals to compete more aggressively for patients, possibly via
competition for physician affiliations or managed care network inclusion. This competition takes
the form of actions by the hospital to increase the perceived attractiveness of their products, for
example by adopting advanced medical technology, acquiring helicopters, employing more
and/or more skilled nursing staff, etc. These actions are costly. The MAR is to be detected by
looking for a correlation between concentration and the input use in question (regressing the
presence of technology on HHI, regressing nurses per patient on HHI, etc.). A negative
relationship is taken as evidence of (presumptively welfare reducing) non-price competition.
Indexes of input use often used are the presence of particular technologies (Dranove et al., 1992,

37

Luft et al., 1986, Robinson et al., 1987), length of stay (Robinson and Luft, 1985, Hersch, 1984),
staffing levels and/or mixes (Robinson, 1988, Hersch, 1984), and reserve capacity (Joskow,
1980). A typical finding in this literature is that higher levels of concentration lead to lower
levels of input use. So, for example, Dranove et al. (1992) find that more highly concentrated
California hospital markets have less sophisticated medical equipment; Robinson and Luft
(1985) find that length of stay is declining in concentration; Joskow (1980) finds that more
concentrated hospital markets hold a lower reserve capacity of beds.
Another set of MAR papers models hospital costs as a function of concentration.
Sometimes the studies estimate what are easily recognizable as neoclassical cost functions, but
with Herfindahl index “dropped” in. In others, functional forms and right-hand-side variables are
more ad hoc. The reasoning in these papers is roughly as follows. If non-price competition is
more aggressive in less concentrated markets and if it is also cost-increasing, then one should
expect to find lower costs in more concentrated markets. A number of papers in this stream of
the literature do find that hospitals in more concentrated markets have lower costs (Robinson and
Luft, 1985, Hersch, 1984, Zwanziger and Melnick, 1988). In addition, studies using more recent
data in California (Melnick and Zwanziger, 1988, Zwanziger and Melnick, 1988) find that costs
are increasing more quickly in high concentration markets, with the inference drawn that
managed care caused hospitals to compete more on price than on quality.
Although most of the non-price competition literature falls into the above categories,
there are papers outside of them. Shortell and Hughes (1988) examine the association between
in-hospital mortality among Medicare patients in 1983 and concentration. There was no
significant association between the two, and the point estimate of the impact of concentration
upon mortality was small.
Another dimension which might be affected by competition is the provision of
uncompensated care. Gruber (1994) studies the effect of competition on uncompensated care in
California. He finds that an increase in Herfindahl by 0.12 leads to an increase in uncompensated
care of 10% and an increase in the number of emergency rooms (disproportionately used by
uninsured individuals) by 4%.
More recently, Kessler and McClellan (1998) find a negative relationship between heart
attack mortality and the Herfindahl index, suggesting that perhaps hospitals may take advantage
of market power by skimping on quality. Hamilton and Ho (1998), however, find no impact of
hospital mergers on heart attack mortality. Volpp and Waldfogel (1998) find that heart attack
mortality in New Jersey increased following hospital rate deregulation, implying that more active
price competition was accompanied by a decrease in quality competition.
4.4.3. MAR, scale economies, and the efficiencies defense
In antitrust cases generally, and in hospital merger cases in particular, firms often mount an
“efficiencies defense.” An efficiencies defense is a claim by the firms desiring to merge that the
merger will create cost savings which will be passed along to consumers. These cost savings are
claimed to be large enough to offset any anticompetitive effects of the merger. In the case of

38

hospital mergers, two types of efficiencies are cited. First, economies of scale in the usual
economic sense are often claimed. Indeed, in their merger guidelines, DOJ and FTC recognize
that there may be substantial scale economies realized by mergers among hospitals with fewer
than 100 beds. They have created a safety zone for such mergers in their statements of antitrust
enforcement in health care (DOJ and FTC, 1996). In addition, hospitals, relying often on the
MAR hypothesis, claim that merging will enable them to rationalize the production of hightechnology services, which they allege to have been wastefully duplicated due to the perverse
effects of competition between hospitals. (See the discussion above under outcomes to date).
There is a large literature estimating hospital costs; however, it is fair to say that few firm
conclusions can be drawn from it. To the extent that any consensus view of scale economies
exists, it is that there are some scale economies for small hospitals, but that these economies are
exhausted above about two hundred beds. Cowing et al. (1983) contains a review of the early
literature on which that consensus is based. This early literature is, for the most part, based upon
ad hoc regression specifications. Typically some measure of average costs is regressed upon
beds and beds squared along with a variety of other control variables. The typical finding is a
shallow U-shaped average cost curve with a minimum around 200 beds.
More recent contributions usually use specifications which are either neoclassical cost
functions (using “flexible functional forms”) or close relatives of neoclassical cost functions.
These papers have produced mixed results, but our reading is that their results are roughly
consistent with the earlier consensus. Vita (1990) and Granneman et al. (1986) find no scale
economies for inpatient care for hospitals in their sample (in fact they find weak scale
diseconomies at all levels of output). Fournier and Mitchell (1992) find substantial scale
economies at point estimates; however, they are unable to reject constant returns to scale at
conventional significance levels, since their parameters are imprecisely estimated. Cowing and
Holtman (1983) find scale economies; however, Vita (1990) recalculates Cowing and Holtman’s
scale economy measures, shifting from Cowing and Holtman’s short run cost function to a long
run cost function, and finds none. Dor and Farley (1996) also find scale economies, but do not
provide measures, confidence intervals, or hypothesis tests for them. Finally, Vitaliano (1987)
finds scale economies; however, his output measure is beds, which is likely better thought of as a
proxy for capital stock, so that it is unclear what to make of his estimates. Dranove (1998)
estimates “cost functions” for cost centers (accounting sub-units of hospitals) within a sample of
California hospitals and finds that scale economies are typically exhausted by hospitals as large
as 200 beds.
Two related problems have prevented a firm consensus from emerging on either the
proper methods for estimating hospital costs or on the facts of the extent and size of scale
economies in production in the hospital industry. First, the “casemix” of the hospital, both in
terms of which diseases are treated and in terms of the severity of illness has not been well
controlled in studies to date. To the extent that large hospitals treat more complex (more costly)
cases, measures of scale economies will be biased downward. Given the “primary”, “secondary”,
“tertiary” and the “community” and “regional referral center” distinctions so common in the
rhetoric of health planners and practitioners, it is at least plausible that this effect is large.

39

Second, and similarly, output is invariably captured via very aggregate measures.
“Discharges” or “patient-days” are frequently used aggregate output measures. In some studies,
five outputs are used, but even this level of disaggregation is not common. Since there are over
400 DRGs (an output classification) for inpatient hospital care, and since even DRG’s are
aggregations of more fundamental output distinctions, there is face validity to this objection as
well. Furthermore, larger hospitals usually have a broader range of services available and
provide more specialized treatments (often costing more). Since this (badly measured) scope of
output covaries positively with the scale of output and since the marginally added outputs are
likely to be more costly than average, this effect works much like the casemix effect above to
depress measurements of true scale economies for large hospitals.
Finally, there is a strain of this literature (Friedman and Pauly, 1981, Gaynor and
Anderson, 1995) which demonstrates that consistent estimates of scale economies can not be
obtained without explicitly modeling hospitals’ problem of maintaining sufficient standby
productive capacity in the face of uncertain demand. Lynk (1995b) argues that there may be
substantial scale economies arising from this inventory management problem. To the extent that
the hospital has a stochastic demand and relatively fixed capacity for various outputs, inventory
models suggest that there can be substantial economies realized by consolidating the operations
of several hospitals. Given the existence of these inventory related economies and given the
already mentioned measurement problems, the argument goes, the findings of no scale
economies in the cost function literature lack plausibility (Lynk, 1995b). These arguments
depend upon hospital capacity being truly fixed in the short run, and any scale economies which
would result from inventory effects would have to be balanced against any diseconomies from
other operations.
4.4.4. Event studies
In addition to the SCP-type cross sectional work described above, there are several recent papers
using a longitudinal approach to measuring the effects of mergers in hospital markets. Event
studies of mergers attempt to infer the effects of mergers by examining movements in the prices
of a firm’s stock arising from information related to mergers. Since most hospitals are not-forprofit, the direct use of stock prices has not been particularly popular. Most of this literature,
then, has used left-hand-side variables other than stock price, including output, output price, and
cost to discern the effect of mergers.
However, one study does use stock price data of several for-profit, publicly traded
hospital firms. Woolley (1989) examines the effects of mergers on the stock prices of “rival”
hospital companies -- that is, hospital companies not involved in the merger. The idea is that, if a
merger is anti-competitive and results in a higher price (and profits), these higher profits will be
shared not only by the merging firms but by other market participants. Conversely, if the merger
has no effect on price and only results in cost savings, the profits of rivals (hence the stock price
of rivals) will not be affected by the merger. Woolley analyzed the movements in the prices of 9
for-profit hospital chains over the period 1969 to 1985. For each merger or anti-merger
occurring in this period, he examined the effect on the stock price of the firms uninvolved in the
merger. For the most part, the mergers were positively associated with movements in the rivals’

40

stock prices and the anti-mergers with negative movements. Woolley’s interpretation that the
results indicate the exercise of oligopoly power were criticized by Vita and Schumann (1991),
reply Woolley (1991), who argue that: 1) Woolley’s definition of the market is excessively broad,
2) that many of Woolly’s mergers occurred in markets sufficiently unconcentrated that it is
implausible that oligopoly power was increased by the merger, and 3) that the for-profit
companies in Woolley’s sample are so large, relative to the number of hospitals affected by each
merger, that an effect could not be discernible in the company’s aggregate profits, whence stock
price. The question of which view is most convincing appears to turn on details of market
definition and the relationship between structure and conduct, and these details are not presently
known.
Two recent papers (Connor et al., 1997, Connor and Feldman, 1997) examine 122
hospital mergers which occurred between 1986 and 1994. The papers use a dataset in which the
authors follow 3500 U.S. hospitals. Hospital mergers are identified from the AHA annual
survey, and 122 are identified in this period. These papers use what is essentially a difference in
differences approach to assess the effects of merger on the exercise of market power. In Connor
et al. (1997), markets are divided into those in which a merger occurred (treatment) over the time
period and those in which one did not (control). The difference in price (average revenue per
admission) and costs are examined for hospitals in each type of market. The effect of mergers is
the difference between the increase in prices (costs) by the merging firms in the merger markets
and the difference in prices (costs) by firms in the non-merger markets. Overall, merging
hospitals had lower growth in prices and costs than did hospitals in markets without mergers.
However, mergers which occurred in markets which had a higher degree of concentration to start
with generated slightly higher price increases than were seen in the control group, and generated
smaller cost savings than did the mergers in the unconcentrated markets. Also, mergers that
occurred among hospitals with higher capacity utilization, fewer duplicative services, and lower
managed care penetration generated more anti-competitive effects. Connor et al. also found that
the hospitals involved in mergers were different in several ways from the control hospitals in
non-merger markets. They were bigger, more urban, more likely for-profit, more likely part of a
system, more profitable, and had higher prices all before the merger occurred.
In Connor and Feldman (1997), the same data are used in a slightly different way to
assess whether or not the mergers led to the exercise of oligopoly power. Using reasoning
similar to Woolley’s event study, the authors used the same difference in difference method to
examine the difference between increases in price and costs in non-merging hospitals in merger
markets (treatment) and the increase in price and costs between hospitals in non-merging markets
(control). In this analysis, the authors find effects which are both very small in magnitude (<1%)
and not significant. These results were not changed in a substantive way by stratifying the
markets by concentration or by stratifying the hospitals by capacity utilization. The authors
conclude that there is not strong evidence that mergers create increases in oligopoly power by
non-merging hospitals in the same market with merging hospitals.
Another recent paper is Alexander et al. (1996). This paper examines the effects of 92
mergers that occurred between 1982 and 1989 on a variety of operating characteristics of the
merging hospitals. The authors examine changes in these characteristics from three years prior to

41

the merger up to the merger and from the merger up to three years after the merger. These
authors also use what amounts to a difference in differences estimator. For their comparison
group, they draw 276 hospitals at random from the AHA survey. The authors seek to test, in
essence, the efficiency-raising properties of mergers, so they look at costs and various correlates
of cost, including staffing levels and beds. Overall, they find that in merging hospitals, the trend
rate of growth of costs was lower for merging hospitals after the merger than it was before the
merger, and that declines in occupancy continued at a slower rate after the merger. In addition,
for the mergers that occurred after 1987, there were reductions in the trend rate of growth of costs
and staffing levels and there was an increase in the trend rate of growth of occupancy rate postmerger. Like Connor et al., however, Alexander et al. find that there were substantial differences
between merger and non-merger markets before the mergers occurred. Markets in which mergers
occurred were declining in both admissions and beds faster than were non-merger. Their costs
were increasing more slowly than were the non-merger markets, again before the merger
occurred.
In a recent, unpublished dissertation, Krishnan (1998) uses a difference-in-differences
technique to assess the effects of hospital mergers for a sample of Ohio hospitals. Her treatment
group is lines of business (DRGs) for the merging hospitals in which the merging hospitals are
likely to have gained market power (DRGs where market share increased by more than 20%
because of the merger). Her control group is lines of business for the merging hospitals in which
the merging hospitals are unlikely to have gained market power (change in market share less than
5%). The average difference in these price changes (pre and post merger) was 4%, so that, in
lines of business where merging hospitals are likely to have gained market power, prices rose 4%
more, post-merger, than in lines of business where merging hospitals are unlikely to have gained
market power.
4.4.5. Studies of Entry
Two recent studies have employed the method developed by Bresnahan and Reiss (1991) for
inferring the degree of competition in a market by observing entry behavior. Firms enter a
market only if it is profitable to do so. For any given fixed cost of entry, the lower average
variable profits are, the greater the market size required to break even is. Market size is assumed
to be proportional to population. Since competition lowers average variable profits, this
increases the population size required to support entry. Thus, if entry increases competition,
more population should be required to support successive entrants. The population required to
support successive entrants will stabilize when the prospective entrant’s profit margin (i.e.,
competition) stabilizes.
The advantage of this approach is that it avoids any potential problems associated with
using price or cost data, as discussed previously. There are a number of disadvantages, however.
The approach relies on the population per firm required to support entry. This will be increasing
as price competition reduces average variable profits. The problem is that a number of other
factors can cause this to increase. Non-price competition can reduce average variable profits by
increasing average variable costs without affecting price. Increases in fixed costs can also cause
the population per firm required to support entry to increase. If later entrants get a lesser share of

42

the market than do earlier ones then the population required to support entry can also be
increasing in the number of firms.
Abraham, Gaynor, and Vogt (1998) use this approach to look at competition in local
hospital markets. These are basically markets in rural areas of the U.S. They find that the
incremental population needed to support additional hospitals increases with the number of
hospitals in the market, at least through market structures of up to four firms. If the changing
market size increments reflect only increased competition, then there are large increases in
competition with additional firms, at least up through the fourth firm. While it is not possible to
directly distinguish between price and non-price competition in this framework, they also find
evidence that the presence of more HMOs reduces entry, consistent with HMOs increasing price
competition.
Chernew et al. (1998) estimate hospital entry into "markets" for coronary artery bypass
graft (CABG) surgery by payer type (Medicare, Medicaid, HMO, Fee-for-service, and Other).
They find evidence that fee-for-service insurers are paying rates that allow for profitable entry.
Medicare payment rates were generous in the mid 1980s, but allowed for zero profits by the mid
1990s. HMOs consistently paid rates that covered variable, but not, fixed costs. Medicaid rates
are below variable costs.
5.

Monopsony and foreclosure

5.1.

Introduction

While a great deal of government antitrust enforcement in health care has addressed horizontal
concerns (hospital mergers, physician boycotts, professional society advertising bans), there have
also been important antitrust cases addressed to vertical issues.66 The two major vertical
concerns that have arisen in health care markets are monopsony power and foreclosure.
Concerns about monopsony power have been confined to the exercise of monopsony power by
insurers against hospitals or physicians. Foreclosure concerns have arisen in the context of
vertical integration, exclusive dealing, or most-favored nation (MFN) clauses between various
combinations of insurers, hospitals, and physicians.
While these issues have for the most part not been viewed as anti-competitive by the
courts in the past, they have received renewed attention in recent years. This is due to two
factors: the recent growth to dominance of managed care in the U.S., and the evolution of
economic and antitrust thinking on vertical restraints. As managed care firms have assumed
large market shares in the insurance market, their bargaining power with hospitals and physicians
has grown. This has led to allegations of the exercise of monopsony power by managed care
firms. At the same time, the health care industry has undergone a great deal of reorganization,
including mergers and acquisitions between insurers, hospitals, and physicians and a great variety
of contractual arrangements between these entities, including exclusive contracts, long term
contracts, and MFN contracts. These contractual or integrated arrangements between upstream
and downstream firms have raised increased concerns about the possibility of these arrangements
leading to foreclosure of competitors and thus increasing the market power of incumbents in

43

these markets. The "Chicago School" thinking on vertical restraints, which overturned previous
antitrust doctrine in this area, is that vertical restraints are pro-, rather than anti-, competitive.
More recent developments in economic theory have led to the evolution of the "Post-Chicago
School," which holds that vertical restraints have anti-competitive potential in certain
circumstances. In what follows, we take up monopsony issues in section 5.2, bilateral market
power in 5.3, and foreclosure in section 5.4.
5.2.

Monopsony power

5.2.1. Monopsony and antitrust enforcement
The U.S. antitrust statutes can be interpreted as prohibiting monopsonistic as well as
monopolistic practices (e.g., predatory pricing, price fixing, market division, bid rigging, refusal
to deal, tying, merger for monopsony, price discrimination, etc. While there have been a number
of cases in which the exercise of monopsony power was found to be an antitrust violation [see
Blair and Harrison (1993, Chapter 2) for a review], for the most part the exercise of monopsony
power has not been of major concern to enforcement authorities. In part this may be due to the
view that monopsony is a rare phenomenon. While this may or may not be true in most markets
in the U.S., questions about the exercise of monopsony power are definitely germane in health
care markets, as we argue below. Another reason for this lack of concern may have to do with
the specifics of antitrust law. U.S. antitrust law does not prohibit price setting by a seller that
takes advantage of monopoly power. As an extension it would seem that the law would allow
monopsonistic price setting as well.67 Most (but not all) of the cases that have been brought
regarding monopsonistic price setting have been decided in favor of the defendant. Another
reason has to do with the antitrust concept of “standing.” Standing is roughly whether the
party(ies) involved have the right to sue under the antitrust laws. The courts have often regarded
sellers to an alleged monopsony as being without standing, since their complaint is that
monopsony led to reduced prices. The view is that the sellers did not suffer any antitrust injury,
since the antitrust laws are not intended to allow a seller to raise prices. In addition, the courts
have regarded monopsony power as leading to reduced prices to consumers (although
monopsony does not necessarily lead to reduced prices to consumers, as we discuss below).
Since this is beneficial to consumers, they have been loath to consider it an antitrust violation,
even if social welfare is reduced.
In health care most antitrust cases involving complaints about monopsony have involved
complaints about unilateral price reductions by a monopsony buyer. In these cases this has been
an insurer buying from a provider of health care services. As indicated previously, the courts
have been reluctant for the most part to regard the unilateral exercise of market power as an
antitrust violation and hence have mostly decided for the defendants in these cases. In the one
case involving a complaint of collusion to obtain monopsony power the court found in favor of
the plaintiffs. At present there have been no health care cases brought involving other sorts of
potential monopsony violations. However, as consolidation continues in the insurance industry it
is likely that cases will be brought concerning mergers between insurers. A possible source of
complaint in those cases is merger for monopsony. We may also see cases alleging predatory

44

pricing (in the case of monopsony this would involve paying high prices to sellers to deter entry),
or collusion, especially as insurance markets become concentrated.
Table 5 contains a list of selected antitrust cases involving monopsony power in health
care.68 In Kartell v. Blue Shield of Massachusetts, Ball Memorial Hospital v. Mutual Hospital
Insurance, and Ocean State Physicians Health Plan v. Blue Cross and Blue Shield and many
other cases, the courts have made it clear that a health insurance plan can bargain as hard as it
wants to get lower prices from providers, providing it is not predatory (attempting to force prices
below marginal cost or average variable cost would be judged predatory). The exception (St.
Bernard Hospital v. Hospital Service Association) is a case where the insurer was controlled by
nine participating providers and the monopsony power was thus judged to be illegally obtained
via a combination.
[INSERT TABLE 5 ABOUT HERE.]
In what follows we provide a brief description of the effects of monopsony power in
general, including how to estimate monopsony conduct. Section 5.2.2 contains a discussion of
monopsony and welfare. In section 5.2.3 we describe a general approach to estimating
monopsony conduct. We then turn to monopsony power in health care in section 5.2.4.
5.2.2. Monopsony and welfare
It is well known that monopsony power leads to a welfare loss for sellers of the product. The
exercise of monopsony power in an input market implies that the quantity and price of the input
sold will both be less than their competitive levels. Thus the owners of the input suffer a loss of
surplus under monopsony. What is not commonly understood is the implication for consumer
welfare. Since the monopsonist obtains a reduced price for the input it might seem that this will
result in a lower marginal cost of production, which might be passed on to consumers.
Consider the following simple model, based in part on Blair and Harrison (1993), Chapter
3, but adapted to represent the health care institutional setting. A health insurance firm produces
output (q), with two inputs: purchased hospital output (x) and another input (y), according to the
following (well-behaved) production function,
q = f ( x, y ) .

(5.1)

The hospital produces its output (x) with costs described by the (continuous, twice differentiable)
cost function c(x ) . Assume, as is usual that cx > 0 and cxx > 0. Hospitals are price takers. Then
hospitals' marginal cost curves are their supply curves and the insurer regards the hospital’s
marginal cost of production, c x , as the unit price of hospital services. Since the insurer possesses
monopsony power its marginal factor cost of hospital services is the derivative of the total factor
cost ( c x ( x ) ⋅ x ). This is c x + c xx ⋅ x . If the output market is competitive, the firm’s profit
function is

45

π = p ⋅ f ( x, y ) − c x ( x ) ⋅ x − p y ⋅ y ,

(5.2)

where p is the output price and py is the price of the other input.69 The profit maximizing amount
of hospital output is where
∂π
= p ⋅ f x − c x − c xx ⋅ x = 0 .
∂x

(5.3)

Clearly this implies that less hospital output is purchased under monopsony than in a competitive
hospital market, the price of hospital output is lower (recall that c xx > 0 ), and hospitals are worse
off.
It is also true, however, that marginal costs are higher under monopsony than with a
competitive factor market. Let the insurance firm’s total costs be
TC = c x ( x ) ⋅ x + p y ⋅ y .

(5.4)

The cost minimizing demands for hospital output and for the other input will be x = x ( p y , q )
and y = y ( p y , q) , respectively,70 thus the cost function is
C ( q, p y ) = c x ( x ( p y , q )) ⋅ x( p y , q ) + p y ⋅ y ( p y , q ) .

(5.5)

Marginal cost is then
∂C
= c xx ⋅ x q ⋅ x + c x ⋅ x q + p y ⋅ y q .
∂q

(5.6)

Note that the first term does not appear when the insurance firm is a competitive buyer in the
hospital market. Since the first term is positive, the marginal cost of production is higher under
monopsony.71 The general point can be established directly by noting that monopsony violates
the conditions for efficient hiring of inputs, thus costs must be higher.
What are the implications of this for consumer welfare? Consider the following scenario.
Assume that output is sold in a regional or national, competitive, market. The monopsonized
factor, however, is purchased in local markets. Assume that this factor is immobile and that
every firm is a monopsonist in its local factor market.72 The result is that every producer sells at
the competitive market price, but operates at higher marginal costs. Thus, aggregate output is
decreased relative to what would be produced if factor markets were competitive. This results in
a welfare loss for consumers. If, however, only a small number of sellers possess monopsony
power there will be (essentially) no loss for consumers. In a competitive market an individual
seller is infinitesimal relative to the total, thus the above described output description only leads
to a welfare loss in a competitive output market if a large number of sellers are also
monopsonists.73 If a seller possesses monopoly power, then a monopsony distortion due to
46

higher marginal costs exacerbates the output restriction due to monopoly. Consumers pay both
higher prices and consume less output from a monopolist-monopsonist than from a monopolist.
5.2.3. Detecting monopsony power
In principle, detecting the exercise of monopsony power via econometric methods is not much
different than is the same exercise for monopoly power.74,75 Let the question of interest be
whether insurers possess monopsony power in the hospital market. Assume that the following
are observable: the price and quantity of hospital output, the price or the quantity of insurance,
factors that shift the marginal productivity of hospitals, and factors that shift the supply of
hospital output.
Rearranging the equation above for the profit maximizing amount of hospital output
yields the equation for hospital output price setting (or quantity of hospital output setting) by a
monopsonist,
p x = c x = p ⋅ f x − c xx ⋅ x ,

(5.7)

where px is the price of hospital output. Note that if the second term equals zero this corresponds
to the wage setting condition in a perfectly competitive labor market. Following Bresnahan
(1989), we can rewrite this to parameterize the extent of monopsony power,
p x = p ⋅ f x ( x, y , M , β , ε f ) − c xx ( x, Z , γ , ε c ) ⋅ x ⋅ θ MS ,76

(5.8)

where M is a vector of insurer marginal productivity shifters, including perhaps management or
technology, β is a parameter vector, ε f and ε c are the econometric error terms for the marginal
productivity and marginal supply functions, Z are hospital supply shifters, γ is a parameter
vector, and θ MS is a non-negative parameter indexing the degree of monopsony power. As θ MS
moves farther from zero the firm’s conduct moves farther away from that of a perfectly
competitive purchaser.
If observations on the quantity of insurance output are available a production function
may be estimated jointly with the price setting equation. If not, however, the parameters β can
still be estimated by making an explicit assumption about the form of the function f.
If the output market is perfectly competitive, output price, p, can be taken as given. If the
firm has market power in the output market then p may be endogenous. In this case instruments
for p may be output demand shifters and marginal cost shifters.77
Estimation of the monopsony conduct parameter requires data on hospital transaction
prices, marginal costs, and output. These data requirements are essentially the same as those
described in section 4.4 for estimating the exercise of monopoly power. As indicated there, such
data are commonly available in state hospital discharge databases. Analogous to the estimation

47

of monopoly power by a seller, identification of the parameter θ MS requires the presence of a
supply rotator78 (which changes the elasticity of supply) as an instrument for marginal supply.
The basic idea is as follows. If the market is competitive, rotation of supply around the
competitive equilibrium point will not change price or quantity. If the market if monopsonistic,
however, the equilibrium price and quantity will change. Candidates for hospital supply rotators
are factor prices in other industries (in the case of hospitals, prices paid by Medicare or
Medicaid), non-operating income (e.g., from endowments or other sources, or, changes in the
technology of producing hospital output. Changes in the technology of producing hospital
services seem ideal for this task, although measuring them in a meaningful way may be difficult.
Hospital non-operating income also seems a good candidate for a supply rotator, since not-forprofit hospitals’ behavior may be subject to income effects. We are not aware of any studies of
monopsony power in health care that utilize this approach. As indicated in the section that
follows, existing studies have used a structure-conduct-performance approach to estimating
monopsony power. As indicated previously in section 4.4, while such an approach can yield
some interesting and useful correlations, it suffers from serious limitations. Applying more
structural approaches to estimation may lead to significant advances in our understanding of the
exercise of monopsony power in these markets.
5.2.4. Studies of monopsony in health care markets
There have been two areas in health care in which the question of monopsony power has arisen.
These areas are insurers negotiating prices for health care services and the purchase of nursing
labor by hospitals. We only discuss studies attempting to detect insurer exercise of monopsony
power. See Sullivan (1989) for a state of the art test of monopsony power in the market for
nurses and a survey of the literature in this area.
The question with regard to insurer negotiation of prices with providers is whether the
insurer possesses monopsony power that allows them to artificially depress price and what the
welfare impact of this exercise of monopsony power might be. This issue has been discussed in
a number of articles [Feldman and Greenberg (1981), Adamache and Sloan (1983), Staten et al.
(1987), Pauly (1987), Staten et al. (1987), Pauly (1988a, b, c), Frech (1988), Melnick et al.
(1992), Foreman et al. (1996)] which have focussed on discounts obtained from providers by
Blue Cross/Blue Shield plans. These studies have focused solely on the unilateral exercise of
monopsony power.
While monopsony power is normally defined as the ability to price below marginal factor
cost, it is clear that this ability is predicated on the purchaser’s ability to buy elsewhere. If
insurers have no power to control the providers from which their patients obtain care, they cannot
possibly exercise monopsony power. Frech (1996) discusses how Blue Cross and Blue Shield
plans were able to direct patients via their use of “participating provider” programs.79 Adamache
and Sloan (1983), Feldman and Greenberg (1981), Frech (1988), and Foreman et al. (1996) find a
positive relationship between Blue Cross market share (in the insurance market) and the size of
hospital discounts from list prices (or simply lower hospital prices). Melnick et al. (1992) find a
significant negative relationship between Blue Cross market share in the hospital and the
hospital’s negotiated prices. Foreman et al. find a significant negative relationship between Blue

48

Cross market share in the insurance market and Blue Cross payments per beneficiary. Staten et
al. (1987), however, find no significant relationship between the discounts Blue Cross receives
from hospitals and Blue Cross market share in that hospital, although the point estimates are
consistent with the earlier studies (Blue Cross market share positively related to hospital
discounts). Frech (1988) finds a positive relationship between Blue Cross discount and per capita
health expenditures. While not conclusive, this is consistent with monopsony power leading to
higher marginal costs and higher output prices (if the monopsonist also possesses monopoly
power in the output market). Overall, these findings indicate a negative relationship between
insurer market share and hospital prices.
While these results are interesting, there are a number of methodological issues regarding
whether one can infer monopsony power from these findings. First, strictly speaking, the
monopsonistic structure of the market for hospital services is not necessarily related to the
structure of the market for health insurance Pauly (1988b, 1998). As a consequence, Blue Cross
market share (or any other measure of health insurance market structure) is not the conceptually
appropriate measure of the structure of the market for selling hospital services. It is, however,
likely that an insurer with monopsony power in a hospital market will also possess monopoly
power in the health insurance market, especially if the geographic markets for both products are
very similar.
Neither is Blue Cross share of a specific hospital’s revenues an appropriate measure of
monopsonistic structure. Monopsony concentration is how concentrated sales are among buyers.
Thus, for example, a monopsony Herfindahl index would use buyer’s market shares of output
purchased for the entire market, not the share of a particular buyer for a particular seller.
The second point is that even if this is the case, it does not follow that an insurer with
monopoly power will possess monopsony power. A monopoly health insurer may face a
perfectly elastic supply of hospital services. Even though it is a single buyer, it will pay the
competitive price for hospital services and purchase the competitive quantity. Third, it is not
clear that regressions of price or price differentials against market share identify tests of
hypotheses concerning market power. The negative relationship between premiums and market
share may simply reflect movement along a demand curve, as opposed to identifying the exercise
of market power.
Fourth, although the Feldman-Greenberg, Adamache-Sloan, and Foreman et al. studies
treat Blue Cross market share as endogenous, it is not clear that there is sufficient power in their
data to identify causal effects.80 Melnick et al. recognize the endogeneity of their Blue Cross
share measure, but do not address it.
Fifth, as Pauly (1987) points out, the difference in Blue Cross and commercial insurer
hospital payments isn’t necessarily a measure of monopsony power. Monopsony power is
properly measured by the price paid for the input or the quantity chosen of the input deviating
from their competitive levels. Differential hospital prices for different insurers may reflect price
discrimination by hospitals (i.e., hospital monopoly power) as opposed to insurer monopsony
power.81

49

Sixth, the variables used by these studies do not properly measure transactions prices.
Staten et al. use the difference between total payments for Blue Cross and commercial insurers,
while Foreman et al. use total Blue Cross payments per Blue Cross beneficiary. This
undoubtedly includes quantity differences, thus it is difficult to know whether the estimated
effects measure price differences or quantity differences due to differences in benefits or
differences in enrollee characteristics between Blue Cross and other plans. Similarly, payments
per member also include quantity effects. Feldman-Greenberg and Adamache-Sloan use (one
minus) the ratio of the fraction of hospital charges paid by Blue Cross to the fraction of hospital
charges paid by commercial insurers. This undoubtedly includes bad debts and payment refusals
for uncovered services, as opposed to actual transaction prices. The best measure is that of
Melnick et al., who have an index of prices actually paid to a hospital by the California Blue
Cross PPO relative to the average of this index across all hospitals in the PPO network.
In the context of managed care, Pauly (1998) has noted that lower prices in hospital
markets could result either due to increased buyer sensitivity to price (i.e., increased
competition), or due to the exercise of monopsony power. Hence he concludes that merely
observing lower prices in hospital markets doesn't provide sufficient information to identify the
exercise of monopsony power. Pauly suggests that observing quantity will provide that
information. The idea is that quantity will expand with lower prices under competition, while
quantity will decrease with lower prices under monopsony. Pauly, however, assumes that
managed care results in the elimination of moral hazard effects ex ante. However, if managed
care does not eliminate moral hazard ex ante, competition can result in both a lower price and a
reduction in quantity. A benevolent, omniscient, insurer will ration care ex post and thereby
improve consumers’ welfare. A lower price will lead to more rationing, hence under managed
care competition can be associated with a reduction in quantity [see Gaynor et al. (1998)]. The
consequence is that simple reduced form estimation does not suffice to identify the exercise of
monopsony power.
One important difference between health care markets and most other markets is that
health insurers do not directly choose the quantity of the intermediate good purchased (hospital
services). Since consumers choose the quantity of hospital services, insurers do not perfectly
control the quantity of the intermediate good, even if they “manage” care. Further, since
consumers bear only part of the cost of hospital services they consume, they will demand more
hospital services than will an insurer.82 Consumers’ demand will depend on the price of hospital
care, the health insurance premium, and the coinsurance rate. In the “normal” case of
monopsony, the buyer chooses a quantity that is off its “demand” curve (strictly speaking a
buyer’s demand curve doesn’t exist in monopsony, just as a supply curve doesn’t exist in
monopoly), but on the seller’s supply curve. In this case, however, consumers will demand more
than the quantity the insurer wants to buy and the hospitals want to sell at the monopsony price,
due to moral hazard. However, an insurer will still have an expected quantity of hospital services
that consumers will choose at each hospital price, premium, and coinsurance rate. The task of
the insurer is then to choose the hospital price, insurance premium, and coinsurance rate to
maximize profit, subject to the constraint that consumers’ demand equals supply. If there is not a
profit maximizing coinsurance rate that balances consumer demand with supply at the

50

monopsony price, then the insurer will not fully exercise its monopsony power. It is possible that
there will be no exercise of monopsony power in this situation at all. Pauly (1988b) is the only
paper of which we are aware that recognizes this issue, although Pauly does not impose the
constraint that demand must equal supply. Formal modeling of the optimal choice of hospital
price and insurance policy by an insurer possessing monopsony power remains to be done. The
normative consequence is that if an insurer doesn’t fully exercise its monopsony power the usual
welfare consequences of monopsony may not be present in health care markets.
Overall, while the bulk of the empirical work in this area has been consistent with the
exercise of monopsony power by health insurers, existing studies have not directly tested the
monopsony power hypothesis. An agenda for future empirical research is to employ structural
methods, as reviewed in section 5.2.3, to identify this conduct.
As stated at the outset of this section, the courts have uniformly rejected attempts to
prosecute the unilateral exercise of monopsony power. Nonetheless, as insurance and health care
markets continue to evolve it is very likely that cases will arise that involve allegations of merger
for monopsony or practices intended to create or extend monopsony power. Advancing
economic research in this area will provide the basis for the economics analysis that will be
necessary to support good legal decisions.
5.3.

Bilateral market power

5.3.1. Identifying bilateral market power
While the discussions in the preceding two sections have focused on monopoly power and
monopsony power in isolation, it is reasonable to suppose that there are health care markets in
which both are present. While bilateral monopoly is a classic textbook example, it is rarely
considered explicitly in most studies of organized markets. Health care may be a case, however,
in which bilateral possession of market power is relevant [Pauly (1998)]. Markets for hospital
services are frequently characterized by both a small number of hospitals and a small number of
insurers (buyers). Recent consolidation among insurers, hospitals, and physicians has increased
the number of markets where this is likely to be true.
Identification of market conduct becomes difficult in this case. In particular, neither
movements in prices nor quantities serve to identify monopoly or monopsony power when either
is possible. To illustrate, consider an observed price decrease and corresponding quantity
increase for a hospital. Such a change could be caused by an increase in the price elasticity of
demand facing a hospital, i.e., a decrease in monopoly power. However it could just as well be
caused by an increase in the elasticity of hospital supply (marginal cost) facing a monopsony
insurer. This situation requires separate identification of monopoly and monopsony power
effects.
Consider the following framework. Suppose that the price for hospital services (px) is
determined as a weighted average of the monopoly price and the monopsony price. We remain
agnostic about the process by which this occurs, although one possibility is that this is the Nash

51

bargaining outcome, in which case the weights represent relative bargaining power.83 Price can
then be represented by the following equation,
p x = ω [c x − p ′x ⋅ x ⋅ ω ⋅ θ MP ] + (1 − ω )[c x + c xx ⋅ x ⋅ θ MS ]
= c x − p ′x ⋅ x ⋅ ω ⋅ θ MP + c xx ⋅ x ⋅ (1 − ω ) ⋅ θ MS ,

(5.9)

where ω is the weight on monopoly versus monopsony, c is the cost of production for x, p x′ is
the first derivative of inverse demand with respect to x, θ MP is the monopoly conduct parameter,
and θ MS is the monopsony conduct parameter. The first terms in square brackets represent the
monopoly outcome and the second set of terms in brackets represent the monopsony outcome.
While it may not be possible to identify ω separately from θ MP and θ MS , it will be possible to
identify ω θ MP separately from (1-ω) θ MS by the use of a demand rotator and a supply/marginal
cost rotator as instruments, respectively. Separate identification of ω may be possible via
functional form assumptions (i.e., nonlinearities) or by the use of instruments that affect relative
bargaining strength, but not demand, marginal cost, or marginal factor cost.84 Regulations, such
as those which govern selective contracting by insurers, are potential candidates.
One thing this analysis points out is that estimates of monopoly or monopsony conduct
which assume the absence of one will underestimate the true value of the conduct parameter,
since what is identified is monopoly relative to monopsony power, not the absolute values of
either. Consider for the moment monopoly power (the same points will also hold for
monopsony). If it is assumed that there is no monopsony power when there actually is, then the
degree of monopoly power will be underestimated. The parameter recovered from the data will
be an estimate of ω θ MP , not of θ MP . This issue has been ignored in most NEIO studies of
market power. The reason may be that it appears to be reasonable to assume no monopsony
power in most other markets studied by industrial organization economists, such as automobiles,
steel, railroads, etc. This may not be the case, however, as a number of studies have found a
negative impact of buyer concentration on seller price-cost margins.85 In health care, however,
bilateral market power is definitely an issue which should not be ignored.
5.3.2. Welfare implications
The presence of market power on both sides of a market changes welfare analysis from the case
where there is market power only on one side (monopoly or monopsony only). The theory of the
second-best applies, and if one market distortion is fixed, adding another may improve welfare.
For example, if we take monopoly power as given, an increase in monopsony power can be
welfare improving. This will not, however, be true in general. First, whether monopsony results
in increased or decreased quantity depends on the relative elasticities of supply and demand. If
supply is more elastic than demand, then the monopsony output will be greater than the
monopoly output, and monopsony is welfare improving. The reverse is true when supply is more
elastic than demand. In this case the distortion from monopsony is worse than the monopoly
distortion. Thus, while monopsony in the face of monopoly (or vice versa) may be used for a
“countervailing market power defense” [Blair and Harrison (1993)], any resulting efficiencies are

52

not automatic and hence the efficiency of the countervailing power must be established.86 The
one case in which monopsony is definitely welfare improving is when supply is perfectly
elastic.87 In that case marginal factor cost is identical with marginal cost and the monopsony
outcome is the same as the perfectly competitive outcome, so the result of monopsony power is
to completely offset monopoly power and restore the competitive equilibrium outcome.
While it is possible for bilateral monopoly to improve welfare over simple monopoly or
monopsony, it is never preferable to perfect competition. For example, consider a hospital
merger which would lead to a substantial increase in monopoly power in a market dominated by
a single insurer. While the merger could be allowed on the efficiency grounds previously
described, a superior policy would be to maintain competition in the hospital market and remove
constraints to competition in the insurance market.
Pure bilateral monopoly will rarely, if ever, be observed in practice. The most likely
situation is that of bilateral oligopoly. Since there are no general results on the welfare effects of
oligopoly, we cannot say in general what the welfare impacts of countervailing power might be
when there is oligopoly (oligopsony) power on both sides of the market.
5.3.3. Studies of relative bargaining power
Empirical work on this issue has been rare. There are, however, two studies which have
addressed themselves to this issue. Melnick et al. (1992) examine the impact of Blue Cross'
share of a hospital’s inpatient days, a hospital’s share of Blue Cross’ total hospital days, and the
Herfindahl index in the hospital’s market on the hospital prices paid by the California Blue Cross
PPO. They find that Blue Cross’ share of the hospital’s days has a negative impact on price, a
hospital’s share of Blue Cross’ days has a positive impact on price, concentration in the hospital
market is positively related to price, and the positive impact hospital share of Blue Cross days on
price is greater in more concentrated hospital markets. These results demonstrate very interesting
associations, but as Melnick et al. emphasize, they should not be regarded as definitive. As
mentioned in the preceding section, there are issues with endogeneity, market definition, and
measurement of market share. In addition, the Blue Cross PPO had at most an 8.9% share of
patient days in California hospitals, while the mean was 2.6%. As such, the results seem
somewhat strong for such small shares of hospitals’ output.
Brooks et al. (1997) specify and estimate a Nash bargaining model of hospital-insurer
bargaining over prices. The paper represents a significant advance over other work by writing
down a carefully specified theoretical model of bargaining. The model, however, is one of
bilateral monopoly, while most real world situations are likely to involve bilateral oligopoly.
Brooks et al. estimate the relative bargaining power parameter using measures of actual
transactions prices for a specific condition, appendectomy. The focus on a specific condition
eliminates concerns about proper comparisons between aggregate payments or price indexes
across hospitals. The choice of appendectomy is particularly felicitous, since this is a condition
for which treatment is likely to be relatively homogeneous compared to many others. Further,
they could control for severity or complication differences by differences in diagnosis.

53

The estimating equation which is derived directly from the structural model is
P − PL = γ (PT − PL ) + ε ,

(5.10)

where P is the transaction price, PL is the hospital’s reservation price, PT is the insurer’s
reservation price, γ is the bargaining power parameter, and ε is an error term. In order to
explore whether relative bargaining power is influenced by characteristics such as market
structure, Brooks et al. also estimate
P − PL = (α + βZ )(PT − PL ) + ε ,

(5.11)

where Z is a vector of exogenous influences of bargaining power. Brooks et al. report a point
estimate of 0.686 for γ . This indicates that hospitals have relatively more bargaining power than
insurers, which is not consistent with insurers possessing monopsony power. They find that
hospitals in more concentrated markets for appendectomies have greater bargaining power. They
did not include any measures of concentration in the insurance market, although the proportion of
the population enrolled in HMOs is estimated to have a positive impact on hospital bargaining
power. This may proxy for concentration in the market for buyers of hospital services.
Estimation of the bargaining power parameter requires knowledge of each party’s
disagreement, or threat, points. In this case the threat points are the reservation prices for the
hospital and for the insurer. The reservation price for the insurer is assumed to be the hospital’s
list price. Brooks et al. did not have actual list prices, so they used a regression model to
estimate a predicted list charge. The reservation price is then assumed to be the greater of the
predicted list charge or actual price. The reservation price for the hospital is assumed to be either
the cost of a unit of output or the next best price paid by an alternative seller. Again, these are
not observed, so Brooks et al. use an involved procedure to estimate this. PL is taken to be the
minimum of an estimate of what Medicare reimbursement would be, the predicted list charge, or
the actual price. There are some potential problems with this approach. First, it isn’t obvious
that a list price represents a buyer’s reservation price when buyers have alternative sellers from
which to choose. If buyers choose sellers to negotiate with based at least in part on list prices,
then list prices will likely be set below a buyer’s reservation price. Analogously, it is not clear
that alternative sellers’ prices represent the reservation price. Second, there is the question of
correcting for sampling error in the reservation price estimates, and separately, about whether
these are endogenous. Third, if the predicted Medicare price and predicted list price are both
greater than the transaction price, then the estimates of the hospital’s and the insurer’s reservation
prices are both equal to the transaction price, and hence there is no gain from bargaining.
The factors Z affecting relative bargaining power are assumed to be represented by a
Herfindahl index calculated for appendectomies, the number of hospitals, the proportion of the
population enrolled in HMOs, state dummy variables, and a number of hospital characteristics.
As discussed above, the results seem reasonable, although this regression resembles a priceconcentration regression typical of the studies of hospital competition discussed in section 4.4.
As such, it shares their virtues and limitations.

54

5.4.

Foreclosure88

The other major form of vertical behavior that has been of concern in health care antitrust have
been vertical restraints that tend to reduce competition in the of the markets involved. These
include vertical integration, exclusive dealing, and most-favored-nations contracts.89 A
commonly used term for this effect is “foreclosure.” The reason for concern is obvious.
Consider a situation with a health insurance duopoly and a hospital monopoly. If one of the
insurers integrates with the hospital or engages it in an exclusive contract, it will have the ability
to foreclose the other insurer from the market, thereby gaining monopoly power. This is,
however, an unsettled area, both in economics and in antitrust. As the Chicago School pointed
out, in situations like that in the preceding example, foreclosure will not necessarily occur, since
it requires that foreclosure is profitable both for the insurer and for the hospital. Further, there
are potential efficiency gains associated with vertical restraints. The Post-Chicago School
acknowledges this and analyzes the circumstances under which foreclosure can occur as an
equilibrium phenomenon. Since vertical restraints both involve potential anti-competitive effects
and efficiencies, antitrust cases involving (non-price) 90 vertical restraints are judged on a rule of
reason basis. This makes economic analysis of effects on competition and efficiencies essential
in such cases.
Table 6 contains a listing of some of these cases.91 These cases have concerned vertical
integration, exclusive dealing, and most-favored-nation contracts. The courts for the most part
have found for the defendants, finding insufficient evidence of anti-competitive effects. As
indicated previously, the vast bulk of exclusive dealing cases or vertical integration cases have
been rejected by the courts impacts (e.g., Hyde, Vicksburg, Marshfield). The Oltz case
represents an exception. In this case a group of anesthesiologists obtained an exclusive contract
from a hospital after threatening to leave if a nurse anesthetist was not fired. The
anesthesiologists’ annual incomes increased by over 40 percent after the nurse anesthetist was
fired, from which the court concluded that the exclusive deal had an anti-competitive effect
[Frech and Danger (1998)]. In some recent cases involving vertical integration (Marshfield,
Vicksburg) the courts did consider the possibility of anti-competitive effects of vertical
integration, although they concluded that such effects were not present in those situations. The
courts have also been unsympathetic to claims of anti-competitive effects from most-favorednation (MFN) contracts (e.g., Marshfield, Ocean State). In a recent case breaking with this
precedent (Delta Dental), the court found for the plaintiff, banning the use of most-favorednation clauses in a consent decree. The court also found for the plaintiff in the Reazin case.
[INSERT TABLE 6 ABOUT HERE.]
There has not been a great deal of research in health economics on these issues, although
there has been some recent increase in research in this area. We expect that this will increase as
these issues increase in importance with the spread of managed care and these forms of vertical
restraint [see Gaynor and Haas-Wilson (1998)]. In what follows we first review the general
literature on vertical restraints, discussing its relevance to health care, and then turn to the health
economics literature.

55

5.4.1. Efficiencies
One line of investigation in the economics literature has been concerned with understanding the
potential efficiencies associated with vertical integration and vertical restraints, such as exclusive
dealing agreements. Both vertical integration and vertical restraints can be efficiency enhancing
by leading to more efficient input pricing, lowering transactions costs, assuring supply of an
input, improving coordination between the firms, and improving monitoring [Coase (1937),
Spengler (1950), Klein et al. (1978), Williamson (1975, 1989), Carlton and Perloff (1994),
Riordan and Salop (1995)]. There is some empirical evidence indicating efficiency gains from
vertical restraints [LaFontaine (1992), Masten (1984), Spiller (1985), Crocker and Reynolds
(1993), Lieberman (1991)].
5.4.2. Anti-competitive concerns
The economics literature on the anti-competitive impacts of vertical restraints has been extremely
unsettled. Early court decisions were extremely restrictive in their treatment of vertical restraints
due to concern that these restraints could lead to market foreclosure and consequently be harmful
to competition.92 Strong criticism of case law by the Chicago School led to a new perspective in
which vertical restraints were viewed as competitively neutral or procompetitive [Bork (1978)].
Current thinking on vertical restraints builds upon the Chicago School critique by applying
modern industrial organization theory to the analysis of more realistic market structures and
conduct. This "Post-Chicago School" literature [Riordan and Salop (1995)] identifies situations
in which vertical restraints can raise concerns about competition.93 In what follows we discuss
the literature on vertical integration and exclusive dealing together, since they are analytically
similar, and then discuss the literature on most-favored-nations (MFN) contracts.
5.4.2.i. Vertical integration and exclusive dealing
The Chicago School critique of antitrust policy toward vertical integration and exclusive dealing
consists of three main points. First, vertical integration or exclusive dealing between a
downstream firm and an upstream supplier does not necessarily imply that the net supply of
inputs to rival downstream firms is reduced.94 For example, with multiple upstream firms, rival
downstream firms may now have access to other suppliers previously utilized by the firm
involved in the merger or the exclusive deal. Just because access to one supplier is foreclosed
does not mean that the net supply of inputs has been foreclosed. In addition, entry can occur in
the upstream market, either by independent entrants, or by the excluded downstream firms
themselves. So even if there is an upstream monopoly, vertical integration or exclusive dealing
does not necessarily imply foreclosure. Second, the Chicago School claims that a monopolist
cannot enhance its monopoly power by the use of exclusive dealing or other vertical restraints.
There is a "single monopoly profit," regardless of the nature of vertical relations [Bork (1978,
p.229)]. In the case of the upstream monopolist above, the upstream firm has nothing to gain
from such a merger, since it is already maximizing its profits by selling to the entire downstream
industry as a monopolist. Third, the Chicago School criticizes the case law on forward
integration on the grounds that upstream firms could not induce downstream firms to accept

56

exclusionary contracts if such contracts actually hurt the downstream firms [Director and Levi
(1956)]. In the case with multiple upstream firms above, if the unintegrated upstream firms gain
market power as a result of the vertical merger, the upstream firm approached by the downstream
firm has an incentive to remain unintegrated. The downstream firm must compensate an
upstream partner for lost profits, potentially rendering the deal unprofitable. Posner (1976, p.
212) and Bork (1978, p. 309) conclude that exclusionary contracts cannot cause any harm and
therefore ought to be disregarded by antitrust law. The Chicago School conclusion is that since
there are no anti-competitive impacts of vertical integration or exclusive dealing, these vertical
restraints will only exist where they result in efficiencies, hence they must be beneficial.
The Chicago School view is based on economic models that employ strong assumptions.
In particular, the result of a single monopoly profit depends critically on the assumptions of a
fixed proportions technology, perfect competition in the upstream or input market, and monopoly
in the downstream or output market with prohibitive barriers to entry.95 The results are critically
sensitive to these assumptions [Riordan and Salop (1995), Westfield (1981), Vernon and Graham
(1971)]. These assumptions do not hold in most markets and certainly do not hold in health care
markets.
The Post-Chicago School literature argues that vertical restraints can enhance efficiency,
but also that vertical restraints can be anti-competitive under certain conditions. The anticompetitive impacts of vertical restraints come from: 1) the potential for a vertically related firm
to raise rivals' costs and/or foreclose rivals' access to a necessary market and 2) the potential for
vertical relations to confer market power by facilitating horizontal coordination or collusion.
A number of papers [Salinger (1988), Ordover et al. (1990), Hart and Tirole (1990),
Bolton and Whinston (1993), Riordan (1998), Choi and Yi (1996)] demonstrate that vertical
integration sometimes can lead to foreclosure in equilibrium, concluding that vertical integration
may be anti-competitive.96
Another concern with vertical restraints is that they may act as facilitating devices,
leading to horizontal collusion. For example, if a downstream firm is integrated with an
upstream input supplier but continues to buy inputs from other upstream firms then it will receive
price quotes and other information from these firms. It can also transmit information from the
integrated upstream firm to the other upstream firms. This information can be used to facilitate
collusive practices in the upstream market [Riordan and Salop (1995)]. In addition, an increase
in the market power of a firm through a vertical agreement may provide it with sufficient power
to initiate or enforce collusive horizontal behavior.
The concern over exclusive dealing agreements is the same as that with vertical
integration: can they can lead to market foreclosure or facilitate horizontal collusion Whether
there is foreclosure critically depends on whether an exclusive deal reduces the net supply of
inputs to rival firms in the downstream market. If access is reduced, then exclusive dealing
agreements will raise the cost of doing business to rival firms [Krattenmaker and Salop (1986a,
1986b), Salop and Scheffman (1983, 1987)]. This will put rival downstream firms at a cost
disadvantage, increase the market power and the profits of the downstream firm with the

57

exclusive deal, and reduce social welfare [Katz (1989), Comanor and Frech (1985), Mathewson
and Winter (1987), Schwartz (1987)]. Not only can this deter entry into the downstream market
or increase the unilateral market power of the downstream firm with exclusive contracts, it can
make collusive agreements among downstream firms more likely. An increase in the market
power of the firm with exclusive contracts can provide it with the necessary power to implement
and enforce collusive agreements [Riordan and Salop (1995)]. A number of papers show that an
exclusionary equilibrium can exist if it is not possible for the upstream firms to coordinate with
each other [Aghion and Bolton (1987), Katz (1989), Rasmusen et al. (1991)].
While the vast bulk of the literature on the anti-competitive impacts of vertical integration
or exclusive dealing is theoretical, there have been some attempts to empirically test whether
there are strategic motives for vertical integration. Lieberman (1991) and Spiller (1985) attempt
to distinguish between efficiencies and anti-competitive explanations for vertical mergers.
Neither study finds any support for the anti-competitive hypothesis.
5.4.2.ii. Most favored nation clauses
Most-favored-nation (MFN) clauses, also called most-favored-customer clauses, are vertical
contractual agreements in which the seller (for example, a hospital or physician group/network)
agrees not to charge the buyer (for example, an insurer) more than the lowest price it charges any
other buyer. If the seller offers another buyer a lower price, then the seller must offer the same
lower price to the buyer with the MFN clause. MFN clauses have appeared in contracts between
health care providers and HMOs, Blue Cross and Blue Shield plans, managed dental plans,
pharmacy networks, and vision care insurers.97
Recent work on MFN contracts also shows that such contracts can have anti-competitive
effects in some situations; however, Chicago School analysts have interpreted MFN clauses as
simply representing efforts by firms to obtain low prices and therefore as promoting competition
[Posner (1995)]. Indeed, the fact that firms are willing to sign such contracts is interpreted as
evidence that such contracts must not be harmful.
Modern theoretical analyses find, however, both that MFN clauses have the potential to
be anti-competitive [Salop (1986), Cooper (1986), Png and Hirshleifer (1987), Baker (1996)] and
efficiency enhancing [Butz (1990), Png (1991), Cooper and Fries (1995)].98
MFN clauses may impair horizontal competition in at least two ways. First, MFN clauses
may facilitate tacit coordination [Salop (1986)]. In the case of health care, MFN clauses may
decrease competition among health care providers by reducing providers' incentives to offer
lower prices to insurers. Since any discount the provider grants to another insurer means
granting the discount to its partner in the MFN contract, the provider must grant the discount on
all the inframarginal units it sells to its partner. This makes price reductions very costly and may
be a way to signal a commitment to collusive pricing. Further, MFN clauses may reduce
insurers' incentives to bargain with providers for lower prices, since rival insurers with MFN
clauses would reap the benefits of the lower prices too. If MFN clauses facilitate coordination
among providers and discourage selective discounting, then MFN clauses will lead to higher

58

prices for health care services and/or lower quality health care services. The limiting factor on
this behavior is the ease of entry or expansion into the market. If potential competitors or
existing rivals can enter or expand easily, then the anti-competitive impacts of MFN contracts
will be limited.
Second, MFN clauses may increase rival insurers' costs and thereby deter entry. When an
insurer with a large market share signs a contract including a MFN clause with a large hospital or
physician group, that insurer has effectively increased its own costs and the costs of rival insurers
and potential rivals in the insurance market. The MFN clause assures that the hospital or
physician group will not offer to provide services at lower fees to rival insurers or potential
entrants. Thus, a large insurer getting most-favored-customer treatment may be able to charge
prices above the competitive level or lower quality below the competitive level.
There has been very little empirical research on the impacts of MFN clauses. One study
is by Crocker and Lyon (1994), who study the use of MFN clauses in natural gas contracts. They
conclude that the impact is to improve efficiency, not decrease competition.
5.4.3. Health economics research on vertical restraints
There has not been very extensive research in health economics on vertical restraints.
Three recent papers consider the impacts of exclusive dealing between insurers and providers on
competition in the insurance market. Gaynor and Ma (1996) consider differentiated health care
providers and homogeneous insurers. Thus providers possess some market power, but the
insurance market is perfectly competitive. Individuals, however, do not know which provider
they will prefer should they fall ill and they are risk neutral with regard to this uncertainty, so, in
essence, health care providers are homogeneous ex ante. Since exclusive dealing means that
both the insurer and the provider must be chosen ex ante, this effectively eliminates the
differentiation between the providers. There is no anti-competitive effect in equilibrium, since
the insurance market is perfectly competitive. Further, there is no ability to commit. The result
is that exclusive dealing cannot create market power where there was none. Gal-Or (1996)
considers the same problem, but with differentiated insurers. With differentiated insurers
foreclosure can occur in equilibrium. In this case, a provider who agrees to an exclusive deal
with an insurer will likely accept a lower payment rate in return for a larger volume of patients.
If both insurers sign exclusive deals with different providers, this benefits insurers by reducing
the outside options of the providers and thus reducing their payment rates. Encinosa (1996)
considers exclusive deals between HMOs and physician groups. There is an incumbent HMO
which has a cost advantage over a rival, but must invest in order to serve the entire market.
When the incumbent HMO is risk averse, it may engage in an exclusive deal with the single
provider. This will result in foreclosure and is socially inefficient. At present, however,
exclusive contracts per se appear to be relatively rare between insurers and health care providers.
Long term services contracts are common, and may confer a degree of exclusivity on an insurer
who is a large buyer.
Exclusive contracts between hospitals and physicians are common [Frech and Danger
(1998)]. In antitrust cases in this area, plaintiffs have argued that the exclusive contract(s)

59

between a hospital and a group of physicians amounts to tying, since consumers who wish to buy
from the hospital must also buy from the particular physician group. The counterargument is that
tying does not increase hospital profits [Lynk (1984)]. It has additionally been contended that
exclusive deals between hospitals and physicians are harmful to physician competition. If
hospitals are controlled to a significant degree by their physician staffs, they may agree to an
exclusive deal that reduces competition in the physician market and increases the staff’s profits,
even if it harms hospital profits [Frech and Danger (1998)]. Alternatively, exclusive dealing
between a hospital and a physician group may increase quality or efficiency [Blackstone and Fuhr
(1984), Lynk and Morrisey (1987)].
Lynk and Morrisey (1987) empirically examine the impact of hospital market power on
the probability of an exclusive contract between a hospital and physicians. Lynk and Morrisey
use county level hospital market share and Herfindahl index as measures of market structure.
They find a negative relationship between hospital market share and the probability of an
exclusive contract, which they interpret an rejecting the hypothesis of exclusive contracts being
anti-competitive. Danger and Frech (1998), however, point out that Lynk and Morrisey erred in
calculating the total effect of market share, taking into account the effect on the Herfindahl index.
Their corrected estimates indicate a positive impact of hospital market share on the probability of
an exclusive contract. Neither of these efforts, however, directly test the main hypothesis of an
anti-competitive effect of exclusive dealing between hospitals and physicians: that it will reduce
competition and increase price in the physician services market. Hospital market power seems to
be a necessary, but not sufficient condition for this effect.
Some recent studies have considered possible gains from vertical integration between
hospitals, physicians, and insurers [Conrad and Shortell (1996), Walston,Kimberley, and Burns
(1996)]. These studies have found very little evidence of increased efficiency or quality due to
integration. We are not aware of any empirical attempts to test whether such integration affects
competition.
While the use of MFN clauses has been fairly common in health care through Blue Cross
reimbursement contracting with physicians, we are aware of no studies that directly examine this
issue. Scott Morton (1997) is a recent study of the impact of the adoption by the Medicaid
program of an MFN clause in purchasing pharmaceuticals. Scott Morton finds that prices of
brand name drugs facing competition from generics increased about 4 percent after the Medicaid
MFN policy took effect. She finds no impact on the prices of patented drugs. In addition, the
prices of generic drugs rose more in concentrated markets following the introduction of the
policy. These results suggest that the MFN clause may have softened price competition.
6.

Conclusions

In this chapter we have reviewed the relevant research issues on the economics of competition
and antitrust in health care markets. We have attempted to summarize the current literature,
indicating what we know and what we don’t know on the basis of these research findings.
Where appropriate we have attempted to suggest methodological approaches for some of the

60

major research issues in this area: in particular hospital competition and insurer monopsony or
bilateral market power between insurers and hospitals.
Although there has been a significant amount of research in health economics on the
competitive workings of health care markets, in some sense research in this area is still in its
infancy. Since only relatively recently has vigorous competition emerged in health care markets,
concomitant with the vigorous application of antitrust, much remains to be understood about
competition and antitrust in health care. In addition, the rich set of behaviors and data from
health care markets may be of use to industrial organization economists and antitrust analysts
wishing to understand the impacts of some facilitating practices generally.

61

1

While many health care systems outside the U.S. do not depend to the same degree on markets, competition is

nonetheless important. In particular, where there is competitive bidding or any system that uses cross firm
comparisons for contracting, competition will be important to ensure efficiency. We do not discuss such issues in
this chapter. See the chapter by Chalkley and Malcomson on government purchasing of health services.
2

See also the chapter in this Handbook by David Dranove and Mark Satterthwaite on the industrial organization of

health care.
3

See the chapter in this Handbook by Thomas McGuire on physicians, Gaynor (1994), or Frech (1996) for a review

of issues concerning physician markets.
4
5
6

See the chapter in this Handbook on pharmaceuticals by F.M. Scherer.
For a fuller description see Miles (1998), Chapter 1.
Note that competition policy issues have emerged in a number of countries as reforms have attempted to create

market incentives in the health system.
7
8

See Chapter 1, “General Background” in Miles (1998).
For example, American Medical Ass'n., 94 F.T.C. 701 (1980), enforced, 638 F.2d 443 (2d Cir. 1980), aff;d by

equally divided court, 455 U.S. 676 5 (1982).
9

Goldfarb v. Virgina State Bar, op. cit., Arizona v. Maricopa County Medical Soc'y, 457 U.S. 332 (1982).

10

American Medical Association v. United States, op. cit., American Soc'y of Anesthesiologists, 93 F.T.C. 101

(1979) (consent order).
11

Wilk v. American Medical Ass'n, 671 F. Supp. 1465 (N.D. Ill. 1987), aff'd, 895 F.2d 352 (7th Cir.) cert. denied,

496 U.S. 927 (1990).
12

A government regulator or purchaser may still want competition among providers in order to provide incentives

for efficiency and quality.
13

Strictly speaking, this is true of tangible products as well. Steel of a certain grade produced at the same foundry

varies between runs. No two cars are identical, even if they are produced on the same assembly line by the same

62

workers. Even simple tap water varies in its composition. This is simply the nature of the physical world. Regardless, it
is commonly agreed that services are inherently more heterogeneous than manufactured or mined goods.
14

It would probably be more accurate to say that it is preference heterogeneity which is critical, since this should call

forth heterogeneity in production by producers. This is especially likely to be true for services, since the cost of altering
the product to suit the customer (e.g., a barber chatting more with his garrulous customers and less with his laconic ones)
is likely to be low.
15
16

Over 88 percent of all physicians were located in metropolitan areas in 1989 [Roback et al., 1990].
Even if physicians are very similar, information problems can cause patients to value physicians they know about (in

terms of quality or characteristics they value) more highly. This can bestow market power on physicians and lead to a
monopolistically competitive market structure even if physicians are essentially homogeneous. Information is discussed
in the next section.
17

More definite results can be derived in specific models. For example, Deneckere and Rothschild (1992) show for

a class of models that competition is approximately optimal when firms’ fixed costs go to zero relative to the size of
the market.
18

In an intriguing paper, Berry and Waldfogel (1997) present empirical evidence indicating that there is excessive

entry in radio broadcasting. To our knowledge, this is the only empirical evidence on this issue.
19

It is not clear that the results for a price regulated industry apply directly to health care. Since price is controlled

by health care firms it is not clear that the results would carry through in a carefully specified model.
20
21
22
23

United States v. Carilion Health System (892 F 2d 1042).
Suspending for a moment the question of whether such strategies are rational or successful.
This is essentially the intuition in Crew (1969). Gaynor et al. (1998) show this formally.
He assumes a homogeneous product. It is not clear what impact introducing product heterogeneity might have on

the results. The papers which consider patient search with a heterogeneous product, e.g., Dranove and Satterthwaite
(1992), do not consider the effects of insurance.
24

Monopoly does have the advantage that the insurer knows the total quantity of a consumer’s insurance purchases.

Rothschild-Stiglitz assume that this is known in a competitive market, but it may be difficult for such a market to set

63

up this exchange of information [see Jaynes (1978) and Hellwig (1988)]. If information cannot be exchanged by
firms in the competitive market then competition results in a 3rd best, and is thus inferior to monopoly.
25

Hubbard (1997) investigates the functioning of the market for automobile repairs. He finds evidence inconsistent

with significant agency problems in this market.
26

See e.g., Darby and Karni (1972), Milgrom (1981), Wolinsky (1993), Plott and Wilde (1980), Crawford and Sobel

(1980), Pitchik and Schotter (1987), Green and Stokey (1981), Nitzan and Tsur (1991) generally, and Pauly (1980),
Dranove (1988), and Glazer and McGuire (1991) for discussions of this in health care.
27

A recent paper by Ma et al. (1994) analyzes the case where the accuracy of the diagnosis is increasing in physician

effort. Physician effort is noncontractible, and this noncontractability causes physicians to shirk and undersupply effort.
28

See, however, Emons (1997) for a result in which no inducement occurs in equilibrium, even though sellers have

the ability to induce.
29

If marginal inducement costs are increasing, the results are indeterminate, because entry decreases the marginal

revenue from inducement but also reduces marginal cost.
30
31

See the chapter on regulation in this Handbook by David Salkever for more extensive discussion.
Federal Trade Commission v. Butterworth Health Corporation and Blodgett Memorial Medical Center (1996, 2

Trade Cases 71,571); 1996 QL 570479 (W.D. Mich. September 26, 1996).
32

The DOJ/FTC Joint Merger Guidelines (U.S. Department of Justice and Federal Trade Commission, 1997)

describe it as a five step process. The organization is somewhat different, but consists of essentially the same
factors.
33

These include the potential for entry and any likely impact, potential for efficiency gains, and the potential that

one of the merging firms will fail without the merger.
34

The HHI is defined as the sum of squared market shares for all firms in the market. The antitrust authorities use

percentage of the market (as opposed to proportion) for market share, thus the maximum value for the HHI is 10,000
2

10,000
 100 
, where n is the number of firms.
 =
n
 n 

and the minimum is n ⋅ 

64

35

Citations for the decisions are as follows: Poplar Bluff (FTC v. Tenet Healthcare (1998 ,US Dist Lexis 11849),

Long Island (U.S. v. Long Island Jewish Medical Center, (1997-2 Trade Cases ¶71,960), Grand Rapids (FTC v.
Butterworth Health Corporation (1996, 946 F.Supp. 1285), Dubuque (902 F.Supp. 968, 1995), Joplin (FTC v.
Freeman Hospital (1995, 911 F.Supp. 1213), Ukiah (Adventist Health System/West (1994, 117 FTC 223), Augusta
(District Court: FTC v. University Health, 1991-1 Trade Cases ¶69,444 Circuit Court: FTC v. University Health
(11th Circuit, 1991, 938 F.2d 1206), Rockford (U.S. v. Rockford Memorial Corporation (1989, 717 F.Supp. 1251),
Roanoke (U.S. v. Carilion Health System (707 F.Supp. 840)), Chattanooga (Hospital Corporation of America (1985,
106 FTC 361), San Luis Obispo (American Medical International (1984, 104 FTC 1)
36

In fact, the court rarely accepts the government’s (or the hospitals’) case in its entirety, but for the government to

prevail, the court must accept, in large measure, each of the government's points.
37

Distance is an extremely important observed determinant of patient choice of hospital. Demand for a managed

care plan's product depends on the hospitals in its network. Therefore a managed care plan has a derived demand for
hospitals for its network based in part on hospitals' distances from consumers. Managed care demand also depends
on price, which in turn is affected by hospitals' prices. Which of these two positions is correct depends on the
tradeoff between price and distance consumers make when choosing insurance.
38

While how far consumers are willing to travel for hospital care is not a settled matter, some empirical evidence

indicates that managed care has almost no impact on the observed distance consumers travel for hospital services
(Mobley and Frech, 1998).
39

All relative to prior decisions in other industries and to the Horizontal Merger Guidelines (U.S. Department of

Justice and Federal Trade Commission, 1997). The Guidelines state that a market with an HHI below 1,000 is
considered unconcentrated, a market with an HHI between 1,000 and 1,800 is considered moderately concentrated,
and a market with an HHI above 1,800 is considered highly concentrated. Mergers in moderately concentrated
markets that result in an HHI increase of 100 points or more are considered to potentially raise significant
competitive concerns. In highly concentrated markets mergers that raise the HHI by more than 50 points but less
than 100 points are considered to potentially raise significant competitive concerns. Mergers in highly concentrated

65

markets that increase the HHI by 100 points or more are presumed likely to create, enhance, or facilitate the exercise
of market power.
40

The 1997 Guidelines for horizontal mergers are a revision of the 1992 Guidelines with regard to efficiencies.

They are unchanged with regard to market definition. They do differ on market definition from the Guidelines
previously issued by the DOJ in 1984 and the FTC in 1982.
41

Actually, the guidelines say “small but significant and nontransitory” price increase and later go on to say that,

most often, this means 5% for the period of at least one year.
42

We note that the 1997 Guidelines specify market definition in terms of a price increase, holding the prices of all

other goods constant. The 1984 DOJ Guidelines do not specify that all other prices are held constant. This
difference gives rise to different implementation methods, as we discuss below.
43
44

For general discussion of market definition, see Scherer and Ross (1990), pp. 176-184, Geroski (1998).
Courts have not usually recognized this substitution as important, however. They appear to rely on the testimony

of physicians that many inpatients could not easily substitute to outpatient care. This reasoning appears to be faulty,
since the fact that some people are not price sensitive at current prices is irrelevant, unless hospitals somehow may
price discriminate among patients who are and are not sensitive.
45
46
47

Fixed proportions are not supported empirically. See Farley and Hogan (1990).
Morrisey et al. (1988) advocate the use of this method for hospitals and illustrate its application.
Actually, the guidelines only use the Bertrand assumption to assess the profitable price rise after the hypothetical

merger or cartelization.
48

This basic method is due to Scheffman and Spiller (1987). They, however, propose using estimates of residual

demand. This method takes, e.g., firm 3’s reaction to firm 1 and 2’s actions into account and substitutes this reaction
function out, so the resulting demand is only in terms of the actions of firm 1 and firm 2. Using residual demand,
rather than structural demand, as we propose, has the advantage of allowing for other firms’ reactions to those of the
”cartel” firms. There are two disadvantages, however. First, the 1997 (and 1992) Guidelines explicitly state that
market definition takes all other firms’ prices as given. This cannot be done using residual demand. Second, since
residual demand is only in terms of the actions of the firms in the hypothetical cartel, separate residual demands must

66

be estimated for every possible combination of firms. This may be an onerous or impossible task in markets with
anything other than a small number of firms.
49

The cellophane fallacy refers to a case in which the court concluded that cellophane was in the same product

market as other flexible wrapping materials, based on a high cross-price elasticity of demand (U.S. v. E.I. duPont de
Nemours and Co., 351 U.S. 377 (1956). A rational monopolist, however, will set its price so that its product is a
substitute for alternatives. The reverse cellophane fallacy is drawing the false conclusion that a firm with a low
cross-price elasticity of demand enjoys market power. The problem with respect to market definition is that the
estimated price increase will be based on demand elasticities estimated at prevailing prices. If elasticity is not
constant and there is not sufficient variation to estimate it over the range relevant for the simulated merger then a low
elasticity may lead one to falsely conclude two firms are in the same market when in fact they are not.
50
51

52

This example is from Berry (1994).
Notice that our use of δ j is slightly non-standard in this literature in that we break price out separately.
If the coinsurance rate and/or discount is equal across decision-makers, no bias in the elasticity of demand would

arise; however, we do not believe that this is the case.
53

There is a widespread belief among researchers in health economics that there is substantial variation in quality

among hospitals and that variation is difficult for third party analysts to measure. Indeed, there is a very large
literature in health services research whose stated purpose is to develop measures of hospital quality. Since this
literature has not met with great success and since there are so many different quality measures, there is a paucity of
easily available evaluations of the relative quality of different hospitals; although, in recent years several states have
released evaluations of hospital mortality and, for a time, the U.S. Health Care Financing Administration did the
same. As a consequence, the issues raised here with respect to unobservable quality are relevant, although future
developments in quality measurement may reduce the scope for these sorts of problems.
54

Of course, these facts can be rationalized by extreme scale economies or extreme errors arising from the

distinction between accounting and economic profits.
55

We ignore strategic interactions with other insurers for purposes of simplicity in exposition. This clearly would

have to be part of a complete analysis.

67

56

We have ignored consumer choice of hospital conditional on insurance plan. While this is important in the

insurer's decision, since they must take into account expected hospital utilization, consumer choice will not be
affected by hospital prices since they are fully insured under managed care.
57
58

We proceed as if a is a scalar quantity. Making it a vector changes the analysis very little.
Although conjectural variations are a convenient way to think about market power, firms' expectations are not

measured empirically by r. what is measured empirically is the behavior of firms, so that firms behave "as if" their
C.V. was r. See Breshnahan (1989) on this point. (If preferred, one can think of 1 + r as a conduct parameter, as in
Breshanan (1989)).
59

Note that we have assumed identical preferences for both firms. If that were not the case, some method for

aggregating the firms' preferences would have to be assumed.
60

If a represents charity care, this seems a reasonable procedure. If it represents an index of technological

sophistication, it may also be a reasonable procedure. It seems least reasonable when a is interpreted as “process”
quality (Donabedian, 1980). In this case, perhaps “average” a in some sense should be used instead.
61

Note that in this analysis, we are implicitly assuming that the hospitals’ residual demand curve has the functional

form p = β 0 + β1 ln Q + f ( a ) . This simplifying assumption allows us to ignore the effect of changing the point at
which demand is evaluated on marginal revenue, much as the linearity assumption on utility allowed us to ignore the
effect of point of evaluation on the “marginal cost” attributable to the utility component. Relaxing the demand
assumption also introduces additional complexity. In the case of linear utility functions as described in the text, a
constant-elasticity demand will yield smaller price increases for NFPs, while with constant-slope demand, NFPs will
have larger price increases. We are grateful to Tom Philipson for explaining the importance of the shape of the
demand curve to us here.
62

It is worth pointing out here that a NFP with a constant marginal utility of output, a zero marginal utility of profit

(hence a binding profit constraint), acts like a NFP with a more sharply declining marginal utility of profit than
marginal utility of output -- post-merger, the shadow price of profit will likely fall, since profit is more easily gotten,
so that

U2
U1 + λ

 U2
=
 will fall post-merger.
 λ 

68

63
64

For a related discussion, see Froeb et al. (forthcoming).
A separate and interesting question is whether a regulator should be interested in only the price and (observable)

quality effects of mergers. Presumably, the NFP form has evolved to predominate in the hospital industry for some
reason, possibly related to information asymmetry [c.f. Frank and Salkever (1994)], and, in this case, the fact that
NFPs have different objectives may mitigate the extent to which they exploit these asymmetries. Discovering that
NFPs have different objectives from FPs might lead a regulator to adopt different attitudes towards them for reasons
we do not model.
65

Again, for a more comprehensive review, see Dranove and White (1994) or the chapter in the Handbook by

Dranove and Satterthwaite on Industrial Organization.
66

The most numerous kind of antitrust suits in health care are vertical cases. These are private suits brought by

physicians denied hospital staff privileges, which are invariably rejected by the courts. We do not discuss these since
they have clearly been judged not to be relevant to competition.
67

For example, Ball Memorial Hospital, Inc. v. Mutual Hospital Insurance, Inc. (7th Circuit, 1986, 784 F.2d 1325)

and Kartell v. Blue Shield of Massachusetts, Inc., (1st Circuit, 1984, 749 F.2d 922) cert. Denied, (1985, 471 U.S.
1029).
68
69

See Miles (1998), Chapter 15, Section 22 for a complete listing of cases.
See Scherer and Ross (1990, Chapter 14) for an exposition of the case where the buyer possesses monopoly power

in the market for its output. The case when the buyer is a monopoly seller of its output is not qualitatively different
from the case when it sells in a competitive market. Since the latter is simpler expositionally, we present that here.
Nonetheless, it is straightforward to adapt this analysis to reflect selling market power on the part of the buyer.
70

Note that since the price of hospital output, cx, is a function of an endogenous variable, x, the factor demands are

functions of the only two exogenous variables, py and q.
71
72

See also Pauly (1998) on this point.
Lumber markets are like this. Trees are immobile and logs are heavy and difficult to transport. Boards, however,

are much easier to transport. Hence markets for logs are usually local and often dominated by a single buyer or a
small number of buyers, while markets for lumber are national, with many sellers.

69

73

Strictly speaking, if the market is perfectly competitive, any seller who can price below others will capture the

entire market (i.e., Bertrand equilibrium). It is not clear in such a case that an equilibrium exists with monopsony
power being exercised.
74

For a somewhat different (but related) approach see Just and Chern (1980), who examine oligopsony power in the

market for tomatoes. Sullivan (1989) examines monopsony power in the market for nurses using a very similar
approach to what we describe here.
75

The exercise of market definition for monopsony can in principle be followed using the Merger Guidelines, as

described in section 4.2.2, with the exercise calculating whether buyers acting as a cartel could decrease price by
more than 5%.
76

Notice that this can be re-expressed as p x − p ⋅ f x

p x = ( − c xx ⋅ x p x ) ⋅ θ MS = θ MS η s , where η s is the

elasticity of hospital supply. Thus the percentage gap between the factor price and the value of the marginal product
is a function of the degree of monopsony power and the inverse elasticity of supply.
77

Presumably output price is correlated with the error in the marginal productivity function. The marginal cost of

production will fluctuate with marginal productivity, causing fluctuations in price to be correlated with the marginal
productivity error.
78
79

It is a demand rotator that is required in the case of monopoly power.
Participating providers agree to accept an insurer’s fee as payment in full and not bill patients covered by that

insurer for the difference between their price and the payment. Participating providers are identified as such by the
insurer.
80

Feldman and Greenberg and Adamache and Sloan both have 60+ observations corresponding to individual Blue

Cross plan areas. Foreman et al. have quarterly observations on 47 Blue Cross/Blue Shield plans for two years.
81

For more detailed criticism of the Staten (1987) paper, see Pauly (1987). See also Staten et al. (1988) response

and Pauly’s further response (1988a).
82

Moral hazard will lead consumers to demand more than would an insurer who maximizes social welfare. This will

be true even for an insurer with market power, since it will wish to restrict output even further below the socially
optimal level.

70

83

This is intended as an heuristic, rather than a formal model. An important task for any future research in this area

is to derive such a pricing function directly from a well defined theoretical model. See Brooks et al. (1997) for a
model of price determination as a Nash bargaining game between a hospital and an insurer. They do not, however,
model competition. Their model is a model of bilateral monopoly, while we are suggesting what is needed is a
model of price determination in bilateral oligopoly.
84

Further work is necessary to determine if such nonlinearities flow from (reasonable) assumptions about the

structure of the model. If not, identification via functional form would be strictly ad hoc and hard to defend. Svejnar
(1986) uses structural functional form assumptions in a model of bilateral monopoly to identify the bargaining power
parameter along with other parameters of the model via nonlinearities in the econometric model.
85
86

See Scherer and Ross (1990, pp. 533-535) for a survey of these results.
There have been attempts at such countervailing market power defense in hospital antitrust cases. This argument

has also been advanced to allow physician “unions” to collectively set prices for independent physician firms without
threat of antitrust prosecution.
87

Consider the monopsony condition for a factor x, p ⋅ f l = w + ∂w ∂l ⋅ l . This can be transformed to

p ⋅ f l = w ⋅ (1 + 1 ε s ) , where ε s is the elasticity of supply. Clearly this condition goes toward the competitive
condition (value of marginal product of labor equals its wage) as the supply curve of labor becomes perfectly elastic.
88

This section draws in part on joint work with Deborah Haas-Wilson and with Albert Ma, some of which appears

in Gaynor and Haas-Wilson (1998) and Gaynor and Ma (1996).
89

We only list the forms of vertical restraints that are relevant to health care markets. For example, we do not list

resale price maintenance, although this has been a major issue in the literature on vertical restraints, since it is not
possible to resell a physician visit or an appendectomy.
90
91

Vertical restraints involving price, i.e., resale price maintenance, is per se illegal.
Vertical cases are by far and away the most numerous type of antitrust case brought in health care. However, the

vast bulk of these are private antitrust suits brought by physicians denied hospital privileges (these often take the
form of challenges to exclusive contracts). The courts have invariably rejected such claims. As a consequence we

71

only list a selected subset of cases involving exclusive dealing. Cases involving vertical integration or most-favorednations clauses have been far less numerous. See Miles (1998) for a comprehensive listing.
92

For example, U.S. v. Aluminum Co. of America (2nd Circuit, 1945, 148 F.2d 416); Lorain Journal v. U.S., (1951,

342 U.S. 143), United Shoe Machinery Corp. v. U.S. (1922, 258 U.S. 451, 458) for exclusionary practices and
Brown Shoe Co., Inc. v. U.S. (1962, 370 U.S. 294), A.G. Spalding & Bros., Inc. (1960, 56 F.T.C. 1125), Kennecott
Copper Corp. v. U.S. (1965, 381 U.S. 414), Ford Motor Co., v. U.S. (1965, 381 U.S. 414), Ford Motor Co. v. U.S.
(1972, 405 U.S. 562) for vertical integration.
93

This literature has been criticized in turn for only demonstrating the possible existence of anticompetitive effects,

but not considering efficiency enhancing impacts [see Klass and Salinger (1995)].
94

This applies similarly to the consideration of upstream firms’ access to a buyer if an upstream firm merges or

engages in an exclusive deal with a downstream firm.
95

Note that the single monopoly profit result, and its criticisms, apply as well to the case of forward integration in

which there is a monopoly in the input market and perfect competition in the output market.
96.

The results can be somewhat fragile. For example, the results of Ordover et al. (1990) depend critically upon an

assumption that the integrated firm can commit to sell to the unintegrated downstream firm at a higher price than the
internal transfer price within the integrated firm [Reiffen (1992)]. Some more recent papers are less sensitive to
assumptions [Riordan (1998), Choi and Yi (1996)].
97

As Frech (1996) points out, the traditional Blue Cross physician reimbursement policy of paying usual,

customary, and reasonable fees contains, in essence an MFN clause due to the usual stipulation. Many Blue Cross
plans, however, do not enforce the usual clause.
98

Corts (1996), however, finds that MFN clauses can be competitive and welfare enhancing.

72

References
Adamache, K.W. and F.A. Sloan (1983), “Competition between non-profit and for-profit health
insurers,” Journal of Health Economics, 2: 225-243.
Alexander, J.A., M.T. Halpern, and S.D. Lee (1996), "The short-term effects of merger on
hospital operations," Health Services Research, 30(6): 827-47.
Anderson, S.P., A. DePalma, and J.F. Thisse (1992), Discrete Choice Theory of Product
Differentiation, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Arrow, K.J. (1963), “Uncertainty and the welfare economics of medical care,” American
Economic Review, December, 53: 941-973.
Baker, J.B. (1988), "The antitrust analysis of hospital mergers and the transformation of the
hospital industry," Law and Contemporary Problems, 51(2):96-164.
Baker, J.B. (1996), "Vertical restraints with horizontal consequences: competitive effects of
‘most-favored-customer’ clauses," Antitrust Law Journal, 64: 517-534.
Baker, J.B. (1997), "Unilateral competitive effects theories in merger analysis," Antitrust, Spring.
Baker, J.B. and T.F. Bresnahan (1985), "The gains from merger on collusion in productdifferentiated industries," Journal of Industrial Economics, 33:427-44.
Baker, J.B. and T.F. Bresnahan (1988), "Estimating the Residual Demand Curve Facing a Single
Firm," International Journal of Industrial Organization, 6(3):283-300.
Becker, E.R. and F.A. Sloan (1982), "Hospital ownership and performance," Economic Inquiry,
23(1):21-36.
Berry, S. (1992) "Estimation of a model of entry in the airline industry,'' Econometrica, 60: 889917.
Berry, S. (1994) "Estimating discrete-choice models of product differentiation," Rand Journal of
Economics, 25: 242-262.
Berry, S., Levinsohn, J., and A. Pakes (1995) "Automobile prices in market equilibrium,"
Econometrica, 63: 841-890.
Berry, S. and J. Waldfogel (1997), “Free entry and social inefficiency in radio broadcasting,”
unpublished manuscript, University of Pennsylvania.
Blair, R.D. and J.L. Harrison (1993), Monopsony: Antitrust Law and Economics, Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.

73

Blackstone, E.A. and J.P. Fuhr (1984), "Antitrust and exclusive agreements: the case of hospitalbased physicians," The Antitrust Bulletin, 29: 739-758.
Bresnahan, T.F. (1989), “Empirical studies of industries with market power,” in R. Schmalensee
and R.D. Willig, eds., Handbook of Industrial Organization, Volume 2, Amsterdam: NorthHolland, 1011-1057.
Bresnahan, T.F. and P. Reiss, (1991), "Entry and competition in concentrated markets", Journal
of Political Economy, 99: 977-1009.
Brooks, J.M., A. Dor, and H.S. Wong (1997), “Hospital-insurer bargaining: an empirical
investigation of appendectomy pricing,” Journal of Health Economics, 16: 417-434.
Burns, L.R. and D.R. Wholey (1992), "The impact of physician characteristics in conditional
choice models for hospital care," Journal of Health Economics, 11:43-62.
Butz, D.A. (1990), “Durable good monopoly and best-price provisions,” American Economic
Review, 80: 1062-1076.
Cave, J.A.K. (1986) "Subsidy equilibrium and multiple-option insurance markets," in R.
Scheffler and L. Rossiter, eds., Advances in Health Economics and Health Services Research, 6:
27-35, Greenwich, CT and London: JAI Press.
Coase, R. (1937), "The nature of the firm," Economica, 4: 386-405.
Comanor, W.S. and H.E. Frech III (1985), ""The competitive effects of vertical agreements,"
American Economic Review, 75: 539-546.
Connor, R.A. and R.D. Feldman (1997), "Horizontal hospital mergers and their effects on nonmerging hospitals in the same market area," American Enterprise Institute Conference Paper
from the conference: Managed Care and Changing Health Care Markets, April 10, 1997.
Connor, R.A., R.D. Feldman, B.E. Dowd, and T.A. Radcliff (1997), “Which types of horizontal
hospital mergers produce savings and which do not?” unpublished manuscript, University of
Minnesota.
Conrad, D. and S. Shortell (1996) "Integrated health systems: promise and performance,"
Frontiers of Health Services Management, 13(1): 3-40.
Cowing, T.G., A.G. Holtman and S. Powers (1983), "Hospital cost analysis: a survey and
evaluation of recent studies," Advances in Health Economics and Health Services Research,
4:257-303.

74

Cowing, T.G. and A.G. Holtman (1983), "Multiproduct Short-Run Hospital Cost Functions:
Empirical Evidence and Policy Implications from Cross-Section Data," 49(3):637-53.
Crew, M. (1969), “Coinsurance and the welfare economics of medical care,” American Economic
Review, 59(5): 906-908.
Crocker, K.J. and T.P. Lyon (1994), “What do ‘facilitating practices’ facilitate? An empirical
examination of most-favored nation clauses in natural gas contracts," Journal of Law and
Economics, 37: 297-322.
Crocker, K.J. and K.J.Reynolds (1993), "The efficiency of incomplete contracts: an empirical
analysis of Air Force engine procurement," RAND Journal of Economics, 24:126-146.
Dixit, A. and J.E. Stiglitz (1977) "Monopolistic competition and optimum product
diversity,"American Economic Review, 67: 297-308.
Federal Trade Commission (1996) Revised Federal Trade Commission, Department of Justice
Policy Statements on Health Care Antitrust Enforcement, US Department of Justice,
Washington, DC.
Donabedian, A. (1980), The Definition of Quality and Approaches to its Assessment, Ann Arbor,
MI: Health Administration Press.
Dor, A. and D.E. Farley (1996), "Payment source and the cost of hospital care: evidence from a
multiproduct cost function with multiple payers," Journal of Health Economics, 15:1-21.
Dranove, D. (1988), "Demand inducement and the physician/patient relationship," Economic
Inquiry, 26:281-298.
Dranove, D. and M.A. Satterthwaite (1992), "Monopolistic competition when price and quality are
imperfectly observable," Rand Journal of Economics, 23:518-534.
Dranove, D. and M. Shanley (1989), "A note on the relational aspects of hospital market
definition," Journal of Health Economics, 8:473-8.
Dranove, D., M. Shanley and C.J. Simon (1992), “Is hospital competition wasteful?,” Rand
Journal of Economics, 23: 247-262.
Dranove, D., M. Shanley and W.D. White (1993), “Price and concentration in local hospital
markets: the switch from patient-driven to payer-driven competition,” Journal of Law and
Economics, 36: 179-204.
Dranove, D. and W.D. White (1994), “Recent theory and evidence on competition in hospital
markets,” Journal of Economics and Management Strategy, 3(1): 169-209.

75

Dranove, D. and R. Ludwick (1999) "Competition and pricing by nonprofit hospitals: a
reassessment of Lynk's analysis," Journal of Health Economics 18: 87-98.
Elzinga, K.G. and T.F. Hogarty (1973), “The problem of geographic market definition in
antimerger suits,” Antitrust Bulletin, 18: 45-81.
Elzinga, K.G. and T.F. Hogarty (1978), “The problem of geographic market definition revisited:
the case of coal,” Antitrust Bulletin, 23: 1-18.
Emons, W. (1997), “Credence goods and fraudulent experts,” Rand Journal of Economics,
Spring, 28(1): 107-119.
Encinosa, W.E. (1996), “Exclusive contracting in health care markets,” unpublished manuscript,
University of Michigan.
Farley, D.E. and C. Hogan (1990), "Case-mix specialization in the market for hospital services,"
Health Services Research, 25(5):757-783.
Feldman, R. and W. Greenberg (1981), “The relation between the Blue Cross share and the Blue
Cross ‘discount’ on hospital charges,” Journal of Risk and Insurance, 48: 235-246.
Foreman, S.E., J.A. Wilson, and R.M. Scheffler (1996), “Monopoly, monopsony, and
contestability in health insurance: a study of Blue Cross plans,” Economic Inquiry, 34: 662-677.
Fournier, G.M. and J.M. Mitchell (1992), "Hospital costs and competition for services, a
multiproduct analysis," Review of Economics and Statistics, 74(4):627-34.
Frank, R.G. and D.S. Salkever (1994), "Nonprofit organizations in the health sector," Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 8(4): 129-144.
Frech, H.E. III (1988), “Monopoly in health insurance: the economics of Kartell v. Blue Shield of
Massachusetts,” in H.E. Frech III, ed., Health Care in America: The Political Economy of
Hospitals and Health Insurance, San Francisco: Pacific Research Institute for Public Policy, 353372.
Frech, H.E. (1996), Competition and Monopoly in Medical Care, Washington, DC: AEI Press.
Frech, H.E., III and K.L. Danger (1998), “Exclusive contracts between hospitals and physicians:
the antitrust issues,” Health Economics, 7:175-178.
Friedman, B. and M.V. Pauly (1981), ) "Cost functions for a service firm with variable quality
and stochastic demand," Review of Economics and Statistics, 63:620-624.
Froeb, L.M. and G.J. Werden (1992), "The Reverse Cellophane Fallacy in Market Delineation,"
Review of Industrial Organizations, 7(2):241-47.

76

Froeb, L., S. Tschantz, P. Crooke, and G. Werden (forthcoming) "The effects of assumed
demand form on simulated post merger equilibria," Review of Industrial Organization.
Gal-Or, Esther (1996), “Exclusionary equilibria in health care markets,” Journal of Economics
and Management Strategy, 6(1): 5-43.
Garnick, D.W., E. Lichtenberg, C.S. Phibbs, H.S. Luft, D.J. Peltzman, and S.J. McPhee (1989),
"The sensitivity of conditional choice models for hospital care to estimation technique," Journal
Health Economics, 8:377-97.
Gaynor, M. (1994), “Issues in the industrial organization of the market for physician services,”
Journal of Economics and Management Strategy, 3: 211-255.
Gaynor, M. and G.F. Anderson (1995), "Uncertain demand, the structure of hospital costs, and
the cost of empty hospital beds," Journal of Health Economics, 14(3):291-317.
Gaynor, M. and D. Haas-Wilson (1998), “Vertical relations in health care markets,” in M.
Morrisey, ed., Managed Care and Changing Health Care Markets, Washington, DC: American
Enterprise Institute Press.
Gaynor, M., D. Haas-Wilson, and W.B. Vogt (1997), “Are invisible hands good hands? Moral
hazard, competition, and the 2nd best in health care markets,” unpublished manuscript, Carnegie
Mellon University.
Gaynor, M. and C.A. Ma (1996), “Insurance, vertical restraints, and competition,” unpublished
manuscript, Carnegie Mellon University.
Granneman, T.W., R.S. Brown, and M. Pauly (1986), "Estimating hospital costs, a multiple
output analysis," Journal of Health Economics, 5:107-27.
Gruber, J. (1994), “The effect of price shopping in medical markets: hospital responses to PPOs
in California,” Journal of Health Economics, 38: 183-212.
Hamilton, B. and V. Ho (1998), “Hospital mergers and acquisitions: does market consolidation
harm patients?” unpublished manuscript, Washington University.
Hersch, P.L. (1984), "Competition and the performance of hospital markets," Review of
Industrial Organization, 1(4):324-40.
Hoerger, T.J. (1991), "Profit variability in for-profit and not-for-profit hospitals," Journal of
Health Economics, 10:259-89.
Hurdle, S. and G.C. Pope (1989), “Physician productivity: trends and determinants,” Inquiry, 26:
100-115.

77

Just, R. and W. Chern (1980), “Tomatoes, technology, and oligopsony,” Bell Journal of
Economics, 11: 584-602.
Katz, M.L. (1989), “Vertical contractual relations,” in R. Schmalensee and R.D. Willig, eds.,
Handbook of Industrial Organization, Amsterdam: North-Holland, 655-721.
Keeler, E.B., G. Melnick, and J. Zwanziger, (1999) "The changing effects of competition on nonprofit and for-profit hospital pricing behavior," Journal of Health Economics 18: 69-86.
Kessler, D. and M. McClellan (1998), “Is hospital competition socially wasteful?” unpublished
manuscript, Stanford University.
Klein, B., R.G. Crawford, and A.A. Alchian (1978), “Vertical integration, appropriable rents, and
the competitive contracting process,” Journal of Law and Economics, 21: 297-326.
Kopit, W.G. and R.W. McCann (1988), "Toward a definitive antitrust standard for nonprofit
hospital mergers," Journal of Health Politics Policy and Law, 13(4): 635-662.
Krattenmaker, T.G. and S.C. Salope (1986a), "Competition and cooperation in the market for
exclusionary rights," American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 76:109-113.
Krattenmaker, T.G. and S.C. Salope (1986b), "Anticompetitive exclusion: raising rivals' costs to
achieve power over price," Yale Law Journal, 96:209-293.
Krishnan, R. (1998), “Market restructuring and pricing in the hospital industry,” unpublished
doctoral dissertation, Katz Graduate School of Business, University of Pittsburgh.
Lafontaine, F. (1992), “Agency theory and franchising: some empirical results,” Rand Journal of
Economics, 23: 263-283.
Lee, M.L. (1971), "A Conspicuous Production Theory of Hospital Behavior," Southern
Economic Journal, 38(1):48-58.
Lee, R.H. and T.A. Mroz (1991), “Family structure and physicians’ hours in large, multispecialty
groups,” Inquiry, 28: 366-374.
Lieberman, M.B. (1991), “Determinants of vertical integration: an empirical test,” Journal of
Industrial Economics, 39: 451-466.
Luft, H.S., D.W. Garnick, C.S. Phibbs, D.J. Peltzman, E. Lichtenberg, and S.J. McPhee, (1991),
"Modeling the effect of hospital charges and quality on choice," Journal of Health Care
Marketing, 11(3):2-11.

78

Luft, H.S., C.S. Phibbs, D.W. Garnick, and J.C. Robinson (1988), "Rejoinder to Dranove and
Shanley," Journal of Health Economics, 8:479-83.
Luft, Harold, J.C. Robinson, D. Garnick, S. Maerki, and S. McPhee (1986), “The role of
specialized clinical services in competition among hospitals,” Inquiry, 23: 83-94.
Lynk, W.J. (1984), “Tying and exclusive dealing: Jefferson Parish Hospital v. Hyde,” in The
Antitrust Revolution: The Role of Economics, J.E. Kwoka and L.J. White, eds., New York:
HarperCollings Publishers.
Lynk, W.J. (1994), "Property rights and the presumptions of merger analysis," Antitrust Bulletin,
39(2):363-83.
Lynk, W.J. (1995a), "Nonprofit hospital mergers and the exercise of market power," Journal of
Law and Economics, 38:437-61.
Lynk, W.J. (1995b) , "The creation of economic efficiencies in hospital mergers," Journal of
Health Economics, 14:507-30.
Lynk, W.J. and L.R. Neumann (1999), "Price and profit," Journal of Health Economics, 18: 99105.
Lynk, W.J. and M.A. Morrisey (1987), “The economic basis of Hyde: are market power and
exclusive contracts related?” Journal of Law and Economics, 30(2): 399-421.
Madrian, B. (1994) “Employment-based health insurance and job mobility: Is there evidence of
job-lock?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109: 27-54.
Masten, S.E. (1984), “The organization of production: evidence from the aerospace industry,”
Journal of Law and Economics, 27: 403-417.
McGuire, T.G. and M.V. Pauly (1991), "Physician response to fee changes with multiple payers,"
Journal of Health Economics, 10:385-410.
Melnick, G.A. and J. Zwanziger (1988), "Hospital behavior under competition and cost
containment policies, the California experience, 1980-1985," Journal of the American Medical
Association, 260(18):2669-2675.
Melnick, G.A., J. Zwanziger, A. Bamezai, and R. Pattison (1992), “The effect of market structure
and bargaining position on hospital prices,” Journal of Health Economics, 11: 217-233.
Miles, J.J. (1998), Health Care and Antitrust Law, St. Paul, MN: West Group.
Miyazaki, H. (1977) "The rat race and internal labor markets," Bell Journal of Economics, 8:
394-418.

79

Mobley, L.R. and H.E. Frech III (1997), “Managed care, distance traveled and hospital market
definition: an exploratory analysis,” unpublished paper, University of California, Santa Barbara.
Morrisey, M.A., F.A. Sloan, and J. Valvona (1988), “Defining geographic markets for hospital
care,” Law and Contemporary Problems, 51: 165-194.
Neipp, J. and R.Zeckhauser (1986) "Persistence in the choice of health plans," in R.Scheffler and
L. Rossiter, eds., Advances in Health Economics and Health Services Research, 6: 47-72,
Greenwich, CT and London: JAI Press.
Newhouse, J.P. (1970), "Toward a theory of nonprofit institutions: an economic model of a
hospital," American Economics Review, 60(1):64-74.
Newhouse, J.P. (1978), "The structure of health insurance and the erosion of the medical
marketplace," in Competition in the Health Care Sector: Past, Present, and Future, Warren
Greenberg, ed., Germantown, MD: Aspen Publishers.
Newhouse, J.P. (1996), “Reimbursing health plans and providers: selection versus efficiency in
production,” Journal of Economic Literature, 34(3): 1236-1263.
Noether, M. (1988), "Competition among hospitals," Journal of Health Economics, 7:259-84.
Ordover, J.A., G. Saloner and S.C. Salop (1990), "Equilibrium vertical foreclosure," American
Economic Review 80: 127-142.
Pauly, M.V. (1968), "The economics of moral hazard: comment," American Economic Review,
58:531-537.
Pauly, M.V. (1978), “Is medical care different?” in Competition in the Health Care Sector: Past,
Present, and Future, L. Goldberg and W. Greenberg, eds., Washington, D.C.: Federal Trade
Commission.
Pauly, M.V. (1980), Doctors and Their Workshops, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Pauly, M.V.(1986), "Taxation, health insurance, and market failure," Journal of Economic
Literature, 24: 629-675.
Pauly, M.V. (1987), “Monopsony power in health insurance: thinking straight while standing on
your head,” Journal of Health Economics, 6: 73-81.
Pauly, M.V. (1988a), “Reply,” Journal of Health Economics, 7: 85-87.
Pauly, M.V. (1988b), “Market power, monopsony, and health insurance markets,” Journal of
Health Economics, 7: 111-128.

80

Pauly, M.V. (1988c), “Competition in health insurance markets,” Law and Contemporary
Problems, 51: 237-271.
Pauly, M.V. (1998), “Managed care, markets, and monopsony,” unpublished manuscript,
University of Pennsylvania.
Pauly, M.V. and M. Redisch (1973), "The not-for-profit hospistal as a physicians' cooperative,"
American Economic Review, 63(1):87-99.
Phibbs, C.S. and J.C. Robinson (1993), "A variable-radius measure of local hospital market
structure," Health Services Research, 28(3):313-324.
Png, I.P.L. (1991), “Most favored customer protection versus price discrimination when
customer demand is uncertain,” Journal of Political Economy, 99: 1010-1028.
Png, I.P.L. and D. Hirshleifer (1987), “Price discrimination through offers to match price,”
Journal of Business, 60: 365-383.
Riley, J.G. (1979) "Informational Equilibrium," Econometrica, 47: 331-59.
Riordan, M.H. (1998) “Anticompetitive vertical integration by a dominant firm,” American
Economic Review, 88: 1232-1248.
Riordan, M.H. and S.C. Salop (1995), "Evaluating vertical mergers: a post-chicago approach,"
Antitrust Law Journal, 63:513-568.
Rizzo, J.A. and D. Blumenthal (1994), “Physician labor supply: do income effects matter?”
Journal of Health Economics, 14(4): 433-453.
Robinson, J.C. (1988), "Market structure, employment, and skill mix in the hospital industry,"
Southern Economic Journal, 55(2): 315-25.
Robinson, J.C., D.W. Garnick, and S.J. McPhee (1987), "Market and regulatory influences on the
availability of coronary angioplasty and bypass surgery in US hospitals," New England Journal
of Medicine, 317(2):85-90.
Robinson, J.C. and H. Luft (1985), “The impact of hospital market structure on patient volume,
average length of stay, and the cost of care,” Journal of Health Economics, 4: 333-356.
Romeo, A.A., J.L. Wagner, and R.H. Lee (1984), "Prospective reimbursement and the diffusion
of new technologies in hospitals," Journal of Health Economics, 3:1-24.
Rothschild, M. and J.E. Stiglitz (1976) "Equilibrium in competitive insurance markets: an essay
on the economics of imperfect information," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 90: 629-650.

81

Royalty, A.B. and N. Solomon (1997) "Health plan choice: price elasticities in a managed
competition setting," unpublished manuscript, May, Stanford, CA: Stanford University.
Salop, S.C. (1979) "Monopolistic competition with outside goods," Bell Journal of Economics,
10: 141-156.
Salop, S.C. and D.T. Scheffman (1983), “Raising rivals’ costs,” American Economic Review,
Papers and Proceedings, May, 73(2): 267-271.
Salop, S.C. and D.T. Scheffman (1987), "Cost-raising strategies," Journal of Industrial
Economics 36:19-34.
Salop, S.C. (1986), "Practices that (credibly) facilitate oligopoly coordination," in J.
Stiglitz and G.F. Mathewson, eds., New Developments in the Analysis of Market Structure,
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Satterthwaite, Mark A. (1979) "Consumer information, equilibrium industry price, and the number
of sellers," Bell Journal of Economics, 10: 483-502.
Satterthwaite, Mark A. (1985) "Competition and equilibrium as a driving force in the health
services sector," in Managing the Service Economy, Robert Inman, ed., Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Scheffman, D.T. and P.T. Spiller (1987), "Geographic market definition under the U.S.
Department of Justice merger guidelines," Journal of Law and Economics, 30:123-47.
Scherer, F.M. and D. Ross (1990), Industrial Market Structure and Economic Performance, 3rd
Edition, Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company.
Scott Morton, F.M. (1997), “The strategic response by pharmaceutical firms to the Medicaid
most-favored-customer rules,” Rand Journal of Economics, 28: 269-290.
Shortell, S.M. and E.F.X. Hughes (1988), "The effects of regulation, competition, and ownership
on mortality rates among hospital inpatients," New England Journal of Medicine, 318:1100-7.
Simpson, J. and R. Shin (1997), "Do non-profit hospitals exercise market power?" unpublished
paper, Federal Trade Commission.
Sloan, F.A. (1975), “Physician supply behavior in the short run,” Industrial and Labor Relations
Review, 28: 549-569.
Spence, A.M. (1976) "Product selection, fixed costs, and monopolistic competition," Review of
Economic Studies, 43: 217-235.

82

Spence, A.M. (1978), “Product differentiation and performance in insurance markets,” Journal of
Public Economics, 10: 427-447.
Spiller, P.T. (1985), “On vertical merger,” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 1:
285-312.
Stano, M. (1987), “A further analysis of the physician inducement controversy,” Journal of
Health Economics, 6(3): 227-238.
Staten, M., W. Dunkelberg, and J. Umbeck (1987), “Market share and the Illusion of power: can
Blue Cross force hospitals to discount?” Journal of Health Economics, 6:43-58.
Staten, M., J. Umbeck, and W. Dunkelberg (1988), "Market share/market power revisited, a new
test for an old theory," Journal of Health Economics, 7:73-83.
Stiglitz, J.E. (1977), "Monopoly, non-linear pricing and imperfect information: the insurance
market," Review of Economic Studies, 44:407-430.
Sullivan, D. (1989), “Monopsony power in the market for nurses,” Journal of Law and
Economics, 32: S135-S178.
Sutton, J.(1991) Sunk Costs and Market Structure: Price Competition, Advertising, and the
Evolution of Concentration, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Svejnar, J. (1986), “Bargaining power, fear of disagreement, and wage settlements: theory and
evidence from U.S. industry,” Econometrica, 54: 1055-1078.
U.S. Department of Justice (1984) Merger Guidelines, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of
Justice.
U.S. Department of Justice and Federal Trade Commission (1997) Horizontal Merger
Guidelines, Issued April 2, 1992, Revised April 8, 1997, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of
Justice, Federal Trade Commission.
Vita, M.G. (1990), "Exploring hospital production relationships with flexible functional forms,"
Journal of Health Economics, 9:1-21.
Vita, M.G. and L. Schumann (1991), "The competitive effects of horizontal mergers in the
hospital industry: a closer look," Journal of Health Economics, 10:359-72.
Vitaliano, D.F. (1987), "On the estimation of hospital cost functions," Journal of Health
Economics, 6:305-18.

83

Volpp, K. and J. Waldfogel (1998), “Competition and the quality of hospital care: heart attack
mortality after the onset of price competition in New Jersey,” unpublished manuscript, University
of Pennsylvania.
Walston, S.L., Kimberley, J.R., and L.R. Burns (1996) "Owned vertical integration and health
care: promise and performance," Health Care Management Review, 21(1): 83-92.
Werden, G.J. (1981), “On the use and misuse of shipments data in defining geographic markets,”
Antitrust Bulletin, 26:719-737.
Werden, G.J. (1990), "The limited relevance of patient migration data in market delineation for
hospital merger cases," Journal of Health Economics, 8:363-76.
Werden, G.J. (1997), "Simulating unilateral competitive effects from differentiated products
mergers," Antitrust, Spring.
Werden, G.J. and L.M. Froeb (1994), "The effect of mergers in differentiated products industries:
logit demand and merger policy," Journal of Law, Economics and Organization, 10(2):407-426.
Westfield, F.M. (1981), “Vertical integration: does product price rise or fall?” American
Economic Review, 71(3):334-346.
Williamson, O.E. (1975), Markets and Hierarchies: Analysis and Antitrust Implications, New
York: Free Press.
Williamson, O.E. (1989), "Transaction Cost Economics," in Richard Schmalensee and Robert
Willig, eds., Handbook of Industrial Organization, Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Wilson, C. (1977) "A model of insurance markets with incomplete information," Journal of
Economic Theory, 16: 167-207.
Woolley, J.M. (1989), "The competitive effects of horizontal mergers in the hospital industry,"
Journal of Health Economics, 8:271-91.
Woolley, J.M. (1991), "The competitive effects of horizontal mergers in the hospital industry: an
even closer look," Journal of Health Economics, 10:373-8.
Zwanziger, J. and G. Melnick (1988), "The effects of hospital competition and the Medicare PPS
program on hospital cost behavior in California," Journal of Health Economics, 7:301-20.

84

Year
1998
1997
1996
1995
1995
1994
1991
1991
1989
1989
1985
1984
1
2

Table 1
Hospital Merger Cases
Case
Winner
Primary Reason for Decision
Poplar Bluff
FTC
Long Island
Hospitals
Product market definition
Grand Rapids
Hospitals
Not-for-profit organization,
Efficiencies
Dubuque
Hospitals
Geographic market definition
Joplin
Hospitals
Geographic market definition,
Not-for-profit organization
Ukiah
Hospitals
Geographic market definition
Not-for-profit organization
Augusta (District) Hospitals1
Augusta (Circuit) FTC
Rockford
DOJ
Roanoke2
Hospitals
Market Definition
Chattanooga
FTC
San Luis Obispo
FTC

This decision was vacated and remanded by the circuit court, see the next line in the table.
This case was a jury trial. Both the court and the jury agreed that the merger should be allowed; however, the

findings of the two were slightly different, so we present the court’s opinion.

Location
Poplar Bluff
Grand Rapids
Joplin
Augusta
Rockford
Roanoke
Chattanooga
San Luis Obispo

Table 2
Merger Effects on Concentration
Post Merger Share Post Merger HHI
84%
6,000 – 7,000
47%-65% general
2767-4521 general
65%-70% primary
4506-5079 primary
24%
1624
43%
3200
72%
5647
about 20 hospitals
18.2%
2495
87% city
7775 city
76% county
6025 county

Change in HHI
2,700 – 3,200
1064-1889 general
1675-2001 primary
222
>630
2621
151
3405 city
2207 county

Table 3
Effects of Standard Merger on Price from Price-Concentration Studies
Study 1
Price Effect
Data - Year
Data - Place
DSW
+ 5%2
1988
CA
MZBP
+ 2%
1987
CA
Lynk
- 1%
1989
CA
LN
-3%
1995
MI
KMZ
+ 6%
1994
CA
SS
+ 10%
1993
CA
DL
+17%
1989
CA
BDW
+ 2%
1988-92
US
SUD
+ 2%
1983
IN
Noether
- 1%
1977,8
US

1

The abbreviations are: DSW-Dranove, Shanley, and White (1993) MZBP-Melnick, Zwanziger, Bamezai, and

Pattison (1992) Lynk-Lynk (1995) LN-Lynk and Neumann (1999) KMZ-Keeler, Melnick, and Zwanziger (1999)
SS-Simpson and Shin (1997) DL-Dranove and Ludwick (1999) BDW-Brooks, Dor, and Wong (1997) SUDStaten, Umbeck, and Dunkelberg (1987), Noether-Noether (1988).
2

The authors use a dummy variable to capture scale effects. The dummy variable big equals 1 if the hospital in

question is large enough. Here (to capture the effect of merger on output) we assume that the authors’ dummy
variable BIG goes from 0 to 1 but that the dummy variable HIGH TECH does not change.

Study
Lynk
LN
KMZ
SS
DL

Table 4
Effects of Standard Merger on Price, by Ownership Form
FP
NFP
Government
+ 17%
- 1%
+ 7%
NA
-3%
NA
+ 16%
+ 6%
+ 9%
+ 9%
+ 10%
8-9%
NA
+17%
NA

Year Decided
1985

Table 5
Selected Health Care Monopsony Cases
Case (Parties)
Winner
Kartell (Physicians
Insurer
vs. Insurer)1

Primary Reason
Not illegal to
exercise market
power to obtain
lower prices (via
balance billing ban).

1986

Ball Memorial
(Hospital vs.
Insurer)2

Insurer

Not illegal to
exercise market
power to obtain
lower prices (via a
PPO).

1990

Ocean State
(Physicians vs.
Insurer)3

Insurer

Not illegal to
exercise market
power to obtain
lower prices (via
MFN clause).

1982

St. Bernard Hospital
(Hospital vs.
Insurer)4

Hospital

Price fixing by
collusive
monopsony is
illegal. Insurer was
controlled by
participating
hospitals, therefore
constituted illegal
combination.

1

Kartell v. Blue Shield of Massachusetts (1st Circuit, 1984, 749 F.2d 922) cert. Denied (1985, 471 U.S. 1029).

2

Ball Memorial Hospital, Inc. v. Mutual Hospital Insurance, Inc. (7th Circuit, 1986, 784 F.2d 1327).

3

Ocean State Physicians Health Plan, Inc., et al. v. Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Rhode Island (1st Circuit, 1989,

883
4

F.2d 1101)

cert. Denied (1990, 494 U.S. 1027).

St. Bernard Hospital v. Hospital Service Association of New Orleans (5th Circuit, 1982, 712 F.2d 978).

Table 6
Selected Health Care Vertical Restraints Cases
Year Decided
1996

Case
Vicksburg (Hospital vs.
Hospital-Physician Group
1
merger)

Vertical Restraint
Vertical Integration

Winner
Merged
hospitalphysician
group

Primary Reason
Barriers to entry to
physician market low,
therefore no
foreclosure.

1995

Marshfield (Insurer vs. HMO2
Physician Group)

Vertical Integration, MostFavored-Nations Clause

HMOPhysician
Group

HMO-Physician
group did not have
market power in
physician market,
therefore foreclosure
impossible. MFN
clauses simply lower
prices, therefore
procompetitive.

1982

Hyde (Physician vs. Hospital)

Exclusive Dealing (between
hospital and physician group)

Hospital

Exclusive dealing
promotes efficiency
and quality.
Competition not
harmed by exclusion
of one physician.

1988

Oltz (Nurse Anesthetist v.
4
Hospital)

Exclusive Dealing (hospital
and anesthesiologist group)

Nurse

1990

Ocean State (Physicians vs.
5
Insurer)

Most-Favored-Nations Clause

Insurer

Exclusive deal
shielded
anesthesiologists
from competition.
MFN clause did not
reduce physician
competition.

1990

Reazin (Hospital v. Insurer)

Most-Favored-Nations Clause

Hospital

Blue Cross
monopolized
insurance market, in
part through use of
MFN clause, which
prevented provider
discounts to other
payers.

1996

Delta Dental (FTC vs.
7
Insurer)

Most-Favored-Nations Clause

Government

MFN clause reduced
dentist competition;
made dental
insurance market
entry difficult.

3

6

88

1

HTI Health Services, Inc. vs. Quorum Health Group, Inc., River Regional Medical Corporation, and Vicksburg

Clinic, P.A. U.S. District Court for the Southern District of Mississippi, Western Division (Civil Action No. 5:96CV-108Br(S)).
2

Blue Cross/Blue Shield United of Wisconsin and Compcare Health Services Insurance Corporation v. Marshfield

Clinic and Security Health Plan of Wisconsin in the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit (Nos. 95-1965, 952140).
3

Jefferson Parish Hospital Dist. No. 2 v. Hyde (466 U.S. 2, 1984, O'Connor, Burger, Powell & Rehnquist, JJ.,

concurring)
4

Oltz v. St. Peter’s Community Hospital (9th Circuit, 1988, 861 F.2d 1440).

5

Ocean State Physicians Health Plan, Inc., et al. v. Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Rhode Island (1st Circuit, 1989,

883 F.2d 1101) cert. Denied (1990, 494 U.S. 1027).
6

Reazin v. Blue Cross & Blue Shield of Kan., Inc., 663 F. Supp. 1360, 1418 (D. Kan. 1987), aff'd, 899 F.2d 951

(10th Cir.), cert. denied, 497 U.S. 1005 (1990).
7

U.S. v. Delta Dental of Rhode Island, 96-113/P, 1996 WL 570397 (D.R.I. Oct. 2, 1996).

89

