NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

UNDERSTANDING THE "PROBLEM
OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT":
THE ROLE OF FACTOR MOBILITY
AND INTERNATIONAL TAXATION
Assaf Razin
Chi-Wa Yuen

Working Paper 7115
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7115

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 1999

Financial support is provided by the Research Grants Council though two grants (HKU 496-94H and HKU
396-96H). The usual disclaimer applies. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 1999 by Assaf Razin and Chi-Wa Yuen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Understanding the "Problem of Economic Development":
The Role of Factor Mobility and International Taxation
Assaf Razin and Chi-Wa Yuen
NBER Working Paper No. 7115
May 1999

JELNo. P2, H2, 04
ABSTRACT

The "problem of economic development," as Lucas (1988) states it, is the problem of
accounting for the observed diversity in levels and rates of growth of per capita income across
countries and across time. We study conditions under which capital mobility and labor mobility
(two seemingly income-equalizing forces) may interact with cross-country differences in income tax
rates and income tax principles (two seemingly income-diverging forces) to generate such diversity.

As a corollary, we also examine when countries with different initial endowments may finally
converge in their income levels.

Assaf Razin
Eitan Berglas School of Economics
Tel Aviv University
Tel Aviv 69978
Israel
and NBER
razin@econ.tau.ac.il

Chi-Wa Yuen
School of Economics and Finance
University of Hong Kong
Pokfulam Road
Hong Kong

cwyuenecon.hku.hk

I.

Introduction
Spurred by Lucas' (1988) seminalpaper 'Vn the Mechanics of Economic Developnent,'

recent years have witnessed renewed and growing interests in the economics profession in the

theory and evidence of economic growth. Factors that were considered as important

sources

of growth in the late 1950s and 1960s, such as technical change and population

growth,

continue to play an important role. But instead of being treated as exogenous factors,

they are

now modelled as outcomes from the optimizing decisions of the economic agents. [See,

e.g.,

Romer (1990), and Becker et al. (1990).] On the other hand, more formal models
are
developed to incorporate other growth engines like human capital accumulation, product

development, and trade that were emphasized in the descriptive literature of economic
development. [See, e.g., Lucas (1988), Grossman and Helpman (1991), and Stokey (1991).]
These models have been collectively called

'endogenous growth models', i.e., models that are

capable of generating persistent growth without relying on exogenous forces.
Among the various driving forces for growth, human capital formation has received the

most attention. This is in marked contrast to the significant role played by the accumulation
of physical capital in the traditional Solow-Swan and Cass-Koopm2n-type neoclassical

growth

models.' This shift in focus can be justified on both theoretical and empirical grounds. While
Jones and Manuelli (1990),

among others, have noted that output growth cannot be sustained

through physical capital formation alone given diminishing marginal productivity of capital,

Jorgenson: and Fraumenj (1989) have also reported that human capital is quantitatively
important relative to nonhuman capital as an income or wealth measure.
'However, there has never been a neglect of the role of human capital in output growth. Growth

accountants, like Denison (1974), have attributed a large fraction ofeconomic growth in the US to improvement
in the quality of labor services; while Uzawa (1965) and Razin (1972) have studied the accumulation of human
capital in the Ramsey-type growth models.
—1—

In order to understand the

problem of economic development

one has to look for ways to account for "... the
obseedpae

as posed by Lucas (1988),

across countries and across

time, in levels and rates of
growth of per capita income ... "in addition to pinning down
the
important factors that can generate and sustain income growth.
Somehow, the literature has
focused on disparities in growth patterns across countries rather than

these cross-country disparities that our paper will focus

across time, and it is on

as well. Trivially, one can attribute

the cross-sectional differences in growth experience
to asymmetric preferences and/or
techhology, but this is generally
unacceptable as a scientific explanation. Less trivially, one
may also attribute the observed diversities
to country-specific shocks and adjustments. King
and Rebelo (1993) have shown, however, that these

growth differences cannot be rationalized

and sustained as a long term phenomenon by short run

(transitional) dynamics alone without

producing extremely counterfactual implications.2 Although the recent
been Successful in

of different factor

growth literature has

explaining cross-coun, differences in (per capita) income levels in terms
endowments, the explanation of differences in (per capita) income growth

rates is a much harder challenge.3

Assuming that countries have identical
different factor endowments,

preferences and technology but possibly

two major kinds of explanations have been provided. First,

multiple steady StateS—economies with different initial endowments

equiljbri growth path, but in different directions, thus

can evolve along the same

converging to different long-run

2Their analysis is conducted in
exogenous growth models. In principle, ansitory changes are capable of
generating permanent effects in models of
endogenous growth. In other words, in the context ofendogenous growth
models, one can attribute persistent differences
in income levels across countries to country-specific shocks. But
as a matter of philosophy, it sounds odd
to explain a regular pattern in terms ofpurely random factors.
3Th.is is especially true in
an exogenous rate of technologicalexogenous growth models, where the natural growth rate (being determined by
progress) is an unalterable given.

-2-

positions;4 or multiple equilibria—economj5 with the same initial endowment
can follow
different equilibrium growth paths and converge to different long

run positions.5 Second,

differences in national, especially tax, policies—which have differential effects

agents' incentives to invest in

on the private

growthenhancing activities and hence the rates of productivity

growth in different countries.6 In this paper, we shall focus on this second, i.e., policy,
explanation.

Most of these policy-growth studies

have been conducted in the context of closed

economies, where different countries are treated

as isolated, non-interacting entities. With

increasing global integration of the world economy, factor mobility opens a room for
international policy spillovers, with policy changes in one country affecting

resource allocation

and growth in another country through changes in factor price differentials. In

this paper, we

would like to examine whether the tax-driven diversity in income
growth rates can be
preserved when (a) factors of production are freely mobile across national borders, and
factor incomes earned in the

(b) the

foreign country are potentially subject to double taxation by both

the home and foreign governments and are thus affected by both domestic
and foreign tax
4See, e.g., Becker et al. (1990) and Azariadis
and Drazen (1990). Assuming that the private rate of return
on human capital rises with the stock of human
capital, Becker et al. obtain two stable steady states: one with large
families and little human capital, and the other with small families and perhaps
growing human and physical capital.
They leave unanswered however, the question of what
produces
diversity
in
long
run growth rates within the groups
of low-growth and high-growth countries
separately.
Growth
diversity
to
a
more
widespread degree—in terms of
the number of multiple stationary
growth paths at various levels of income—is obtained in Azariadis and Drazen
through increasing social returns to scale with local variations (what they called 'threshold
externalities') in the
accumulation of human capital.
5See, for instance, Benhabib and Peru

(especially that of an externality parameter),(1994),
there where they show that, depending on the values ofparameters
can exist a continuum of equilibria—not just continuum of
balanced growth paths—in the Lucas (1988) model.
6See, e.g., Rebelo (1991) and Jones and Manuelli
(1990) for a qualitative analysis, and King and Rebelo
(1990), Lucas (l990a), Stokey and Rebelo (1995), and Mendoza et al. (1997) for a quantitative
assessment, of the
effects of tax changes on long run growth rates in models with capital formation (human
and
physical)
as the source
of growth. McGrattan and Schmitz (1998) examine the role of a wide
range
of
policy
variables
in
explaining
crosscountry income and growth differences.

-3-

policies. In particular, is factor mobility a growth-equalizing force and international income
taxation a growth-diverging force? How do factor mobility and

cross-country tax structures

interact to determine growth differentials?
Similar issues have been addressed

by Razin and Yuen (1996,1999). But in those two

papers, we discuss oniy the role of capital mobility and

international capital taxation. In this

paper, we shall examine the role of labor mobility and international labor taxation as well. In
particular, we shall try to distinguish between the effects of capital mobility and labor

mobility.

Although capital flows seem to be more prevalent and face less restrictions globally than labor

flows, the latter is common among states within a federal system (such as the

contiguous

provinces in Canada, prefectures in Japan, and states in the US) and among neighboring
Countries with close economic and political ties (such as countries in the
Labor flows are thus more relevant for
to know whether labor mobility and

European Union).

regional growth. Among other things, we would like

capital mobility are complements or substitutes as forces

affecting growth? Are labor and capital flows symmetric in terms of their level and growth
effects on incomes per capita?

Given the close connection between

population growth and economic growth in the

development process and as a broadening of the definition of the problem of development,

shall try to account for the observed

we

diversity in the growth of (per capita and total) incomes

as well as population. When population

growth is determined exogenously, taxes can only

affect income growth through the growth engine (say, human capital), with

indistinguishable

effects on the growth of per capita income and aggregate income. Endogenizing

population

growth will introduce a new channel through which taxes can affect per capita income

and aggregate income growth differently. (See Appendix for more details.)

-4-

growth

For the above reasons, we think that it is important to examine the interaction between
taxation and (population and income) growth in the presence of factor mobilJty. To
feel about the tax-growth relations

get some

across countries, we display in Table 1 the average effective

tax rates on capital and labor income and the long run average annual growth rates of
population and income across the G-7 countries.

[insert Table 1 about here]
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II derives a fundamental relative

growth condition and examines the

growth-equalizing role of capital mobility and labor

mobility. Section III provides an overview of two polar principles of international income
taxation. The role of international factor income taxation in explaining the diverse growth
performance across countries under different forms of factor mobility is analyzed in Section
IV. Section V then examines a possible mechanism for income level convergence. A

summary

and some concluding remarks are Contained in Section VI. Most of the results reported in this

paper are model-free. We present a full-fledged model of endogenous growth (featuring both
population and human capital growth) in a closed economy context in the Appendix. All the
results in the paper can also be derived more formally in an open economy extension of such

model by incorporating capital and labor mobility and global taxation.

U..

Growth Rate Convergence: The Role of Factor Mobility
It is well understood from standard trade theory that perfect factor mobility will lead

to factor price equalization. In particular, capital mobility will equalize interest rates, whereas
labor mobility will equalize wage rates, across countries. To assess the role of factor mobility

in equalizing cross-country differences in output growth rates, we have to understand how

-5-

factor price equalization is related to growth rate equalization. Their formal

relation can be

analyzed in a full-fledged dynamic general equilibrium model of endogenous growth
an open economy extension of the autarky model laid out in the Appendix. Here in

such as

the main

text, we shall focus only on those ingredients that are essential for
understanding the
fundamental relative growth condition (*) spelled out below.

Recall from the theory of saving that a consumer is allocating his consumption
time in a utility-maximizing way when s/he is equating her/his intertemporal

substitution (IMRS) to the interest rate

over

marginal rate of

( after adjusting for the relevant taxes), i.e.,

IMRSII =

(1)

between any two periods t- 1 and t. Here,
we are assuming for simplicity full depreciation

of physical capital within one period and the absence of tax-deductibility of

depreciation

allowances The reader can rest assured, though, that the essence of all the results in the
remainder of the paper does not

depend on this simplification; they will just be slightly
complicated by the presence of the depreciation terms if we drop this assumption.
Suppose consumer preferences are isoelastic with some altruistic element as specified

in the utility function below and as explained in fuller details in the Appendix:

where V is the size of the population (or the size of the representative dynastic
consumption of the representative

family), c1 the

consumer, 3 the subjective discount factor, the degree of

interpersonal altruism, and a the inverse of the elasticity of intertemporal
consumption

-6-

substitution. In what follows, we shall loosely interpret the parameter as reflecting consumer
preference towards 'child quantity' and 1—a as reflecting consumer preference towards 'child

quality'. Then we can rewrite equation (1) as

(l+g,)1(l÷g1)0
where

the growth rate of any

g = x,/x,1 -1.

variable

[Cf. The fundamental

=

(1)'

x between period

growth equation in

t-l and period

t

is

defined as

Rebelo (1992).J Between any

countries A and B with symmetric preferences (i.e., same f3, a, and

two

), their relative growth

rates can be expressed as:
A

l+g
l+g$

Aa

l+g
l+g

—A

=

r.

(1)

r1

This relative growth condition (1)" will hold inany period t>

0

(i.e., in both the short

run and the long run). In the long run when all econonijc variables are growing at constant

rates, (1)" can be simplified further by imposing two balanced growth restrictions, viz.,

g = g,' (i = A, B) and g

=

g.

The first restriction says that per capita consumption (c)

and per capita output (y) must grow at the same rate. It follows from the long run constancy
of the consumption-output ratio. The second restriction says that aggregate output growth rates

must be equal across countries. It follows from the requirement that the net trade balance
(resulting from either capital flows or labor flows) between any two countries grow at the same

rate as their respective GDPs along the global long run steady state growth path, which is in

turn a direct consequence of the long run constancy of the trade balance-GDP ratio in all
countries. Since aggregate income (Y) is the product of per capita income (y) and population

-7-

(N) so
(1

that g =

(1 ÷gN)(i g)

— 1, this second restriction implies that (1 +g)/(1 +g)

=

+gB)/( 1 g'4) . Applying these two restrictions to (1)", we obtain the fundamental relative

growth condition:

l+ A -(1-o)
B
1

We shall exploit this condition to derive all the important results in the rest of the paper.

II.A The Role of Capital Mobility
Under perfect capital mobility, capital will flow from capital-rich or low-MPK
(marginal product of capital) countries to capital-poor or high-MPK countries. Given the law

of diminishing returns, these cross-border capital flows will ultimately equalize the MPKs or

rates of return on capital in all countries that are interconnected by capital mobility.8 In the

absence of taxes, therefore, r = B which (from (*)) implies that gA gB Nonetheless,
this growth rate convergence is only a necessary, but not sufficient, condition for

convergence

in per capita income levels. For countries that start off from different levels of initial income

(due perhaps to cross-country differences in initial endowments of human and/or physical
capital), their absolute income levels will still diverge (although their relative income levels

7Among other things, it implies that countries with lower population growth will enjoy faster growth in
their per capita incomes. See Razin and Yuen (1997a) for supportive evidence on this and other related empirical

implications. In a multi-country world, it is possible for aggregate output growth to diverge across blocs of
countries that are not interconnected by factor mobility(i.e., when net capital and/or labor flows exist only

among
countries within each bloc, but not across blocs). But within each bloc (where factor mobility is effectively
at

work), this total income growth equalization result will still apply—and it is around this scenario that our analysis
is built.
8Such rate-of-return equalization will be immediate ifcapital stocks (both existing and new) can be moved
from one country to another costlessly. In a more realistic setting where old capital is movable only at a high cost
and/or where new capital investment involves adjustment costs, the equalization will be slow and gradual.

-8-

will remain constant) in spite of identical long run rates of income growth.

II.B The Role of Labor Mobility
As Razin and Sadka (1997) make clear in their survey paper, ".. [wJith identical
constant returns to scale technologies

everywhere and two factors (capital and labor), it

suffices that one factor is freely mobile to equalize the marginal product of each factor
everywhere..." It follows that wage rate (or marginal product of labor, MPH) equalization
brought about by labor mobility will also be accompanied by equalization of interest rates (or

MPKs) whether or not capital is internationally mobile. As a result, we again have rA =

(in the absence of taxes), implying gA = gB from (*), i.e., growth rate
convergence.

In other words, under constant returns to scale technology, capital mobility and labor
mobility play a symmetric role in equalizing income growth rates across countries without any
necessary implications for income level convergence.9 One

may wonder why, as equation (*)

suggests, interest rate equalization implies equalization ofper capita output growth rates. To

understand this, one has to understand two basic relations. First, the rate of growth of

per

capita income (g) is identical to the rate of growth of human capital (gb)' i.e., human capital
is the engine of growth. Second, the interest rate (r, representing the rate of return on physical
capital investment) has to be equal to the rate of return on human capital investment (rh). The

first is a balanced growth relation that holds in the long run under constant returns to scale
9Absent adjustment costs, factor price equalization, hence growth rate convergence, will occur immediately
following the open-up of the national borders for capital andlor labor flows. In addition to the normal case that
involves positive net flows of capital andlor labor,
one may wonder whether two extreme cases will arise, i.e., (a)
all capital orworkers in the world reside in
one single country, and (b) no cross-border capital flows or labor flows
take place (i.e., back to autarky). Theoretically,
one can rule out case (a) by imposing the Inada conditions and case
(b) by assuming some fundamental
cross-country heterogeneity (such as differences in initial stocks of human
andlor physical capital). Empirically, these two extreme cases can be dismissed as uninteresting and irrelevant.

-9-

production technologies, and the second is a no-arbitrage relation between the two kinds
of
capital investment. Since the rate of return on human capital (rh) governs how fast

like to invest in her/his human capital (i.e., gb), these two relations
together imply a one-to-one correspondence between interest

(g =

one would

g and r = rh)

rate equalization and growth rate

equalization.

So far, our analysis of growth rate convergence has abstracted from cross-country
diversity in income taxes that may give rise to factor price (interest rate and/or wage rate)
differentials even in the presence of factor

mobility. As we shall see, whether tax differences

will drive a wedge in factor prices will depend on the tax treatment of the foreign-source factor

income earned by domestic factors of production—by both the domestic and foreign
governments. In other words, it depends on the principle of international income taxation
adopted (or tax agreements reached) by their tax authorities. It is to this particular issue that

we now turn.

III.

Principles of International Income Taxation
Two common principles of international income taxation are the residence (or

worldwide) principle and the source (or territorial) principle. The residence principle uses the
place of residency of the taxpayer as the basis for the assessment of tax liabilities. The source

principle employs the source of income as the basis for assessing tax
Let us use

to denote the tax rate on the domestic-source q-income (q =

w,r) of

residents of country , t1 the tax rate on the q-income earned
by non-residents in country 1,
and tqF the tax rate on the foreign-source q-income of country i residents

'°For details, see Frenkel eta!. (1991).

- 10 -

on top of their non-

residents' taxes paid to the foreign government net of the domestic tax credit or deduction
granted by country i government. The mnemonics are such that 'D' stands for domesticsource, 'F' for foreign-source, and 'N' for non-residents. All these three tax rates are levied
by the country i government. The after-tax rate of return on capital in countxy i, P,

equals (1 —rrD)r

if capital is invested at home, and [1 —cF--(l —ar$,,]ri if capital is invested abroad (in

country

j). In the general case where the credit rate, ar', lies between zero and one, we have a partial
credit system whereby part of the tax paid abroad is deducted from the tax liability in the home

country. It can be interpreted as a full credit system when ar' =

deduction system when ar' =

1

and r r and as a full

With international capital mobility between countries A

and B, the absence of net-of-tax arbitrage possibilities across investment locations imply
= [1

(1 —t,.D)r

_p_(l_arI5r,]rB, and

B

B
(1 —t,.0)r = [1

B

BA

rpF(lar )trN]1

A
.

(2A)
(2B)

A similar set of arbitrage conditions across work locations holds for labor income taxation
under international labor mobility, with r replaced by w, i.e.,
(1

—

WD)W
B

(1 —tWD)w

=

[1

—

B =
[1

—(1 _a,5.cBN]w B, and
B

BA

tWF(la)N]w A.

(3A)
(3B)

Under the pure residence principle, residents are taxed on their worldwide income
uniformly regardless of their source of income, while non-residents are not taxed at all. Under

Without any credit and deduction, the after-tax rate of return on capital invested abroad (in countryj) is

(1 -trF-i)rJ. Under the full credit system, whereby taxes paid abroad are fully deducted from the tax liabilities

in the home country, it becomes (1 -tF)rJ. The
deduction system, whereby the tax paid abroad is deducted from
taxable income in the home country, provides
an alternative relief from double taxation. In that case, the after-tax
rate of return on capital invested abroad (in country j) should be written s (I -)(l
-t/,,,)rJ. All the qualitative
results in this paper are valid for both the credit and deduction systems.
—11—

capital mobility, this implies that tD =

r

and trN = 0 (and ar' becomes irrelevant). From

equations (2A) and (2B), it follows that r A =

r8

i.e., equalization of the pre-tax interest rates

(or MPK's), hence efficiency in the global allocation of investment. Similarly, the residence
principle implies equalization of pre-tax wage rates—i.e., w A = w 8—hence efficiency in the

global allocation of labor under labor mobility.
Under the pure source principle, all types of income originating in the country are taxed
uniformly regardless of the place of residency of the income recipients. With capital mobility,

we have, rD = rN and either trF = a' = 0 or

=

a't$,1.. From equations (2A) and (2B),

this implies (l—tD)r' = (l—r,)r' (i = A,B; j = B,A), i.e., equalization of the post-tax
interest rates (or IMRS's), hence efficiency in the global allocation of savings. Similarly, the

source principle implies equalization of post-tax wage rates—(l —rD)W = (1
—t.,D)wJ (i =

A,B; j = B,A)—hence efficiency in the global allocation of household time under labor
mobility.

IV.

Interaction between Factor Mobility and International Income Taxation

1V.A The Role of Capital Mobility and International Capital Income Taxation
This is a case we have analyzed in an earlier paper Razin and Yuen, 1996). In order

to facilitate the comparison with the case of labor mobility and to build intuition behind the
results derived below, let us revisit it here. When capital is mobile, the choice of international
tax principle and tax rates levied on capital incomes earned by residents and non-residents at
home and abroad will affect the after-tax rates of return on capital (7) and, indirectly, the long

run rates of growth of per capita income (ga,) across countries through the fundamental growth

condition (*). Applied to two open economies A and B, we have

- 12 -

-(I-a)

1+gyA
1

—

B

7A

rB

—

(l—tD)r'

BB
(1 r,.D)r

l—r,.D

—
1

B

()*

BA'

r,.F(l —a,. )t,.N

where use has been made of the interest arbitrage condition for country B residents (2B) to
arrive at the last equality. This equation shows how the relative income growth rates in A and

B depend on the capital tax rates in the two countries and the relative bias in preference
towards quantity versus quality of children ( versus 1—a).
Recall that, under perfect capital mobility, the no-arbitrage restrictions will force the

after-tax rates of return on capital (F's) to be equalized across countries under the source

principle. Equation (*)' therefore implies convergence in income growth rates if the source
principle prevails (i.e., when tN = TD and either t. =
B
the alternative residence principle (i.e., when t,..
=

a,.8

B

trD,

=

0

=

or

A

trN =

0,

a,.Br,.N).

Under

B

and a,. becomes

irrelevant), since the after-tax interest rates are not equalized by capital mobility, asymmetry

in F's (due to the asymmetry between r and ) implies, in turn, asymmetry in growth rates.

Equation (*)'

also

indicates that under residence-based taxation, when

1—a,

asymmetric tax rates may have differential effects on income growth. In particular, when
people are more biased towards quality rather than quantity of children ( <

1-a),

the country

with a higher capital tax rate will exhibit faster growth in per capita income. Given that
growth in aggregate income will be equalized across countries in the long run, this implies

slower growth in population. The reverse is true when people are more biased towards
quantity than quality ( >

1_a).12

The intuition is similar to that given in the closed economy

example in the Appendix. Other things equal, the country with a higher capital tax rate will
12The tax rate t,, rather than the after-tax MPK, matters here because the cross-country MPKs will be
equalized under the residence principle anyway.

- 13 -

have less incentive to invest in physical capital and more to invest in either child quality if

< 1-0 or in child quantity if > 1—a. We summarize these results in the following
proposition.

Proposition 1 (P1): International Capital Taxation and Relative Growth B
(a)

When both countries adopt the source principle,

g = gB and g = g if # 1-a

irrespective of international tax differences;
(b)

When both countries adopt the residence principle, Iwo cases are possible:
i)

ii)

t;

if > 1 -a, gA gB and g1 g as
A <B
if < 1- a, g A<
— gB and A> B as trD

and

trD

While asymmetry in tax rates can induce differential growth rates when both countries

adopt the residence principle, we note that the adoption of asymmetric international tax
principles (with or without asymmetry in tax rates) by different countries can also generate

disparity in growth rates.14 Note also from equation (*)'that, in cases intermediate between

13j the special case where =

1—a, the representative agent is 'justly altruistic', i.e., the dynastic family
can be viewed as one single person so that transferring consumption fromone family member to another will not
change the utility of any family member. In this case, as they substitute out ofphysical capital investment following
a rise in the capital income tax, they will be indifferent betweensubstituting into investment in child quality and
substituting into investment in child quantity. As a result, we can show by using (*)' that
aggregate consumption
growth will always be equalized across countries irrespective of cross-country tax differences under the source
principle and may differ across countries depending on tax differences under the residenceprinciple. More
formally, (1 +g)( 1 ÷g) = (I +g)( I +g) for all t> 0 under the source principle, and (1 +g)( I g)
(1 +g)( I +g)
as trDI - t for all t> 0 under the residence principle. Notice that these results
apply to the whole dynamic growth
path (i.e., both the short run and the long run). To ensure the existence of balancedgrowth under source-based
taxation, however, we have to impose a restriction, i.e., tD = D' so that (I +g)( I ÷g) =
(1 +g)( 1 +g) in the long
run. This restriction is not required under residence-based taxation, though.

'4When country A adopts the pure residence principle (with fulldeduction) and country B adopts the pure
source principle, for instance, there are again two cases to consider: (i) g - and g - g as
0 if> 1—a;
and (ii)) g
as
and g
0 if < 1-0. In the special casg5
where = 1-0, we have (I +g,)(I +g)
(I ÷g)(l +g)as t - 0 for all t> 0. But a restriction, t = 0,
has to be imposed (implying (I +g)(l
(I +g)( 1 g8)) in order to ensure the existence of balanced growth if = 1—a. In this scenario (irrespective of

-

- 14

-

the pure source and pure residence principles (i.e., with partial credit or deduction of taxes on

foreign-source capital income to be paid to the domestic and/or foreign governments), the
relative magnitudes of the tax wedges (1 -'.D) and [1 -t4.-(l —acN] (i = A,B; j = B,A)
matter. In those cases, it will also be important to distinguish between the differential growth

effects of the two alternative forms of relief from double taxation, i.e., the credit system and
the deduction system.

Proposition 1 characterizes the tax effects on relative growth due to the international

tax system and the relative bias in preference between quantity and quality of children. In
reality, the residence principle is the dominant tax principle widely adopted by most industrial

countries for the taxation of capital income. The popularity of residence-based taxationmay
be explained by its production efficiency, Ramsey (second best) efficiency, and capital export

neutrality implications.'5 From (Pib), we can thus conclude that international asymmetry in
capital taxes is a plausible explanation for the diversity in growth rates. A closer examinption
of the relation between capital taxes on the one hand and income and population growth rates

on the other seems to suggest that > 1-a conforms to the situation in these countries. In
other words, low capital tax rates tend to be associated with faster growth in per capita income

and slower growth in population. [See Razin and Yuen (1996).]

the relative magnitudes of and 1-a), residents of country A will always earn a lower after-tax rate ofreturn—by
a factor of (i-J-.-than will residents of country B irrespective of their locations of investment unless the capital
tax rate in A is negative. Residents of country A will earn (1 -i,)r at home and (I -4)(1 _1)3 abroad, and

residents of country B will earn (I-r,)r' at home and A abroad. No arbitrage ensures that (l-,)r r4 for
residents of both countries. That explains why, here, the sign of r rather than the relative size of r, and r

determines the relative growth rates of population and per capita consumption in the two countries. Although the
details of the results here have to be modified if the residence principle is applied by country A with full or partial
credit or partial deduction instead, this example serves to illustrate the somewhat weird possibility of growth rate
convergence even when countries adopt different tax principles and different tax rates (say, when r, = 0 and

r> 0).

'5See Frenkel et al. (1991) and Razin and Yuen (1999) for a discussion of these implications of the
residence principle.

- 15 -

EV.B The Role of Labor Mobility and International Labor Income
Taxation

Under perfect labor mobility, the absence of arbitrage opportunities ensures the
equalization of after-tax wage rates for any worker who can choose to work ineither country.

In particular, the two wage arbitrage conditions (3A) and (3B) hold, i.e., (1 tD)w' =
[1 -

-(1 -a,)çJwJ (i = A,B; j

= B,A). To determine whether international income

growth rates will be equalized by labor mobility, we have to first figure out what these two
conditions imply about interest rate equalization and then use the fundamental relative growth

condition i*) to derive their implications forgrowth rate convergence.
In perfectly competitive markets, profit-maximizing firms will always hire capital and

labor by equating their prices to their respective marginal products. In other words,

r

=

MJPK' and w'

=

MPH'. To determine a more precise relation between MPK' and

MPH', let us suppose (as in the closed economy example in the Appendix) that the aggregate
production function takes the Cobb-Douglas form, i.e.,

Y = AKH'
where Y is aggregate output, K the aggregate capital stock, H total effective labor, A (>0) the

production coefficient, and E E (0,1) the output share of capital. Suppose further that all
countries face the same technology, i.e., identical production parameters (A,E). Then one can

easily show that the relative capital-labor ratios, (K '/H ')/(K/H'), can be expressed as either

(MTPKJ/MPK ')" or (MPH '/!vIPHJ)"s, i.e., (r1/r "C'

= (w '1w J) 11€ Combined with the

wage arbitrage condition (3A) and applied to any two economies A and B, this implies that
B

=

I A\ (1-eye
I

XL. I

r4 wB)

=

1—
_ .— awl
A\tB
twF
wN

lrWD
- 16 -

(1—€)/€

= MB

Substituting this into the fundamental relative growth condition (*), we obtain

A (1-a)
1+g

—

A

= rA = (l—trD)r

A

A

B (1_t)rB

ltrD

=

(*)"

(l_t)AAB

Note that twD = twF, twN = 0, and a becomes irrelevant (implying AAB = 1) under the

residence principle, and tN
AAB

= t and either t = a = 0 or tF = a twN (implying

1 as t, . t) under

the source principle. The proposition below should be

transparent.

Proposition 2 (P2): International Labor Taxation and Relative Growth 16
(a)

When both countries adopt the source principle, two cases are possible:
— B, and
if > 1- a, g, A>
— gB and gA< B as A>

it)

— gB and A>
g gBas 14>
if < 1-a, g A<

where the weighted tax wedge is defined as

(b)

=

B

(1 -r.f(l

—t,)1.

When both countries adopt the residence principle, two cases are possible:
i)
ii)

>icggBandggBasl<t.afld
ifi< 1-cr, gA gB and gA gB as trD

trD

Contrary to what we find in the capital mobility case, (P2a) shows that the source
principle is not necessarily growth-equalizing. Although the post-tax MPH's are equalized
under territorial taxation, the post-tax MPK's are not unless the weighted tax wedges (Q's) are

uniform across countries. So, in contrast to (P2a), wage tax asymmetry matters here as much
t6We require Q- = Q' in case (a) and rD = trD in case (b), so (1 +g)(1 ÷g)
existence of balanced growth if = 1-a.

- 17 -

=

(1 g)(1 ÷g,7), for the

as interest tax asymmetry. Like (Pib), though, (P2b) implies that asymmetry in capital tax
rates under worldwide taxation can be a source of growth disparity. As before, we can show

that asymmetry in the international income tax principle (with or without asymmetry in tax
rates) can be yet another source of growth rate differences.17

IV.C The Role of Capital cum Labor Mobility and International Income Taxation
What happens when both capital and labor can freely move across national borders to
take advantage of factor price differentials? We understand from the preceding analysis that,
in equilibrium, capital mobility implies equal after-tax interest rates from the perspectives of

capital owners in each country, irrespective of the location of their investment. Similarly,
labor mobility implies equal after-tax wage rates from the perspective of workers, irrespective

of their work location. These two no-arbitrage conditions can be expressed as
i

ltrF(la)tN

H'

1-t,
lIE

K'
H'

Together;they

j 1/(1-e)

j

K'

ltwD
1

- WF - (1

-a)t

H
K

H'

imply the following viability conditions

(1-tD)(l-tD) = [1 trF(l ar)trNJ [1
Again,

K
—,and

WF(laW)tWNI, i = A,B;j

=

B,A.

one can examine the possibility of growth rate convergence under different

'7When country A adopts the residence principle and country B adopts the source principle, g - g11 and
(I

gas (1-t5
(1-t)
if>
1—a,
whereas
gA gB and gA gas (l-r - (l-t) if < 1—a. We require
<
A€
H
A
A
8

r) = (I tr), S0 (l fgv)(l 4g )

= (1 --g)(l

>

), for the existence ofbalanced growth if =
- 18 -

1—a.

international tax principles. Instead of considering the various possible cases one by one, we

shall focus on a case of realistic interest, i.e., when the source principle is applied to labor
income taxation and the residence principle to capital income taxation. Under source-based

labor taxation, D

= v and either

capital taxation, rD =

and

= a'

= 0

or

=

aWcN. Under residence-based

rN = 0 (a,.' irrelevant). Substituting these conditions into the

viability conditions above reduces them down to one single restriction, viz.,
implying that

A=

=

1. Imposing this restriction on the relative growth condition (*y' yields
4 -(1-a)

l+g

=

l+gyB

A

P

p ltD

(*)S'

Hence, the following proposition.

Proposition 3 (P3): International Taxation and Relative Growth under Capital cuin
Labor Mobility
When both countries adopt the residence principle for capital income taxation and the source

principle for labor income taxation, two cases are possible:
(i)

tf(> 1-cr, g4 . gB and gp1 . gB as 4

(ii)

zf< 1-ci, g4

.

andg g as

4

4.

Proposition 3 suggests that applying different international income tax principles to

different kinds of income can be another source of growth diversity under free mobility of both

factors of production only if the capital income tax rates are also different across countries.

Again, if = 1-a, we have to impose the restriction t
to ensure the existence of balanced growth.
- 19 -

, so (1 +g)(1 +g) (1+g,)(1 ÷g,5, in order

The results look very similar to those stated in (Pib), i.e., capital taxation under the pure

residence principle. This is due to two reasons: (a) as we have seen in Section U, under
constant returns technology and in the absence of taxes, capital mobility and labor mobility are

perfect substitutes in terms of factor price equalization; and (b) the viability conditions under

capital cuin labor mobility do not permit wage tax asymmetry across countries, so that only
interest tax asymmetry matters here.

V.

Income Level Convergence
So far, we have considered only growth rate convergence, which may or may not be

accompanied by convergence in income levels. Obviously, the various scenarios we have

analyzed that may give rise to growth rate divergence will also result in income level
divergence. Although the recent evidence on the convergence of incomes across countries is

mixed,t9 it is interesting to examine the conditions under which international diversity in
income levels can be eliminated.

Recall from Section U that, under a constant returns to scale technology, capital
mobility and labor mobility will play a symmetric role in equalizing income growth rates
across countries without any necessary implications for income level convergence. This
conclusion is based on the implicit assumption that physical capital and humpn capital are two

symmetric factors of production. However, it has been widely accepted that the 'human

nature' involved in the accumulation of human capital makes it quite different from the
accumulation of physical capital. Among other things, one feature of human capital investment

that distinguishes it from physical capital investment is that it is a social activity involving

'oSee, e.g., Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1992) and Ben-David (1995).

-20 -

groups of people, that an individual's effort to raise her/his knowledge and skills may end up

benefitting other members of the society through group interactions. In short, investment in

human capital involves an external productivity or spillover effect. Lucas (1988, 1990b)
models these knowledge spillovers in the form of a dependence of aggregate output on the

economy-wide average level of human capital (h) through an externality parameter (E) in
addition to its dependence on the capital and labor inputs—i.e., these externalities generate
some form of increasing returns. The production function is modified as follows:
Y=

AKH'h.

This externality feature of human capital has been exploited by Lucas (1990b) to resolve the
puzzle why capital does not flow from rich to poor countries to take advantage of rate-of-return
benefits. Assuming these spillover effects to be somehow confined within national boundaries,

we (Razin and Yuen, 1997b) have also used it to show how, unlike capital mobility, labor
mobility can serve as an income-equalizing force by providing a channel for the transmission

of these external effects across countries/regions.

The idea behind our income level convergence result is simple and intuitive. Under
labor mobility, workers will move from low-wage (human-capital-poor) countries to high-wage

(human-capital-rich) countries. By mingling themselves with more knowledgeable/skillful

workers in the high-wage country, migrants or guest workers will enjoy an upward shift in
their wage profile. Through wage arbitrage, 'those left behind' in the low-wage country will

also experience higher wage profiles. This will give them incentive to increase their rate of
human capital investment. In this sense, we can view the migrant workers as 'messengers' of
technological progress, transmitting the more advanced knowhow from the foreign country to

- 21 -

their home country. Over time, this transmission mechanism will lead to equalization in the
levels of human capital and income per capita among economies interlinked by labor mobility.

This level convergence result, which also implies growth rate convergence, does not
mean that cross—country differences in income tax rates can never give rise to international

diversity in income growth. Since the result is a manifestation of long run behavior, all it
means is that balanced growth may not exist in the presence of tax asymmetry when knowledge

spillovers (or increasing returns) are prevalent. Evidently, when the economies fail to
converge to their steady state growth paths because of such tax asymmetry, their income levels

and growth rates will generally diverge as well. Put differently, tax harmonization is generally

required for level convergence.

VI.

Conclusion
Let us first summarize the answers to the several questions posed in the introduction,

and then make some concluding remarks. First, factor (both capital and labor) mobility is

found to be a driving force that will equalize aggregate income growth rates, but not
necessarily per capita income growth rates, in the long run. The latter differences may persist

due to, say, cross-country differences in income tax rates. Second, capital mobility and labor
mobility are perfect substitutes as growth-equalizing forces in the absence of international tax

differences and of knowledge spilovers (or increasing returns). Third, tax-driven diversity
in growth rates can be preserved under (i) the residence principle with either capital or labor

mobility; or (ii) the source principle when labor is mobile; or (iii) when different countries
adopt different international tax principles; or (iv) when different international tax principles

are applied to capital incomes and labor incomes separately. [See Propositions 1-3.] Fourth,

- 22 -

the relative growth effects of taxes between capital mobility and labor mobility aie symmetric

under the residence principle, but not also under the source principle [cf. Propositions 1 and
2] or when different countries follow different international tax principles [cf. footnotes 14 and

17]. Finally, income level convergence can be brought about by international transmission
of technology through labor mobility in the presence of knowledge spillovers.
In sum, we have identified two major sources of disparity in income (and population)

growth rates across countries. They are: (i) asymmetry in factor income tax rates, and (ii)
asymmetry in international income tax principles, as adopted by different countries or applied

to different factors of production. We have also shown how the growth effects of capital
mobility and labor mobility can differ under these cases and how they are related to the relative

bias in preferences towards quantity and quality of children. Although these differences can

easily be eliminated if enough symmetry is assumed between the two factor inputs (e.g.,
uniform taxation of incomes from both factors), we believe that the asymmetries examined here

are very real. In fact, the unequal barriers to the cross-border movements of the two factors
can be another real source of asymmetry that is nonetheless ignored in our analysis.
The purpose of our paper has been to point out some relevant theoretical possibilities

as solutions to the problem of economic development. We are not trying to claim that the
sources of growth diversity and of asymmetry in the mobility of labor and capital we have
analyzed here are necessarily the crux of the problem. They may be. But the answer has to
be found from the data. In Razin and Yuen (1997a), we provide some evidence in support of

the growth-equalizing effect of capital mobility and of the income-equalizing effect of labor
mobility. In particular, our empirical results show that restrictions on labor flows tend to make

per capita incomes more divergent across nations and/or regions.

- 23 -

On the theoretical front, some extensions are worthwhile. Since population changes
in a country can be a result of both births/deaths and inflow/outflow of people, it is interesting

to examine the link among fertility, migration, human capital formation, and income growth.
Attention has to be drawn to the distinction between labor migration and labor mobility. (Here
in this paper, we have been sloppy in using the two terms interchangeably as if they meant the

same thing.) While the latter involves supplying effective labor to work in another country,
the former also involves relocating one's home and changing one's national identity, hence the

environment in which one raises children and invests in human capital. Cross-country wage
rates will be equalized under labor mobility, but not necessarily under labor migration. What
will be equalized instead under free migration are the lifetime utilities of the marginal migrant

in the home and foreign countries. Consequently, it is not immediately obvious whether labor

migration is a growth-equalizing force. Migration will also change the context in which
questions of policy choice and national welfare should be addressed.

Throughout the paper, we have been concerned about possible explanations of
international diversity in income levels and growth rates. As a mirror image of the "problem
of economic development", one may sometimes want to know under what conditions (however

stringent) the diversity may vanish completely. This is especially true for member countries
of an economic union (such as countries in the European Union and federal states in the US).
Our results suggest two essential preconditions: (i) harmonization of income tax rates, and (ii)

labor mobility to facilitate knowledge spillovers. Condition (i) will ensure growth rate
convergence irrespective of the international tax principle •20 Condition (ii) will ensure income

200ne can conceive of some special cases under which a combination of asymmetric international tax
principles and asymmetric income tax rates may produce symmetric growth rates. (See, e.g., the discussion in
footnote 14.) But these are too special to be of general interest for our purpose.

- 24 -

level convergence as well. These findings may not be surprising at all. We do hear them

widely advocated by the EU.2' The question is whether each national government will
willingly choose to follow these guidelines.

In Razin and Yuen (1999), we show that, under capital mobility and with or without

international tax coordination, it is optimal (both national-welfare-maximizing and globalwelfare-maximizing) for each national government to eliminate taxes on capital incomes from

all sources in the long run. Based on results obtained by Jones et al. (1997) for the optimal
wage tax in a closed economy, we conjecture that the same will apply to labor income taxes
under labor mobility in the absence of human capital externalities. In other words, optimal tax

policies are growth-equalizing. But in these cases (absent knowledge spillovers), level
convergence cannot be guaranteed.

In the presence of knowledge spillovers, however, the optimal structure of taxes on
labor income will change. In particular, two kinds of inefficiencies—associated with people's
migration decisions and human capital investment decisions—will arise. In terms of migration
decisions, the importation of human-capital-poor workers from the low-wage country into the

human-capital-rich (high-wage) country will impose a negative externality on the latter's
workers by lowering their average level of human capital and consequently their wage profile.

In the absence of immigration restrictions, the migrant workers will not take this negative
external effect into account and thus over-migrate to the host country. In terms of education
decisions, people in both the labor-importing and labor-exporting countries will under-invest

in human capital. This is because each worker, being small, will ignore the positive external
effect its human capital investment has in raising the average level of human capital in her/his
21What is perhaps more surprising is that, in the presence of perfect labor mobility, capital mobility is
neither necessary nor sufficient for both growth rate and level convergence.

- 25 -

workplace.
In Razin and Yuen (199Th), we show that inefficiency of the first kind can be corrected

through a (non-resident) wage tax on imported workers plus a wage subsidy to domestic
workers in the labor-importing country while inefficiency of the second kind can be eradicated

through education subsidies in both the labor-importing and labor-exporting countries. In the

non-cooperative equilibrium, the host country government will use the wage tax-subsidy
package to limit labor mobility, thus generating a wage tax asymmetry and preventing the

achievement of income equality. At the same time, the source-country government (who
ignores the potential benefits of exporting more educated workers to the host country) will

under-subsidize education, thus resulting in inefficiently low levels of income in both
countries. In order to achieve income equality while internalizing the cross-country spillovers
of human capital externalities, concerted efforts to lift barriers to labor mobility, to harmonize

income tax rates, and to coordinate education (or human capital investment) policies are

necessary. In other words, another plausible 'solution' to the "problem of economic
development" lies in the lack of international policy cooperation. This speculative answer is
again subject to empirical verification.

- 26 -

References

Azariadis, Costas, and Allan Drazen, "Threshold Externalities in Economic Development,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics 105 (1990), 501-26.
Barro, Robert J., and Xavier Sala-i-Martin, "Convergence," Journal of Political Economy 100
(1992), 223—51.

Becker, Gary S., and H Gregg Lewis, "On the Interaction between the Quantity and Quality
of Children," Journal of Political Economy 81(1973), S279-88.
Becker, Gary S., Kevin M. Murphy, and Robert Tamura, "Human Capital, Fertility, and
Economic Growth," Journal of Political Economy 98 (1990), S12-S37.
Ben-David, Dan, "Convergence Clubs and Diverging Economies," working paper, Tel Aviv
University, 1995.
Benhabib, Jess, and Roberto Peru, "Uniqueness and Indeterminacy: Transitional Dynamics in
a Model of Endogenous Growth," Journal of Economic Theory 63(1994), 113-42.
Denison, Edward, Accounting for United States Economic Growth. 1929- 1969, Washington
DC: Brookings Institution, 1974.

Ehrlich, Isaac, and Francis T. Lui, "Intergenerational Trade, Longevity, and Economic
Growth," Journal of Political Economy 99 (1991), 1029-59.
Frenkel, Jacob, Assaf Razin, and Efraim Sadka, International Taxation in an Integrated World.
Cambridge: MIT Press (1991).
Grossman, Gene M., and Elhanan Helpman, Innovation and Growth in the Global Economy,

MIT Press, 1991.
Jones, Larry E., and Rodolfo E. Manuelli, "A Convex Model of Equilibrium Growth,"
Journal of Political Economy 98 (1990), 1008- 38.
__________ and Peter E. Rossi, "On the Optimal Taxation of Capital Income," Journal of
Economic Theory 73 (1997), 93-117.
Jorgenson, Dale W., and Barbara M. Fraumem, "The Accumulation of Human and Nonhuman
Capital, 1943—84," in Robert E. Lipsey and Helen S. Tice (eds), The Measurement of
Saving. Investment, and Wealth, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1989.
King, Robert G., and Sergio T. Rebelo, "Public Policy and Economic Growth: Developing
Neoclassical Implications," Journal of Political Economy 98 (1990), S126-49.
___________ "Transitional Dynamics and Economic Growth in the Neoclassical Model,"
American Economic Review 83 (1993), 908-3 1.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr., "On the Mechanics of Economic Development," Journal of Monetary
Economics 22 (1988), 3-42.
__________ "Supply-Side Economics: An Analytical Review," Oxford Economic Papers 42
(1990a), 293—3 16.
__________ "Why Doesn't Capital Flow from Rich to Poor Countries?" American Economic

Review Papers and Proceedings 80 (1990b), 92-6.

McGrattan, Ellen R., and James A. Schmitz, Jr., "Explaining Cross-Country Income
Differences," Research Department Staff Report 250, Federal Reserve Bank of
Minneapolis, 1998.
Mendoza, Enrique G., Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, and Patrick Asea, "On the Ineffectiveness
of Tax Policy in Altering Long-Run Growth: Harberger's Superneutrality Conjecture,"
Journal of Public Economics 66 (1997), 99-126.

Mendoza, Enrique G., Assaf Razin, and Linda L. Tesar, "Effective Tax Rates in

-27-

Macroeconomics: Cross Country Estimates of Tax Rates on Factor Incomes and
Consumption," Journal of Monetary Economics 34 (194), 297-323.
Razin, Assaf, "Investment in Human Capital and Economic Growth," Metroeconomica 24
(1972), 101-16.

Razin, Assaf, and Efraim Sadka, "International Tax Competition and Gains from Tax
Harmonization," Economics Letters 37 (1991), 69-76.
___________ "International Migration and International Trade," in Mark R. Rosenzweig and

Oded Stark (eds.), Handbook of Population and Family Economics, Volume lB.
Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1997.
Razin, Assaf, and Chi-Wa Yuen, "Utilitarian Tradeoff between Population Growth and Income
Growth," Journal of Population Economics 8 (1995), 81-87.
__________ "Capital Income Taxation and Long-Run Growth: New Perspectives," Journal
of Public Economics 59 (1996), 239-63.
__________ "Factor Mobility and Income Growth: Two Convergence Hypotheses," Review
of Development Economics 1 (1997a), 171-90.
__________ "Income Convergence Within an Economic Union: The Role of Factor Mobility
and Coordination," Journal of Public Economics 66 (1997b), 225-45.
__________ "Optimal International Taxation and Growth Rate Convergence: Tax Competition
vs. Coordination," International Tax and Public Finance (1999), forthcoming.
Rebelo, Sergio T., "Long Run Policy Analysis and Long Run Growth," Journal of Political
Economy 99 (1991), 500-21.
__________ "Growth in Open Economies," Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public
Policy 36 (1992), 5-46.
Romer, Paul M., "Capital Accumulation in the Theory of Long-Run Growth," in Robert J.
Barro (ed.), Modern Business Cycle Theory, Harvard University Press, 1989.
__________ "Endogenous Technological Change," Journal of Political Economy 98 (1990),
S71-S 102.

Stokey, Nancy L., "Human Capital, Product Quality, and Growth," Quarterly Journal of
Economics 106 (1991), 587-616.
Sergio T. Rebelo, "Growth Effects of Flat Rate Taxes," Journal of
Economy 103 (1995), 519-50.

___________ and

Political

Hirofumi, "Optimum Technical Change in an Aggregative Model of Economic
Growth," International Economic Review 6 (1965), 18-31.
World Bank, World Development Report, various issues, Oxford University Press.
Uzawa,

- 28 -

APPENDIX
Population Growth and Income Growth: A Closed Economy Example
Among the development patterns summarized by Romer (1989), the negative correlation
between population growth rates and the levels of per capita income is classified as one stylised

fact. Similar correlation between population growth (g) and per capita income growth (g)
is not as clear.22 In fact, both of these correlations vary across development stages and tend
to be negative during the more advanced stage of development.23
To understand the rationale behind the relation between population growth and income
growth, let us consider a simple example that features their tradeoff as an equilibrium outcome
in a closed economy. Imagine a dynastic family with N1 identical members in each period (t
= 0,1,2,...) and two engines of growth (human capital and population). The typical agent

cares about his own consumption c and the other family members N1. His preferences are
given by:

I 131T[ _]

(Al)

where 13 is the subjective discount factor, an altruism parameter, and o the inverse of the

intertemporal elasticity of substitution in consumption. As long as > 0, altruism is reflected
not only in preference for 'quantity' but also 'quality' of children (viz., consumption per
capita, or standard of living)—since, with positive , there is weight given to quantity, but the
weight on the consumption term is magnified as well. Observe that if > 1-a, then there will
be a relative bias in preference towards quantity; whereas if < 1— a, the bias will be in the
opposite direction.24 When = 1—0, the representative agent is said to be 'fairly altruistic'
in the sense that he cares only about the size of the total pie (N1c1) to be shared among all
family members, but is indifferent to the exact sharing arrangement.

In each period t , there are N1 members in the representative family (given N0 at

t = 0). Each household member is endowed with one unit of time (net of the leisure and

22The dynamic evolution of this cross-sectional correlation is a question of demographic transition—a
transition from high rates of fertility and mortality to relatively low rates during the development process—and thus

varies with the phase of development of the various countries. See Ehrlich and Lui (1991) for a theory of
demographic transition linking longevity, fertility, and economic growth.
23Since countries that exhibit low rates of growth of income will turn out to have low levels of income over
time, these two types of correlation may not be all that distinguishable. They are, however, quite different from the
more familiar negative relation between fertility and the level of income. The latter is explained by Becker and

Lewis (1963) in terms of the tradeoff between the 'quantity' and 'quality' of children, where the rise in income
raises the amount parents invest in their children, making each and every child a more 'expensive commodity' and
thus causing a decline in the number of children.
24ln terms of the utilitarian approach, the objective function (1) is a Millian (average utility) social welfare
1, it becomes a Benthamite (sum of utilities) criterion. See Razin and Yuen (1995)
for details.

criterion when = 0. When =

- 29

-

working time, assumed to be perfectly inelastic) and possesses h1 of human capital and k1 of
physical capital carried over from period t-1 (given h0 and k0 at t=O) in each period t. S/he
can split the unit time among learning in schools (e1 for education) and child-rearing (v1 for
vitality). S/he also has to decide how much capital (k11) to be carried forward to the ensuing
period. Newly acquired effective labor (N1 h,) and physical capital (N1 k1) are supplied to the
labor and capital markets in each period t at the prevailing competitive wage (w1) and rental
(r1) rates.
The dynamics of the two growth engines are determined as follows. The child-rearing
activity gives rise to population growth:

N11 = Dv N1

(A2)

where D > 0 and a E (0,1] are the fertility efficiency coefficient and productivity parameter
respectively. One can think of N11/N1 as one plus the number of children per family (when
the number of parents is normalized to unity). Since the child-rearing cost (v) is increasing
with the number of children, DiP can be thought of as the inverse function of this cost-quantity
relation. The schooling activity contributes to human capital growth:

h,1 =

(A3)

Be1h1

where B > 0 is the knowledge efficiency coefficient and y E (0,1] the productivity parameter.
Final output (Y1) is produced by competitive firms using physical capital (K1 = N -A)
= AK1H1
and total effective labor (H1 = N1 h1) via a Cobb-Douglas-type technology:
where A > 0 is the production coefficient and e (0,1) the output share of capital. Goods
produced are either consumed by the private sector (N1c1) and by the government (G1) or
invested in the form of physical capital (K,1). The societal resource constraint can thus be
written as:
N1c, + G, + K11 =

= AKH1'

E

(A4)

For simplicity, full depreciation is assumed for K1, N1, and h1 in each period.

The fiscal authority levies flat rate taxes on labor income (t) and capital income (trt)
to fmance its spending (G1), which is assumed to be a fraction (ti) of national output. Absent

deficit finance, the fiscal budget is balanced in every period, with t = Errt + (1 —€)t1.
to denote the tax wedges I —t, 1 —t, and 1 tr
Below, we shall use R and
respectively.

r

25Making leisure and worked hours endogenous will make the analysis less tractable. The allocation of
time to work at home or abroad is allowed to change in the labor mobility framework considered in the text. We
note here, though, that time allocation may vary over the stage of development in the economy. In poor countries,
people may be more concerned about splitting time between work and child-rearing. In richer countries, the concern
may be more about education v/s-a-v/s work and/or leisure.
-

30 -

Since, in a representative family, every member will receive equal treatment and the
economy at large is closed to external loans, borrowing and lending at the individual level will
w1N1h1 +
be superfluous. Thus, the (effective) family budget constraint is N1c1 +
Qrcrt1Ct. The optimization problem facing the dynastic head is to choose {c1, e1, K1 ,N;.
h141}0

to maximize (Al) subject to (A2), (A3), and the budget constraint, given

The firm's problem is to choose the amount of capital (K1") and effective
labor (H ) in each period t to maximize profit '1 - w1H1' - r1K1', given w1 and r1. The
equilibrium wage rates (w1) and interest rates (r1) are determined in the labor and capital
markets under market clearing: N1h1 = H1' and K1 = K1".
{w1, r1,

The set of first order conditions describing the optimizing behavior of the household
and the firm and the market clearing conditions are as follows. The consumer's first order
conditions (C) with respect to c1, e1, K11, N, and h11 are given by:

N5ICIO =
h1yBef h,

=

(Cl)

.L1,

(C2)

N,al(l —e,)'N1,

=

=

P{D(1

(C3)

-e,,1 ) + 1+1( w11h1,1 -c1) +
=

( ) N1c0]

+
P(,Be?+1 p+1Qw1+1N+1).

and

(C4)
(CS)

The Lagrange multipliers (jh for "mu"ltipliers) at time t associated with the consumer budget
constraint and the laws of motion of population and human capital are denoted by jt1, N,and
respectively. The firm's first order conditions (F) are
w1 = (1 -€)A

K

— , and

r=EA-

.

(Fl)
(F2)

H1

The equilibrium conditions in the labor and capital markets (E) are
N1h1 = H1",

and

(El)
(E2)

Substituting (A2), (A3) and (Fl) into (C2), we get,
YPhk+1

=

aj.iiV1
1 —e1

- 31 -

Along the balanced growth path, time allocations and tax rates are constant, i.e., e1 =
= rt+ ,so that (A5) implies that
R+1 wt = w1+ and
h,1k÷2

13

P.iNI,IN+2

(A6)

I4h[t 1

where the:two terms in (A6) are given respectively by

______

=1

- (1

(A7)

1+1
_e)( PLt÷iY÷ij

1÷1

from (A2), (C4), and (F 1),

______ = 1-

JN/l

(l-€)÷1—a
-l (l-s)
)

(A8)

from (A3), (Cl), (C5), and (Fl), with the savings rate (s) and the fiscal wedge () given by
=

rP(1 _e)a](Be

)'

and

=

+ (1

We shall restrict our attention here to the growth effects of taxes along the balanced

growth path—the special path along which the time allocations as well as the rates of growth
of population, human capital, physical capital, and output are all constant. Along this path,
by combining (A5)—(A8), we can reduce the system of steady state equations to the following
single equation in one single unknown, the time allocation (e).

e)

=

+

_ç__1) (l—s)
1—a
) (l—€),

= Be—l and g = D(l _e)a_l , with
The growth rates can be expressed in terms of e as:
=
=
gand g = gy' where Ydenotes total income and y per capita income (i.e., YIN).
Since e+v = 1, the competing use of time for the two growth activities implies a negative
relation between g and gN as found in the data. Note the dependence of the time allocations
and the growth rates on the preference of the agent towards child quantity relative to quality
(reflected by /(1—a)) and the effectiveness of time in producing quality relative to quantity
(reflected by y/c). Assuming identical preferences (13,,a) and technology (a,y,€,B,D), then
growth rates can differ across isolated economies only if their governments adopt different

g

fiscal policies (t,t,c).
To examine the growth effects of tax changes, two simple policy experiments can be
considered. (i) Change in income taxes under uniform taxation of labor and capital incomes
with compensathig change in the output share of the government (i.e.,
= '. = t); and (ii)
change in the capital income tax rate (-r,.) compensated by a change in the labor income tax
(ç), keeping r constant. Comparative statics show that e, hence g' is decreasing (increasing)

c

- 32 -

> (<) 1—a under the first experiment, and the reverse is true under the second
experiment. One can relate these effects to the tradeoff between the quantity and quality of
children a Ia Becker and Lewis (1973). Other things equal, an increase in r, will discourage
investment in physical capital and encourage investment in child quantity if people are more
altruistic ( > 1—a) or investment in child quality if they are less so ( < 1— a). As
increases, however, investment in both child quality and child quantity will be discouraged
since the returns on both types of investment depend on the future stream of after-tax wage
income. But the returns from investment in quantity depend also on the utility gain net of the
cost of raising an additional child, which will be 0 as .. 1_a.26 'Quantity' investment will
thus become more (less) favorable as > (<)1 — a as a result of the tax increase. Piecing
these arguments together confirms the result under experiment (i) when the increase in t, is
But if the increase in r is accompanied by a
accompanied by an equal increase in
reduction: in
the argument for c above will have to be reversed, with the c-effect
dominating the re-effect, to obtain the result under experiment (ii).

in tr

as

The utility gain from 'quality' investment net of the gain from 'quantity' investment is given by:

htk+l NtN,+l

= ( - i)
-33-

-''-°

Table 1. Tax Rates and Growth Rates in the G-7 Countries

:

Average tax rates (1965—88)

Average annual

Capital

Labor

population

Country

tax(%)

tax(%)

(%)

United States
United Kingdom
Germany
Italy
France
Japan
Canada

43
56

25

27

1.00
1.20

25
26
24
33

40

36

1.01

38

0.17

43
20
22

0.64

0.17
0.47

growth rates (1965—87)

per capita
GNP(%)

total
GNP(%)

1.5

2.50
2.90
3.51
2.87
3.34
4.37
3.17

1.7
2.5
2.7
2.7
4.2
2.7

Sources: Tax rate figures are drawn from Mendoza, Razin, and Tesar (1994), and growth rate figures
from the World Development Report (1989).

