Learning and Forgetting: The Dynamics of Aircraft
Production

C. Lanier Benkard*

Many past empirical studies have documented \learning-by-doing", the hypothesis that unit
cost decreases with cumulative production, in military aircraft production (T. P. Wright
(1936), Harold Asher (1956), Armen Alchian (1963), Thomas R. Gulledge and Norman Keith
Womer (1986)). Utilizing newly available production data for the Lockheed L-1011 Tri-Star,
this paper studies commercial aircraft production, with an emphasis on the dynamics of
production technology. Because commercial production is subject to many uncertainties not
present in military production, the data presented here allows consideration of a richer set
of hypotheses than was previously possible. In addition to learning, support is found for
organizational forgetting (the hypothesis that the rm's production experience depreciates
over time), and incomplete spillovers of production expertise from one generation of an aircraft
to the next.
This research is directed toward commercial aircraft for several reasons. The aircraft industry
has many unique features | massive entry costs, dynamically increasing returns, imperfect
competition, the fact that many countries consider it \strategic" | that make it important
from a policy perspective, and the industry has frequently been the target of industrial policy,
most notably in Europe. Dynamically increasing returns associated with learning make the
industry a rare case in which infant industry protection may be theoretically valid, perhaps
justifying such specialized policies.1 A case has also been made for restrained antitrust policy
based on the fact that concentrating learning is socially optimal.2
1

Aircraft production was also the rst published case study of the learning curve, and remains
among the most widely cited examples. However, despite this reputation, anecdotal evidence
and discussions with industry executives have indicated that the marginal costs of producing
aircraft do not always decrease over time, as would be expected if production was subject to
pure learning, and a brief inspection of the data presented here (see Figure 1) con rms this
fact. A goal of this paper is to reconcile these two con icting stories and to show why they
are both correct.
The evidence presented here also has important consequences. The organizational forgetting hypothesis in particular adds another degree of dynamic complexity to industries where
learning is present. Hence, there are implications for many areas of industrial organization,
including dynamic pricing and the evolution of the structure of an industry. These strategic
outcomes in turn in uence what industrial policies may be optimal, particularly in areas
such as antitrust policy and strategic trade policy. While the current theoretical literature
is relatively scarce with respect to the learning hypothesis,3 it is scarcer still with respect to
organizational forgetting.4
At the macroeconomic level, organizational forgetting implies that recessions may lead to a
reduction in productivity that lasts beyond the rebound in output. It also has implications
for production scheduling, and leads to a particular kind of dynamic returns to scale in which
greater production rates lead to greater productivity over time.
The hypothesis of incomplete spillovers implies that production costs increase generally when
rms introduce new models of a product. Since competition often forces rms to produce
2

many variants of their products in order to secure sales (e.g., there have been over 25 di erent
types of 747 produced in approximately 1000 units sold), there is reason to believe that the
number of products in an unconstrained dynamic equilibrium may be too high from a social
perspective. If that is the case, there would be further support for restrained antitrust policy,
beyond that already called for due to the learning hypothesis.
Learning can also be thought of as the accumulation of human capital, which leads to an
appealing interpretation of the two hypotheses considered. The organizational forgetting hypothesis suggests that organizational human capital depreciates, an assumption often maintained in other lines of the literature but thinly studied empirically. The extent to which
production experience spills over across products or rms is a measure of speci city of the
rm's human capital.5 This paper provides precise estimates of both the depreciation rate of
the rm's experience and the rate at which experience spills over across aircraft models.
Finally, the data set used in this paper is quite special, uniquely suited to evaluation of the
hypotheses of interest, and distinctive in the literature on several counts. It contains labor
requirements data for each aircraft unit produced individually and over a period of highly
variable production rates, both features that make it highly informative on the existence and
extent of organizational forgetting. It is also the only data set that I know of to contain
observations for several di erent models of a product produced simultaneously in the same
plants on the same production line, making it also highly informative on the extent of learning
spillovers.

3

I.

Hypotheses on Aircraft Production

Past studies of learning in aircraft production have concentrated on military data because
it was all that was previously available. However, in many ways military data is free of the
dynamics that make commercial production interesting. A military producer typically gets
a contract to produce a certain number of identical planes, N , over a certain number of time
periods, T . Gulledge and Womer (1986) correctly characterize this as an optimal control
problem in which the producer schedules production so as to minimize costs. Typically this
results in production schedules that are relatively smooth over time and free from many of
the uncertainties present in the marketplace. For commercial producers: orders are inconsistent due to both competition and business cycles, return on investment is not guaranteed,
aggressive competition leads to the need to periodically upgrade models as well as to simultaneously produce several variants within each model generation, production rates may need
to be changed quickly to ful ll sales agreements, and even within a given model variant every
unit produced is customized. In essence, commercial producers experience more uncertainty,
and a shorter planning horizon.
Because of the regularity of production in military programs, organizational forgetting and
spillovers of production experience are less apparent. If forgetting is present, it may be very
diÆcult to identify (e.g., data could be consistent with either a 20 percent learning rate or a
25 percent learning rate with 5 percent forgetting). And, in most cases there simply are not
many model variants, so spillovers are not important.6 The Lockheed L-1011, on the other
hand, was produced at a time when the commercial aircraft market was extremely volatile,
4

1970-1984. It was in erce competition with another plane, the McDonnell-Douglas DC-10,
that was very similar. As a result, there were four basic models of L-1011 in only 250 units
produced and production rates varied widely.

A.

Learning

It was long ago realized that aircraft production was characterized by strong learning e ects
(Wright (1936), Alchian (1963), and Asher (1956)). Wright (1936) noticed that labor, material, and overhead requirements declined with cumulative production. His estimates led
to wide acceptance of the \20 percent learning curve" in the engineering literature, which
has the interpretation that production input requirements reduce by 20 percent for every
doubling of cumulative past production. He also introduced the learning curve speci cation
that is now typical of the economics literature:
(1)

Li

where

= AEi

Li

is labor input per unit,

A

is a constant,

Ei

(\experience") is cumulative past

output, and  is a coeÆcient describing learning.7 Alchian (1963) ran similar learning curve
regressions on WWII military data for 22 plane types in four major classi cations and came
to the conclusion that the learning rate varied across each plane type. In a more recent study,
Gulledge and Womer (1986) link the two ideas of the production function and the learning
curve by allowing for various kinds of scale e ects and pro t maximization in an optimal
control setting. They apply their model to data for several military programs and nd that
5

it ts the data well. Learning has also been documented in many other industries, e.g.
aircraft engines, machine tools, metal products, nuclear power plants, chemical processing,
semiconductors, and shipbuilding.
Learning may take on many di erent forms depending on the particular nature of production.
In more capital-intensive industries such as chemical processing and semiconductors, learning
primarily results from the ne tuning of production techniques. In such industries, engineers
and managers analyze current output and constantly make small changes to the process with
the result that productivity gradually improves. In labor-intensive industries such as aircraft
and shipbuilding, learning primarily results from workers becoming more eÆcient at the tasks
they perform through multiple repetition. Many industries may be subject to both types of
learning. The exact nature of learning may also in uence the transferability and persistence
of experience.
Because the unit of output is so large, commercial aircraft production is highly labor intensive
and production rates are very low.8 Learning thus results primarily from a more experienced
work force.9 In recognition of the importance workers' experience plays, aircraft producers
are very careful to maintain stability in their manufacturing process over time.

B.

Organizational Forgetting

Organizational forgetting is the hypothesis that a rm's stock of production experience depreciates over time. Since an aircraft rm's experience is embodied in its workers, it seems
likely that turnover and layo s may lead to losses of experience. The traditional learning
6

hypothesis does not allow for this possibility. Linda Argote, Sara L. Beckman and Dennis
Epple (1990) and Argote and Epple (1990) suggest that based on rapid job turnover, highly
variable production rates, and anecdotal evidence that production costs did not uniformly fall
over time, the L-1011's situation was consistent with the hypothesis of organizational forgetting. Argote, Beckman and Epple (1990) also nd support for the organizational forgetting
hypothesis in WWII ship production.10
Experience may depreciate in times of falling production rates since typically such times are
accompanied by layo s. During subsequent increases in production, the rm is often unable
to acquire the same workers that it formerly released, and must completely retrain new ones.
Normal rates of employee turnover may also lead to experience depreciation during periods
of constant production, particularly if turnover rates are high.
The term \forgetting" may seem somewhat inappropriate when referring to an organization,
since under the explanation given above it may be that no individual is forgetting anything.
Furthermore, the data in this paper is only able to distinguish \forgetting" at the organizational level without accounting for what fraction is due speci cally to individuals. However,
since aircraft production rates are so low (individual assemblies are worked on for as long
as four weeks) it is entirely plausible that forgetting may occur both at the individual and
organizational levels.11
An implication of the organizational forgetting hypothesis is that recent production is more
important than more distant past production in determining a rm's current eÆciency. This
prediction is perhaps more intuitive than that of the learning hypothesis, which treats all
7

production equally no matter how old. In a practical example, it is hard to imagine that
Boeing's rapid production of 747s in the early 1970's is as important to current unit costs
as production in the early 1990's, particularly because it is unlikely that many of Boeing's
workers from that period remain with the company today.
The organizational forgetting hypothesis is especially relevant to aircraft production due
to a unique contract that producers have with the International Association of Machinists
and Aerospace Workers (IAM) regarding seniority called \displacement rights" or \bumping
rights". As hourly employees attain seniority, they have the option of requesting an upgrade
into a higher level job classi cation if one should become available. At the same time, the
company is bound to ll positions from within the existing ranks whenever possible, even if
it means retraining. Of course, if an opening is lled from within then the position vacated
by the worker upgraded is subject to the same rules. Similarly, when there are layo s, the
higher seniority workers can bump down lower seniority workers, and so forth down the ranks.
Whenever employment changes, there is a domino e ect throughout the company that has
been known to a ect as many as ten positions for just one job opening. This \bumping"
has the greatest impact on increases in employment since it could mean that the company
must retrain its existing workers in their new positions as well as the usual training of new
workers. Under \bumping", turnover rates are high, which leads to greater organizational
forgetting.12

8

C.

Experience Spillovers

The question of to what extent experience spills over across rms (external) or products (internal) is one of how speci c the rm's production experience is. Because of their implications
to trade policy, external spillovers have been a major topic in semiconductors production (e.g.,
Douglas A. Irwin and Peter J. Klenow (1994), William W. Nye (1996)). Internal spillovers,
or spillovers across programs or plants within the rm, also have strategic implications, particularly in aircraft production due to rms' joint military and commercial production. The
European Union frequently defends its huge subsidies to the Airbus Consortium on the basis
that U.S. commercial rms are implicitly subsidized by their large military contracts. This
argument hinges partly on the existence of internal spillovers across programs.
These are important issues that are, however, not easily analyzed with the data presented
here, which covers just one aircraft program. This paper instead looks at to what extent
experience spills over incompletely across di erent models of an aircraft within one overall
program. If it is true that the skills required to build a new model of an existing aircraft do
not transfer over completely from past production, then upon introducing the new model,
the rm experiences a setback in learning and higher production costs for the whole aircraft
program. Furthermore, the extent to which experience is speci c to similar models within
one program represents an upper bound on the extent to which experience is speci c across
di erent programs.
Despite there now being only two rms in the industry, the commercial aircraft industry
is characterized by extreme competition. One way that rms compete is by aggressively
9

tailoring their product to customer's needs, leading to their providing many di erent models
of every aircraft they produce.13 If learning does not spill over completely between these
models, then production costs for the whole program are higher as a result. It seems likely,
then, that in an unconstrained dynamic equilibrium there may be too many models from
a social perspective. This argument thus o ers additional support for restrained antitrust
policy in this industry, beyond that already called for due to learning.14

II.

Data

Underlying this research is a new dataset for L-1011 production made available to the author
by Lockheed that shows how labor requirements varied across the 250 L-1011s produced
between 1970 and 1984 (see Figure 1).15 The data refers to direct man hours incurred by
Lockheed California in the production of each plane including detail fabrication in Burbank,
Burbank assembly, Palmdale nal assembly and ight test.16 It does not include major
subassemblies that were subcontracted such as the complete wing with all ight controls and
systems, complete empenage, S-duct, doors, etc.17 Unfortunately, at the present time very
little data (annual reports, newspaper articles etc.) is available to document the cost of other
inputs to production such as capital investment and materials. Due to high development costs
typical of the industry and the fact that the L-1011's price rarely exceeded even marginal
cost, the L-1011 was phased out in the early 1980's for a total loss of several billion dollars.
Additional data was obtained from the 1995 edition of the Jet Airliner Production List Vol.

2 which lists each plane's model, serial number, and entire ownership history including rst
10

ight date, which is taken to be the plane's date of completion.18
With these two data sets, it was possible to compile the production schedule and sales pattern
of the L-1011 across time and models (Figures 1 and 2). The rst model produced, the L10111, comprised 65 percent of total production and was produced during the whole period. The
L1011-100 and -200, which together account for just 15 percent of production, utilize the
same fuselage as the -1 and are otherwise quite similar to produce, the di erence being in
accessories only (fuel tanks, landing gear, engines, etc.).19 The -500 on the other hand has a
shorter fuselage with two fewer doors and a di erent cargo compartment con guration and
galley, di erences signi cant enough that it would not be unreasonable to expect an impact
on production. The -500 accounts for the remaining 20 percent of L-1011s and was produced
from 1978-1984.
Figure 1 graphs direct labor requirements and yearly output for the L-1011. This graph
emphasizes the di erences between this dataset and the military datasets used in the existing
literature on learning curves. While military production is not perfectly smooth, L-1011
production rates varied sharply (4-42 planes per year) over the period 1970-1984 re ecting
the chaotic state of commercial air traÆc in the 1970's.
The labor requirements data (Figure 1) has a fairly classic learning curve shape up until the
overall trough in man hours at unit 112, where 226 thousand direct labor hours went into
production of the plane. At this low point, which occurs in the fth year of production, the
direct labor requirement is about one-sixth that of the rst plane.

11

The most striking feature of the data is the upturn in labor hours for units produced after
number 112. Much of the empirical work presented here is devoted to an explanation of this
seeming departure from the learning curve.
The most obvious explanation for this feature would be some kind of supply disruption such
as a strike or materials shortage, but that explanation does not hold up in this particular
case. There was in fact an IAM strike during the last three months of 1977. However, as
noted above, this strike took place during the tail end of a recession in commercial air travel
when production rates were very low anyway, and hence had little impact on Lockheed's
production schedule. The planes produced during this strike correspond to the very rst
part of the upturn on the graph in Figure 1 (approximately units 148-150). The second peak
in labor requirements occurs at plane number 181 which was completed three years later in
March 1980. Though it is entirely plausible that the strike could have caused an upturn
in labor requirements, there is a great deal of evidence that production technology was not
permanently in uenced by the outcome of the strike.20
Two other possible explanations for the increase in labor requirements are labor hoarding
and scale e ects. If this were a labor hoarding story then it would be expected that the
peak in labor requirement would occur near the trough in output. Instead, the peak in labor
requirement occurs at the second peak in output. While scale e ects are investigated in more
detail in the estimations that follow, it is apparent in Figure 1 that over the rst half of the
data there is an increasing returns relationship, while over the second half of the data the
relationship is the opposite: output and labor requirements grow together.
12

III.

A.

A Model of Commercial Aircraft Production

Production Function

This section concentrates only on the production function itself, but makes assumptions with
consequences that extend to the underlying dynamics. For an example of a dynamic model
of the commercial aircraft industry that is consistent with the assumptions made here, see
C. Lanier Benkard (1998).
Consistent with practice in the industry, it is assumed that rms must build a plant prior to
beginning production and that from then on the rm maintains the plant but cannot change
its size.21 That assumption transfers to a production function with xed capital, denoted K .
The rm's single-product production function is assumed to take a Leontief form in variable
inputs labor (L) and materials (M ):
(2)

 





q = min G L; E; K; S;  ; H M; E; K; S; 



where E is the rm's \experience", a state variable that determines the rm's current production technology, S is line-speed (or current production rate),  and  refer to productivity
shocks to labor and materials respectively, and G() and H () are functions to be described
later.
The \line-speed" variable is a measure of current output rate and measures within period
scale e ects. It is included primarily for comparison with previous work (Werner Z. Hirsch
13

(1952), Gulledge and Womer (1986)) and because its importance could not be entirely rejected
in the estimations that follow. However, several cautions must be raised. First, line-speed
is a choice variable and is hence endogenous. Second, the relationship between line-speed
and production in a xed capital model is not obvious. For very low production rates, it is
presumed that an increase in line-speed would lead to an increase in productivity. However,
since capital is xed, it must be the case that at high production rates diminishing returns
set in.22
The Leontief form of (2) was chosen for several reasons, the most important being that it is
a reasonable approximation of the industry. By far the greatest input to production next to
labor is engines, which can not substitute with labor since they are fully subcontracted. In
addition, the same strict adherence to a production process discussed above in the context
of keeping the capital stock constant over time also applies here, limiting the scope for
input substitutability. The second reason is that many other candidate speci cations such
as Cobb-Douglas in all inputs would place strong restrictions on the joint substitution of
experience with labor and materials which seem unlikely to hold in practice. Note also that
the importance of the Leontief assumption to the results is quite limited since, despite the
fact that exact materials inputs data is not currently available, there are straightforward ways
of testing the substitutability of labor and materials by adding proxies for materials prices
to the labor requirements equation.
A unique feature of aircraft production is the large unit size of production (one plane), which
leads to very low production rates and a production technology that is noticeably di erent
(due to learning) for every unit produced. Production technology changes over time as
14

learning progresses. Additionally, building an aircraft is such a large undertaking that rms
can adjust variable inputs at the unit level. Fortunately, the data also contains observations
at the unit level. Hence, consider the eÆcient production frontier along the surface of G(),
(3)





T q; L; E; K; S; 

=0

Since rms adjust the variable inputs at the unit level, it is as if they are always operating
along the unit isoquant (q = 1). Assuming that the eÆcient frontier takes the Cobb-Douglas
form and rearranging terms gives:
(4) ln Li = ln A(K ) +  ln Ei + 0 ln Si + i
The parameter  above measures the rate of learning (the learning rate is calculated as 1 2 ),
while

0

measures the within period returns to production rate. The i subscript, omitted

prior to equation (4), indicates the unit number of the product being produced. More speci c
assumptions on the Ei and i processes follow below.

23

Equation (4) implies a stable relationship between line-speed and labor requirement which
goes against the discussion of line-speed above. Hence, in estimation more exible functional
forms were also used to allow for a more general relationship.
The timing assumptions on the production process de ned above are as follows: Line-speed is
set at the beginning of the period so that output equals demand for the period. At any time
the rm can produce a plane according to the technology in (2). When it produces a plane, it
rst observes the shocks i and i and then injects the required amount of labor and materials
15

to produce exactly one unit. The exact technology used is determined by the rm's current
experience level, the current line-speed, and productivity shocks. The timing of observing
the shocks before injecting the variable inputs is a reasonable approximation of the fact
that during the 7-15 months it takes to produce a plane, anything that goes wrong requires
increased labor (and/or materials) to right. This increased input requirement is unforeseeable
and unavoidable unless the rm were to scuttle the unit entirely in mid-production | an
unlikely prospect given the size of the investment involved.

B.

Experience

In the traditional learning model, experience is de ned very simply as cumulative past output:
(5)

Ei

= Ei 1 + 1;

with

E1

= 1:

In order to incorporate the hypotheses described above, a new speci cation is used. The rst
goal is to incorporate organizational forgetting. In that regard, this paper uses the speci cation introduced by Argote, Beckman and Epple (1990) which has experience depreciating
by a factor Æ each month. Experience in a given month is then the cumulative depreciated
production experience of all production that took place prior to that month:
(6)

Et

= ÆEt 1 + qt

1;

with

E1

= 1:

There are many ways to justify this speci cation theoretically.24 I prefer an abstract interpretation of experience in which the company can only invest in experience by producing
16

and this experience depreciates at a constant rate due to a variety of factors including geographic turnover, company turnover, literal forgetting, and nonreinforcement of routine (see
Chapter 5 of Nelson and Winter (1982)). If these various e ects occur at constant rates, the
speci cation yields a constant overall discount factor.25 It may also be desirable to allow the
discount factor to vary over time. This generalization is discussed further in the estimation
section of the paper.
Just as (5) is a reduced form for learning, (6) is only a reduced form representation of organizational forgetting. The forgetting hypothesis hinges upon very micro-level employment e ects
such as turnover, layo s, and literal forgetting that are not accounted for separately. Instead,
output rates and the timing of output are used to proxy the underlying learning/forgetting
processes. Within the model, learning can only take place by producing planes, and unless
production rates are maintained, experience begins to depreciate. These e ects are regardless
of any underlying employment patterns. In actuality, it seems likely that more than one time
series of employment could lead to the same set of outputs, while simultaneously resulting in
a di erent path for production technology. For instance, it may be within the power of the
rm to raise the value of Æ, presumably at some cost. While this is certainly an interesting
prospect that may point toward optimal employment strategies, it is a subject for further
research. The goal of this paper is simply to document the presence of organizational forgetting, and to understand the dynamics of technology in aircraft production. Additionally, the
reduced form speci cation (7)-(9) is found to lead to extremely stable results, justifying its
use.

17

The second addition to the model allows for experience spillovers to be incomplete across
models. To test that hypothesis, the four L-1011 types were divided into two overall classications. The -1, -100, and -200 were joined together under the heading -1 since they share
the same fuselage. The -500, which has a slightly di erent fuselage, is kept separate under
its own heading.
With these considerations, the new experience variable is de ned as follows:26
8
>
>
>
<

E1;t

(7)

Ei

=

(8)

E1;t

=

ÆE1;t

(9)

E500;t

=

ÆE500;t

E1;t

>
>
>
: E500;t

1

: if i is type -1, -100, -200
: if i is type -500

+ q1;t 1 + q500;t
1

1

+ q500;t 1 + q1;t

1

and

E1;1

=1

and

E500;1

=1

refers to the rm's experience in producing type -1s and determines its production

technology for type -1s at any given time.

E500;t

is de ned similarly. Thus, the rm now

has two experience state variables where it used to have one.



is the experience spillover

parameter. The case where Æ = 1:0 and  = 1:0 corresponds to no organizational forgetting
and complete spillovers respectively. In that case, Ei is essentially the same as (5).27
Note that (7)-(9) assumes some cross equation restrictions. Several alternatives to this speci cation exist, none of which are supported by the theoretical arguments given previously.28
One such alternative would be to allow for spillovers to be asymmetric. However, asymmetric spillovers would be contrary to the theoretical intuition that experience spills over due
to workers becoming pro cient at tasks common to both aircraft models. This alternative
18

hypothesis was nevertheless tested and the data did not support it.29

C.

Estimation

Equation (4) can be estimated using OLS if i is iid and independent of Ei and Si. However,
this would not be an innocuous assumption. Past research (e.g., G. Steven Olley and Ariel
Pakes (1996)) indicates that serial correlation in the unobserved portion of rm productivity
is important. In that case, both

Ei

and

Si

are correlated with

i

as follows: If  is not

independent across observations, then as indicators of future productive eÆciency, past values
of  are state variables for the rm. As such, they in uence the rm's choices of prices and
line-speeds, Si . Since Ei is a function of past quantities, which are determined in part by
past prices, which are in turn a function of past 's, it too must be correlated with i .
As a result, it is necessary to instrument for these correlations in order to regain consistency.
For the traditional learning model (5), where Ei is not a function of parameters and is thus
observable, two stage least squares (2SLS) is suÆcient. However, in the other two models, it
is necessary to use a nonlinear estimator.
The nonlinear estimator used here is based on the standard literature for estimating GMM
models with a conditional moment restriction as described in Lars P. Hansen (1982). It
departs from that literature primarily in estimating the covariance matrix of the moment
conditions, which is used in calculating both standard errors and an optimal weight matrix.
To account for serial correlation without making any speci c assumption as to its form,
a nonparametric heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation consistent (HAC) estimator of the
19

covariance matrix suggested by Andrews (1991) is used.30

D.

Instruments

Both the 2SLS and GMM estimators require exogenous instruments. As above, the two
variables being instrumented are line-speed and experience. Under the assumptions of the
model, line-speed should be highly correlated with current output, while experience should
be highly correlated with recent output. Hence, good instruments (Z) for this model include
present and lagged demand and cost shifters. To be valid instruments, the variables used
must be exogenous in the sense that they are not choice variables for the rm.
Demand shifters used include various world GDP measures (world, OECD, third-world), the
price of oil, and a time trend. For the GDP measures, one- and two-year lags were used,
while for oil prices lags up to four years were included. The longer lags on oil prices were
designed to instrument for demand for the more eÆcient model (type -500), the development
of which signi cantly lagged the initial oil price shock.31
Cost shifters used include the world aluminum price and the U.S. manufacturing wage rate.
For both cost shifters, the one- and two-year lags were included. It is assumed that in both
cases, Lockheed amounts to a negligible amount of demand so that both variables are truly
exogenous to Lockheed's productivity shocks. Due to high industry concentration, it would
not be appropriate to make a similar assumption regarding more industry speci c prices, e.g.,
the aircraft industry wage rate.

20

If the Leontief assumption in equation (2) were relaxed and instead production was assumed
to be Cobb-Douglas in all inputs, then production only at the unit level would imply a labor
requirements equation similar to (4) with the addition of both the wage rate and materials
prices. In that case three of the instruments, the manufacturing wage rate which is highly
correlated with the industry speci c wage rate and the world prices of oil and aluminum which
ought to proxy materials prices, may also belong as regressors. If these instruments belong
as regressors but are excluded, consistency is lost if they are included in the instrument set.
This discussion implies two straightforward tests of the validity of the Leontief assumption.
First, the value of the GMM objective function provides a simple test of the overidentifying
restrictions. This test should fail in the event that the Leontief assumption is false. Second,
a perhaps more powerful test would be to include input prices in the production function as
would be correct in the Cobb-Douglas case and see if that has any impact on the results.

IV.

A.

Results

Traditional Learning Model

For comparison purposes, consider rst the traditional learning hypothesis speci cation. For
the whole of this section, experience is de ned as cumulative past output as in equation (5).
See also Tables 1-2.
Regressions 1 and 2 show estimates for the traditional learning model in its most basic
form for both the rst half of the sample and the entire sample. The results for the rst
21

112 units are very similar to those found in the literature (e.g., Aircraft: Alchian (1963);
Semiconductors: Irwin and Klenow (1994), Harald Gruber (1992)). The implied learning
rate is slightly higher than average at 30 percent, degree of t is very high, and the learning
parameter, , is estimated very precisely.32 The primary reason for running this restricted
regression is to show that the rst half of the sample is consistent with previous results.
However, a brief visual inspection of data is enough to tell us that this model will not t the
full sample well and that expectation is born out in regression 2 (see also Figure 3). Thus,
it seems that the traditional learning hypothesis explains the rst half of the data well, but
falls short when applied to the full sample.
The hypothesis maintained in this paper is that this discrepancy is caused by the fact that
the rm's experience is not being fully retained over time, which only becomes apparent when
production rates are uneven and new models are introduced. However, before testing that
hypothesis speci cally, I rst show that the discrepancy is not easily explained if we maintain
the traditional learning hypothesis.
Regression 3 adds line-speed and line-speed squared33 to the equation in order to allow exibly
for within period returns to scale. Both terms are found to be signi cant, and the estimated
relationship implies that returns to scale are increasing at a decreasing rate in the observed
output range. While this relationship is intuitive, it nevertheless adds little explanatory
power to the model as evidenced by the high SSR.34
For comparison with some of the existing literature (e.g., Gruber(1992), Martin B. Zimmerman (1982)), regression 4 tests the hypothesis that learning takes place over calendar time
22

as well as from production experience. Despite improved t and the small standard error on
the time variable, the model is rejected due to the sign of the time variable, which implies
technological change is negative.
I also tested several model extensions which attempt to directly explain the increase in labor
requirements after unit 112. The rst of these, regression 5, is a test for the presence of
adjustment costs in labor and includes two variables representing the change in line-speed,
one for a positive change and one for a negative one. The adjustment costs speci cation
was tried because some contemporary newspaper articles imply that Lockheed incurred great
diÆculty in increasing production after 1978.35 This preliminary evidence weakly supports
that adjusting production upward increases labor requirement whereas adjustment downward
decreases it. However, this speci cation also has very little explanatory power, and the result
disappears when the learning model is generalized.36 Another possible explanation for the
upturn in labor requirements is the IAM strike of 1977, but several speci cations testing this
were tried with no success.37
The regressions in Table 2 test the robustness of the production function speci cation. The
cleanest regression under the traditional learning hypothesis is regression 6 and comes from
adding a \scope" dummy, which equals one for all units produced after the introduction
of the type -500, the period of joint production.38 The coeÆcient on scope is signi cant
and positive, indicating strong diseconomies of scope, and the t of the model is also much
improved. Remaining misspeci cation occurs primarily for units 140 onward.
Regressions 7 and 8 include input prices as regressors as would be implied if the production
23

function were Cobb-Douglas. The positive sign on the aluminum price is as expected, but the
strong positive sign on the wage rate implies that a higher wage leads to much greater use of
labor, which seems to make little sense. Furthermore, if the scope dummy is added to this
regression the wage rate coeÆcient becomes close to zero and insigni cant, suggesting that
the result is spurious. To resolve this matter and especially since the aluminum price was
signi cant in both regressions, this issue will be reconsidered in the context of the general
learning model.
Note that throughout this section the signi cant and positive estimates of



throughout

Tables 1 and 2 are as much an indication of misspeci cation in these models as they are of
serial correlation so they are not addressed until the next section.

B.

General Learning Model

Regressions for the general learning model are shown in Table 3. The signi cant and positive
estimates of  in all regressions indicate that, while serial correlation is signi cantly reduced
from before, it is still present. Hence, NLLS is inconsistent due to endogeneity of the right
hand side variables. Additionally, while the HAC-IV estimates were found to be statistically
signi cantly di erent from those of the NLLS model | the NLLS estimations were rejected |
their interpretation was essentially the same and therefore the inconsistent NLLS results have
been omitted. There was also little di erence between the point estimates using the HAC
weight matrix and the more standard serial independent weight matrix (both are consistent)
in the GMM estimation. The only di erences were that the HAC technique gave slightly
24

larger standard errors and acceptance of the 2 test of the overidentifying restrictions in all
cases.
Regression 9 generalizes the learning model to allow for organizational forgetting (0  Æ  1),
but still enforces that spillovers are complete ( = 1). This regression shows that organizational forgetting alone is very powerful in explaining the labor requirements data. With the
addition of only one parameter, the SSR to falls from 12.9 to 2.9. In addition, the depreciation parameter, Æ, is estimated extremely precisely and is signi cantly di erent from one in
all cases, strongly rejecting the hypothesis of no forgetting.
The estimate of Æ rises signi cantly when the model is extended to allow for incomplete
spillovers (regression 10, see also Figure 4). This is because the introduction of the -500
occurs near the time when forgetting is causing labor requirements to increase and incomplete
spillovers help to explain the increase in labor requirements. Leaving out incomplete spillovers
from the model thus leads to a downward bias in the experience depreciation parameter. The
addition of the spillovers parameter also improves the t of the organizational forgetting
model to the point of being nearly perfect. Most of the remaining speci cation error is
present only for units 1-10, and is most likely due to discretization errors in the model that
result from modeling experience as accumulating all at once upon completion of a unit rather
than smoothly over the whole production of the unit. However, even over this range the
model correctly captures the timing of two local maxima and two local minima in the data
caused by early production delays.
It is particularly noteworthy that the model explains both halves of the data well. It accounts
25

successfully for the rise in labor costs in the latter half of production while still explaining
the rst half of production, which was shown above to be consistent with the simpler learning
model. Moreover, the model ts both turning points in the observed data. In comparison
with the diseconomies of scope regression, the organizational forgetting model captures the
overall productivity trend much better from unit 140 onward. The scope regression misses the
early upturn in labor requirements as well as its subsequent peak. Importantly, for approximately two years after its introduction, production of the type -500 becomes progressively

less eÆcient even though the scope of production was unchanged and production rates were
increasing. It is this feature of the data, along with the increasing labor requirements for the
type -1 planes, that supports the organizational forgetting model and rejects diseconomies
of scope. Similarly, the fact that labor requirements for the two models converge over time
supports that learning spillovers are incomplete.
Despite the fact that the estimate of the depreciation parameter for this data is much higher
and more precise than previous results obtained by Argote, Beckman, and Epple (1990) and
Darr, Argote, and Epple (1995), the implied depreciation rate still seems quite high. The
value Æ = 0:96 implies that 61 percent (0:9612 ) of the rm's stock of experience existing at the
beginning of a year survives to the end of the year.39 This high rate of depreciation is in part
justi ed by low aircraft production rates. Some tasks performed by workers are repeated only
rarely. However, it is helpful to keep in mind that we are not measuring simply the depreciation in an individual's skills, which would be unlikely to be that high, but the depreciation
in a rm's stock of a very speci c kind of human capital. Thus, a high depreciation rate is
also justi ed by the e ects of turnover, remembering that the \displacement rights" contract
26

provision serves to multiply the e ects of company level turnover. Lastly, in the past it has
proven diÆcult to measure human capital and its depreciation, so any intuition we may have
about it is likely driven by either theoretical considerations or estimates of depreciation for
other kinds of capital, neither of which are likely to give us very accurate or precise estimates.
One reason for the stability of the organizational forgetting model in this dataset is that
aircraft producers, and Lockheed in particular, do not make signi cant technological changes
to the production process once production is underway. Hence, the data is not in uenced
very much by factors not accounted for in the model, as may occur in other industries. What
is perhaps most interesting is that organizational forgetting may also explain the lack of
technological change itself. In discussions with industry executives they have expressed the
belief that disruptions in production, even those designed to improve eÆciency, may lead
to setbacks in productivity since they upset workers' routines. Companies thus choose to
maintain current processes for as long as possible in order to retain production experience.40
One consequence of allowing for depreciation in the model is that the learning rates in Table 3
(35-40 percent) are much higher than those estimated under traditional learning hypothesis.
The reason for this is that learning is no longer relative to cumulative production, but is now
relative to accumulated experience, which is constantly depreciating. The interpretation of
the learning rate is thus not as simple as before since the current production rate (monthly
output) also matters. The new learning rate implies that if experience were doubled, then
labor requirements would fall by 35-40 percent. However, whether or not this reduction is
even attainable depends on the current experience level and planned production rates.
27

In all of the regressions (except 11 { see below) the spillover parameter, , is estimated to
be signi cantly di erent from 1.0, so the hypothesis of complete spillovers is rejected. Given
that the two L-1011 models are quite similar and were produced in the same plants together,
the spillover parameter estimates were surprisingly low, suggesting that aircraft production
experience is very speci c. The parameter estimates imply that approximately 70 percent
of production tasks overlap between the two models. This number can also be assumed to
be an upper bound on the amount of spillovers that would take place across two di erent
aircraft programs and suggests that the level of cross program spillovers may be quite low.
This nding is consistent with the fact that labor requirements are usually very large upon
introduction of a new aircraft program.41
The results in regression 10 were also tested for robustness against all of the alternatives mentioned in the previous section with similar results (see Table 4). Regressions 11-13 show that
input prices and diseconomies of scope are rejected in the general learning model, though there
is clearly some collinearity between the scope dummy and the level of experience spillovers as
the standard error on the spillovers parameter is quite large in regression 11. The spillovers
parameter changes value somewhat in regressions 12 and 13 and is generally the least stable
parameter of those estimated, but interpretation of the results is not signi cantly altered.
The results were also tested for robustness against a variety of other alternatives. The strike
and adjustment cost variables were included and found to generate small insigni cant coeÆcients. The line-speed coeÆcient,
but the restriction that

0

0

is found to have a small amount of explanatory power,

= 0 does not substantially change the results. When included, the

squared term in line-speed ( 1 ) and the time variable produced coeÆcients that were very
28

small and insigni cant.
Using the parameter estimates in Table 3 it is possible to quantify the impact of the L-1011500 on Lockheed's variable cost of production. If we assume values of  = 0:70 and  = 0:63,
then the rst -500 produced required approximately 25 percent (= 0:70

0:63

) more labor than

a -1 would have required. If Lockheed chose to produce both -500s and -1s in approximately
equal numbers for the rest of the program, then labor requirements would continuously run
approximately 11 percent (= ((1:0 + 0:70)=2)

0:63

) higher for each model than in the single

model case.42
These gures show that due to incomplete spillovers, the decision to bring out a new (albeit
similar) model can involve a signi cant setback in learning, and an associated large and
immediate increase in variable costs. Moreover, simultaneous production of more than one
model causes variable costs to be continuously higher than they would be for the same
production rate of a single model.43 When research and development expenses are added in,
it becomes evident that introducing new models is a costly endeavor even within an existing
aircraft program.

V.

Alternative Production Schedules

This section considers the implications of the general learning model to productivity through
alternative production schedules. The organizational forgetting model implies a kind of dynamic increasing returns to scale that is somewhat di erent from that in the traditional
29

learning model. In the organizational forgetting model the number of units produced recently is most important in determining productivity, so that greater production rates can
lead to greater average productivity. In the traditional learning model only the total number
of units produced matters and hence production rates do not change average productivity for
a production run of xed length. Thus, in the general learning model we should expect to
nd that some bunching of production is optimal, much as producing all output in one period
would be if production were subject to static increasing returns.44 On the other hand, production scheduling is irrelevant in the traditional learning model with respect to a production
run of xed length.
Three counter factual production schedules are considered. The rst is a smooth production
schedule of 19.8 units per year, the average output for the L-1011, but leaves the set of models
produced unchanged. The second uses the same smooth production schedule as the rst, but
assumes that only one model of plane is produced. The third further assumes that production
rates are doubled so that production occurs in half as many years. Figure 5 shows actual
direct labor requirements versus direct labor requirements for the three alternatives. Note
that per unit direct labor requirement is the inverse of labor productivity.
Of the four schedules shown, no one schedule is best for every unit produced. In particular,
the actual production schedule is best for most units in the range 80-120. However, Table 5
shows that alternatives 3 and 4 both result in both higher average productivity and higher
productivity in expected discounted value than what actually occurred. On the other hand,
smoothing production over time would have increased labor requirements by both measures
as expected.
30

Figure 5 also shows that in a smooth production schedule, the labor requirements curve
generated by the organizational forgetting model appears similar to one generated by the
traditional learning model, the only di erence being that it asymptotes to a positive value.
This feature of the model may explain why previous studies of military production have found
support for the traditional learning model. A comparison of lines 3 and 4 in Figure 5 suggests
that Alchian's (1963) conclusion that learning rates varied across di erent aircraft programs
may result from the use of too narrow a learning model. In the more general learning model
presented here, these apparently di erent learning rates may be explainable through either
varying production rates across the di erent programs or varying levels of cross program
experience spillovers.
None of the four schedules shown is likely to be the optimal production schedule given demand
for the product. Lockheed's actual production choices may have been optimal ex ante but,
even if that were true, they are unlikely to have been optimal ex post. Calculation of the ex
post optimal production schedule using the learning model estimates would require further
assumptions about inventory costs. I do not attempt to make this calculation here since
these costs are diÆcult to observe and any assumptions I might choose to make would thus
be somewhat arbitrary. In the absence of inventory costs, the production schedule that would
minimize the EDV of cost according to the model estimated is one in which production is
run essentially at capacity from start to nish. Interestingly, most military production runs
are of this form. If inventory costs are large enough, then the optimal production run looks
much like the actual one, which closely matched scheduled deliveries.45

31

VI.

Concluding Remarks

Previously, commercial aircraft and other markets with learning have been analyzed using
theory that is based on smooth learning curves. The evidence presented in this paper suggests that, in actuality, the dynamics of production are much more complex. In order to
better understand these industries, the strategic e ects of organizational forgetting need to
be considered. This is an area of theory that has, to my knowledge, not been studied.
At the same time, it seems unlikely that forgetting is important in all industries where learning takes place. This brings up the issue of what properties of the rm, and of production,
are most important in causing the depreciation of experience. Commonalities between aircraft, ship, and service franchises | the only three industries where forgetting has yet been
documented | include: the products are labor intensive, learning is thought to be important
at the individual worker level, and all three experience relatively high turnover. These may
be criteria for evaluating how important organizational forgetting is to an industry. However,
that hypothesis remains to be tested.
Additionally, it seems plausible that the rate of experience depreciation is under the rm's
control. For example, avoiding layo s may be in the rm's interest even if workers are
temporarily underutilized. In the event that layo s are unavoidable, it may be in the rm's
interest to make some provision for reacquiring layed o workers in future periods. Further
study with some additional data on employment and turnover might point toward ways that
management could maximize experience and productivity by minimizing loss of experience.
A full understanding of the causes of forgetting may also lead to a better understanding of
32

its macroeconomic e ects.
The learning model estimated here (and elsewhere) assumed a deterministic learning process,
but it seems more likely that learning actually takes place stochastically, i.e., upon executing
a task sometimes something is learned and sometimes not. However, a stochastic version of
this model was estimated using simulation techniques and yielded almost identical results.
In hindsight, this result is quite intuitive given that the unit of output actually consists of
many individual tasks. If learning occurs stochastically at the individual task level, then
the learning process at the unit level would have very low variance and thus resemble a
deterministic process.
Finally, the results above show that, in addition to their development costs, new models can
have a great impact on variable production costs across an entire aircraft program. Therefore,
it seems likely that in an unconstrained dynamic equilibrium rms may produce too many
models. A social planner or multiproduct monopolist would internalize the business stealing
e ects of product di erentiation and may produce fewer models to avoid these higher costs.

33

{

{

{

6.03 -1.08 -0.04 0.004 1.16 {
(0.15) (0.04) (0.13) (0.025) (0.07)

{

{

{

{

{

{

{



L:R:

5.4

0.56 53%
(0.04)

11.0 0.92 21%
(0.03)

15.0 0.97 18%
(0.02)

1.36 0.73 30%
(0.04)

SSR

6.75 -0.31 0.67 -0.16 {
0.07 -0.04 15.8 0.43 19%
(0.26) (0.03) (0.25) (0.05)
(0.03) (0.02)
(0.06)
N = 238
T SS = 33:7
NOTES: All regressions are 2SLS. Instruments (Zi ) are present and lagged demand shifters (various
world GDP measures, the price of oil, and a time trend { see text) and present and lagged cost shifters
(U.S. wage rate, aluminum price). L.R. is the implied learning rate.

5.

Adjustment Cost:

4.

Calendar Time:

3.

{

{

6.51 -0.35 0.95 -0.20
(0.21) (0.02) (0.17) 0.03

7.16 -0.29 {
(0.08) (0.02)

2. Units 1-238

Line-Speed:

7.90 -0.51 {
(0.06) (0.01)

1. Units 1-112

Basic Regressions:

Table 1: Traditional Learning Model Regressions
ln A 
Time Adj.+ Adj.0
1

{

{

{

0.83 32%
(0.04)

0.70 29%
(0.04)

10.0 0.81 30%
(0.04)

9.3

0.55 2.4
(0.02)

0.27 {
(0.04)

{

-15.9 -0.52 0.45 -0.09 8.68 0.50 {
(3.37) (0.03) (0.18) (0.03) (1.32) (0.09)

5.88 -0.54 1.36 -0.27 {
(0.21) (0.03) (0.17) (0.03)

7.35 -0.49 0.49 -0.10 {
(0.10) (0.01) (0.08) (0.02)

L:R:

N

= 238
T SS = 33:7
NOTES: All regressions are 2SLS. Instruments (Zi ) are present and lagged demand shifters (various world GDP measures, the price of oil, and a time trend { see text) and present and lagged cost shifters (U.S. wage rate, aluminum
price). L.R. is the implied learning rate.

8.

Input Prices:

7.

Oil Price:

6.

Diseconomies of Scope:

Table 2: Traditional Learning Model Regressions: Input Prices and Diseconomies of Scope
ln A 
Wage PAL Poil Scope SSR 
0
1

Table 3: General Learning Model Regressions
ln A



7.63

-0.65

0

Æ



SSR

GMM(p)



L:R:

0.952

{

2.9

0.60

0.51

36%

OF Only:

9. [SN = 9:3]

0.14

(0.01) (0.02) (0.12) (0.003)

(0.05)

Spill-Overs:

10. [SN = 6:9] 7.73

-0.63

0.11

0.960

0.70

2.3

0.62

(0.01) (0.03) (0.17) (0.003) (0.07)

0.45

36%

(0.05)

= 238
T SS = 33:7
NOTES: All regressions in this table use the HAC-IV method described in the text. InN

struments (Zi ) are present and lagged demand shifters (various world GDP measures,
the price of oil, and a time trend { see text) and present and lagged cost shifters (U.S.
wage rate, aluminum price). SN is the optimal bandwidth used in estimation the GMM
covariance and optimal weight matrices. L.R. is the implied learning rate.

0.954

Æ

0.73



-0.72

0.17

0.946

0.79

-0.70

0.14

0.952

0.77

0.06

{

{

Wage

(1.92)

-0.03

Scope

(1.13)
2.9

3.3

3.1

SSR

0.78

0.89

0.62

GMM(p)

(0.05)

0.46

(0.05)

0.51

(0.05)

0.45




SN

is the optimal bandwidth used in estimation the GMM

covariance and optimal weight matrices. L.R. is the implied learning rate.

lagged cost shifters (U.S. wage rate, aluminum price).

lagged demand shifters (various world GDP measures, the price of oil, and a time trend { see text) and present and

N

= 238
T SS = 33:7
NOTES: All regressions in this table use the HAC-IV method described in the text. Instruments (Zi ) are present and

{

-0.003 {

{

Poil

0.009 {

{

{

PAL

(0.13) (0.01) (0.08) (0.003) (0.04) (6.36) (2.96)

13. [SN = 7:9] 7.63

Input Prices:

0.13

0

(0.01) (0.02) (0.05) (0.002) (0.05)

12. [SN = 9:0] 7.72

Oil Price:

-0.71



(0.01) (0.02) (0.10) (0.004) (0.17)

11. [SN = 7:7] 7.91

Scope:

ln A

Table 4: Alternative Hypotheses

38%

39%

39%

L:R:

Table 5: Alternative Production Schedules
Unit Labor Requirement

Average

EDV

1. Actual

381.5

62440

2. Smooth Production (20/yr)

385.1

63570

3. One Model (20/yr)

373.7

62330

4. One Model (40/yr)

324.6

55860

Figure Titles:

Figure 1: L-1011 Production: Direct Labor Requirement and Yearly Output
Figure 2: L-1011 Production by Model
Figure 3: Traditional Learning Curve: All 238 Units (log-log)
Figure 4: Organizational Forgetting and Incomplete Spill-Overs (Regression 10)
Figure 5: Labor Requirements: Actual and Three Alternatives

1100
900

40

700

30
500
20
300

10

100

0
0

50

100

150

200

Unit Number
Labor Requirement (L)

Annual Output (R)

Units Per Year

50

Figure 1:

Thousand Man-Hours/Unit

60

250
1
100
200
500

150

Figure 2:

Cumulative Number Produced

200

100

50

0
70

72

74

76

78
Year

80

82

84

10000

Figure 3:

log(Thousand Man Hours Per Unit)

actual
fitted

1000

100
1

10

100
log(Units Produced)

1000

actual
fitted

1400

1000

800

Figure 4:

Thousand Man-Hours Per Unit

1200

600

400

200

0
0

50

100
Unit Number

150

200

600

400

200

Unit Number

200

150

100

50

0

0

Thousand Man-Hours Per Unit

800

Figure 5:

A
A
AA
A
AA
A
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
1. Actual History
AA
A
AA
A
A
AAAA
AAAA
AA
2. Smooth Output (20/yr)
A
AAAA
AAAA
AA
A
A
A
A
3. One Model (20/yr)
AA
A
AA
AA
AA
4. One Model (40/yr)
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
A
AA
AA
A
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AAAA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AAA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
A
AAA
A
AAA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA AA AAAA
AA
AA
AAA
AAA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AAAA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AAA
AA
A
A
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AAAAA
AAAA
AAA
AAA
A
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AAAA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AAA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AAA
AAAA
A
AA
AA
AA
AA
AAAA
AAAA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AAAA
AA
AA
AA
AAAA
AA
AAAA
AAA
AAA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AAAA
AA
AA
AAA
AAA
AA
AAA
AA AA
AA
AA
AA
AAA
AA
AAAA
AA
AA
AA
AAA
AA
AA
AAA
AAA
AA
AA
AAA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AAAA
AAAA
AAAA
AAA
A
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AAA
AAAA
AAAAA
AAAA
AAAA
AAAA
AAAAAAA
AAAA
AAAA
AAA
A
A
AA
AA
AA
A
A
AA
A
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA

1000

Notes

Graduate School of Business, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, e-mail:

*

lanierb@leland.stanford.edu. I would like to thank Ariel Pakes, John Rust, Steven T. Berry
and Donald W. K. Andrews for their invaluable advice. I also thank Daniel Ackerberg,
Michael Riordan, Christopher Timmins, George Hall, two anonymous referees, and many
seminar participants for helpful comments, and especially Tom Crawford at Lockheed for
providing many important insights into the industry. Financial assistance from the Alfred P.
Sloan Foundation is gratefully acknowledged.
1

Richard Baldwin and Paul Krugman (1988) discuss this issue in the context of the Euro-

pean Airbus subsidies. Partha Dasgupta and Joseph Stiglitz (1988) do not refer to aircraft
speci cally, but do prove the result that, in the presence of learning curves, there are circumstances in which an import ban may be welfare enhancing.
2

See Dasgupta and Stiglitz (1988) for a theoretical argument and conditions under which

restrained antitrust policy is preferred. Additionally, the Department of Justice chose not to
block the recent Boeing{McDonnell-Douglas merger, a move that would be hard to imagine
in other industries given the market shares involved.
3

Luis M. B. Cabral and Michael Riordan (1994) give a good summary of the current theory

on strategic interaction under learning.
4

To my knowledge, the strategic implications of organizational forgetting have not been

studied.
5

Machines can be either very speci c in their use, such as a die which can only be used

to fashion one speci c part, or very transferable, such as a hand-held welding device which
can be used to join any number of parts. The same can be said for workers' skills. The
skill of operating a welding device is very transferable, but the intricate details of welding a
particular assembly may not be.
6

Gulledge and Womer have one example (F102A/TF102 program) in which there are two

models produced but the two models are very similar and hence the authors do not attempt
to account for the di erences.
7

The learning rate is calculated as 1 2 . A 20 percent learning rate corresponds to

=
8

0:32.

The highest selling commercial jet airliner ever, the Boeing 737, has sold less than 3000

units in eight models over 32 years. It is more typical to sell fewer than 1500 units, especially
for larger planes. Among wide-bodies, the Boeing 747 is the only plane to have sold more
than 1000 units, and it has been through four model generations over 28 years.
9

This belief has been represented to me in many conversations with industry executives.

It is also supported in many current and past anecdotal accounts, e.g., The New York Times,
November 14 1997 and Aviation Week & Space Technology, October 15 1979.
10

Eric Darr, Linda Argote, and Dennis Epple also found support for organizational forget-

ting in franchises.
11

Richard R. Nelson and Sidney G. Winter (1982) refer to an individual's \skills" (chapter

4) and an organization's \routines" (chapter 5). The organizational forgetting hypothesis
relates to their claim that organizations \...remember a routine largely by exercising it..."

much as an individual \...remembers skills by exercising them."(p. 99). See also Charles D.
Bailey (1989) for an empirical study of individual rates of forgetting, and Jacob Mincer and
Haim Ofek (1982) for a study of the depreciation of human capital at the individual level.
12

The existence of such a contract provision may in itself seem contrary to the importance

of learning. However, it should be noted that this contract, which originated prior to the
unions, most importantly serves to provide workers with insurance against being laid o in
recessions.
13

Most aircraft come in many di erent con gurations which usually vary in seating capacity

and range. Examples of individual model tailoring are also extensive and include everything
from cabin con guration, engine type, and optional fuel tanks down to prayer rugs, and
custom galleys and lavatories, e.g., a recent article in The New York Times (November 14
1997) claimed that Boeing o ers a choice of 37 di erent cockpit clipboards.
14

Dasgupta and Stiglitz (1988) show that under certain circumstances, the learning hypoth-

esis implies that unconstrained monopoly may be socially preferable to oligopoly.
15

Complete data for all levels of production is not available for the last 12 planes produced

and hence they are excluded from this study.
16

The data provided by Lockheed includes a breakdown for each of these parts of the pro-

duction process. However, for a majority of the planes, data for the rst stage of production
(accounting for about one-third of direct labor hours) is only available by lot. Hence, for the
purposes of this paper only the total direct labor requirement is used.
17

The level of subcontracting was consistent throughout the production run. The primary

subcontractor was Lockheed Georgia (the primary L-1011 producer was Lockheed California).
I have been unable to acquire additional production data for any of the portions of production
that were subcontracted.
18

For reference, the time to completion for the L-1011 ranged from 7-15 months depending

on the overall rate of production. Delivery usually took place soon after the ight test except
in a few isolated occurrences.
19

Because the di erences between the -1 and -100 and -200 models were in accessories only,

conversion was a simple task and was ordered by several airlines for their existing eets upon
introduction of the -100 and -200. For the purposes of this exercise, conversions are ignored.
20

Lockheed managers have indicated (consistently with concurrent articles in the press)

that the strike was initiated by management in trying to break the \displacement rights"
contract provision described previously. The strike was settled when management gave in
and the settlement did not involve any signi cant contract changes.
21

Though normal practice is to build a plant prior to production and to essentially leave

the plant as is during the entire production run, there has on occasion been a plant changeover in mid production. Lockheed relocated production of the P-3 Naval Patrol Aircraft
twice, once in mid-production with a \disastrous a ect" on the program, and the second
time between two separate production runs with minimal e ects. In the case of the L-1011,
however, production consistently took place in the same plants for the entire production run.
When production rates were low, these plants were producing below capacity.
22

Since plant size is xed, aircraft rms increase production rates by adding workers to the

existing line and increasing the line speed. Increasing returns to line-speed at low production
rates are thus likely to result from worker specialization. In the extreme case, one can
imagine that one worker assembling the entire plane would not be very pro cient at any of
the individual tasks. However, because the plant size is xed, adding more workers would
eventually lead to overcrowding and inhibit production.
23

Since we only observe production at the unit level, the returns to labor are not identi ed

in this model and have been normalized out.
24

One rather mundane way is to de ne

Ei

as the (normalized) sum across tasks of the

number of times a current employee has executed that task, where production of an aircraft
is assumed to be broken up into a certain number of small \tasks". Then, suppose that the
company loses a constant fraction of its employees each month and that the average experience
of lost employees is a constant fraction of the average experience of current employees (e.g.,
1).
25

Note that assuming that a company invests in a regional experience pool and that geo-

graphic migration occurs at a constant rate seems more plausible than assuming that company
level turnover is constant.
26

To be clear, the sequential (as opposed to recursive) representation of equations 7-8 is:

E1;t

= Pts=01 Æt

s

1q

1;s

+  Pts=01 Æt

s

1q
500;s

. The sequential representation of E500;t is anal-

ogous.
27

The only di erence between (7)-(9) vs. (5) in the case of Æ =  = 1:0 is that experience

accumulates monthly instead of unit by unit.

28

It should be noted here that due to the very large scale of production, as is typical in the

industry, L-1011 production narrowed to one line in its later stages. This provides a unique
environment in which the same workers in the same plants sequentially work on di erent
models.
29

Another interesting alternative to (7)-(9), the idea for which I owe to Dennis Epple, would

have initial condition E500;t = E1;t for the period in which the rst -500 was produced,
and then follow (7)-(9) for the remaining planes. This alternative speci cation would allow
separate estimation of the  and  parameters and would have very di erent implications
to (7)-(9) if it were found that  6= . However, estimation of this speci cation strongly
supported the hypothesis that  = , which is consistent with the \task overlap" intuition
for experience spillovers and further supports the use of (7)-(9).
30

In particular, Andrews' Quadratic-Spectral (QS) kernel example is used since he shows

that an estimator based upon the QS kernel is best in terms of an asymptotic truncated
mean square error criterion among kernels that necessarily generate positive semide nite
estimates. The bandwidth was chosen optimally using a parametric rst stage. The resulting
GMM estimator is eÆcient under the class of IV estimators with instruments Z, but does
not obtain the asymptotic eÆciency bound due to the nonlinearity of the experience variable.
Details on all aspects of estimation are available from the author upon request.
31

In the serial independent case the optimal instrument for the spillover parameter would

be highly correlated with the ratio E1 =E500 , and thus it is desirable to include instruments
which separately capture demand for the two di erent models.

32

The standard errors listed do not account for serial correlation and are hence likely to be

too low. However, these results are comparable with others in the literature.
33

Because line-speed is not directly observable, in all of the estimations that follow, line-

speed is measured as the annualized number of planes produced in the period beginning
three months before the current month and ending three months after. Alternatives to this
de nition that were considered included varying the period length and using the simple annual
output rate. Results were nearly identical in all cases.
34

Note that these regressions are not orthogonal projections and hence the use of the SSR

as a measure of t is only approximate.
35

See articles from The Wall Street Journal and Aviation Week & Space Technology listed

in the references.
36

Several other versions of the adjustment cost test suggested by seminar participants were

also tried involving various speci c functional forms of the rate of change in output. The one
shown contains the strongest results found.
37

See previous revisions of the paper for details.

38

This speci cation may not be the most intuitive test for scope economies, but it is the

speci cation that gave by far the strongest results. Several other speci cations were also
tested that actually measured the scope of production continuously.
39

In the two previous examples in the literature, the depreciation parameter was estimated

to be in the range 0.75-0.85, suggesting that only 5-15 percent of experience was retained

from year to year.
40

Despite this argument and the stability of the depreciation parameter in the estimations,

several attempts were made to allow the depreciation rate to vary over time. Several seminar
participants and an anonymous referee suggested allowing depreciation to be a function of
output or the change in output, but this was not supported by the data. Other speci cations
tried included high order polynomials in time and splitting the sample into subperiods. Some
support for the latter speci cation was found with the sample split into two at approximately
the 90th unit. However, the p-value in a test of equality of the two depreciation parameters for
the subsamples was only 0.014, which is surprisingly high given the precision of the estimates,
and the true (unconditional on the split point) p-value of such an arbitrary search must be
much higher.
41

High initial labor requirements and relatively fast learning rates imply that only a small

amount of the rm's production experience from other models is relevant to current production.
42

An alternative speci cation was tried that lends further support for the hypothesis that

simultaneous production is costly. That speci cation, which is discussed in footnote 29,
attempted to separate experience gained toward production of the -500 from previous production of the -1, from spillovers of experience during simultaneous production. The two
spillover rates were estimated to be equal.
43

The extent of the increase in costs would likely vary in each instance depending on how

many of the production tasks overlap. The spillover parameter estimates shown here only

apply to this particular case.
44

This is only true if the depreciation rate of experience is not a function of current output

rates, as was found to be the case here. If it were true that higher production rates led to
less depreciation then it may instead be optimal to smooth production.
45

In some simple experiments I have found that including a small inventory cost on the order

of the interest cost of the investment in the plane is enough to make the actual production
run very close to ex post optimal.

VII.

References

Alchian, Armen. \Reliability of Progress Curves in Airframe Production." Econometrica,
October 1963, Vol. 31 No. 4, pp. 679-694.
Andrews, Donald W. K. \Heteroskedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance
Matrix Estimation." Econometrica, March 1991, 59(3), pp. 817-858.
Argote, Linda and Epple, Dennis. \Learning Curves in Manufacturing." Science, February
1990, 247, pp. 920-924.
Argote, Linda, Beckman, Sara L. and Dennis Epple. \The Persistence and Transfer of
Learning in Industrial Settings." Management Science, February 1990, 36(2), pp. 140154.
Asher, Harold. Cost-Quantity Relationships in the Airframe Industry, Santa Monica, CA:
The RAND Corporation, R-291, 1956.
Aviation Week & Space Technology. \TriStar Production Costs O set Lockheed Pro ts."
October 15, 1979, p. 32.
Bailey, Charles D. \Forgetting and the Learning Curve: A Laboratory Study." Management
Science, March 1989, 35(3), pp. 340-352.
Baldwin, Richard and Krugman, Paul. \Industrial Policy and International Competition
in Wide-bodied Jet Aircraft." in Robert E. Baldwin, ed., Trade Policy and Empirical
Analysis, National Bureau of Economic Research Conference Report series Chicago and
London: University of Chicago Press, 1988, pp. 45-71.
Benkard, C. Lanier. \Dynamic Equilibrium in the Commercial Aircraft Market." Mimeo,
Stanford University, 1998.
U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. Nonfarm Payroll Statistics from the
Current Employment Statistics (National). http://stats.bls.gov/sahome.html.
Cabral, Luis M. B., and Riordan, Michael H. \The Learning Curve, Market Dominance,
and Predatory Pricing." Econometrica, September 1994, 62(5), pp. 1115-1140.
Darr, Eric D., Argote, Linda, and Epple, Dennis. \The Acquisition, Transfer, and Depreciation of Knowledge in Service Organizations: Productivity in Franchises." Management
Science, November 1995, 41(11), pp. 1750-1762.
Dasgupta, Partha, and Stiglitz, Joseph. \Learning-by-Doing, Market Structure and Industrial and Trade Policies." Oxford Economic Papers, June 1988, 40(2), pp. 246-268.
Davidson, Russell and MacKinnon, James G. Estimation and Inference in Econometrics.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1993.
Fudenberg, Drew, and Tirole, Jean. \Learning-by-Doing and Market Performance." Bell
Journal of Economics, Autumn 1983, 14(2), pp. 522-530.

Gruber, Harald. \The Learning Curve in the Production of Semiconductor Memory Chips."
Applied Economics, August 1992, 24(8), 885-894.
Gulledge, Thomas R., and Womer, Norman Keith. The Economics of Made-to-Order
Production, New York: Springer-Verlag, 1986.
Hansen, Lars P. \Large Sample Properties of Generalized Method of Moments Estimators."
Econometrica, July 1982, 50(4), pp. 1029-1054.
Hirsch, Werner Z. \Manufacturing Progress Functions." The Review of Economics and
Statistics, May 1952, 34(2), pp. 143-155.
Hirsch, Werner Z. \Firm Progress Ratios," Econometrica, April 1956, 24(2), pp. 136-143.
International Monetary Fund. International Financial Statistics Yearbook. Washington,
DC: International Monetary Fund, 1985, 1995.
Irwin, Douglas A., and Klenow, Peter J. \Learning-by-Doing Spillovers in the Semiconductor
Industry." Journal of Political Economy, December 1994, 102(6), pp. 1201-1227.
Mincer, Jacob and Ofek, Haim. \Interrupted Work Careers: Depreciation and Restoration
of Human Capital." Journal of Human Resources, Winter 1982, 17(1), pp. 3-24.
Nelson, Richard R., and Winter, Sidney G. An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1982.
The New York Times. \Stacked Up at Boeing; Plane Giant Tries to Recover From Its Snarls
in Production." November 14, 1997, p. 1.
Nye, William W. \Firm-Speci c Learning-by-Doing in Semiconductor Production: Some
Evidence from the 1986 Trade Agreement." Review of Industrial Organization, June
1996, 11(3), pp. 383-394.
Olley, G. Steven, and Pakes, Ariel. \The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecommunications Equipment Industry," Econometrica, November 1996, 64(6), pp. 1263-1298.
Prescott, Edward C., and Visscher, Michael. \Organizational Capital." Journal of Political
Economy, June 1980, 88(3), pp. 446-461.
Rapping, Leonard. \Learning and World War II Production Functions." Review of Economics
and Statistics, February 1965, 47(1), pp. 81-86.
Roach, J. R. and Eastwood, A. B. Jet Airliner Production List Volume 2. Farnborough:
The Midas Press, 1995.
Scherer, Frederic M., and Ross, David. Industrial Market Structure and Economic Performance.
3rd ed., Boston: Houghton Mien, 1990.
Tirole, Jean. The Theory of Industrial Organization, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1988.

The Wall Street Journal. \Lockheed is Planning a Write-Down of $600 Million on Its TriStar
in a Complex Financial Restructuring." June 3, 1974, p. 1.
The Wall Street Journal. \Lockheed Net Soared 108% in 3rd Period but Outlook for TriStar
Sales is Dismal." November 7, 1975, p. 1.
Womer, Norman Keith. \Learning Curves, Production Rate, and Program Costs." Management
Science, April 1979, 25(4), pp. 312-319.
Womer, Norman Keith. \Estimating Learning Curves from Aggregate Monthly Data."
Management Science, August 1984, 30(8), pp. 982-992.
Wright, T. P. \Factors A ecting the Cost of Airplanes." Journal of the Aeronautical
Sciences, February 1936, 3, pp. 122-128.
Zimmerman, Martin B. \Learning E ects and the Commercialization of New Energy Technologies: The Case of Nuclear Power." Bell Journal of Economics, Autumn 1982, 13(2),
pp. 297-310.

