1. Introduction
        It was just a few years ago that capital flows to Asian emerging markets
were praised as a model for the rest of the world. A majority of capital flows to Asia
took the form of foreign direct investment, as opposed to portfolio investment.
Although portfolio investment is quick to come and quick to go, it is less likely,
many believe, for foreign direct investment to reverse the direction. Capital flows
to Asia increased investment, and increased investment contributed to achieving
higher growth. Then high growth performances attracted further capital inflows. A
virtuous cycle of capital flows and economic growth was indeed an important part
of the Asian miracle. However, in the wake of Asian crisis, all the praises were all
but disappeared. Even Asia could not withstand the shocks of volatile capital
outflows caused by a sudden change in investors’ expectations.
        When the baht was floated on July 2, 1997, it was hardly a surprise for
many foreign exchange dealers, Treasury officials and central bankers of G7, and
academic economists. However, few predicted that the exchange rates would
depreciate as much as it actually did, and the crisis would spread to other countries
in the region, especially to Korea, in the following several months. The Asian
currency crises of 1997 have been a surprise in its depth and contagion. Indonesia
had been praised by the World Bank until just before the Thailand devaluation.
There was little sign of trouble in Korea, until three months after the baht
devaluation. There was no warning of contagion in the International Capital
Markets report of 1997 (published in September 1997). The IMF financial support
package was negotiated and accepted by the Thai authorities in August, followed
by Indonesia in November and Korea in December. After six months, there is no
clear assessment whether the contagion has stopped. It turned out that the Asian
currency crisis of 1997 is broader and deeper than the Mexican peso crisis of 1994-
95.
        From the end of June to the end of December, 1997, the Indonesian rupiah
depreciated more than 140 percent, while the Korean won and the Thai baht
depreciated more than 80 percent, via-a-vis the U.S. dollar. Malaysian ringgit and
Philippine peso depreciated about 50 percent. Even Singaporean dollar and
Taiwanese dollar depreciated close to 20 percent. The least affected was the Hong
Kong dollar and Chinese renminbi, both of which kept the nominal exchange rate



                                          2
to the U.S. dollar.
        Stock prices in these countries have also plummeted. In the ASEAN-4
(Thailand, Malaysia, Philippines, and Indonesia) and Korea, stock prices became
less than half from January to December of 1997. Withdrawal of funds from the
stock market by foreign investors at least partly explains a simultaneous collapse
of stock and currency markets.
        These exchange rate and stock price movements reflect the strong outflow
of capital from these Asian countries. Even relatively large foreign reserves, in
terms of import months, were not enough in Thailand and Korea. In the case of
Thailand, speculations in the forward market exhausted foreign reserves (in terms
of spot-forward net positions) and in the case of Korea, refusal of rollovers to
Korean commercial banks by foreign banks exhausted the “usable” Korean foreign
reserves.
        The Asian cases of 1997 also suggest a strong contagion. Countries in the
region are most strongly affected by a currency crisis of a country. Although there
are similarities among countries in crisis, differences are also pronounced.
Common features include external shocks, the yen/dollar exchange rate movement
and internal factors like weak banking system and large short-term borrowings.
One cannot deny the possibility that a crisis in one country suddenly changes
investors’ mind about the prospects of other countries.
        The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The next section describes
how capital went into Asian from 1991 to 1996. Section 3 summarizes the crisis of
1997. Similarities and differences between Mexico and Asian countries, and also
those among Asian countries will be shown. Lastly, lessons from this episode of the
currency crises will be drawn in Section 4, and Section 5 concludes.


2. Capital Flows to Asia
2.1 Overview
        Capital flows to Asia have been a focus of the intensive studies in the last
several years, especially after the currency crisis of the 1997. Figure 1 shows the
total gross capital inflows—direct investment, portfolio investment, and other
capital flows (78bed, 78bgd, 78bid lines of International Financial Statistics,
IMF)—to the ASEAN-4 (Thailand, Indonesia, Philippines, and Malaysia) and



                                         3
China for the period from 1976 to 1997. Several characteristics are evident. First,
capital flows to these countries increased markedly in the 1990s (until the crisis of
1997). Second, capital flows to China after 1993 dwarfs others. Third, among
ASEAN countries, Thailand has been the largest recipient of capital flows between
1988 and 1996. However, with the currency crisis, they became outflows in 1997.
Fourth, capital flows to Indonesia and Malaysia were larger than other countries
from 1982 to 1984, but declined since then.
          Let us focus on net private capital flows in the 1990s and compare Asia
with other regions. Table 1 shows global capital flows to developing and transition
economies (taken from IMF, International Capital Markets). Net private capital
flows to emerging markets increased seven-fold from 1990 to 1996. In 1990, total
capital flows to emerging markets (developing countries and transition economies)
were about 30 billion dollars, of which two-thirds went to Asia and one third went
to Latin American countries. In 1993, the total amount of capital flows was up to
160 billion dollars, of which Asia and Latin America received about 40 percent
each. A majority of flows to Asia took the form of direct investment and an
overwhelming portion of flows to Latin America took the form of portfolio
investment. The large ratio of portfolio flows to Latin American countries in 1991-
93 became a source of instability in the wake of, if not a trigger of, the Mexican
peso crisis. In 1995, net portfolio investment to Latin America became negative in
the wake of the Mexican peso crisis. The total private flows also declined sharply.
Capital flows to Latin America recovered sharply only in 1996, contributing to a
new record high for the capital flows to emerging markets exceeding 240 billion
dollars, of which about a half went to Asia, and one third went to Latin America.
          Several reasons for the sharp rise in capital flows from 1990 to 1996 have
been pointed out in the literature. First, a declining trend of the interest rates in
the advanced countries prompted the institutional investors to search high yield
opportunities in many emerging markets.1 The pursuit of high yield was reinforced
by desire to diversify their portfolio internationally. Second, on the recipient side,
emerging markets liberalized restrictions on inward investment. Some developing
countries introduced economic reforms including financial sectors. Others allowed
direct investment into various industries. These factors are analyzed in IMF
(1995).



                                          4
        During the episode of strong capital inflows, several host countries
complained that capital inflows were too much, in that capital inflows were causing
adverse side effects, overheating domestic economies to speculative appreciation
pressure. Thailand and Malaysia in particular received inflows amounting to more
than 10 percent of GDP. Thailand was accumulating foreign reserves as a result of
intervention to prevent appreciation even with current account deficits of 8 percent
(of GDP) in 1995-96. If not intervened, the currency would have appreciated.
Intervention was probably only partly sterilized. There are some signs that capital
inflows contributed a real estate boom in Thailand and Malaysia. More detailed
discussions on the inflow problem are found in IMF (1995).
        The picture sharply changed in 1997. The Thai baht was effectively
devalued in July, and the Thai government asked for the IMF assistance in
August. The currency crisis spread to Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, and Korea
in the subsequent months. Private capital fled from these countries. In the end net
private capital flows to Asia fell from 110 billion dollars in 1996 to mere 14 billion
dollars in 1997. Net portfolio investment to Asia became negative in 1997 for the
first time since 1990. If the affected countries—Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, the
Philippines, and Thailand—were singled out, private capital went out in net by 11
billion dollars. Even in the crisis, foreign direct investment to Asia did not decline
from 1996 to 1997. This reflects both investors’ confidence in the long-run prospects
of Asian economies and host countries willingness to be acquired in hard times. It
is also notable that portfolio flows declined sharply both in the Latin American
countries in 1995 and Asian economies in 1997. However, the drop in portfolio
flows were much more dramatic among Latin American countries in the aftermath
of the Mexican crisis.
        In total of net private capital slows, the decline among Asian countries
from 1996 to 1997 was much more dramatic than the decline for Latin American
countries from 1994 to 1995. There are two factors to consider. First, in the
Mexican crisis of 1994-95, the crisis was effectively stopped by the IMF packages to
Mexico at the end of January 1995 and to Argentina in March 1995. In contrast,
the Asian currency crisis spread from Thailand, to Indonesia, to Korea. This
contributed to a much larger decline in net capital flows to Asia in 1997 than to
Latin America in 1995. Second, in both crises, the bank lending and credits were



                                          5
reversed sharply (see “Other” line in Table 1) among Asian economies.


2.2 Scenario: Virtuous and Vicious Cycle
Net capital inflows make it possible for a host country to run current account
deficits without running down the foreign reserves. Net capital inflows increase
resources that the host country can use. In Asia, capital inflows were mostly used
for investment. The saving rate is already high in many Asian countries, especially
in Malaysia and Singapore, but the investment rate is even higher. Investment,
both foreign direct investment and domestic companies and government projects
are believed to have contributed to higher growth. Higher growth in turn invites
more investment.
        One of the factors that helped exports and economic growth of the East
Asian countries in the last two decades was a long-term trend of yen appreciation.
There are at least two channels from yen appreciation to economic growth of the
Asian economies. First, as the yen appreciates, Asian products will become more
price competitive against Japanese goods in the world markets, especially in the
Japanese and the U.S. markets. For example, Korean shipbuilding, steel, and
semiconductors are direct competitors to Japanese counterparts in the world
market. Although they may not compete directly in the same quality category, they
indirectly compete in the same product category. Hence, yen appreciation is a
business chance for manufacturing companies based in East and Southeast Asian
economies.
        Second, yen appreciation has convinced many Japanese companies of
benefits in moving production facilities out of Japan. Looking for the production
sites where high quality workers are available at low wages, Japanese
manufacturing    companies    shifted   production   abroad,   mainly    in   Asia.2
Technological transfers with Japanese management helped the Asian countries
increase productivity in manufacturing. Some of productions in Asia became
productive enough to export to the United States, Japan, and the rest of the world.
        Hence, the low interest rate and the yen appreciation were external shocks
to the Asian economies in 1994-96. Yen appreciation produced more Japanese
direct investment in Asia. FDI from Japan and other advanced countries provided
the host countries with technological transfer and export capability. Asian exports



                                         6
grew at the rate of 20 to 30 percent. Low interest rate in the industrial countries
including Japan produced the portfolio flows to the Asian economies. Those
portfolio flows were used investment rather than consumption. Asian economies
were totally confident in their export-let growth strategy and the World Bank “East
Asian miracle” gave a seal of approval.
        The currency “stability” vis-à-vis the US dollar was instrumental in
bringing in direct and portfolio investment. The investors had confidence in Asian
countries that were virtually pegged to the US dollar. The currency risk was
minimal, so considered the investors and borrowers. The credit risk was also
minimal, due to high economic growth. The interest rates in the Thailand were
higher than in the US, and that invited bank deposits and short-term bond
investment.
        Growth in one Asian country is further amplified by growth in other
countries in the region, as countries are connected by trade and investment flows.
The “multiplier” of growth among countries the region was considered to be rather
high.
        Large current account deficits in some countries were source of concern for
some economists. But high economic growth made it possible to assert that the
“grow-out-of-debt” scenario would work. The low total productivity growth pointed
out by Young and Krugman posed some doubts on the sustainability of high
growth. But, industrialization and sophistication of the industries were impressive
enough to wipe off doubts. Essentially, high growth invited more capital inflows,
that produced even higher exports and economic growth. This is the virtuous cycle,
as schematically depicted in Figure 1. Until 1996, almost all observers were
confident that the virtuous cycle would work for a foreseeable future.
        The virtuous cycle was suddenly interrupted in 1996-97. Exports from
most Asian countries sharply declined due to several reasons. The yen depreciation
from 1995 to 1997 reduced Asian goods’ competitiveness. Slow growth produced
lower economic growth. However, before the crisis, it was growth recession—from
1995 to 1996, growth rates in Thailand was down from 8.8% to 5.5%, Malaysia
from 9.5% to 8.6%, Singapore from 8.7% to 6.8%, and Korea from 8.9% to 7.1%. On
the other hand, growth was hardly affected in Indonesia, the Philippines, China,
and Taiwan.



                                          7
        The growth rate of Japanese FDI and portfolio flows to Asia was slowing
down due to the yen depreciation, but capital flows to Asia continued to be strong,
due to increased flows from Europe and the U.S. in 1996. In fact, there was not
significant change in FDI and capital flows until the devaluation broke out in July
1997.
        Japanese FDI, mostly assembly plants of finished products, to Asia has
stimulated industrialization. However, factories built by Japanese FDI continue to
require imports of parts and semifinished goods from Japan. As domestic
production of parts has become a challenge for Asian countries which have
recorded large trade deficits against Japan.     (An exception is Indonesia which
records surpluses against Japan.)
        Once the currency was destabilized in July-August 1997 among ASEAN
countries, capital inflows to the region became substantially cut. As discussed
above, net private capital flows to the Asian region in 1997 became only one-tenth
of that of 1996. Most of the outflows took place in banking flow reversal. All the
logic of virtuous cycle worked in reverse. The vicious circle (Figure 2) set in after
September 1997: Capital outflows caused the currency to depreciate; depreciation
made the real economy and the banking sector weaker; weak economies made
investors’ pessimistic; and pessimism encouraged further capital outflows.


2.3 FDI to Asia, overview
        Foreign direct investment (FDI) to Asia has increased steadily during the
1990s. Table 2 shows that FDI flows to selected Asian countries and economies
measured by host countries’ authorities.3
        From Table 2 (Panel A), it is evident that all Asian countries significantly
increased FDI inflows during the 1990s. The increases are most significant in
China, where it was a 15-fold increase in six years (1990 to 1996 before the East
Asian crisis). Other countries, Korea, Singapore, Indonesia, Thailand, and Viet
Nam saw from two-fold to four-fold increase in the first six years of the 1990s.
        Table 2, panel B, shows the source countries of FDI to Asia in 1995. Japan
provided most FDI to the total of nine Asian countries (4 NIEs, ASEAN-4, and
China). In some countries (Korea, Taiwan, Singapore, and Philippines), the US is
the number one FDI source country, while for others, Japan is the number one.



                                            8
Europe collectively was investing into Asia in a similar size to the US. However, for
most countries, impacts of FDI in typical Asian countries are dictated by investors’
behavior of Japan and the United States.
        As the largest investor in the region, the role of Japan in FDI is important.
The Japanese FDI data to Asia is analyzed. The Japanese data are collected by the
Ministry of Finance, Japan, and they are based on the voluntary (formerly
mandatory) reporting basis. Table 3 shows changes in the Japanese FDI to the
nine Asian economies in the 1990s.4 The Japanese FDI to the world were below 5
billion dollars a year until 1980. It became more than 10 billion dollars in 1984.
Only two years later, the amount was doubled, exceeding 22 billion dollars. It
reached 67 billion dollars in 1989. In the beginning of the 1990s, FDI in fact
declined to 36 billion dollars, before turning around and went back to the
neighborhood of 50 billion dollars. Out of the total FDI in the postwar period, 617
billion dollars, more than half was done in the 1990s. The largest recipient is
Indonesia, closely followed by Hong Kong and China. Japan invested in the NIEs
(Korea, Taiwan, Singapore, and Hong Kong) during the 1980s, as well as the
1990s—the ratio of the 1990s investment to the all years is below 60 percent. In
contrast, more than 60 percent of Japanese FDI to Thailand, Malaysia, and the
Philippines were done in the 1990s, reflecting the rapid rise of these economies,
and the sharp rise in Japanese investment in these economies. In the beginning of
1990s, Indonesia, Thailand, and Malaysia were the preferred destinations of
Japanese FDI. On average Indonesia has received more than 150 billion yen (about
1.3 billion dollars) annually in the 1990s. By the mid-1990s, China became the top
host of Japanese FDI. In 1995, China received more than 430 billion yen (about 4
billion dollars) of Japanese FDI.
        Foreign direct investment (FDI) is often said to be a preferred form of
investment for host countries. (Direct investment is usually defined as a purchase
of more than 10 percent in equities of a particular company.) Compared with bank
credit, bank deposits, or bonds, it is more difficult and costly to withdraw
investment which have become factories and other real assets. Moreover, direct
investment comes with foreign management and technological transfers, which is
expected to contribute to improving industrialization levels of a host country.




                                           9
2.4 FDI determinants
        According to the virtuous cycle hypotheses, FDI from Japan is motivated
by optimistic expectations on the prospects of the Asian economies and the yen
appreciation. The Japanese firms moved their productions to Asian economies as
the yen appreciated. The level of the yen/dollar rate influences the flow of foreign
direct investment from Japan to Asian countries. Figure 2 shows the correlation
between the level of the yen/dollar rate and the foreign direct investment from
Japan to Asian countries.5 This shows the rapid rise of FDI from 1986 to 1989,
which appears to be a lagged response to the sharp yen appreciation (drop in the
yen/dollar rate) from 1985 to 1988.
        In a more rigorous manner, determinants of FDI flows from Japan to Asia,
in aggregate or in individual countries, can be analyzed. Suppose that FDI flows
are motivated by the cost conscious Japanese manufacturing firms, then the
yen/dollar exchange rate is an important signal. For each industry, there seems to
be a threshold of the value of the yen. When the firm judge that the yen is
persistently above the threshold, the firm moves production facility to Asia. It may
take one year to convince the firm that the yen is “persistently” above a certain
level, so the yen/dollar rate is lagged one period. The yen/dollar exchange rate is
the determinants in deciding locations of production facilities for Japanese
exporters. Most labor intensive portion of the production process was out-sourced
first. The semifinished products or finished products are then exported back to
Japan or other countries.
        The Japanese FDI is also motivated by the prospect of the Asian
economies, as some of the products are intended to be consumed locally. Japanese
auto makers set up production, sometimes in joint ventures, for example in
Thailand, Indonesia, and Malaysia, mainly to sell autos in their respective
countries. It is mostly to avoid high tariffs of auto imports. The FDI to pursue
domestic consumption is motivated by the prospect of economic growth.
        With these considerations, the log of FDI flow from Japan to Asia is
regressed on the log of the yen/dollar exchange rate, one year lagged, and growth
rate, in aggregate or the individual countries. Unfortunately, the FDI data are only
available annually, and the sample period is from 1976 to 1997. Table 4 shows
regression results.



                                        10
        In the aggregate specification, the log of aggregate FDI flows from Japan
to eight Asian countries (four NIEs and ASEAN-4), FDI8, is regressed on the log of
the yen/dollar exchange rate of year t-1, and the average growth rate of these eight
countries. The negative coefficient of the yen/dollar rate implies that FDI from
Japan to the eight Asian economies tends to increase as the yen appreciates (drop
of the yen/dollar rate). The positive coefficient of the growth rate implies that an
increase in growth rates of the Asian economies tends to increase FDI from Japan
to these economies.
        For individual countries, the log of aggregate FDI flows from Japan to an
Asian country is regressed on the log of the yen/dollar exchange rate of year (t-1),
and the growth rate of year (t). Results in general confirm effects of the yen-dollar
exchange rate effect and the optimistic expectation, driven by actual growth rate,
on the FDI flows from Japan. In each economy, either the yen or the growth rate is
statistically significant (at least at 5 percent, except for Taiwan, where only 10
percent significance) with expected signs. In Korea, the Philippines, and Malaysia,
both variables are significant.


2.4 Effects of FDI on the economy
        When foreign capital flows in as direct investment, it has at least two
positive effects on the economy. First, it adds to the domestic saving to become
funds for investment. Second, it often comes with technological spillovers.
        There are many studies on impacts of FDI on the host country.6 A recent
studies, such as Belderbos, Capannelli and Fukao (1999) and Urata and Kawai
(1999), show the significant technological spillovers to the subsidiaries in Asia from
the Japanese manufacturing firms.7
        The growth rate of the Asian economy is regressed on the level of foreign
direct investment of year (t-1), the change in the yen/dollar exchange rate, Japan’s
growth rate, and the US growth rate. The yen appreciation (drop in the yen/dollar
rate) will enhance competitiveness of Asian exporters that compete with Japan’s
exporters. Therefore the change in the exchange rate will promote exports of the
Asian economies, contributing to their economic growth. The coefficient of the
change in the yen/dollar exchange rate is expected to be negative. The two most
important markets for most Asian economies are Japan and the United States.



                                         11
Therefore, the income effects of the Japanese and the US economic growth should
appear in the economic growth of Asian economies as positive coefficients on
Japan’s economic growth rates and the US economic growth rates.8
        Our main interest here is whether the lagged FDI will increase economic
growth rate, controlling for the exchange rate the economic growth rates of the two
most important trading partners. The specificaiton that only FDI of year (t-1) is
included assumes high dissemination of technological transfer and a temporary
boost of productivity. The statistically-significant positive coefficient on the FDI
term is indicative of growth-enhancing technological transfers.
        Table 5 shows the regression results. For the aggregate of the 8
economies, results are consistent with theoretical predictions mentioned above. The
first row shows the result for the aggregate of the eight Asian economies (4 Nies
and ASEAN4). The weighted average of growth rates of the economies tends to
increase when the level of FDI from Japan in the preceding year is high, implying
the boost to the productivity associated with FDI. The growth rate becomes higher
if the yen appreciates (a negative sign is yen appreciation) from the preceding year.
Higher growth in Japan and the United States help the growth of these economies.
Estimates imply that a 10 percentage point appreciation in the yen increases 0.5
percentage point of the average Asian growth rate in these economies. One
percentage point increase in Japanese and US growth rates, respectively, increases
the average Asian growth rate by 0.4 and 0.2 percentage point.
        For individual economies, results are not as prominent as the aggregate
equation. The FDI effect on growth is evident for Hong Kong, Thailand, and
Malaysia. The yen/dollar exchange rate seems to influence growth in Korea,
Taiwan, Thailand, and Malaysia. In these economies, 10 percentage point
appreciation in the yen boost the economic growth rate by 1 percentage point. The
Japanese economic growth has a positive spillover effect on Korea, Taiwan, and
Thailand, while the US economic growth has a positive effect only on Taiwan.
Regressions for Singapore, Indonesia, and the Philippines did not produce any
meaningful result.


2.5 Portfolio Flows
        Portfolio investment consists of equities, bonds, and other securities



                                         12
investment. Bank deposits and lending and cross-border transfers between bank
branches are usually classified as “other types” of capital flows. Table 6 shows three
types of gross capital flows—FDI, Portfolio, and other—to Korea, ASEAN4, and China.
It is shown in the ratio (%) to GDP so that the relative impact to the economy can be
assessed. Between 1994 and 1996 (that is, after the Mexican crisis and before the
Asian crisis), these countries have received large amount of capital inflows, but
composition was very much different across countries.
        China and Malaysia are the two countries that encouraged and received
foreign direct investment. Their portfolio inflows are minimal or even negative in the
case of Malaysia. Except Malaysia in 1992 and 1993, other types of capital inflows were
very small too.
        Thailand received most capital inflows in the ratio of GDP between 1993 and
1996. The total capital inflows were about 10 percent of GDP between 1993 and 1996.
Most notably, portfolio inflows and other types of inflows were higher than FDI. Since
portfolio or other types of capital flows are considered to be much more mobile than
FDI, this feature was an ominous sign of coming currency crisis, at least in retrospect.
However, the precise mechanism of movement of “hot money” is debatable.
        In case of Mexican crisis in December 1994, it has been argued that a sudden
and massive outflows in days after the “surprise” 15% devaluation is blamed for
bringing down the peso by almost 50% in one week. Mostly, short-term securities
investment, especially Tesobonos, by mutual funds and institutional investors
withdrew their investment quickly. The larger size of portfolio investment is potential
for such kind of a large impact of a sudden reversal of capital flows by investors, once
their assessment of the country changes.


2.6 Bank Lending
        In order to investigate further what kind of money is invested, the cross-
border bank lending is investigated. Table 7, panel A shows the balance of cross-
border bank lending from industrial countries to developing countries. Total
liabilities and short-term liabilities of recipient countries, as of end-June 1997, are
shown in the first two columns after the country names. The breakdown of total
lending, by countries of lending banks, to each borrowing country is shown. In a
general tendency, the Japanese and European banks lend to Asian countries, while
American and European countries lend to Latin American countries. Among the



                                           13
Asian countries, Japanese banks have higher shares in Thailand (54%), Indonesia
(39%), and Malaysia (36%), while European banks, collectively, have more than
40% of shares in China, India, Malaysia, and Taiwan. Among the Latin American
countries, US banks’ share is between 20 and 28 percent, while European banks
about 50%.
        In ratio to GDP, total bank liabilities are highest in Thailand (0.381),
followed by Malaysia, Indonesia, and Korea. These countries have higher ratios of
bank liabilities to GDP than any Latin American countries.
        Bank lending behavior is supposedly different from securities investment.
Although they are short-term, they are often lent on implicit understanding of
rolling over indefinitely. If the interest rate spread is maintained, bank lending is
usually rolled over. However, once banks suspect credit (default) risk becomes,
overwhelming, any interest rate spread may not keep the bank lending.
        In order to assess the vulnerability to potential problems with bank
lending, such as a sudden refusal of roll-overs, the short-term lending to the foreign
reserves is examined. The ratio of the stock of short-term liabilities to foreign
reserves represents one possible measure of this type of vulnerability. If the ratio is
higher than one, it implies that if all banks refuse to roll over the short-term loans,
foreign reserves will be exhausted. Among Asian countries, the ratio exceeds one in
Korea, Indonesia, and Thailand. These three countries needed the IMF assistance
later in that year. In retrospect, this indicator would have been good in predicting
the Asian currency crisis. Among Latin American countries, the ratio exceeds one
in Argentina and Mexico.
        In Table 7, panel B, the changes in these bank liability indicators from
1993 to 1997. For Asian countries, bank liabilities tended to increase both for the
total liability/GDP ratio and the short-liability/foreign-reserve ratio. The exception
is China for the latter indicator. The cases of Thailand and Malaysia stand out in
their increases in the latter indicator. Asian countries relied on bank lending for
their economic development.
        For Latin American countries, movements are mixed. Between 1993 and
1997, some countries increased the total liabilities to GDP ratio and the short-term
liabilities to foreign reserve ratio, while other countries decreased these ratios.
        The salient feature of the country share movement is the rapid expansion



                                          14
of European banks both in Asia and Latin America. In aggregate, European banks
increase the share of lending to Asia by 6 percentage points, while the Japanese
banks decreased lending by 8 points. In case of Latin American countries, the
European banks increased its share from 45% to 50%, while both the Japanese and
US banks decreased their shares by 5 points. If the lending boom to Asia was to be
blamed, which is a controversial “if,” then the European banks were the ones that
seemed to lay the last brick in Asia.
        In China, Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, and Taiwan, European banks
increased their share markedly at the expense of Japanese banks, while in the
Philippines, European banks increased their share at the expense of the United
States. Only in Thailand, Japanese banks maintained a significant share.


2.7 Too much capital flows?
        As explained in the beginning of this section, capital flows, especially FDI,
are in general a part of “a virtuous cycle” in developing countries. However, an
exceptionally large size of capital flows, especially short-term flows, become large,
monetary policy becomes difficult. (See Khan and Reinhart (1995) is one of the first
papers on this topic. See also IMF (1995).) Capital flows to Asian countries have
been sometimes massive, sometimes exceeding 10 percent of GDP.
        When the size of capital inflows becomes larger than current account
deficits, there is an appreciation pressure on the currency. Having adopted the de
facto dollar peg, many Asian countries have resisted the appreciation pressure by
intervening the foreign exchange market. The stability in the exchange rate was
considered to be important for nurturing exporting industries and inviting FDI
inflows. As intervention continued, levels of foreign reserves among Asian
countries have soared in the 1990s. Intervention can be sterilized or left
unsterilized. Unsterilized intervention will increase monetary base, resulting in
lower interest rates. The stimulating effect of lower interest rates may cause
inflation, if the economy is already in the full capacity production, which is often
the case for emerging market economies that attract a massive capital inflows.
        In order to avoid inflation, intervention can be sterilized. Sterilized
intervention is a combination of foreign exchange intervention and domestic open
market operation to keep the monetary base constant (in levels or in proportion to



                                         15
GDP in a growing economy). Sterilized intervention will keep the interest rate level
the same, in theory. In practice, the interest rate may rise by the sterilized
intervention. Suppose the initial capital inflows were in the form of FDI. The
domestic end of sterilization is most likely done in the short-term money market.
Then, the short-term interest rate may increase, while the long-term interest rate
will decline. The higher short-term interest rate will invite more capital inflows in
the form of portfolio investment. Hence, sterilized intervention may increase
capital inflows.
        Of course, a story as told in the manner of policy decision tree, is only a
reflection of the well-known economics principle: it is impossible for a small open
economy to have free capital flow, the fixed exchange rate, and independent
monetary policy. Usual theoretical answer to this impossibility problem is to float
the exchange rate. A more heterodox answer is to adopt some mild forms of capital
controls on short-term inflows, such as raising the reserve requirements on bank
deposits by nonresident or imposing withholding taxes on short-term instruments
held by nonresidents. Many emerging markets did adopt market-based capital
controls (see IMF, 1995).
        There is an important footnote to the impossibility principle. By reducing
fiscal deficits (or increasing fiscal surpluses) will ease the overheating pressure by
capital inflows. A contractionary impact of fiscal surpluses, such as tax increases or
expenditure cut, is mitigated by monetary stimulus of unsterilized intervention. In
fact, several Asian countries, such as Thailand, adopted this option in the
beginning of the 1990s. Many Asian countries did run fiscal surpluses.
        Lessons on the danger of too much capital inflow seems to have been learnt
in the Mexican peso crisis of 1994-95. The governments of many emerging markets
were vigilant on capital flows. However, the Asian countries did run into a problem
in 1997. The next section analyzes what happened to capital flows in the midst of
the currency crisis in Asia.




                                         16
3. The Currency Crisis of 1997
3.1 Overview
The Asian currency crisis has been analyzed in several papers and books. See
Goldstein (1998), Krugman (1998), Montes (1998), Radelet and Sachs (1998a, b), to
name a few. Various reasons for the currency crisis were suggested. Three factors have
been identified as the major causes. First, the de facto dollar peg as the currency
regime contributed to generating crisis. China, and Hong Kong have maintained the
nomial fixed exchange rate to the US dollar. Before the crisis, Thailand, Singapore,
Malaysia, and Korea all adopted a currency basket system. However, they in fact had a
high weight on the US dollar in the basket (see Frankel and Wei (1994)), so the
exchange rate regime was de facto dollar peg. In the period of yen appreciation, Asian
exporters enjoy high growth contributing to an overall high economic growth, while
in the period of yen depreciation, Asian economies’ performance becomes less
impressive. In fact, the yen depreciation from 1995 to 1997, was partly a reason for
lower growth of Asian economies (except the Philippines) in 1996-1997. Moreover,
the dollar peg with high interest rates invited in short-term portfolio investment.
Investors and borrowers mistook the stability of the exchange rate as the
nonexistence of exchange rate risk.
        Second, a weak bank and nonbank sector complicated the currency crisis.
Key industries of many Asian countries relied on bank lending for their fund needs.
Banks in Korea were lending to industries that were deeded to be important from
the industrial policy point of view. Many Indonesian banks, including one or two
state banks, had been seriously burdened by nonperforming loans. Thai finance
companies (nonbanks) had large nonperforming loans from an asset inflation
(1992-93) and deflation (1996-97). A weak banking system becomes an indicator of
for foreign speculators to attack the currency. When attacked, the central bank
could employ a high interest rate policy to encourage capital to stay (or come in).
But, weak banks would make this policy counterproductive from the domestic
banking policy. Knowing this, speculators are more willingly to attack a country
with a weak banking system. The banking crisis causes the currency crisis. Also,
many bank liabilities and corporate debts were denominated in the US dollars.
This was a reflection of the dollar peg. However, when the currency is devalued,
dollar-denominated liabilities would become much larger in terms of the local



                                         17
currency. The currency crisis often causes the banking crisis. In this sense, the
currency crisis and banking crisis are “twin crises” (Kaminsky and Reinhart
(1996)).
           Third, short-term liabilities were mounting in some of Asian economies,
most notably in Thailand, Indonesia, and Korea (recall Tables 6 and 7). These
short-term capital can be withdrawn quickly and put pressures on the exchange
rate. Withdrawal of funds slowly started in Thailand in 1996. Once the thai baht
was floated, neighboring countries were on the alert list on the investors.
Withdrawal of short-term funds intensified after September. Refusal of the rollover
of bank loans particularly put pressure on the Korean won.
           In addition to these common factors, there are idiosyncratic factors for
different countries. Speculative attack by hedge funds was a trigger for the Thai de
facto devaluation, while Indonesia did not intervene so that foreign reserves were
ample when it asked for a “precautionary” IMF program. The burst bubble was the
major cause for weak financial systems in Bangkok, while reasons other than
bubbles explain the weak banking system in Seoul and Jakarta. Controls on capital
accounts had been eliminated for a long time in Indonesia, while there were
significant capital controls in Korea. Thailand went through financial liberalization
several years prior to the currency crisis. Political conflicts were a major problem in
Indonesia, while Thailand and Korea had a solid political
           More detailed analysis of mine has to be left for other opportunities. (Ito
(1998a, b, c)).    The rest of this paper is devoted to a concise summary of the
observations, emphasizing the role of capital flows and some new perspectives. What is
new in this paper is to emphasize the common factors and idiosyncratic factors of Asian
currency crisis. But, first, background to the crisis has to be described.


3.2 Shift of the wind in 1995-96
           Several changes in the Asian economic performances occurred in 1996.
First, exports have precipitously declined in most Asian countries. Export growth
rates in 1994 and 1995 reached 20 to 30 percent in China, Korea, Singapore,
Thailand, Malaysia, and Philippines. Then in 1996, exports of all countries went
down sharply. Thai export growth, for example, slowed from more than 20 percent
to virtually zero within a year. Korea and Taiwan suffered from a recession in the



                                            18
semiconductor industries. As the region depended on exports, the decline in exports
substantially brought down economic growth. Figures 4 and 5 shows the
remarkable decline in exports of NIEs and ASEAN-4 in 1996-1997. (More detailed
analysis of export deceleration is done in Ito (1998b).
         Second, as export growth slowed down, economic growth also faltered. Third,
in some countries, such as Thailand, stock prices started to decline. All of these
changes were signaling the end of a long boom. Capital flows which are sensitive to
yields started to reverse the direction.
         As economic growth slowed down, a virtuous cycle turned into a vicious circle
(recall Figure 2). The exports decline was a trigger for a shift from a virtuous to vicious
cycle.


3.3. Thailand
         The crisis first hit Thailand, which seemed most vulnerable from
traditional measures. In 1996, the current account deficits of Thailand had reached
8 percent of GDP, the same level that brought Mexico into a currency crisis in
1994. The export growth rate plummeted from 20 percent per annum to virtually
zero, although a decline in the economic growth rate was only modest, from about 9
percent to 7 percent. In retrospect, Thailand experienced a bubble economy from
1993 to 1995. The economy was overheated and stock prices soared in 1993, as
capital flows increased, especially in the form of portfolio flows. (See Ito (1998c) and
Nukul Report (1998).)
         Note that a major slow down in exports occurred also back in 1984-85.
Recall that the dollar appreciated. This supports the working hypothesis described
in the previous sections that the dollar appreciation (yen depreciation) is bad for
the Asian exports and growth.
         After the asset bubble burst, banks in Thailand had nonperforming loans
problems. In particular, finance companies borrowed from domestic and foreign
banks to finance their property loans were in serious problems. The weakness in
financial system, along with large current account deficits, invited speculative
attacks on the baht.
         The speculative attack came in several waves, between December 1996 to
the spring of 1997, before the massive speculative attack in May 1997. For one



                                            19
week in May, some investors sold the baht in the spot market, and other in the
futures (or swap) market. The central bank intervened to defend the dollar peg
regime, which was in place since 1984. The dollar peg was considered to be
instrumental to winning confidence of foreign investors. The net result for the
central bank position was to lose the foreign reserves in forward position. Although
the announced, on-balance figure of the foreign reserve was close to 30 billion
dollars, it would be revealed later that the amount of off-balance dollar selling
futures contracts exceeded 20 billion dollars. Although the market knew that there
were central bank interventions in the futures (swap) market, as a result of
defending the baht from speculators, the precise number had not been known.
When the central bank decided to float the currency on July 2, the market was bit
surprised only for the timing.
        In the case of Mexican crisis, the Mexican government had not announced
the decline in foreign reserves for almost 10 months. This non-transparent practice
was criticized because market discipline could not work. This was one of the major
reasons that IMF introduced Special Data Dissemination Standard (SDDS). In the
case of Thai case, the foreign reserves figures were correctly disclosed every month
with a one-month lag for statistics collection in compliance of SDDS as one of its
subscribing nations. However, it was off-balance liability which was not disclosed
to the market and finally brought down the fixed exchange rate peg.
        After the baht was floated, it immediately depreciated by 15 percent.
Within a few weeks, Malaysia, Philippines, and Indonesia either floated or
significantly widened the band. Central banks of these countries intervened
occasionally, but the amount was limited.
        Although the rate was floated, the baht problem was not over. The Bank of
Thailand was carrying large forward positions, and commercial banks had large
short-term liabilities which may not be rolled over in the following months. The
market knew that the Bank of Thailand was carrying forward contracts, but the
amount was not accurately known. Thailand sought liquidity assistance from
Japan and the United States in vain. The Bank of Thailand introduced in May
capital controls that prohibited residents to lend money to nonresidents in offshore
markets. The offshore rate deviated from onshore rates in May and June, but
deviations became very small after floating the rate. By the end of July, Thailand



                                        20
decided to ask for assistance from International Monetary Fund.
        There were two kinds of problems in putting together an IMF program for
Thailand. First, the amount of a support package would have to become large, and
the limit in stand-by loans may not be enough. Second, it was not clear what kind
of conditionality should be placed.
        After intense negotiations, Thailand agreed to an IMF conditionality which
includes tight monetary and fiscal policy, as well as concrete action programs on
finance companies. The assistance program had also Japan and other Asian
countries also offered assistance. IMF portion was $4billion dollars (close to 500 %
of quota for Thailand), while Asian countries, including Japan, pledged additional
$13.2 billion.9 It was a quite unusual arrangement that Japanese Export-Import
Bank provided a parallel loan of $4 billion with IMF. The agreement was signed on
August 20, 1997.
        One of the problems that Thailand experienced was the fragile financial
system, in particular, huge nonperforming loans problems in the finance
companies. In June, worst 16 finance companies were suspended. In addition, 42
finance companies were suspended before the IMF agreement of August.
        The IMF program did not put an end to the depreciation of the baht. As
the IMF program failed to stop depreciation of the baht, other currencies in the
region became further affected.
        The loss of foreign reserves was a major concern in Thailand. The
termination of foreign bank lending was also a cause and effect of depreciation.
Capital flows out of Thailand were accute (recall Figure 1), and they took place
mostly in terms of bank lending withdrawal. (recall Table 6).


3.4 Indonesia
        Indonesia was thought to be doing well on the macroeconomic managment.
The exchange rate had flexibility (slow depreciation vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar on the
slide schedule with a band around it), and intervention was restrained to conserve
foreign reserves. The fundamentals were better than neighboring countries.
However, toward the end of September, the Indonesian rupiah depreciated
suddenly, and it was decided in Jakarta to seek IMF assistance. This decision was
a little surprising in the sense that there was little evidence that the central bank



                                         21
needs to build up foreign reserves at that point. Also, problems in the Indonesian
economy lie in the real sector, namely inefficient big national projects and
nontransparent President’s family businesses. The IMF conditionality would look
quite different from a usual one.
         On November 5, the IMF program was agreed. At the same time,
coordinated intervention by other Asian central bank was carried out to help prop
up the value of the rupiah. A most remarkable aspect of the IMF program for
Indonesia was to close down (not just to suspend) sixteen banks with questionable
assets. One bank was owned by President Suharto’s son. Depositors were paid off
only up to a certain amount. There was also no announcement on the health of the
remaining banks. This caused a run on some of weak banks.
         Uncertainty which was not completely resolved was the size of corporate
debts to foreigners. As many firms borrowed from foreign banks (in foreign
currency denomination), but the total amount was not known at the time. To
Indonesia, IMF, the World Bank, and ADB decided to extend $23 billion. The U.S.,
Japan, Singapore, and Asian countries pledged a “secondary line” of support.
         However, having an IMF program did not stop depreciation of the rupiah.
Ironically, a real currency crisis came after the IMF program was signed. In the mid-
December, a rumor of President Suharto having poor health, based on his cancellation
of appearance in an international conference, pushed down the rupiah. Also, whether
structural reforms would be carried out was questioned, especially after a closed bank
was replaced by a new bank run by the same person at the same site. After President
Suharto announced a new fiscal year budget on January 6, which contained more than
40 percent increase in its size, the rupiah was sold heavily. The rate broke the level of
10,000 rupiah/$ and went down to a point, where the rupiah’s value was one-sixth of
what it was a year earlier. The rupiah’s movement was much more influenced by
political news. In the process of rupiah depreciation, foreign investors’ role was not as
heavy as capital flight.


3.5 Korea
Korea was initially thought to be remote from a crisis. The fundamentals had
turned around for better earlier this year. The exchange controls were reasonably
stringent, so that it would be difficult to speculate against the won. Nonresidents
cannot borrow the won. The Korean won did not depreciate more than 20 percent


                                           22
until the end of October. However, suddenly in November, the currency became
under heavy pressure. Foreign banks that had lent to Korean banks decided to
withdraw funds, by not rolling over their lending. Korean central bank reportedly
lent foreign reserves, as foreign-currency deposits, to commercial banks, which
could not raise funds without paying prohibitively high risk premium (Korean
premium).
        Korea decided to ask for an IMF assistance toward the end of November,
and obtained one on December 4. Negotiation was carried out in an unusually fast
manner. The amount of assistance was also unusually large. IMF would provide
$21 billion, supplemented by $10 billion from the World Bank and $4 billion from
ADB. The United States, Japan, and other countries would provide additional $36
billion, bringing the grand total of $57 billion.
        One of the most critical elements in the Korean crisis was how much would
foreign banks roll over their lending to Korean banks. It was estimated that short-
term liabilities would be close to $100 billion, if guarantees provided by the Korean
corporations to their subsidiaries abroad are counted. Table 8 summarizes how
Korea’s external liabilities have changed.
        Pressure on the won did not stop at the IMF program of December 4.
Accute problems in liquidity developed surrounding Korean banks. It was not until
December 24, when administrative pressure from monetary authorities of G7 was
applied on commercial banks to maintain lending to Korean banks, that the crisis
was contained.
        Recall that the short-term bank liability to foreign reserve ratio was
highest in Korea (Table 7). The Korean currency crisis can be understood in terms
of “bank run,” (in terms of Radelet and Sachs (1998a, b)) unlike Thailand or
Indonesia.


4.6 Contagion
The experience of Asian currency crises in 1997 certainly puts more weights on the
case of contagion. In the case of the Mexican peso crisis, the tequila effect did not
succeed in changing the exchange rate regime, despite pressures on Argentina, and
Asian countries. However, in the case of Asian currency crises, depreciation spread
to a large number of countries.



                                           23
        An interesting work would be whether a contagion model, such as
Eichengreen and Rose would have predicted such spillovers, at the point that
Thailand decided to float. How much increase in probability of devaluation in
rupiah, ringgit, and Philippine peso would the Thai devaluation of July 2 would
have indicated? When investigated closely, a contagion process was more
complicated than just spillovers from Thailand. Through the summer and up to
September, the Thai baht was most depreciated, followed by rupiah, peso and
ringgit. However, from October to November, the degrees of depreciation for baht
and ringgit are about the same, near 40 percent. Up to November, the Korean won
depreciated only about 15 to 20 percent. As a crisis in Seoul deepens, the won
depreciated further. The process indicates that the direction of spillovers change
over time. This was not the case in a simple devaluation-led crisis like Mexico
1994.
        Recall the hanges in the currencies of NIEs and ASEAN-4. From July to
October, the baht was the most depreciated currency. Other ASEAN currencies
were following the movement of the baht. The magnitude of the peso, ringgit, and
rupiah depreciation was about half of the baht depreciation until September. Then,
rupiah suddenly depreciated at the end of September. From September to
November, the rupiah movement seems to influence other currencies. Then, the
Korean won depreciated sharply in December, reflecting the liquidity problem
mentioned above. Indonesian rupiah depreciated further in January 1998.
Therefore, sources of contagion seem to shift from one country to another, as
political and economic shocks occur in various countries.




                                         24
4. Lessons: Capital Flows and Reversal10
Many reasons for the capital inflows and their subsequent reversal have been
suggested. Depending on which reason is to be believed, a prescription to prevent a
future crisis will be different. We will review some of the current thinking on the issue.


4.1 Moral hazard
A first hypothesis is that capital flows to Asia can be characterized as the result of
moral hazard. Some observers pointed out that implicit guarantee of deposits and
financial institutions by emerging market invite too much capital flows. (Goldstein
(1997, 1998), Krugman (1998), McKinnon and Pill (1996)) Investors perceive that
deposits that pay higher interest rates than the advanced countries attractive, and
especially so when the economy is growing fast and the exchange rate stability appears
to be secured. Mexico before 1994 and Thailand before 1997 are primary examples. The
host countries receive capital which cannot be put into productive use which has long-
run returns exceeding the interest rates that are paid to creditors. Mexico resulted in a
consumption boom and Thailand a real estate boom. Investors remained complacent
just before the crisis because they felt that investment are protected by the government
guarantee. In case of Mexico, a large part of capital inflows were explicitly guaranteed
because they were government securities (tesobonos). In case of Thailand, capital flows
that rapidly rose in 1994 to 1997 were through its offshore banking facility (BIBF). In
this case, investors must have recognized that deposits were implicitly guaranteed
because the government would bail out banks, just like in advanced countries.
Moreover, investors may be reassured by the IMF handling of Mexico in 1995, because
investors were not asked to involuntarily roll over their investment. Borrowers were
also mistaken. They might not be placing capital in a prudent manner. They tend to go
for a high-risk, high-return project. If the project fails, the government would bail out
the bank, and if the project succeeds, the bank benefits. The situation is well known in
the deposit insurance literature. Explicit and implicit guarantees caused the moral
hazard among investors and borrowers.
         If moral hazard is the problem, there are two kinds of solution. First,
prudential regulation on borrowers to avoid building the dangerous positions is
important. Second, burden sharing on lenders, once a problem develops, would deter
future irresponsible lenders.
         One problem with this argument, however, is the timing of crisis. Why the
capital inflows reversed in 1997 so dramatically cannot be explained adequately from


                                            25
moral hazard. If the blanket guarantee was to be believed, there is no reason for
investors to flee so quickly.
         Another problem with the moral hazard explanation is the cross-sectional
differences. Why Indonesia and Korea were affected most severely, while the
Philippines and Malaysia seem to have escaped the worst. The blanket guarantees
were the same for Asia, and other macroeconomic fundamentals were similar. Moral
hazard argument alone would not explain the cross-sectional differences.
         One way to combat the moral hazard problem is to ask the involved parties to
take losses from easy lending and borrowing. Many observers point out the problem
of moral hazard on the part of borrowers. However, overborrowing is overlending.
How could IMF ask “lenders” (Tesobonos. Lenders to 58 finance companies in
Thailand. ) to take losses? In fact, IMF packages are usually strict enough that
countries do not willingly come under, and the penalty of mismanagement is
severe, negative economic growth for Mexico and Thailand after the crisis. There is
little scope for moral hazard on the part of a country to mess up the economy (at
least for a decade or two after one crisis). IMF did not “bail out the country”,
because money was repaid in the Mexican case, and so will the Asian cases. What
IMF packages bail out in the Mexican type crises is actually a group of lenders to
the countries, by recovering the asset values (currency, stock, Tesobonos, Brady
bond, and other bond prices). If Mexican Tesobonos holders had been asked to take
some losses in the Mexican peso crisis, they might not have extended too much
credit to some of the Asian countries that got into trouble in 1997. It would be
difficult to devise a program to ask for a fair share of burdens on lenders, without
causing an international systemic risk, unless the IMF intervenes swiftly.
         Another solution is to strengthen prudential regulations. Thailand relaxed
banking regulations and capital controls without strengthening bank supervision.
Finance companies were outside of more strict bank regulation. A lack of policy
contributed to easy lending. Korean merchant banks were outside the bank regulation
which restricted a large lending to a single customer. A lesson here is that fianancial
deregulation has to be accompanied by strengthening bank and nonbank supervision.


4.2 Bank run
Radelet and Sachs (1998a,b) argue that the Asian currency crises were caused by
sudden shift in investors’ behavior. Those countries that relied on short-term capital


                                          26
inflows were caught in the liquidity crisis when investors refused to roll over lending.
In the case of the Mexican crisis of 1994-95, it was the short-term government
securities (tesobonos) which became a focus of the roll-over problem. In Thailand and
Korea, domestic banks could not obtain enough dollars to repay short-term borrowings
when roll-overs were refused. Banks were not insolvent, by any standard. It was a
liquidity problem, or a problem of bank run (a la Diamond-Dybvig (1983)).
          When a currency crisis of a country is analyzed in the model of bank run,
investors’ behavior to withdraw funds form the country may not have to be irrational.
Given other creditors are withdrawing funds, it is rational to withdraw funds. In fact,
it is rational to be first in line.
          The situation in Korea in November and December 1997 fits the bank run
model best. Korean banks faced acute liquidity shortage in US dollars, and the
monetary authorities helped them with providing the foreign reserves (as deposits to
commercial banks). When foreign reserves are exhausted, there was no choice but to
ask for the IMF assistance.
          If the bank run is the sole reason for the crisis, establishing the international
lender of last resort would be a good solution. Suppose that the International Monetary
Fund to play the role of international lender of last resort. The IMF would inject
foreign reserves, and the central bank would help commercial banks unwind the
liability positions, when roll-overs are refused. In fact, having the lender of last resort
would convince lenders not to refuse roll over. This is a straight-forward application of
the role of domestic central bank to the international circumstances.
          If analogy to the domestic central bank is applicable, the IMF lending to help
prevent a bank run should not be tied to a stringent conditionanality, and
disbursement has to be quick and front-loaded.
          The reservation to such an international lender of last resort also comes from
the analogy to the domestic central bank. In order to provide liquidity in a massive
amount, the monetary authorities regularly conduct strict examinations. Weak
institutions are closed or at least restricted in their activities. When a liquidity crisis
occurs, the monetary authorities have to have a confidence that that financial
institutions are essentially sound before it injects liquidity to help financial
institutions. Similarly, the monetary authorities of the emerging markets have to
demonstrate that the liquidity support from the international lender of last resort does
not go into insolvent institutions. Therefore any recommendation for establishing the
international lender of last resort should be accompanied by the proposal to


                                            27
strengthening the banking system and its supervision. Moreover, in practice, it is often
very difficult to distinguish the liquidity problem from the insolvency problem.
          A possible solution to an international bank run is to make IMF the
international lender of last resort. Funding would have to be increased and
conditionality would have to be relaxed. It might be necessary to create a regional fund
to which neighboring countries subject to possible contagion supplement the IMF
coffer.


4.3 Herd Behavior
Similar to the idea of bank run, the model of herd behavior has been developed in the
finance literature. In relation to stock market crashes, Scharfstein and Stein (1990)
and Banerjee (1992) developed the so-called herd behavior model. Investors behave in a
herd because it is profit maximizing to behave as others do. When others are investing,
it is more likely that prices will go up and the currencies to appreciate, so that it makes
sense to invest. When others are withdrawing, it is rational to go along because prices
and currencies would go down. The self-fulfilling prophecy works.
          One might question this kind of simple story by arguing that markets have a
self-regulating mechanism which would bring the economy back to the equilibrium. A
currency depreciation shock by capital flows should promote exports and thus in the
long-run put the pressure to appreciate the currency. For example, depreciation would
hurt the balance sheet of banks and corporations that borrowed in foreign currencies.
Thus, lending from banks would be limited and the interest rate would rise. The
business activities would be depressed and struggle to obtain working capital. The
depressed domestic demand, consumption and investment, further depress the
business activities.
          In the meantime, if the inflation rate increases due to the depreciated
currencies, the real exchange rate does not warrant much increase in exports. Foreign
debts (denominated in nominal terms in foreign currencies) are mushroomed in local
currencies.
          The fate of the Indonesia seems to fit this description of herd behavior and
multiple equilibria well. How else could we explain that the economy is still suffering
(at minus 15% growth rate) at the exchange rate level that is one-sixth of pre-crisis
level? Other countries, such as Thailand and Korea, also have negative growth, even
though their currencies have depreciated by 30-40%.
          Herd behavior can be dealt with by capital controls, or a stand-still agreement


                                            28
imposed by IMF. Temporary capital controls on outflows may calm the market. A
stand-still agreement that would be an effective tool to start negotiation process of
corporate debts or sovereign bonds. This would eliminate the incentive to withdraw
funds first.


4.4 Irrational exuberance and a bubble
The last model is more ad hoc. Excessive capital inflows can be characterized by
irrational exuberance (a famous word of Alan Greenspan on US stock prices), which
sooner or later results in an eventual crash. The stock prices and real estate prices of
some Asian cities, like Thailand, Hong Kong, and Kuala Lumpur, increased so high due
to the capital inflows, which were prompted by high economic growth. However, at
least in the end, the level of stock prices could not be rationalized by fundamentals.
The stories of real estate bubbles in some Asian cities were similar to those in Japan,
the bubble and burst cycle from 1985 to 1998. Ito and Iwaisako (1996) explained the
stock price movements by applying the stochastic bubble model, a la Blanchard and
Watson (1982). A similar methodology can be applied to the Asian crisis.


4.5 Early Warning Signal
It has become a popular exercise to look for variables that help predict a future
crisis. Frankel and Rose (1996), Eichengreen and Rose (1996), Goldstein (1996),
Kaminsky, Lizondo, and Reinhart (1997) have contributed to the literature of early
warning signals. Frankel and Rose (1996) identified, for example, the size of
current account deficits and the composition of bank borrowing (short-term and
foreign-currency-denominated loans), increases the probability of a future crisis
(large devaluation). Goldstein (1996) list seven factors as presumptive indicators of
vulnerability to a financial crisis: an upturn in international interest rates; a
mismatch between the government’s/banking system’s short-term liabilities and its
liquid assets; a large current account deficits; an overvalued exchange rate; weak
banking system and large fiscal deficits which put constraints on the authorities’
willingness to increase interest rates; a boom in bank lending followed by a fall in
asset prices; and high susceptibility to contagion due to similarities to a financial
crisis elsewhere (more likely if neighboring countries). Eichengreen and Rose also
confirms a contagion effect, that is, a probability of a crisis increases if a
neighboring country experiences a crisis. Kaminsky, et al. (1997) attempted to


                                          29
calculate appropriate widths of thresholds of various macro variables. When an
indicator moves beyond certain threshold levels, they are treated as a signal. On
any given month, the system would estimate the probability of a crisis within the
following 24 months conditional on the indicators issuing signals at that moment.
The variables are chosen on the basis of indicating correct signals (while
minimizing false signals) for a crisis. Although the results are encouraging, there
are as many false signals as correct signals even for variables that are less noisy.


5. Concluding Remarks
In this paper, characteristics of capital flows in Asia before and after the crisis of
1997 were summarized. Although some common factors are available, each crisis
has its own idiosyncratic factors. In fact, Thailand, Indonesia, and Korea present
much different kinds of “food for thought,” just as their ethnic foods are different.
Thailand is much like a classic attack on the reserve for a country with large
current account deficits, while Korea seems to be an international bank run.
Indonesian problem cannot be understood without investigating political and social
shocks. These differences reflect underlying bank and corporate liability structures,
which is a result of their policies during the capital inflow phase. The capital
outflow crisis investigation has to start at research on capital inflows. For this
reason, detailed data analyses and description of idiosyncratic factrors in this
paper may be useful for further research.




                                          30
                                     References

Belderbos, Rene; Giovanni Capannelli, and Kyoji Fukao, 1999. “Local Procurement by
Japanese Electronics Firms in Asia” in T. Ito and A. O. Krueger, Role of Foreign Direct
Investment in Economic Development, NBER, University of Chicago Press, forthcoming.

Banerjee, Abhijit, 1992. “A Simple Model of Herd Behavior,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, vol. CVII: 797-817.

Blanchard, Olivier and Mark W. Watson, 1982. “Bubbles, Rational Expectations, and
financial markets,” in P. Wachtel, (ed) Crisis in the Economic and Financial Structure,
Lexington Books.

Diamond, Douglas, and P. Dybvig. 1983. Bank runs, deposit insurance and liquidity,
Journal of Political Economy, vol. 91: 401-419.

Eichengreen Barry and Portes Richard 1995 Crisis          What Crisis      Orderly
Workouts for Sovereign Debtors London: Center for Economic Policy Research

Eichengreen, Barry and Andrew Rose, 1996. “Contagious Currency Crises: Channels of
Transmission,” in T. Ito and A. O. Krueger (eds.) Changes in Exchange Rates in
Rapidly Developing Countries: Theory, Practice, and Policy Issues, NBER-University of
Chicago Press.

Frankel, Jeffrey A. and Andrew K. Rose, 1996. “Currency Crashes in Emerging
Markets: Empirical Indicators,” NBER working paper 5437, January.

Frankel, Jeffrey A. and S.-J. Wei, 1994. “Yen Bloc or Dollar Bloc? Exchange Rate
Policies of the East Asian Economies,” in Ito, T. and A. O. Krueger (eds.)
Macroeconomic Linkage: Savings, Exchange Rates, and Capital Flows, University of
Chicago Press.

Goldstein, Morris, 1996. “Presumptive Indicators/Early Warning Signals of
Vulnerability to Financial Crises in Emerging-Market Economies,” Institute for
International Economics, photocopy, January.

Goldstein, Morris, 1997. The Case for an International Banking Standard, Institute for
International Economics, Washington, DC.

Goldstein, Morris, 1998. The Asian Financial Crisis: Causes, Cures, and Systemic
Implications, Institute of International Economics, Washington, DC.

Graham, Edward M. and Paul R. Krugman, 1991. Foreign Direct Investment in the
United States, Second Edition, Institute of International Economies, Washington, DC,
1991.

Graham, Edward M. and Paul R. Krugman, 1993. “The Surge in Foreign Direct
Investment in the 1980s” in Kenneth A. Froot (ed) Foreign Direct Investment, NBER,
University of Chicago Press.

Group of Ten 1996. ”The Resolution of Sovereign Liquidity Crises” photocopy, May.



                                          31
International   Monetary      Fund 1995 International     Capital     Markets:
Developments Propects and Policy Issues Washingtont DC: International Monetary
Fund

International   Monetary      Fund 1996 International     Capital     Markets:
Developments Propects and Policy Issues Washingtont DC: International Monetary
Fund

Ito, Takatoshi, 1998a. “Bail-out, Moral Hazard, and Credibility: IMF and World Bank
policies in Crises of the 21st century type,” presented at the Wharton conference on
Asian Twin Financial Crises, Tokyo, March 10.

Ito, Takatoshi, 1998b. “Asian Exports: Principal Causes of Deceleration,” mimeo Asian
Development Bank.

Ito, Takatoshi, 1998c. “The Development of the Thailand Currency Crisis: A
Chronological Review,” The Japan Export-Import Bank, RIID Review, vol. 24,
September: 66-93.

Ito, Takatoshi; Eiji Ogawa; and Yuri Nagataki Sasaki, 1988. “How did the dollar peg
fail in Asia?” Journal of the Japanese and International Economies, vol. 12, no. 4:
forthcoming.

Ito, Takatoshi and Tokuo Iwaisako, 1996. “Explaining asset bubbles in Japan”
Monetary and Economic Studies, Bank of Japan, vol. 14, July: 143-193.

Kaminsky, Graciela L., Saul Lizondo, and Carmen M. Reinhart, 1998. “Leading
Indicators of Currency Crises,” IMF Staff papers

Kaminsky, Graciela L. and Carmen M. Reinhart, 1996. “The Twin Crises: The Causes
of Banking and Balance-of-Payments Problems,” Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System, photocopy, February.

Khan Mohsin S. and Carmen M. Reinhart, 1995. “Macroeconomic Management in
APEC Economies: The Response to Capital Inflows”, in M. S. Khan and C. M. Reinhart
(eds.) Capital Flows in the APEC Region, IMF Occasional Paper, no. 122, pp. 15-30.

Kojima, Kiyoshi, 1978. Direct Foreign Investment, London: Croom Helm.

Krugman, Paul, 1979. “A Model of Balance-of-Payments Crises” Journal of Money,
Credit, and Banking, vol. 11, no. 3, August, pp. 311-325.

Krugman, Paul, 1985. “Is the Strong Dollar Sustainable?” in Federal Reserve Bank of
Kansas City, The U.S. Dollar—Recent Developments, Outlook, and Policy Options,
1985, chapter 5: pp. 103-155.

Krugman, Paul, 1998. “What Happened to Asia?” January.

McKinnon, Ronald, and Hugh Pill, 1996. “Credible liberalizations and international
capital flows: the overborrowing syndrome,” in T. Ito and A.O.Krueger, eds., Financial
Deregulation and Integration in East Asia, Chicago: Chicago University Press.


                                         32
Milesi-Ferretti, G. M. and A. Razin, 1996a. Current-Account Sustainability, Princeton
Studies in International Finance, no. 81, October 1996.

Milessi-Ferretti, G. M. and A. Razin, 1996b. “Persistent Current Account Deficits: A
Warming Signal?” International Journal of Finance & Economics, vol. 1, no. 3, July:
161-182.

Montes, Manuel F., 1998. The Currency Crisis in Southeast Asia, Updated Edition,
Institute of Southeast Asian Studies.

Nukul Commission, 1998. “Analysis and Evaluation on Facts Behind Thailand’s
Economic Crisis,” (translated by Nation Multimedia Group, Thailand).

Radelet, Steven and Jeffrey Sachs, 1998a, “The Onset of the East Asian Financial
Crisis,” presented at a seminar at USAID, January 29, 1998; and NBER Currency
Crises Conference, February 6-7, 1998.
[Bank run model]

Radelet, Steven and Jeffrey Sachs, 1998b. “The East Asian Financial Crisis: Diagnosis,
Remedies, Prospects,” Brookings Panel, Washington DC March 26-27, 1998.
[criticism of IMF Policy]

Scharfstein, David and Jeremy Stein, 1990. “Herd Behavior and Investment,”
American Economic Review, vol. 80, June: 465-479.

Urata, Shujiro, and Hiroki Kawai, 1999. “Foreign Direct Investment and International
Technology Transfer in East Asia: The Case of Japanese Manufacturing Firms,” in T.
Ito and A.O. Krueger, Role of Foreign Direct Investment in Economic Development,
NBER University of Chicago Press.




                                         33
Table 1. Net Private Capital Flows to Emerging Markets

Unit, billion U.S. dollars
                   1990      1991    1992    1993        1994     1995     1996     1997
Emerging
markets,              31.0   126.9   120.9    164.7       160.5    192.0   240.8    173.7
Total                 17.6    31.3    37.2     60.6        84.3     96.0   114.9    138.2
    FDI               17.1    37.3    59.9    103.5        87.8     23.5    49.7     42.9
    Portfolio         -3.7    58.4    23.8      0.7       -11.7     72.5    76.2     -7.3
    Others
1. Asia
   Total            19.1      35.8    21.7        57.6   66.2      95.8     110.4    13.9
    FDI              8.9      14.5    16.5        35.9   46.8      49.5      57.0    57.8
    Portfolio       -1.4       1.8     9.3        21.6    9.5      10.5      13.4    -8.6
    Others          11.6      19.5    -4.1         0.1    9.9      35.8      39.9   -35.4

1a. Affected
 Total             24.9       29.0    30.3        32.6   35.1      62.9    72.9     -11.0
  FDI               6.2        7.2     8.6         8.6    7.4       9.5    12.0       9.6
  Portfolio         1.3        3.3     6.3        17.9   10.6      14.4    20.3      11.8
  Others           17.4       18.5    15.4         6.1   17.1      39.0    40.6     -32.3

2.LatinAmeric
a                  10.1       26.1    56.0        64.3    47.4     35.7    80.5     91.1
  Total             6.7       11.0    13.6        12.8    24.3     25.3    36.9     51.2
   FDI             17.5       14.7    30.4        61.1    60.6     -0.1    25.2     33.5
   Portfolio      -14.0        0.3    12.0        -9.5   -37.5     10.5    18.5      6.5
   Others
3.Transition
Economies,
 Total              3.5       -2.4    7.2     12.2       18.4      29.8     21.3     34.5
  FDI              -0.3        2.4    4.2      6.0        5.4      13.2     13.1     18.2
  Portfolio         0.0        0.0    0.1      4.5        4.1       2.9      2.9      7.3
  Others            3.7       -4.8    2.9      1.7        8.9      13.6     13.6      9.0
3.Other
regions            -1.7       67.4    36.0    30.6       28.5      30.7     28.7     34.3
  Total             2.2        3.5     5.9     5.9        7.9       7.9      7.9     11.0
   FDI              1.1       20.7    16.3    16.3       13.7      10.2      8.9     10.8
   Portfolio       -5.0       43.3     8.4     8.4        7.0      12.5     11.8     12.6
   Others
Notes. “Others” include short- and long-term credits, loans (not including use of IMF
credit), currency and deposits, and other accounts receivable and payable.
“Other regions” include “Middle East and Europe” and “Africa”.
“Latin America” is labeled as “Western Hemisphere” in the original table.

Source, IMF, International Capital Market September 1998.




                                             34
Table 2: Gross Foreign Direct Investment Inflows

Panel A. Time-series of FDI inflows
US$million
           1990    1991    1992     1993   1994   1995   1996   1997
China        3500    4400 11000 27500 33800 37500 42400 45300
Korea         803    1396      895    1044   1317   1941   3203   6971
Taiwan       2302    1778     1461    1213   1631   2925   2461   4267
Singapor     1224    1425     1678    1966   2833   3423   4054   3979
e
Indonesi     8751    8778 10323       8144 23724 39915 29931 33833
a
Thailan      8029    4988 10022       4285   5875 16492 13124 10616
d
Malaysia     6517    6202     6975    2443   4321   3652   6812   4018
Philippin     961     778      284     520   2374   1871    967   1993
es
Viet         512    1147   1926    2615    3722     6524 8497 5550
Nam
Source: Economic Planning Agency, Japan, Asian Economies 1998 (in
Japanese), 1998.
Original Sources: Government Agencies of host countries.

Panel B. Cross-section by source country, 1995
$mil.    Korea Taiw HK        China Sing Mala Phil Thai Indone TOTAL
         95      an     95    95      apor ysia ipp9 land sia95
                 94                   e95 94       5     95
TOTAL    1914. 1523       566 37520. 4852 4242 1871 1649 39914. 108897
               4     .9             5     .4    .5           2     7     .4
US        644.9 293.      198    3083 2075 473. 627. 2582 2770.5 12749.
                      7                   .8     6     9    .2            6
Japan     418.3 391 514. 3108.5 1152 667. 101. 7891             3792 18036.
                            1             .5     1     2    .4            1
Germany 44.6 91.5              386.4         247.    0.9 174. 1344.6 2290.3
                                                 6           7
UK         86.7 29.2        - 914.1           35.5 125 301. 6322.1 7728.9
                         85.5                                8
France     35.2 15.5              287         18.9        26.2 498.4 881.2
Italy                          263.3            20        49.6  22.8 355.7
Netherla 170.1 79.9 34.7 114.1                12.1 5.6           360 776.5
nd
Swiss       9.8            -   63.5 13.2               100.     44.9   192.1
                        39.6                               3
other               0                                   37.2   345.5   382.7
EU
EU        346.4 216.       - 2028.4 13.2 334. 131. 689. 8938.3 12607.
total                1 90.4                      1    5       8             4
Others    504.8 623.       - 29300. 1610 2767 1010 5328 24413. 65504.
                     1 55.7        6     .9     .7   .4     .6      9       3
Notes: Based on each country’s direct investment figures. China’s figure is
based on disbursement basis. Others are on the approval basis.
Original Source: Government Agencies of host countries.


                                    35
Source: Economic Planning Agency, Keizai Bunseki
(The Economic Analysis), no. 156, “Applied General Equilibrium Analysis of
Current Global Issues – APEC, FDI, New Regionalism and Environment” (by
Kanemi Ban, et al.), March 1998.

Excel, FDI Asia CrsSection




                                   36
Table 3: FDI from Japan, Time-series cum cross-country
Unit, million dollars
mil $      1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 90- 51- 90s
                                                                    97    97      (%)
                                                                    tota tota
                                                                    l     l
TOTAL     5691 4158 3413 3602 4105 5147 4810 5402 3633 6172 58.
               1      4      8       5       1       8     1      5    12     06     9
Asia       7054 5936 6425 6637 9699 1238 1163 1219 7195 1124 64.
                                                     0     4      4     8     23     0
malaysi 725 880 704 800 742 576 573 792 5792 8298 69.
a                                                                                    8
singapo 840 613 670 644 1054 1187 1117 1826 7951 1366 58.
re                                                                              4    2
thailan 1154 807 657 578 719 1242 1406 1869 8432 1170 72.
d                                                                               1    1
indones 1105 1193 1676 813 1759 1608 2419 2517 1308 2352 55.
ia                                                                      9       4    6
philipp 258 203 160 207 668 719 560 524 3299 4620 71.
ines                                                                                 4
hong       1785 925 735 1238 1133 1149 1489 696 9150 1721 53.
kong                                                                            5    2
taiwan      446 405 292 292 278 456 522 450 3141 5427 57.
                                                                                     9
korea       284 260 225 245 400 450 416 443 2723 6577 41.
                                                                                     4
china       349 579 1070 1691 2565 4485 2515 1989 1524 1771 86.
                                                                        3       6    0
Notes: Foreign direct investment (FDI) from Japan in this statistics is on the
“reporting basis,” of cross-border investment.        It may not match with actual
disbursement because some reported investment may be canceled, and some will be
carried out without reporting (no penalty). New FDI financed locally or reinvestment
from past FDI is not covered by this statistics. FDI numbers are announced in the yen
after 1995. They are converted in the dollar using the average exchange rate of the
year.

Source: Ministry of Finance, Japan, (1997). Annual Report of the International
Finance, 1999, Tokyo (forthcoming).

Excel file, FDI from Japan, pt 3




                                         37
Table 4: Determinants of FDI

Estimates, (T-statistics) and [significance level]

Dependent     Constant      Trend      Log(Yen(t-    Growth        R bar sq.
Variable                               1))           [of           D.W.
                                                     respective
                                                     economy]
Log(FDI8)     12.439        0.058      -1.111        0.068         R=0.86
              (3.02)        (1.38)     (-1.71)       (2.41)        DW=1.65
              [0.003]       [0.168]    [0.087] *     [0.015] **
Log(FDIKor    10.842        0.024      -1.335        0.128         R=0.74
)             (2.50)        (0.58)     (-1.83)       (7.18)        DW=1.55
              [0.013]       [0.013]    [0.068] *     [0.000] ***
Korea
Log(FDITai    4.534         0.147      -0.397        0.069         R=0.81
)             (1.32)        (4.33)     (-0.67)       (1.87)        DW=0.59
              [0.186]       [0.000]    [0.500]       [0.061] *     (AR)
Taiwan
Log(FDIhon 12.854          0.056      -1.425         0.010       R=0.68
)             (2.98)       (1.33)     (-2.03)        (0.18)      DW=0.96
              [0.003]      [0.184]    [0.042] **     [0.855]     (AR)
Hong Kong
Log(FDIsin) 15.820         0.022      -1.915         -0.027      R=0.81
              (2.76)       (0.46)     (-1.99)        (-1.38)     DW=1.44
Singapore     [0.006]      [0.643]    [0.047] **     [0.169]     (AR)
Log(FDITha 6.520           0.164      -0.880         0.146       R=0.92
)             (1.52)       (4.00)     (-1.25)        (4.26)      DW=2.02
              [0.129]      [0.000]    [0.213]        [0.000] ***
Thailand
Log(FDIInd 5.673           0.057      -0.156         0.145       R=0.36
)             (0.65)       (0.66)     (-0.11)        (2.37)      DW=1.95
              [0.515]      [0.509]    [0.912]        [0.012] **
Indonesia
Log(FDIPhi 30.05           -0.101     -4.604         -0.060      R=0.86
)             (4.38)       (-1.70)    (-3.98)        (-1.95)     DW=2.16
              [0.000]      [0.089]    [0.000] ***    [0.051] *
Philippines
Log(FDIMal -8.392          0.260      1.804          0.132       R=0.84
)             (-1.37)      (4.54)     (1.80)         (4.27)      DW=1.81
              [0.172]      [0.000]    [0.072] *      [0.000] ***
Malaysia
Sample period, 1976:1 – 1996:1.
Estimations is executed by RATS with the “Robusterrors” option, using a
consistent covariance matrix allowing for heteroscedasticity and
autocorrelation (LAGS=2), when necessary (when low DW, shown as “AR”,
with sample 1997:1 –1996:1).
FDI8=the sum of FDI from Japan to four NIEs and ASEAN-4.
Log(Yen) = Log of the yen/dollar rate, average of the year.
Growth rate = Growth rate of the respective economy of the equation. In the
case of FDI8, the growth rate is the weighted avearge of growth rates of the



                                        38
eight economies, with nominal GDP in dollars as weights, in percent.




                                     39
Table 5: Impacts of FDI on growth rate

Estimates, (T-statistics) and [significance level]
Dependen Constan Log(FDIx(t-            YenChg         Japangr      USgr         R   bar
t variable t            1))                                                      sq
                        x=country                                                DW
Asia8gr      0.422      0.589           -0.058         0.361        0.237        R=0.14
             (0.20)     (2.30)          (-3.25)        (3.02)       (3.41)       DW=1.79
             [0.838]    [0.021]**       [0.001]***     [0.003]***   [0.001]***
Korea        0.603      0.827           -0.080         0.445        0.468        R=0.14
Growth       (0.13)     (1.25)          (-2.36)        (1.98)       (1.19)       DW=1.89
             [0.212]    [0.212]         [0.018]**      [0.048] **   [0.235]
Taiwan       5.598      -0.241          -0.116         0.474        0.497        R=0.51
Growth       (2.95)     (-0.77)         (-3.99)        (2.15)       (4.18)       DW=2.7
             [0.003]    [0.442]         [0.000]***     [0.032]**    [0.000]***   4
Hongkong 16.945         -1.813          -0.035         0.113        0.268        R=0.25
Growth       (4.68)     (-4.05)         (-0.66)        (0.40)       (0.98)       DW=2.15
             [0.000]    [0.000]***      [0.512]        [0.686]      [0.327]
Singapore 8.925         -0.056          0.073          -0.216       0.097        R=-0.17
Growth       (2.79)     (-0.14)         (1.17)         (-0.55)      (0.57)       DW=1.32
             [0.005]    [0.890]         [0.238]        [0.585]      [0.566]
Indonesia 9.173         -0.352          0.021          -0.175       0.141        R=-0.21
Growth       (1.24)     (-0.35)         (0.73)         (-0.72)      (0.54)       DW=1.22
             [0.215]    [0.720]         [0.460]        [0.469]      [0.590]
Thailand     -1.250     1.108           -0.078         0.795        0.117        R=0.32
Growth       (-0.66)    (3.88)          (-1.68)        (3.40)       (0.70)       DW=1.00
             [0.508]    [0.000]***      [0.092]*       [0.001]***   [0.482]
Malaysia     2.690      0.888           0.102          0.061        0.008        R=0.16
Growth       (1.30)     (3.06)          (2.42)         (0.24)       (0.06)       DW=1.24
             [0.193]    [0.002]***      [0.015]**      [0.810]      [0.951]
Philippine 0.953        0.270           -0.012         0.497        -0.388       R=-0.18
s            (0.25)     (0.37)          (-0.16)        (1.09)       (-0.68)      DW=0.95
Growth       [0.803]    [0.710]         [0.875]        [0.276]      [0.493]

Note: YenChg is the percent change of the yen rate change from year (t-1) to year (t).
Japangr is the growth rate of Japan, and Usgr is the growth rat of the United States.




                                          40
Table 6,
Import from file “table2”




                            41
Table 7: Cross-border Bank Lending
Panel A. June 1997
  International Bank Lending to Selected Emerging markets, June
1997
    End of Total By                 By      nationality      of Total/ Short/
       June liabil maturity lending banks                       GDP(96) Foreig
       1997 ity       Short: Up Japan US              Europe            n
            (US$mi to 1 yr                                              Reserv
            l)                                                          e
China         57922         30137        32%       5%      48%     0.071 0.234
Indonesia 58726             34661        39%       8%      38%     0.265 1.629
Korea       103432          70182        23%      10%      35%     0.213 2.106
Malaysia      28820         16268        36%       8%      44%     0.293 0.609
Philippin 14115                8293      15%      20%      48%     0.162 0.726
es
Taiwan        25163         21966        12%      10%      57%     0.092 0.243
Thailand      69382         45567        54%       6%      28%     0.381 1.411
ASIA        389441         242273        32%       8%      40%
Argentina 44445             23891         4%      23%      59%     0.158 1.303
Brazil        71118         44223         7%      23%      45%     0.096 0.772
Chile         17573            7615       8%      23%      51%     0.146 0.447
Colombia      16999            6698       8%      20%      59%     0.105 0.674
Mexico        62072         28226         7%      28%      43%     0.185 1.187
Latin       251086         131304         6%      24%      50%
America
Panel B. Comparison of 1993 and 1997
              Total liability/    Short liability/ Japan      US share Europe
                   GDP           Foreign Reserve share (%)    (%)       Share (%)
             1993      1997      1993      1997    1993 1997 1993 1997 1993 1997
China          0.047 0.071         0.509 0.234 40% 32%          2%   5% 36% 48%
Indonesi       0.192 0.265         1.622 1.629 55% 39%          8%   8% 27% 38%
a
Korea          0.119 0.213         1.397 2.106 30% 23% 10% 10% 33% 35%
Malaysia       0.166 0.293         0.210 0.609 41% 36% 10%           8% 34% 44%
Philippi       0.108 0.162         0.499 0.726 17% 15% 44% 20% 32% 48%
nes
Taiwan         0.069 0.092         0.175 0.243 27% 12% 16% 10% 41% 57%
Thailand       0.207 0.381         0.733 1.411 55% 54%          8%   6% 24% 28%
ASIA                                               40% 32%      9%   8% 34% 40%
Argentin       0.107   0.158       1.193   1.303    7%    4%   32%  23% 49% 59%
a
Brazil         0.118 0.096         0.930 0.772 17%        7% 17% 23% 43% 45%
Chile          0.227 0.146         0.557 0.447      9%    8% 33% 23% 42% 51%
Colombia       0.140 0.105         0.433 0.674 17%        8% 28% 20% 31% 59%
Mexico         0.138   0.185       1.029   1.187    7%    7%   35% 28% 42% 43%
Latin                                              10%    6% 28% 24% 45% 50%
America
Notes:   Europe  includes   Austria,  Belgium,   France,  Germany,   Italy,   Luxembourg,
Netherlands, Spain, UK. Total liability/GDP and Short liability/Foreign reserves are
June 1993 and June 1997; the country share are December 1993 and June 1997.
Source: Bank for International Settlements, “The Maturity, Sectoral and Nationality
Distribution of International Bank Lending, First Half 1997”, Basle, January 1998.




                                           42
Table 8: Korea’s External Liability, Korea, Residents’ external liabilities
      Short term liabilities                         Long term liabilities                                 Grand
      Korean      Foreign     Korean       Total     Korean       Foreign     Korean      Public   Total   total
      Banks       bank        corporati              banks        bank        corporati   sector
                  branches    ons                                 branches    ons
De.    65.2        12.8        22.0        100.0     41.5          3.2         13.6        2.4     60.7    160.7
96
De.    37.4        17.2        25.6         80.2     40.4          3.8        17.6        11.0     72.8    153.0
97
Source: Bank of Korea (quote from, Nikkei, January 29, 1998)



 Korea, External Liabilities to International Banks, by length of maturities
                   Total             Maturities       Maturities       Maturities
                                     Up to and Over 1 & up Over 2 years
                                     equal to 1 to 2 years
                                     year
June 1996           88,027            62,332           3,438            13,434
Dec 1996            99,953            67,506           4,107            15,884
June 1997          103,432            70,182           4,139            16,366
Source: Bank for International Settlements, “The Maturity, Sectoral and nationality
Distribution of International Bank Lending,” Basle, January 1998.

 Korea, External Liabilities to International Banks, by lending bank nationalities
          Total     Japan US            Grmny Franc UK               Belg.      Neth.
                                                 e
Jun 96 88,027 22,512            9,582     8,529    6,994     4,140    2,312      1,651
Dec 96 99,953 24,324            9,355     9,977    8,887     5,643    3,731      1,926
Jun 97 103,43        23,732     9,964    10,794 10,070       6,064    3,899      1,736
          2
Source: Bank for International Settlements, “The Maturity, Sectoral and nationality
Distribution of International Bank Lending,” Basle, January 1998.




                                                         43
  Figure 1.



                                            Figure 1: Capit al Flows to Asia: All Types
80
               China
               Thailand
60
               Indonesia
40             Philippines
20             Malaysia
 0
      1976

             1977

                    1978
                           1979
                                  1980

                                         1981
                                                1982

                                                       1983
                                                              1984
                                                                     1985

                                                                             1986
                                                                                    1987
                                                                                           1988

                                                                                                  1989
                                                                                                         1990

                                                                                                                1991

                                                                                                                       1992
                                                                                                                              1993

                                                                                                                                     1994
                                                                                                                                            1995
                                                                                                                                                   1996

                                                                                                                                                          1997
-20




  Notes: The sum of lines 78bed, 78bgd, and 78bid of the countries.
  Source: IMF, International Financial Statistics, CD ROM, September 1998




                                                                            44
Figure 2 Capital Inflow Phase, 1990-95

External Factors
       Low interest rate                 Yen appreciation
=================================================================


 Portfolio inflows       Japan FDI increase Asian Exports increase



                                         Strong Growth



                      Optimistic Expectations     Import Increase




                                   >
Capital Inflows         Exchange Rate Stability     Current Account
Deficit

                  >

           Foreign Reserves Increase




                                    45
Fig. 2 (con’d) Capital Outflow Phase, 1996-98

External Factors

       Still Low interest rate          Yen depreciation
=================================================================

Portfolio inflows
decrease/outflow        Japan FDI slow down Asian Exports plummet




                                           Slow Growth



                       pessimistic Expectations Import Contraction




Capital outflow           Currency Deprecation           Current Account
balance

              contagion
                         other countries

             speculative attack

           Foreign Reserves decrease




                                      46
Figure 3: FDI from Japan to Asia and the yen/dollar Rate


                                                                           FDI from Japan
       Fig.3 FD Iand the Yen/D ollar
                                                                           Yen- Dollar Rate

  80000                                                                                   350
                                                                                          300
  60000                                                                                   250
                                                                                          200
  40000
                                                                                          150
  20000                                                                                   100
                                                                                          50
       0                                                                                  0
           1976

                  1978

                         1980

                                 1982

                                        1984

                                               1986

                                                      1988

                                                             1990

                                                                    1992

                                                                            1994

                                                                                   1996
   EXCEL file,"FDI from Japan"




                                                      47
                                                                                                                                    Korea
 F ig. 4 Export ($V alue) G row th R ates 81:1-97:2                                                                                 Hong Kong
 50
                                                                                                                                    Singapore
                                                                                                                                    Taipei, China
 40

 30

 20

 10

  0
      1981
             1981
                    1982
                           1983
                                  1984
                                         1984
                                                1985
                                                       1986
                                                              1987
                                                                     1987
                                                                            1988
                                                                                   1989
                                                                                          1990
                                                                                                 1990
                                                                                                        1991
                                                                                                               1992
                                                                                                                      1993
                                                                                                                             1993
                                                                                                                                    1994
                                                                                                                                           1995
                                                                                                                                                  1996
                                                                                                                                                         1996
-10

-20




                                                                            48
                                                                                           Thailand
F ig. 5 Export ($V alue) G row th R ates: 81:1-97:2                                        Indonesia
                                                                                           Philippines

50                                                                                         M alaysia




30

10
       1981
              1982
                     1983
                            1984
                                   1986
                                          1987
                                                 1988
                                                        1989
                                                               1991
                                                                      1992
                                                                             1993
                                                                                    1994
                                                                                              1996
                                                                                                       1997
-10

-30




                                                  49
50
                                            Notes:


1   An influence of the U.S. interest rate on global capital flows to the emerging markets
was pointed out in the Mexican crisis of 1994-95. The declining interest rate in the U.S.
from 1992 to 1994 prompted a large capital flows to Latin America and other emerging
market economies. The rapid interest rate hike in the United States from February
1994 to the summer of 1994 is pointed out to be one of the many reasons for capital
outflows from Mexico, which finally caused the currency devaluation in December
1994.


2   Japanese manufacturing companies shifted their productions also to the North
America partly to avoid trade conflicts and to prepare for NAFTA.


3   Precise definitions of foreign direct investment are different from country to country.
Some countries include reinvestment, others do not; Some countries count both the
foreign investment and domestic partners’ contributions in the case of joint ventures;
most countries are on the reporting basis, while China is on the disbursement basis;
and for Singapore and Malaysia, only manufacturing sectors are included, while for
other countries, all sectors are included. For precise definitions, see the comparative
table of definitions in Economic Planning Agency (1998, p. 80). Therefore, numbers are
not exactly comparable across countries.


4   These numbers do not necessarily agree with host countries’ data presented in Table
2, Panel B. Possible reasons are mentioned in the preceding footnote.


5   The Asian countries in this graph includes, four NIEs, ASEAN-4, China, and other
broadly defined Asian countries. The category follows the “Asia” in the Ministry of
Finance data source.


6   For an overview of theory of foreign direct investment and its surge in the 1980s, see
Graham and Krugman (1991, 1993). A seminal work on Japanese FDI is Kojima
(1978).
7 Belderbos, et al. examined the determinants of local contents among 157 Japanese
electronics manufacturing subsidiaries in Asia. Local contents, the sum of in-house
value added and local outsourcing, are considered to be a key for benefits to host
countries, as they yield technological transfers. They found that local contents are


                                              51
lower in greenfield subsidiaries; subsidiaries of R&D intensive parents; and export
oriented subsidiaries in ASEAN-4 and China. In contrast, local contents are higher in
export oriented subsidiaries located in the NIEs; those subsidiaries that have a higher
domestic sales ratio; and subsidiaries of a vertical keiretsu firm with strong intra-
keiretsu supplier relationships. Urata and Kawai attempts to measure the intra-firm
spillovers by comparing total factor productivity changes in the parent and
subsidiaries. They found that capability to absorb technologies, reflected in educational
level and in experiences in industrial production, in the host countries is very
important for them to absorb technological transfer from foreign firms, both in the
forms of intra-firm technological transfer and local technological transfers.

8 The major channel to growth from the exchange rate, the Japanese growth and the
US growth is considered to be through exports. The East Asian Miracle (The World
Bank, 1993) was very much a story of tremendous export growth. In the 1980s and the
first half of the 1990s, many economies in Asia achieved sustained export growth of 20
percent or more. Export promotion, instead of import protection, was a successful
incentive. All Asian countries, which used to be an agrarian economies only decades
ago, rapidly modernized manufacturing firms, and started to export more sophisticated
manufactured goods. See Ito (1998) for detailed analysis of Asian export deceleration in
1995-96.

9   The IMF contributed only $4 billion for the package, because it is 500% of the quota of
Thailand. The 500% was considered to be the limit at that time, due to the precedent of
Mexican package.
10   I owe Dani Rodrik for suggesting me some of policy implications included in this
section.




                                             52
