1 Introduction

1.1    Technology, wage inequality and the demand for skilled labor
        Over the past two decades, wage inequality has grown significantly in the United
States. The total effect has been large, as the gap between wages at the 75th percentile of
the distribution and the 25th has increased by nearly 50 percentage points.1 The total
effect has also been widespread, shifting relative wages in the top, middle, and bottom of
the income distribution. The main cause of the growth in inequality appears to be a shift
in the demand for workers of different kinds. Demand is growing for workers with
exceptional talent, training, autonomy, and management ability much faster than for
workers in low and middle-wage occupations.
         Parts of this shift in labor demand are explained by such broader economic
patterns as globalization, sectoral shifts in employment and changes in labor market
institutions. Yet these forces appear too small to explain the breadth and depth of the
shift, leaving a large residual shift (Krugman and Lawrence, 1993). Economists have
concluded that this residual must reflect a "skill-biased technical change" in the way
goods and services are produced in the economy (Griliches, 1969; Berndt, Morrison and
Rosenblum, 1992; Berman, Bound and Griliches, 1994). The nature of this technical
change are still not well-understood, but its size, breadth, and timing have led many
observers to link it to the largest and most widespread technical change of the current era,
information technology (see, e.g., Autor, Katz, and Krueger, 1997 and references
therein).
         In this paper, we examine the firm-level evidence for a specific theory of how
information technology (IT) could cause skill-biased technical change. In particular, we
argue that the effects of IT on labor demand involve far more than simple automation and
substitution. Instead, we highlight the central role of IT-enabled organizational change in



         1
            Murphy and Welch (1993) show percentiles of the wage distribution of prime-age males: the
interquartile range has increased from about 1.75 to 1 to about 2.25 to 1. More extreme percentiles have
moved even farther from the median, so that the entire distribution of wages is widening over time.
IT, Organization and Labor Demand                                                                 Page 2


a cluster of complementary and mutually reinforcing innovations that X change work
fundamentally.
        Employers adopt IT-based production processes to improve service quality or
increase efficiencies and thereby increase profits. In either case, effective use of IT
involves changes to organization. Examination of the form of the organizational changes
suggests a theory of why IT-based technical change is skill-biased (Bresnahan (1997)).
First in service-producing sectors like finance, then in the service parts of goods-
producing industries, firms have found ways to take advantage of new production
processes that use IT intensively (Barras (1990)). They have found it very difficult to
profit by just replacing other factors with computers and telecommunications gear while
making the same products. Often, the benefit of the new production process is new
services or improved service quality. Further, the new production process involves
global changes to the organization.2 These often involve replacing low-skill human
workers (automation), while passing on to humans an increased variety of tasks related to
the higher level of service. A similar pattern holds for attempts to achieve IT-based
efficiencies in production. Only with organizational change, typically of a kind that
involves complementarity with high skill as well as substitutability for low skill human
work, do employers get the benefit they seek from IT.
        These observations lead us to an analysis based on a cluster of complementarities
that we see as at the heart of recent changes in labor demand. Intensive use of IT, higher
service levels for customers, and organizational change all go together, and together call
for higher-skilled labor. These form a mutually reinforcing cluster of inventions for
employers. Critically, the organizational changes associated with IT-based service
improvements are skill-using. The key skill-biased technical change of the present can
thus be seen to consist not only of IT, but of the complete cluster of associated
complements. The "technical" side of this cluster is the large, ongoing declines in IT
prices and large, ongoing improvements in IT performance. It is tightly linked to labor

        2
          Among the first to predict this effect were Leavitt, and Whisler (1958). There are by now many
papers which illustrate the role of IT-enabled organizational change at varying levels of detail, notably
Attewell and Rule (1984), Crowston and Malone (1988), Malone, Yates and Benjamin (1987), Milgrom
and Roberts (1990), Brynjolfsson, Renshaw and van Alstyne (1997), Bresnahan and Greenstein (1997), and
IT, Organization and Labor Demand                                                                 Page 3


demand through its organizational side. Investments in the complete cluster, including the
dollars, time, and effort associated with the organizational change are likely to be
substantially larger than the IT investments themselves, even if they are more difficult to
quantify.

1.2    Aggregate data suggest IT is behind the labor demand shifts
        Broad-based studies of the labor market are consistent with the hypothesis of an
IT-based demand shift.
        An important body of research looks at wage determination at the level of
individual workers or jobs. A wide variety of studies have examined individual worker
wage equations (surveyed in Gottschalk, 1997). Based on large data sets, such as the
Current Population Survey, these studies predict wages with both observables – education
and experience – and unobservables – the residual in the wage equation. The observables
are interpreted as proxies for skills. Changes in their coefficients over time are interpreted
as changes in the prices of those skills. When the distribution of the residual spreads out,
it is interpreted as an increase in the price of an unobserved skill. The important results
from these studies are that the relative demand for more highly educated workers is rising
(probably related to general cognitive skill), that the relative demand for more
experienced workers is rising (likely specific knowledge or managerial/people skills) and
that the relative demand for "residual" highly skilled workers (skills not captured by
education or experience) is rising as well.
        A related literature classifies occupations by skills and examines the wages and
employment changes for work thus classified (see, e.g., Howell and Wolff, 1991). These
studies also find considerable support for the view that relative demand is shifting toward
cognitive and interpersonal interaction skills.
        The difficulty with both these bodies of empirical inquiry is the same. While they
can reveal the effects of changes in labor demand, they do not examine the demanding
unit. They look at the demanded unit – the worker or the job. Accordingly, their ability
to examine alternative stories of demand is quite limited.


Brynjolfsson and Hitt (1997). It has also been an important theme in the management literature (Davenport
and Short (1990) and Hammer, (1990)).
IT, Organization and Labor Demand                                                                   Page 4


         Another body of studies gets closer to the demanding unit by looking at
industries. Here there is also a very clear finding. The IT-intensive industries, have seen
the demand shift earlier (Wolff (1996)) and to a larger extent (Autor, Katz and Krueger
(1997)) than other industries. This finding appears to be robust to how computer-
intensity is measured, as looking at investments in all IT capital and looking at the
fraction of workers in an industry that use a computer or terminal yield comparable
results. The finding is particularly strong in services.
         An industry may be simply too wide a unit to capture the relevant flows of
causation. Industries contain variety across firms in IT-use strategies. Industries contain
variety in service and product strategies. Industries contain variety in organizations of
work. Our study, focussing on the firm level behavior, is pointed more closely at the
relevant unit of demand.

1.3    Outline of the paper
        In the next Section, we use a simple production function framework to explain our
view of the relevant complementarities. We then derive the implications for labor
demand in Section Three and summarize the data we use to test our theory in Section
Four. Section Five presents our findings regarding the correlations among the variables,
firm productivity and managers' opinions about the effects of IT. In Section Six we
derive some implications and Section Seven we summarize our conclusions.

2 What does "Computerization" mean? The Case of White-
  collar Bureaucracies
         The key to our argument is that computerizing a firm involves far more than
installing computers. Typically, success requires that the firm's work organization and
the nature of it's services and products must also be reinvented in myriad large and small
ways. As a result, the types of workers employed and the skills of those workers are
likely to change.
         In this section, we take up the implementation of computer business systems for
labor demand in white-collar bureaucracies.3 There are two stages. First, we summarize

         3
           Many of the same implications are present in blue-collar contexts (see for instance the case
study of “Macromed” in Brynjolfsson, Renshaw and van Alstyne, 1997), but for brevity we do not
IT, Organization and Labor Demand                                                                       Page 5


our overall view of the complementarities. This revolves around the graphical
presentation in Figure 1. We then discuss the specifics of the relationship between IT-
enabled organizational change and the shift in labor demand patterns.
         Computer business systems change white-collar work. One way they change it is
by organizing, routinizing and regularizing tasks that people- and paper-based systems
did more intuitively but more haphazardly. They also change work by changing the
nature of the firm’s output, especially in the service sectors, and in the white-collar
activities of the goods sectors. Computer-based production leads to higher levels of
service or even whole new services and products. The labor-demand impact comes at the
firm level, as computer business systems form the modern production process for many
service industries (and for the service functions of other industries.) As computers have
grown cheaper, and especially as computer networking has improved, computer-based
production has spread more and more widely through white-collar work.

2.1     IT, Organizational Innovations and Improved Services are Mutual
        Complements
          An emerging view of the way IT comes to be used in companies is represented in
the bottom half of Figure 1. This view, which has considerable support in earlier work,4
emphasizes complementarity among three distinct kinds of technical change. The three
complements are:
      • Cheaper, more powerful IT Capital
      • Organizational Change
      • New Products, Services or Quality

         The theory we will test is that the cluster of three complements at the bottom of
Figure 1 represents, together, a form of skill-biased technical change. Implementing all
three of these forms of technical change together transforms companies and leads to
substantial changes in labor demand by type. We need not make any assumption that one

emphasize them. A very substantial portion of work in modern economies is in purely white-collar
industries, such as service industries, or in the white-collar functions of goods-producing industries. We
focus particular attention on the parts of bureaucracies that are associated with transactions. These are
associated not only with a great deal of the IT-related technical change of the past, but also, as electronic
commerce grows more important, with the IT-related technical progress of the future.
IT, Organization and Labor Demand                                                              Page 6


of these three uniquely causes the other, only that they tend systematically to go together.
Since all three involve substantial amounts of invention, the complementarity arises in
the long run. Taken together, the three forms of technical change are the cluster of driver
technologies for labor demand we study.




        4
          See for example Applegate, Cash and Mills (1988), Barras (1990), Davenport and Short (1990),
Levy and Murnane (1996), Malone and Rockart (1991), Milgrom and Roberts (1990), Orlikowski (1992),
Scott Morton (1991), Simon (1973), Zuboff (1988).
        IT, Organization and Labor Demand                                                           Page 7


                                        Figure 1: Causal Flows in Our Framework




                                            Demand for Human Capital (HK)
                                            •   Education Mix
                                            •   Occupation Mix
                                            •   Skills Mix
                                            •   Training Mix
                                            •   Recruitment and Retention
                                            •   Wages Offered




                                     (E’)             (E)                      (E”)




Workplace Organization (WO)                                                 Information Technology Drivers (IT)
• Authority and Hierarchy                                                   • Falling Costs of IT Capital
• Task content of operational work                           (C)            • Rising Capabilities of IT Capital e.g.,
• Cognitive content of managerial /                                           new networked platforms
  professional work                                                         • Legacy Applications, Data and
                                                                              Systems




                              (C')
                                                                                        (C")




                                     Organization's Strategic Goals
                                     •      New Products and Services
                                     •      New Quality Levels
                                     •      New Capabilities
                                     •      New Efficiencies
IT, Organization and Labor Demand                                                     Page 8




2.2   A Production Function Framework
       The next step moves us toward specificity by having a simple framework for the
inputs and outputs of white-collar work. We show our framework in a descriptive way in
Figure 2 and in a more analytical way in Figure 3.

        Figure 2: The Production Function Framework
Detailed Inputs                Detailed Production                    Detailed
                               Process                                Outputs
Labor of several types         Tasks for each input                   Services

IT capital of several          Job responsibilities &
types                    =>    computer programs               =>     Transactions

Other capital goods of         Organizational structure of            Control
several types                  inputs, hierarchy, etc.

        The view we take of the production function is one that has a detailed presentation
of inputs, processes, and outputs. Labor and capital of several different types are the
inputs. This gives us the opportunity to represent our fundamental long-run driver,
declines in the price of IT capital goods. It also gives us the opportunity to represent our
fundamental dependent variable, demand for labor of different skill levels. The detailed
production process and detailed outputs play a different role. They permit us to state a
specific theory about the mechanisms by which changes in the price of IT affect the
demand for labor in the intermediate run. They also offer some further dependent
variables tied to the mechanisms of the theory.
        The production of detailed outputs is particularly important here, and illustrates
why we take a detailed view of the production process. A white collar bureaucracy's
outputs do not only consist of what the bureaucracy literally does – the services it makes
for customers or the transactions it processes with customers or suppliers. Above and
beyond the simple completion of its task, a bureaucracy produces managerial control of
the task.
        This may be illustrated by simple examples. Consider a department with
responsibility for accounts receivable. What does it produce? It produces, in a literal
IT, Organization and Labor Demand                                                                 Page 9


sense, transactions in which the firm collects money and a record of those collections. If
we think literally about the "service quality" associated with those, it suggests collecting
most of the money owed the firm, not annoying customer/debtors too much, and so on.
A broader view includes the firms' control of its receivables and of the collection process
in the output. Can the firm identify problem accounts for special attention? In allocating
new trade credit associated with new sales, can the firm discriminate between rapid
payers and slow ones? Can it do this unobtrusively and quickly?
        Both the narrow and the broad view of output suggest a changed role with
computerization. Better record keeping clearly makes it possible to collect each bill once
and only once. Combined with some changes in policies and procedures, it also makes it
possible for salespeople to know the credit status of an account while in the process of
making a sale.
        More generally, these examples reveal two things about the IT-based production
process from a very operational perspective. First, as IT has grown cheaper and more
powerful, the number and kind of white-collar processes it can automate in this way has
grown. More and more interactions in the business world are undertaken with this kind
of computer support. That means more and more substitution out of certain kinds of
human effort. Computers have been especially successful in routine, repetitive tasks,
which are typically those that have not been highly rewarded historically. Second,
computerizing tasks makes it much easier to accumulate data, both intentionally and as a
by-product of other tasks.5 A firm can decide to retain a systematic record of all its
interactions with a customer, or all of a given employee's interactions with customers, for
example. This is a much lower-cost decision given that the interactions are mediated
through IT. As more and more interactions are so mediated, the complexity of record
keeping and record analysis can grow. This offers opportunities for the new uses of
human intelligence.




        5
           The introduction of bar code scanners to supermarkets might seem to be primarily a way to save
labor by cashiers. However, this benefit is vastly outweighed by the benefit of analyzing scanner-derived
product data to improve inventory control, supply-chain management, marketing and promotion programs,
and pricing strategies.
IT, Organization and Labor Demand                                                       Page 10


         Figure 3: Short Run Production Function Notation
Detailed                          Detailed                           Detailed Outputs
Inputs                            Production
                                  Process
L 1 . . . . LM                                                       X
                  =>              Indexed by T, S       =>
K1 . . . . KM                                                        Q

         Moving to Figure 3, we show the way we will represent the detailed outputs and
inputs. L and K are vectors of labor and capital types, respectively. X measures the
quantity of various services or transactions, and Q represents the service level or degree
of control over those transactions that the bureaucracy offers. T and S index the
technologies used in production and the organizational structure of production,
respectively. These are the things usually left in the black box.
         The link to factor demand is via a short run production function:


                 0 = F (L1 . . . . LM , K1 . . . . KM, X; Q, T, S)


         That is, the detailed labor and capital requirements are determined by the level of
output, output qualities, and the technology and organizational structure used in the firm.
This is a short-run production function because it conditions on the organizational
variables fixed by the firm in the intermediate run.
         Our analysis will focus on the short run and the intermediate run. The short run
has Q, T, and S fixed, and we look at the relationship between the capital (IT) and labor
factors of production. In the intermediate run, Q, T, and S can be improved by the firm,
perhaps because of the complementarities associated with (C'), (C"), (C) and so on. The
relationship between the two runs and Figure 1 is as follows. In the short run, Q, T, and
S are fixed, and only flow of causation (E") is available to change labor demand. In the
intermediate run, organizational structure and service are flexible, so that flows of
causation (E) and (E') also come into play. We believe that both the short and
intermediate run causal flows can be seen in our data. We are less certain that they can
be distinguished.
IT, Organization and Labor Demand                                                       Page 11


       It is worth noting at this stage that this framework is designed to look at the
individual firm. Further organizational changes associated with changes in the boundary
of the firm will not be fully captured in firm data, nor will they enter our framework. We
conjecture that we are, as a result, leaving out one of the important flows of causation
from IT-based organizational change to labor demand. We will miss, both theoretically
and empirically, much of the impact of the creation of new specialty firms employing
highly paid workers, for example.

3 Implications of the Theory for Labor Demand

3.1   Limited substitution
       Computer business systems involve the regularization and routinization of white-
collar tasks. Simple, repetitive tasks are far more amenable to regularization and
routinization than more complex and idiosyncratic ones. The result has been the
systematic substitution of computer decisionmaking for human decisionmaking in
clerical (and similar bureaucratic) work. Decisions that were once reached by humans in
a paper- and people-based system are now reached by software. Advances in artificial
intelligence notwithstanding, the scope of this substitution has been limited. Simple
decisions, closely related to individual transactions or other operational actions, have
been most amenable to computerization. More complex and cognitively demanding
work, such as that of managers and professionals, has proved remarkably difficult to
automate with computers. Similarly, tasks that require judgment, creativity and frequent
exceptions are much more difficult to computerize than well-defined and repetitive tasks.
Computer automation of white-collar work has been correspondingly limited in its scope,
affecting demand for clerks and expediters far more than for managers and professionals.
       This limited substitution is related to all three of the causal arrows (E), (E'), (E")
in Figure 1. First, but probably least important empirically, is the narrow flow of
causation from the use of IT capital alone to substitution out of low-cognitive skill labor;
this is (E"). In the short run, holding Q and S constant, it is sometimes possible to
literally replace people with IT, holding other aspects of the organizational system
constant. A telephone-switching computer replaces a telephone operator in a variety of
tasks, an automatic teller machine replaces a bank teller, and documents once organized
IT, Organization and Labor Demand                                                     Page 12


and filed by clerks are instead handled entirely by machine. Yet these examples – and
even they are imperfect, involving considerable change in Q, and S as well as T – are
rare.
        Far more important is substitution of computer for human decisionmaking in the
intermediate run, with corresponding changes in T, Q, and S. This reflects that fact that
job design and the allocation of tasks to workers combine tasks which use similar
information sets, or which it is efficient to monitor together, which have similar skill
requirements, or which should be performed geographically close together (Holmstrom
and Milgrom (1991), Jensen and Meckling (1992), Williamson (1979)). Yet, computers
have very different strengths and weaknesses than humans. As a rule, computerization
significantly changes at least one, and more often all, of these factors influencing job
design. As a result, successful computerization also requires a rethinking of how work is
organized and the types of workers required.
        This can perhaps be most simply seen in a homey example from Accounts
Receivable (AR). Almost everyone has heard of how early applications lacked the
commonsense of human clerks, for example sending bills for $0.00. A computer needs to
be told not to send a bill for $0.00, whereas (many) clerks could be relied upon to do this
without explicit instruction. After a while, the software system in an AR application
improves and the system stops making these silly mistakes. Or the company adopts an
organizational change, such as a human clerk who can override the system when it is
obviously doing something silly. Improvements in T – better software systems – made
the computer a better substitute for a clerk. Improvements in S – such as using the fact
that the clerk's actions are now well recorded to permit autonomy, or using the computer's
memory to permit any of a wide variety of clerks to deal with a particular account in a
teamwork fashion – make the clerk plus the computer an improved production process.
These improved rules draw on the very distinct capabilities of IT and humans. They can
only effect labor demand with some invention by the firm. The invention is as much of
improved work organization as it is of improved software.
        This tendency for improvements in T and S to offer opportunities to substitute out
of L into K is quite general. There are some common-sense rules in any bureaucracy.
IT, Organization and Labor Demand                                                               Page 13


Where common sense can be reduced to rules, or where the business can get by with a
little less common sense, or where common sense can be reorganized into a human-
override, IT systems can be made to substitute for simple human decisionmaking. It is
especially true where S changes.
        There are, however, strict limits to this substitution, for all its power. As a result,
some types of work are affected far more than others.

3.2    Increased demand for cognitive skills
         The IT-related cluster of innovations is not merely a substitute for low cognitive
skill labor. It is also a complement for high cognitive skill labor. These two effects of
computerization combine to change the demand for skilled labor. In this subsection, we
look at the more complex causal relationship between the IT-related cluster and high
cognitive skill workers such as managers and professionals.

3.2.1 Direct Causal Flows
      There is an important causal flow directly from IT capital to use of very skilled
technical workers of an (E") form. Computer departments themselves employ highly
skilled people. So, to, does the computer services industry. (This industry is an
extension of company computer departments. It offers custom programming, consulting,
and systems integration to user companies.) Finally, there is a related effect on demand
in the computer hardware, software, and networking industries themselves. In the US,
though not to any very large extent in other countries, this represents a substantial
demand for cognitive skill. Aggregating all these flows will not, however, amount to a
very large fraction of employment (Bresnahan, 1997). We need to look elsewhere for a
substantial complementarity between the IT-based cluster and high cognitive skill.
        Another direct causal flow of the (E") variety has been widely discussed but is
likely to be of limited importance. This is the direct use of personal computers (PCs) by
individual workers in organizations. By far the largest single use of PCs is for word
processing.6 Anecdotes about excessive font-futzing and lost data notwithstanding,
typists and secretaries have clearly become much more productive as a result. However,

        6
         The statements about the relative importance of various PC applications are based on data from
Computer Intelligence Infocorp.
IT, Organization and Labor Demand                                                     Page 14


this is an implausible source of wage dispersion. Meanwhile, managers and professionals
who do their own typing may also become somewhat more productive with PCs, but this
is also an unlikely explanation for their higher relative wages. Similar arguments apply
to the other dominant PC applications, spreadsheets and graphics. However, a minority
of more specialized applications, such as PC-based computer aided design and project
management, are more promising candidates for skill complementarity. The growing
organizational uses of PCs, which can affect the wages of even those managers who do
not literally use computers, are likely to be especially important (see further discussion in
Bresnahan, 1997).

3.2.2 Causal Flows Through Organizational Change
      Many effective uses of computers make use of IT's comparative advantage in
doing simple tasks quickly, and in remembering a large volume of simple information
and recalling it rapidly. Many times, these features of computers are most effective when
combined with human intelligence. For example, a typical "analytical" application
consists almost entirely of complex data storage and recall. Rapid, detailed memory by
computers is often a complement for human judgement in decisionmaking. In our
accounts-receivable example, the computer may quickly report a summary of a particular
customer's payment history. That is an "analytical" application. As a result, firms like
Capital One (a major credit card issuer) are hiring more MBAs and even Ph.D.s to help
them analyze customer data that they collect so easily with IT. Human judgement might
have the final say in whether a particular account's value to the firm warrants extending
trade credit in particular circumstances or whether a new type of product or service is
likely to be successful with a particular customer segment.
       A related kind of effective use of the computer's detail and completeness turns the
"analytical" lens on workers and departments within the firm. Detailed reports on the
success – measured by anything the computer system knows systematically – of
individual workers or departments are a kind of management tool that has grown cheaper
with the falling costs of computerization. In Figure 1, this kind of increased demand for
highly skilled labor shows up as an (E) flow, that is, one that involves changes both in
computerization and in organization.
IT, Organization and Labor Demand                                                     Page 15


       This complementarity between machine and human capabilities leads to a wide
variety of organizational structures, but some specific ones are worth mentioning here.
One is the information-enabled decentralized worker. In the most extreme form, this
involves use of a worker who is supported by analytical applications that let her know
everything she needs to know to accomplish her task. She is in turn monitored by a
computer analytical application that permits her superiors to monitor her performance
quickly and efficiently. Less extreme examples vary in a number of ways. They might
have the human unit that is supported and monitored be a team rather than an individual
worker. They might use only one of the support/monitoring flows of information.
       Note that this tendency toward computer-based reorganization calls for several
very different changes in worker capabilities. The first is cognitive. Individual workers
or teams supported by analytical applications means must be able to interpret the
information that is presented. Often, this involves bridging from the quantitative data
provided by computers to complex decisions involving many factors. In a wide variety
of applications, computers have made information vastly cheaper and more abundant.
This increases the demand for humans who can process information processing in ways
that machines cannot. Indeed, it creates an information-overload bottleneck. Simon
(1973) noted this not long after the first widespread use of computers in business that
"The scarce resource is not information, it is the processing capacity to attend to
information. Attention is the chief bottleneck in organizational activity, and the
bottleneck becomes narrower and narrower as we move to the tops of organizations."
Thus, in addition to a general increase demand for human cognitive skills,
computerization can lead to attempts to bypass the managerial bottleneck via new
organizational forms which favor increased lateral communication and coordination.
       A second set of human capabilities associated with this kind of organizational
change has to do with autonomy more than with any specific cognitive skill. Monitoring
technologies in general are useful for moving responsibility and authority. The
monitoring technology associated with computer-based work appears to be systematically
related to incentives, at least long run incentives, which are more closely tied to
measurable performance. Not all workers come with equal tolerance for or capability to
IT, Organization and Labor Demand                                                                 Page 16


respond to these kinds of incentives. The change in the mode of supervision calls for
changed talents.
        A third set of human capabilities associated with this kind of organizational
change involves the skills associated with dealing with customers and suppliers,
influencing teammates and colleagues and inspiring and coaching subordinates. More
generally, they involve providing the people skills which computers lack.
        Additional complementarities of the (E) form, i.e., involving the three-way
complementarity with organization, IT, and product change, arise from inventive
dynamics of computer-based organizations. As we emphasized above, effective use of
computer systems involves a great deal of invention by the using firms. It is a complex
activity to discover and implement ways to gain from computers’capabilities. As
computers have become more powerful, more flexible and more user-friendly, the largest
and growing fraction of this inventive activity occurs outside of the programmers’job
function. It is now the duty of those who use computers, directly and indirectly, in large
ways and in small ways. In particular, this puts pressure on managers' and professionals'
cognitive capabilities.
        Adding more complexity, the most computer-intensive businesses typically use
computers for improved customer service and as the basis for new and improved services.
Invention of the new products those processes will deliver and of the human side of the
delivery mechanism are very difficult cognitive tasks. They call for managers who can
think of ways to take advantage of the new production processes offered by computing.
This calls for new cognitive skills, having a deep understanding of one’s own
organization and one’s customers’needs.7 This raises the demand for high levels of
cognitive skills in managers and professionals.
        Some of these new demands on highly skilled workers can call for a great deal of
human capability. It can be quite difficult to think about one's customers, for example,
both through the lens of knowing them and the more analytical lens of seeing their

        7
           Bartel and Lichtenberg (1987) suggest that high levels of cognitive skills may be particularly
important in creating and adapting to change, notably in implementing new technology. The managerial
side of computer-based production processes is an excellent example of this story. The constant
improvements in computer technology mean that organizations that use IT intensely have this demand for
high levels of cognitive skill on a standing basis, not just for a single transition.
IT, Organization and Labor Demand                                                          Page 17


behavior systematically in databases. Once the firm knows new and interesting things
about its customers it must invent new ways to interact with them.
       As more and more of business is mediated through computers, there are more and
more opportunities for managers and professionals to undertake two activities. The first
is research-like, combining IT-based quantitative information about customers or
employees with deep knowledge of the business. The second is designing organizations,
products, and so on, taking advantage of the new research findings. This, too, combines
hard quantitative skills with deep business knowledge. To the extent that the new
organization or product will be enabled by computer, the firm is specifying a new
computer "program". Even those managerial and professional workers who never touch
computers have their work transformed in this way, calling for more and more complex
bodies of skill and knowledge as well as new organizational structures. Thoughtful
designers of business information systems recognize the information overload bottleneck:
"While we've seen a great revolution in bandwidth and computing power, unfortunately
the input/output capability of human beings hasn't changed much over the last decade".8

3.3   The net impact of IT and IT-enabled organizational change
       In computerized work environments, high levels of human information processing
skills should be getting more valuable. In part, this reflects the potential of present-day
computers to substitute more effectively for routine information processing tasks than for
complex or ill-structured cognitive tasks. It also reflects a potential complementarity
between some of the strengths of computers -- storing, communicating and executing
instructions on a flood of data -- and many types of human judgement and decision-
making. As Simon (1971) has noted "What information consumes is rather obvious: it
consumes the attention of its recipients." In an information age, the scarce resource is
human information processing.
       One implications of this theory is that computerized firms will seek to address the
increased relative demand for high cognitive skill labor by hiring more skilled and
educated workers and by investing more heavily in training for existing workers.
Another implication is that the information overload bottleneck is likely to be especially

       8
           Robert Walker, CIO of Hewlett Packard, quoted in Mendelson and Pillai (1998).
IT, Organization and Labor Demand                                                     Page 18


severe higher up in the hierarchy. Human capital should be especially at a premium here.
But firms will also seek non-hierarchical forms of organizing to bypass the bottleneck
(e.g. "self-managing teams"). As a result, computerized firms should make greater use of
self-managing teams and decentralized decision-making. Furthermore, in these firms,
employees with "team" skills, and "autonomy" skills should become more valuable.
       To summarize the implications of our theory for labor demand, information
technology impacts the optimal organization of work, and impacts the demand for skills
both directly and through changes in workplace organization.

4 Data Description
       The data set used for our analyses is a cross sectional survey of organizational
practices and labor force characteristics conducted in 1995 and 1996 matched to a panel
detailing IT capital levels and mix over the 1987-1994 time period. For some analyses,
we will also use data on other inputs and outputs, including non-IT capital, total
employment, sales, and value-added. Data cover approximately four hundred large US
firms. Approximately 55% of the sample are from the manufacturing, mining, or
construction sectors and 45% are in services. More detail on the survey can be found in
Brynjolfsson and Hitt (1997), and Bresnahan, Brynjolfsson and Hitt (1998).

4.1   Measures of key variables
       In our empirical work, we useda simplified and streamlined version of Figure 1.

4.1.1 Human Capital
      Our richest set of measures falls in the upper, human capital demand, box. We
measure human capital (HK) in several direct ways: via the manager's assessment of
workforce skill, the educational composition of the firm's workforce or the percentage of
employees who are professionals, managers, clerical, etc. We also construct a broader
measure of information work based on the percentage of all employees who are
managerial, professional or clerical -- precise definitions of all constructed variables are
in Table 3. Our interpretation is that these are alternative measures of the same broad
concept -- a tendency at the firm level to use, or to attempt to use, more highly skilled
workers.
IT, Organization and Labor Demand                                                                Page 19


        While we observe those human capital measures only once in cross section, we
also have a measure of the firm's policies toward human capital investment. HKI is
defined as a mean zero, standard deviation one variable that is created from the percent of
workers receiving training, the extent to which the firm screens for education in hiring
and the firms' use of cross-training (definition, Table 3). This variable is more dynamic:
it shows where human capital levels are changing whereas others reveal where they are
high.
        All these data were gathered via a survey administered to senior human resource
managers or their designees. The survey based on questions from prior surveys on
workplace organization and human resource practices (Ichniowski, Shaw and Prennushi,
1994; Osterman, 1994). In particular, the approach of Osterman (1994) was followed in
focusing on a single class of employee termed “production employees” (which
corresponds to Osterman’s “core employee”) and focused on the organizational practices
at the most typical establishment.9 A total of 416 firms provided at least some data for
the study. Descriptive statistics are in Table 1.

4.1.2 Workplace Organization
      On the left of Figure 1 lies the concept of workplace organization. Workplace
organization is notoriously difficult to measure and the changes in organizational
structure that are complementary to IT capital might be particularly so. Gathering new
data on workplace organization and linking these variables to IT capital at the firm level
is one of the advances that permits this study, and the earlier ones by Brynjolfsson and
Hitt.
        In the broad and general sense, it is well established that organizational change
and information technology are complements. However, only a subset of the relevant



        9
            Because we are especially interested in firm-level effects, one difficulty of our sampling
approach is that the practices reported by the respondent may not be representative of the work practices
across the entire firm. To address this issue, the revised instrument contained questions about how
representative production workers were in terms of total employment and the uniformity of work practices
for this category of workers. For the average firm in the second survey subsample, production workers
account for about two thirds of total employment and organizational practices are found to be fairly
uniform: 65% of respondents said that all production workers have the same work practices. Furthermore,
82% reported that at least 80% of workers had the same work practices.
IT, Organization and Labor Demand                                                                   Page 20


organizational changes is captured in our survey and used in our empirical work.10 We
focus on one particular type of organizational change that has been found to be important
in earlier work by Brynjolfsson and Hitt (1997). Our variable WO is defined as a mean
zero, standard deviation one variable reflecting the several distinct measures of
workplace organization greater use of teams, greater delegation of a variety of decision
rights to line workers, and activities that support the use of teams such as team building.
(definition, Table 3.) 11 These variables have a clear interpretation as measures of
decentralization. Our concept of workplace organization is narrow and specific.
         Our data on organizational characteristics were gathered via the same survey used
for our human capital data. Since these data are based on a snapshot at the end of the
sample period, we do not know whether each firm had the same organizational
characteristics throughout the sample period and in contrast to the human capital data, we
do not have information on the levels of "investment" firms were making in
organizational change. The reasonable interpretation based on aggregate data, however,
is that many of the firms have only recently adopted these practices.12 In a measurement
sense, our measure of WO (a level at the end of the sample period), can also be
interpreted as ∆WO (the amount of organizational change in the organization during the
sample period).

4.1.3 Information Technology
      At the right of Figure 1 is the concept of IT drivers. Our IT measures are stocks
of computer hardware at the firm level and also stocks of specific types of hardware (e.g.

         10
            For instance, we do not have any data on changes in outsourcing which might plausibly change
the skill mix of remaining employees. Nor do we attempt to catalog and measure all the types of internal
reorganization that might occur. Omitting these other forms of organizational change probably leads us to
understate the role of organizational factors.
         11
             This choice of measures reflects the first principal component of a factor analysis of responses
to the organizational practices survey. Interestingly, Osterman (1994) reports that a similar set of team-
oriented practices loaded on the first principal component in his survey of 694 establishments.
          12
             The practices we use to define WO are very similar to the ones that , according to Ichniowski et
al (1996), "have become increasingly common among U.S. businesses in recent years". In fact, Osterman
(1994) asked about a similar cluster of work practices in a survey of 694 managers and found that 49.1% of
the establishments in his sample reported introducing "teams" in the five years prior to his survey year of
1992. He also reports that 38% introduced job rotation practices, 71% TQM programs and 67.9% problem
solving groups in the years between 1987 and 1992, each of which also reflects increased decision-making
by line workers.
IT, Organization and Labor Demand                                                                    Page 21


PCs).13 Empirically, we view them largely as alternative measures of the same concept.
A distinction among the types of computers between those suitable for organizational
computing (mainframe and minicomputers) and those for personal computing (PCs)
sharpens this somewhat. In the period of our data, however, PCs could be an indicator
either of a tendency to personal computing or of new-architecture organizational
computing. Thus the sharper interpretation is ambiguous and most of our interpretation is
the broad one that some firms are more IT intensive than others.
         The measures of IT use were derived from the Computer Intelligence Infocorp
installation database that details IT hardware spending by site for companies in the
Fortune 1000 (approximately 25,000 sites are aggregated to form the measures for the set
of companies that represent the total population in any given year). This database
provides details on the ownership for specific pieces of IT equipment and related
products. These data include variables capturing the total capital stock of IT (central
processors, PCs, and peripherals) as well as measures of computing capacity of central
processors in millions of instructions per second (MIPS) and the number of PCs. The IT
data do not include all types of information processing or communication equipment and
are likely to miss a portion of computer equipment which is purchased by individuals or
departments without the knowledge of information systems personnel.

4.1.4 Strategic Goals
      The most difficult observable in terms of the cluster of driver technologies is the
change in product and service quality and the invention of new products and services, the
box at the bottom of Figure 1. Success, which is related to one interpretation of our
production function results, may be an observable indicator of these. Our interpretation
is that firms that with high levels of measured productivity have achieved one or more of
the subgoals at the bottom of the Figure.
         In order to calculate productivity, we combined the above data with data from
Standard and Poors' Compustat. Measures were created for output, capital, labor, and

         13
           It is more difficult to observe the portions of IT expenditure that are distributed throughout the
firm (personal computers, small web servers, etc.). It is also more difficult to observe software investments
than hardware investments, and it is particularly difficult to observe applications software that would reveal
the purposes of business computer systems.
IT, Organization and Labor Demand                                                                Page 22


value-added. These let us estimate a production function relationship between value-
added and the various inputs following the procedures in Hall (1990) and Brynjolfsson
and Hitt (1997). Table 2 provides sample means for these variables.

5 Empirical Results

5.1    Introduction
         Our hypothesis that IT, human capital, and decentralized organizational structure
are all complements has a number of testable implications for the firm-level data. What
we do in this paper is focus on the overall patterns in the data to build a prima facie case
that IT, WO and HK all "go together".14
        First, under plausible assumptions, we would expect levels of each of them to
covary in cross-sectional / time series data.15 If IT is a complement for HK, we should
expect firms that for some reason have higher levels of IT than their competitors should,
on average, also find it more profitable to hire more educated workers and to train
existing workers more intensively. Similarly, if IT is complement for WO, we should
expect IT-intensive firms to be more likely to organize production using self-managing
teams and delegated decision-making than other firms in the same industry. Likewise,
high levels of HK or WO should, all else being equal, be predictive of high levels of the
other hypothesized complements.
        Second, productivity should be higher in firms that successfully match IT,
organizational structure and human capital investments than in those that cannot make
such matches. Specifically, productivity should, on average, be higher in firms' which
have above-average levels of both IT and HK as compared to firms which are above the
industry average on one dimension and below average on the other. Other pairwise
combinations should also predict productivity levels.


        14
            In a related paper (BBH, 1998), we build more structured models of firm-level demand
functions for IT and human capital, and also examine a variety of production functions which enable more
formal tests of the theory.
         15
            Holmstrom and Milgrom (1994) offer a theory of complementarity and a series of observations
about the conditions under which co-movements of different organizational practices and factors of
production are indicators of complementarity. Athey and Stern (1998) are rightly critical of interpreting
co-movements in a cross section of firms as indicating complementarity when there is a possibility of
omitted common factors.
IT, Organization and Labor Demand                                                                  Page 23


         Third, in light of the productivity predictions, one can also make some predictions
about how the levels of IT, HK and WO should change over time in different firms.
Firms with high levels of one or more of the three complements should find it more
profitable to invest more aggressively in the remaining elements of the hypothesized
complementary system. For instance, for any observed level of IT capital stock, we
should see more rapid IT investment in firms with high levels of HK. We should also see
more investment in training in firms with high levels of IT.

5.2     Correlations among IT, human capital and workplace organization
         As discussed in the data section, we have numerous different measures of firms’
IT capital, their employees’human capital and overall workplace organization. The first
way we examine the data is simply to consider correlations among these measures. We
begin by examining Spearman rank-order correlations among pairs of the relevant
variables while controlling for industry, firm size (employment), and the composition of
the principal production workers in each firm. The last control is really a production-
process one. At the risk of "over-controlling" for factors which may be endogenous to
our theory, we include these controls to reduce the role of unobserved heterogeneity in
the sample.
         In Tables 4 through 8, we show that IT, HK and WO are all highly correlated with
each other in our data, regardless of how each concept is measured. One can thus make
predictions about, say, a firm's work organization relative to its competitors, if one knows
it's IT-intensity or human capital levels, and vice-versa.

5.2.1    IT use is correlated with employees' human capital in firm level data
         We find that most measures of IT are significantly correlated with most measures
of employees’human capital in our sample of firms (Table 4). The correlation is stronger
when the measures of IT are taken from the same organizational survey as the human
capital data (first three columns) than when we use the IT measures from the separate CII
survey. This probably reflects a better match of the unit of observation.16 The finding of


         16
           The respondents for the organizational practices survey were explicitly asked to consider a
representative site for both the HK and IT questions. In contrast, the CI data were for the company as a
whole.
IT, Organization and Labor Demand                                                     Page 24


a correlation between IT and HK in firm-level data extends findings in previous work,
which used more aggregate data (e.g. Autor, Katz and Krueger, 1997).
       Classification of employment by job title is also correlated with IT. Firms which
employ more managers and especially professionals are more likely to have high levels
of IT relative to their industry competitors while those with more blue collar workers tend
to have less IT, and vice versa (Table 5). In our framework, the employment job titles can
be interpreted as proxies for employee skills, as is common in earlier work, or as
characteristics of workplace organization.

5.2.2 IT use is correlated with specific characteristics of workplace organization
      In Table 6 we examine the correlations of various measures of IT with our
summary measure of decentralization, WO, and with the measures that underlie it. All of
the components of WO are individually correlated with IT measures. Interestingly, the
strong correlations with self-managing teams and team-building exercises suggest that
"people" skills, not just decision-making skills, are important complements of IT.
       In these tables, one would conclude that there are significant relationships
between IT and human capital and between IT and workplace organization whichever
measure of IT was used. There are two further points worth noting. First, PCs are not the
strongest correlate for most measures of human capital. Instead, central computer use
appears to be a slightly better predictor, which is consistent with an important role for
organizational computing and, by inference, organizational impacts. Second, email use is
a particularly strong indicator of teams and related practices, as well as of high levels of
human capital. This could suggest an important role for communication, as opposed to
automation, in driving skill upgrading. Like the other correlations, it may also simply
reflect some residual unobserved heterogeneity in the sample.

5.2.3 Human capital is correlated with workplace organization
      In turn, the same decentralized workplace organization that is correlated with IT
is also is highly correlated with employee human capital (Table 7). Our finding that
certain workplace systems are correlated with higher levels of human capital extends and
amplifies a result reported by Osterman (1994) who observes "As the skill levels required
IT, Organization and Labor Demand                                                                  Page 25


by an enterprise's technology increase, so does the use of the various work organization
innovations."17
         Some, but not all of the correlation between IT and human capital that we found
can be “explained” through their common covariance with differences in organizational
structure. When we partial out workplace organization, the correlation between IT and
most measures of human capital drops somewhat (Table 8). While the three move
together, there is also substantial separate movement and co-movement of the pairs. This
is consistent with the view that all three are complements.
         Alternative theories in which highly skilled workers or successful managers in
particular firms are given IT for nonproductive reasons are implausible here.18 WO and
mainframes are very odd ways to consume a managerial rent or to reward favored classes
of workers. This is notably true given that most of WO is ∆WO, and that these
organizational changes are notoriously difficult and unpleasant. Mainframes and servers
make terrible toys. When queried, the managers in our sample provide a simpler
explanation: IT use tends to require more skilled workers and more decentralized
decision-making. Indeed, as reported in more detail in our companion paper (BBH,
1998), the greater a firm's experience with IT, the more likely it is to report these effects,
and vice-versa.
         This argument will be strengthened by the observation that coordinated
investments in HK, WO, and IT are more productive than uncoordinated investments, a
topic to which we now turn.

5.3    How do various combinations of IT, human capital and workplace
       organization contribute to output?
        If all managers fully understood the potential complementarities among IT,
workplace organization and human capital, if their decisions always reflected the profit-
maximizing strategies for their firms, and if there were no lags, adjustment costs or


         17
             The workplace innovations tracked by Osterman were teams, job rotation, TQM and quality
circles. His measure of skills was a dummy variable for whether "the production process requires a high
level of skill."
          18
             If highly skilled workers and managers cause IT and WO in the cross section of firms (rather
than the reverse) for productive reasons, then they are complements in production and our argument is
correct.
IT, Organization and Labor Demand                                                                   Page 26


mistakes in implementing these strategies, then the demand equations IT and for HK
would fully reflect the optimal relationships among these factors. Furthermore, under
these assumptions, we would not expect to observe any firms that were not implementing
the optimal combinations of these practices. Of course, one of the reasons that we think
studying these relationships is interesting is that we believe that they are not fully
understood. With the benefit of hindsight, it is clear that many firms make significant
mistakes in their IT investments, organizational strategies or human capital policies.19
Furthermore, a large number of firms actively experiment with these policy levers in a
conscious effort to understand the how to best use the every cheaper processing, storage
and communications power delivered by IT. As with any important general-purpose
technology, a tremendous amount of organizational and strategic co-invention must
accompany technological advances in computing and most managers are fully aware of
this need.
         Under these conditions, different combinations of inputs will lead to differences
in product and service quality in our sample of firms. Under the assumption that higher
quality levels will be manifested in increased revenues (due to greater sales, higher unit
prices, or both), a production function can help to identify complementarities. Indeed,
the production function approach will be most effective to the extent that firms are not all
employing a well-matched combination of inputs. Thus, this approach provides a
valuable counterpart to the correlation results and demand equations, which both provide
the strongest results when firms are successfully optimizing.
         The theory is quite specific about what we should expect to see. As noted by
Milgrom and Roberts (1990), it is not enough to find that firms that invest heavily in all
the posited complements have greater output than those that do not. Instead, the theory
requires that the increase in output associated with the investment in one complement be
greater when other complements are present than when they are not. IT, for example,
may be productive on its own, but our theory predicts that it will be more productive in
firms with high levels of HK, WO or (especially) both.


         19
            See, for instance, Kemerer and Sosa (1991) for a catalog of disastrous IT projects, some running
into the tens of millions of dollars. Most of the failures are linked to organizational and strategic errors.
IT, Organization and Labor Demand                                                      Page 27


        While the productivity analyses depend on at least some firms making the
"wrong" choices by investing in one complement without the others, we need not assume
that all combinations of inputs are equally like to be observed. Specifically, suppose that
managers are attempting to increase firm output quantity and quality by choosing the
optimal combinations IT, WO and HK. Suppose further that they are imperfect in these
attempts, but do better than mere chance. Then we would expect to find evidence of
complementarities both in the correlations, which reflect the partial success in combining
IT, WO, and HK, and in the estimated production functions, which reflect the increased
value of output generated by the firms that get the combinations “right” relative to those
who don't. In this way, we can link differences in firms' choices of IT, WO and HK to
their degree of success in achieving their organizational goals.
        A natural way to study this is to estimate a production function and examine how
various combinations of organizational characteristics affect productivity. Following
common practice, we focus on a loglinear specification and its variants. This functional
form has the advantage of its simplicity and straightforward interpretation. It is the
interaction effects between different inputs that measure complementarities in this
framework. Accordingly, we build a model starting from a very simple specification
(consistent with Cobb-Douglas production) and adding various sets of interactions. The
baseline production function includes controls for industry and year and two types of
productive inputs: labor and capital.
        We can now easily explore complementarities among various combinations of
inputs. For instance, to study how IT and HK combine to affect output we split the
sample into four quadrants: 1) High IT-High HK, 2) High IT-Low HK, 3) Low IT-High
HK and 4) Low IT-Low HK, and define dummy variables for each of the quadrants, D.
        We then run a regression of the form:
log(Output) = α log (Labor) + β log (Capital) + δhh *Dhigh-IT*high-HK + δhl * Dhigh-IT *low-HK
+ δlh * Dlow-IT*high-HK +δll *Dlow-IT*low-HK + ε
        The first two terms control for the contributions of the traditional inputs, labor and
capital, to output while the next four terms are dummy variables that depend on a firms
IT intensity and its human capital levels relative to its industry competitors. In this way,
IT, Organization and Labor Demand                                                                      Page 28


we can estimate the average productivity levels of firms in each quadrant relative to the
baseline case of low IT-low HK. The results for δare shown in Table 9.
         As we expected, those firms which combine high levels of IT with high levels of
HK are more productive than those which are low on both dimensions. And the
differences are not small. The measured output of firms with high levels of IT and more
skilled workers is over 4% higher than their industry competitors' with similar levels of
labor and capital inputs.20
         What is especially striking, however, is that low-low also tends to be a relatively
high productivity outcome. We normalize the omitted category low-low to zero, so the
negative estimates for δhl and δlh mean that firms in the off-diagonal cells (low-high or
high-low) are less productive than those with low IT and low HK. Thus, high HK is
associated with high productivity, but only in firms which also have high IT. HK is not
associated with high levels of productivity for firms with low IT. The productivity kick
comes from matching IT and HK. This suggests that high levels of IT are most effective
in the presence of a trained and educated workforce and conversely.
         As noted above, this is exactly the pattern predicted by the complementarities
notion. There is a perfectly workable cluster of low-low, old-style firms. They have
internal consistency in their mix of complements, what Milgrom and Roberts (1990) call
a "coherent combination" of practices. Further, this result argues against heterogeneity
arguments as an explanation for the results. While some unobserved firm level shock
(free cash flow is the obvious one) could yield positive effects on human capital, IT and
productivity at the same time, it would not explain why firms with both low IT and low
HK have higher productivity than those with one but not the other.21 Similarly, this result
argues against a "fad" interpretation. The cluster of inputs that go together are clearly




         20
             The table shows sample splits for only one measure of HK, namely SKILL. Qualitatively
similar results obtain for other measures, such as %COLL, and for related specifications with the output
elasticities varying between high and low IT firms.
          21
             One can, of course, construct a more intricate theory to explain the results. In this case, there
could be correlated shocks to the productivities of the factors at the firm level that are confined to certain
ranges of use of the factors in different ways in different firms. In empirical science, there is always an
alternative explanation of this form; this one is distinctly pre-Copernican in structure.
IT, Organization and Labor Demand                                                                 Page 29


related to increases in output quantity or price (perhaps because of service quality). Thus
they cannot be merely an inefficient fad.22
        Similar results also hold when the regression includes WO and its interaction with
HK (in Table 9B) instead of IT and HK. Firms with more of the characteristics of the
new work organization are more productive if they also have highly skilled workers.
However, firms attempt the new work organization without more skilled workers than
their industry peers, or which employ more skilled workers but not the new work
organization, are notably less productive than firms which simply adopted a Low WO-
Low HK strategy. As before, this is most easily explained as evidence of
complementarities.
        Finally, comparing interactions of WO and IT (in Table 9C) leads to a similar
story. In this case, the off-diagonal firms (high-low and low-high) are not actually less
productive than the low-low firms, instead, the productivity advance to getting one but
ont the other is positive but small and insignificant. Shifting from low levels of IT to
higher levels of IT is associated with a greater increase in productivity for high WO firms
than for low WO firms, and conversely, WO appears to be most productive in the
presence of high levels of IT.
        As noted above, in each table the sample is split at the median firm so that
approximately half of the firms are in each "high" group and half are in each "low" group.
However, it is clear that the firms are not evenly distributed among all four quadrants. As
one might expect if our explanation is correct, a majority of firms avoid the low
productivity quadrants in favor of the "high-high" or "low-low" quadrant. For instance,
there are over twice as many firms in the "high IT-high HK" quadrant as in the "high IT-
low HK" quadrant". This is of course consistent with the earlier correlation analyses
(Section 5.2), but we can now see that this pattern is also consistent with the hypothesis
that firms to choose their practices at least in part to increase productivity.
        While the 2x2 tables present a simple way to see the productivity levels
associated with various combinations of IT, HK and WO, much the same story is evident
in more structured models such as those we explore in our companion paper (BBH,

        22
             We exclude the fancier theory of an inefficient fad whose incidence is somehow confined to
IT, Organization and Labor Demand                                                       Page 30


1998). When various interaction terms are included in a log-linear specification, alone or
in combination, the results indicate that IT, HK and WO are complements. This is true
when alternative measures of the each of the basic work practices are examined, when we
instrument the endogenous variables to control for endogeneity and to a limited extent
even when three-way interactions are explored, although collinearity limits the reliability
of such analyses.

5.4    How are IT, HK and WO changing over time?
        Levels of investment in both IT and HK are well known to be increasing over
time. The biggest changes are in IT, where impressive advances in the underlying science
and engineering of the technology has led to sharp improvements in both capabilities and
costs. As a result, real investment in IT has grown at double-digit rates for several
decades and current levels dwarf those of even a few years ago. Meanwhile, the skill
levels of the workforce have also increased, at least according to such metrics as the
proportion of college graduates in the workforce. Data on changes in WO are harder to
come by, although there seems to be a consensus that many of the practices we measure
are becoming more common (See e.g. Ichniowski et al., 1996, Osterman 1994).
         While the levels of IT, HK and WO may all be increasing, all firms do not
necessarily adopt them at the same rate. In fact, the complementarities theory predicts
that firms which are further along in one practice should be more likely to adopt the other
practices, ceteris paribus. The productivity analyses empirically support the notion that
such a policy will have the greatest rewards.
         We can test this implication more directly by looking at investments, not just
levels, of the work practices. We do not have direct measures of HK or WO over time,
but we do have measures of investments in training and policies of screening new
employees based on education at the end of the sample period. These measures can be
interpreted as investments in HK. At noted earlier, we find that most measures of IT are
correlated with greater investments in human capital (Table 4, middle rows). IT can
predict greater investments in human capital (HKI) even when we control for current
levels of human capital (by including SKILL and EDUC as partial covariates in the

successful firms. That is, of course, possible, if peculiar.
IT, Organization and Labor Demand                                                                    Page 31


bottom rows of the table). Although HK is changing much most slowly than IT, this
result is consistent with the hypothesis that IT-intensive firms are attempting to move
toward a new cluster of complements, relative to less IT-intensive firms.
         The earlier results indicated that firms with high levels of human capital and work
organization are more likely to also have high levels of IT. We can also examine a
dynamic version of this question by adding interaction terms between a time trend and
two human capital and organizational structure measures. We can undertake this
partially dynamic analysis as we have IT data for each year of our sample period, but our
measures of human capital and workplace organization are only available for the end of
the period. In Table 10, we see that for any given set of prices and business conditions,
firms with more decentralized decision-making (WO) tend to invest more rapidly in IT
than their competitors. However, we do not find that HK is a particularly strong predictor
of IT investments (as opposed to IT levels) even though IT levels can predict HK
investments.
         As with our other results, the most direct interpretation is complementarities. The
interactions with time pick up changes in IT over time. WO is changing in many of our
sample firms and, where it is changing, IT is growing. In one story, WO is a new
organizational invention23 (or IT-enabled WO is a new organizational invention). Those
firms that have moved forward in WO have also moved forward on the other
complements, by this interpretation.24 HK is more stable, and so the level of HK at the
end of the period is not a good predictor of changes in IT. This would suggest that the
IT-HK complementarity is closer to equilibrium while we are observing firms actively
investing in both WO (narrow definition) and complementary IT.
         In summary, we view these dynamical results as consistent with the
complementarity story. While not all of the complements are changing at the same rate,

         23
             This is essentially the view that Ichniowski et al. (1996) put forth in their summary of the
literature on innovations in workplace organization.
          24
              Accordingly, it is not a criticism to note a weaker correlation between WO and IT in the early
part of the sample (since our WO data are only contemporaneous with IT at the end of the sample period).
Similarly, it is not an econometric criticism that WO(1995) is a measure of WO(t) with an error that
declines over time, rather, this econometric remark is closely linked to the economics of our interpretation.
          25
             Indirect evidence for this fact is the high gross marginal products found for IT when standard
production functions are estimated using firm level data (Brynjolfsson and Hitt, 1995, 1996, Lichtenberg,
1995).
IT, Organization and Labor Demand                                                     Page 32


it appears that one can make some predictions about a firm's investment rates in one
complement by looking at the levels of other complements in that firm.

5.5   Relationship to Earlier Work
       Most earlier work at the industry level finds complementarity between IT and HK
(AKK 1997). The incompleteness, there, and the advance here, is getting inside the black
box of the firm first with the WO data and second with the managerial queries just
reported. This illuminates the mechanisms at work in a way that makes the technological
causation story more complete and thus more refutable; when unrefuted, more
convincing.
       Earlier work at the individual worker level has been at best ambiguous in its
results about IT-HK complementarity. Individual workers who use computers do
command higher wages (Krueger (1993)). Yet it appears that both the higher wages and
the computers may be given to workers who are already particularly productive, rather
than (or in addition to) the computer making the worker more productive (DiNardo and
Pischke (1997)). Here we have considerable evidence against a nonproductivity
alternative direction of causation argument at the firm level. The firm-level equivalent
would be that firms with particularly high levels of HK got, for some reason not related to
production complementarities, WO and IT. The analogy to the individual-worker theory
is obviously false; WO and mainframes make poor "rewards" for the reasons we just
argued. Finally, at the firm level we have more direct evidence on the productivity of
using the factors together. Moving closer to the actual demanding unit, the firm, permits
investigation of the hypotheses better than at the worker or industry level.


6 Implications
       Strong complementarity among human capital, new forms of workplace
organization, and IT is a finding with important implications for the whole economy. The
three complementary factors play different roles.
       (IT)    The real price of IT has been falling rapidly and will continue to fall for at
least a decade. This shifts firms in the direction of using all three complements. This is
IT, Organization and Labor Demand                                                    Page 33


the route by which IT and the workplace organization changes it enables become skill-
biased technical change.
       (HK) The supply curve for more skilled workers is rising. The IT-driven skill-
biased technical change has driven changes in relative wages, hours, and earnings.
       (WO) Finally, the third complement, workplace organization, is characterized by
very substantial adjustment costs, as is changing in output quality. Firms must co-invent
the specific organizational changes and specific new product qualities that work in their
particular circumstances, a nontrivial challenge.
       Computer and other information technology prices have been falling steadily,
tending to raise demand not only for IT capital but also for the invention of new
organizational forms and for new services or new levels of quality. The demand for all
three is by no means automatic, however, because of those substantial adjustment costs.
At any given moment, we expect to see variety in a cross section of firms in the degree to
which they have adopted the three complements. Leading firms will have high levels of
all three complements; trailing firms will have low levels of all three complements.
Some firms will be further along on some dimensions than on others due to mistakes or
random factors that influence their adoption.
       What's more, the underlying complementarities in the systems adopted by the
leading firms are undoubtedly far more complex and intricate than those we can observe
in our data. For instance, Brynjolfsson, Renshaw and Van Alstyne (1997) studied one
firm's transition from traditional manufacturing to modern, computer-intensive
manufacturing and found not only dozens of complementarities but also several mistakes,
reversals and abortive attempts to implement incomplete clusters of complements. When
the firm finally got the new work system working smoothly, they literally painted the
factory windows black to prevent competitors from quickly imitating their success. This
supports the hypothesis that one of the barriers that prevents competitors from quickly
imitating the most successful computer users is the subtlety and complexity of the
organizational co-inventions needed to harness this revolution in computer power.25
       Like econometricians, rival managers may be able to observe the broad outlines
of a successful strategy without knowing the myriad details necessary to implement it
IT, Organization and Labor Demand                                                                  Page 34


effectively. This is consistent with the large adjustment costs associated with IT, which
have been found to be primarily the costs of adjusting the complementary WO, not the IT
itself (cf. Bresnahan and Greenstein (1997), Brynjolfsson and Hitt (1997), and especially
Ito (1996) on this point),26 and suggests that merely pointing the way toward a "high
performance work organization" will rarely be sufficient to get trailing firms to adopt the
new system.
         In addition to these adjustment costs, rising wages of highly skilled labor also
slow the diffusion of the cluster of complements (and presumably offer a powerful
incentive for inventing ways to use IT and organizational forms that economize on skill.)
Neither of these counter-effects, however, reverses the trend to the cluster of
complements. They simply slow it, in large measure by limiting the number of firms
using the cluster of complements.
         We therefore believe that the current cross-firm variety in adoption of the three-
way cluster of innovations embodies a forecast of the future. An easy prediction is that
IT prices will continue to fall and IT performance will continue to improve (notably in
the data networking area). As a result, more and more firms will find the cluster of
complements worth adopting. In parallel, firms that are now experimenting or unsure
will increasingly overcome the costs and delays associated with the organizational
change. Over time, therefore, more firms will come to look like those using the cluster of
complements: IT-intensive, changed workplace organization, and high human capital.
The aggregate implication is that the recent tendency toward skill-biased technical
change will continue.

7 Conclusion
         In this paper, we combine and extend two distinct research streams. One,
developed primarily by labor economists, links IT to the increased demand for skills.
Another, developed primarily by information systems researchers, links IT to changes in

         26
            If we were to expand the definition of IT to include applications software and the training and
reorganization needed to use it effectively, it would become more fixed in the short run. Our observables,
however, correspond to the adjustment cost relationships described in the text. There might well be a
different way to divide the cluster of complements, focussing on applications of IT rather than IT hardware,
which would yield a more detailed and nuanced view of the pattern of adjustment costs than we can
provide here. That, however, would call for more detailed data on the software side of IT.
IT, Organization and Labor Demand                                                      Page 35


organization and output quality. We hypothesize that the increased demand for skilled
labor is related to a particular cluster of technological change involving not only
increased use of IT, but also changes in workplace organization and changes in product
and service quality. The most common combinations of IT-enabled organizational and
strategic change increase the relative demand for skilled workers.
       We find that the empirical evidence is broadly consistent with our hypothesis as
well as prior theoretical and empirical work on IT and labor demand and IT and
organization. In particular, our analysis of firm-level data suggests that IT use is
correlated with increases in the demand for various indicators of human capital and
workforce skills. IT use is also correlated with a pattern of work organization involving
more decentralized decision-making and greater use of teams. Increases in firms’IT
capital stock are associated with the greatest increases in output in firms which also have
high levels of human capital or decentralized work organization, or both. However, firms
which implement only one complement without the others are often less productive than
firms which implement none at all. Firms with high levels of some complements are
more likely to invest in other complements. In addition, in our companion paper (BBH,
1998) we show that these empirical facts are consistent with the widespread perception
among the managers in our sample. When asked directly, these managers reported that
IT is skill increasing, and this tendency is particularly pronounced in high human capital,
IT-intensive, and decentralized firms.
       The combination of computerization, workplace organization and increased
demand for skilled workers appears as a cluster of changes in modern firms, almost
certainly because they are complements. This has two implications. First, many of the
recent s changes in the structure of the corporation and the demand for human capital
have a common origin in technological change, technological change which shows no
sign of abating. As a result, the specific mechanisms of skill-biased technical change
now and in the future can be better understood by more closely studying the nature of IT-
enabled organizational change in firms.
IT, Organization and Labor Demand                                                               Page 36



8 Bibliography
Applegate, L., Cash, J. and Mills, D. Q. (1988), “Information Technology and Tomorrow’s Manager,”
   Harvard Business Review, November-December, pp. 128-136.
Athey, S. and S. Stern, (1998) "An Empirical Framework for Testing Theories about Complementarities in
    Organizational Design". NBER working paper 6600.
Attewell, P. and J. Rule (1984) “Computing and Organizations: What We Know and What We Don't
    Know.” Communications of the ACM27(December): 1184-1192.
Autor, David, Lawrence F. Katz and Alan B. Krueger. (1997) “Computing Inequality: Have Computers
    Changed the Labor Market?” revised, March.
Barras, Richard. (1990) “Interactive Innovation in Financial and Business Services: The Vanguard of the
    Service Revolution,”Research Policy No. 19.
Bartel, A. and Lichtenberg, (1987) “The Comparative Advantage of Educated Workers in Implementing
    New Technology”, Review of Economics and Statistics, 64 1-11.
Berman, E. J. Bound and Z. Griliches (1994) “Changes in the Demand for Skilled Labor within U.S.
   Manufacturing Industries,”Quarterly Journal of Economics, May, 109, 367-98.
Berndt, E. R., C. J. Morrison and L. S. Rosenblum (1992). "High-Tech Capital, Economic Performance
    and Labor Composition in U.S. Manufacturing Industries: An Exploratory Analysis." MIT Working
    Paper 3414EFA.
Bound, John and Johnson, George. (1992) “Changes in the Structure of Wages in the 1980s An Evaluation
   of Alternative Explanations,”American Economic Review82,3: 371-392.
Bresnahan, T. (1997) “Computerization and Wage Dispersion: An Analytic Reinterpretation.” Mimeo.
    Stanford University.
Bresnahan, T. and S. Greenstein (1997) “Technical progress and co-invention in computing and in the uses
    of computers,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Micro, pp. 1-83.
Bresnahan, T., Brynjolfsson, E. and L. Hitt (1998). “Information Technology, Workplace Organization and
    the Demand for Skilled Labor: Firm Level Evidence.” Mimeo. MIT, Stanford and Wharton.
Brynjolfsson, E. and L. Hitt (1995). “Information Technology as a Factor of Production: The Role of
    Differences Among Firms.”Economics of Innovation and New Technology. 3 (4): 183-200.
Brynjolfsson, E. and L. Hitt (1996). “Paradox Lost? Firm-level Evidence on the Returns to Information
    Systems Spending”Management Science(April).
Brynjolfsson, E. and L. Hitt (1997). "Information Technology and Organizational Design: Evidence from
    Firm-level Data” MIT Sloan School Working Paper.
Brynjolfsson, E., A. Renshaw and M. V. Alstyne. (1997) “The Matrix of Change,”Sloan Management
    Review, Winter.
Crowston, Kevin and Malone, Thomas W. (1988), “Information Technology and Work Organization,”
   Chapter 49 in: M. Helander, ed.,Handbook of Human-Computer Interactions. Elsevier Science,
   Amsterdam, pp. 1051-1070.
Davenport, Thomas H., and James E. Short. (1990) “The New Industrial Engineering: Information
   Technology and Business Process Redesign.”Sloan Management Review 31.4: 11-27.
DiNardo, John and Jörn-Steffen Pischke. (1997) “The Returns to Computer Use Revisited: Have Pencils
   Changed the Wage Structure Too?”Quarterly Journal of Economics 1 1 2 (February).
IT, Organization and Labor Demand                                                                 Page 37


Gottschalk, Peter. (1997) “Inequality, Income Growth, and Mobility: The Basic Facts,”Journal of
    Economic Perspectives 11, 2 (Spring): 21-40.
Griliches, Z. (1969). “Capital-Skill Complementarity.”The Review of Economics and Statistics 51(4): 465-
    468.
Hall, B. H. (1990). The Manufacturing Sector Master File: 1959-1987, Documentation. NBER Working
    Paper 3366.
Hamermesh, Daniel S., Labor Demand Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1993.
Hammer, M. (1990). “Reengineering Work: Don't Automate, Obliterate.”Harvard Business Review (July-
   August): 104-112.
Holmstrom, B. and P. Milgrom (1994). “The Firm as an Incentive System.”American Economic Review
   84(4, September): 972-991.
Howell, C., and E. Wolff, (1991) "Trends in the Growth and Distribution of Skills in the U.S. Workplace,"
   Industrial and Labor Relations Review, April.
Ichniowski, C. Thomas A. Kochan, David Levine, Craig Olson and George Strauss, (1996) "What works at
    work: Overview and Assessment",Industrial Relations, Vol. 35, No. 3 (July). P. 299-333.
Ichniowski, C., K. Shaw and G. Prennushi, "The Effects of Human Resource Management Practices on
    Productivity." American Economic Review, June, 1997.
Ito, Harumi, Essays on Investment Adjustment Costs, Ph.D. Dissertation, Stanford University, September
     1996.
Jensen, M. and W. Meckling, (1992) “Knowledge, Control and Organizational Structure”, in
                                                                                       Contract
    Economics, L. Werin and H. Wijkander, Editors., Basil Blackwell: Cambridge, MA. p. 251-274.
Katz, Lawrence F. and Kevin M. Murphy. (1992) “Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987: Supply and
    Demand Factors,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107 (February): 35-78.
Kemerer, C. F. and G. L. Sosa, (1991) “Systems Development Risks in Strategic Information Systems.”
   Information and Software Technology33(3): 212-223.
Krueger, Alan B. (1993) “How Computers Have Changed the Wage Structure? Evidence from Micro
   Data,” Quarterly Journal of Economics (February): 33-60.
Krugman, Paul, and Robert Z. Lawrence. (1993) “Trade, Jobs, and Wages,” NBER WP No. 4478,
   September.
Leavitt, H. J. and T. L. Whisler (1958). “Management in the 1980s.”Harvard Business Review
    (November-December).
Levy, Frank and Richard Murnane. (1996) “With What Skills Are Computers a Complement?”American
    Economic Review, 86 (May): 258-262.
Lichtenberg, F. R. (1995). “The Output Contributions of Computer Equipment and Personal: A Firm-Level
    Analysis.” Economics of Innovation and New Technology3: 201-217.
Malone, T. and Rockart, J. (1991), “Computers, Networks and the Corporation,”Scientific American, Vol.
   265(3): 128-136.
Malone, T., Yates, J. and Benjamin, R. “Electronic Markets and Electronic Hierarchies.”
   Communications of the ACM 30(6): 484-497.
Mendelson, Haim and Ravi Pillai, "Clockspeed and Informational Response: Evidence from the
   Information Technology Industry", Manuscript, 1998.
Milgrom, P. and J. Roberts (1990). “The Economics of Modern Manufacturing: Technology, Strategy, and
    Organization.”American Economic Review80(3): 511-528.
IT, Organization and Labor Demand                                                            Page 38


Murphy, Kevin M. and Welch, Finns. (1993) "Lessons from Epirical Labor Economis: 1972-1992.
   Inequality and Relative Wages,"American Economic Review, 83, 2.
Orlikowski, W. J. (1992). Learning from Notes: Organizational Issues in Groupware Implementation. in
    Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work. J. Turner and R. Kraut. Toronto, Association
    for Computing Machinery: 362-369.
Osterman, P. (1994). “How Common is Workplace Transformation and Who Adopts It?”Industrial and
    Labor Relations Review 47(2): 173-188.
Scott Morton, Michael S. (Ed.) (1991), The Corporation of the 1990s: Information Technology and
    Organizational Transformation, Oxford University Press.
Simon, Herbert A., "Applying Information Technology to Organization Design." Public Administration
   Review, (1973), p. 268-78.
Simon, Herbert A., "Designing Organizations for an Information-Rich World," in Computers,
   Communications, and the Public Interest, Martin Greenberger, ed. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins
   Univ. Press, 1971, pp. 40-41.
Wolff, Edward N. (1996) "The Growth of Information Workers in the U.S. Economy, 1950-1990: The
   Role of Technological Change, Computerization, and Structural Change," The C.V. Starr Center for
   Applied Economics, New York University.
Williamson, Oliver E. 1979. Transaction-Cost Economics: The Governance of Contractual Relations.
    Journal of Law and Economics 22 (October):233-261.
Zuboff, Shoshana (1988) In the Age of the Smart Machine: The Future of Work and Power
                                                                                    , New York:
   Basic Books.
IT, Organization and Labor Demand                                                            Page 39



9 Tables and Figures
         Table 1: Organizational Practice Survey Variables
                                                 Range     Variable       N         Mean       Std. Dev.
Team-Based Work Organization
Use of Self-Managing Teams                        1-5      SMTEA         345        2.11         1.13
Use of Employee Involvement Groups                1-5      QUALC         345        2.85         1.21
Use of Team Building Activities                   1-5      TEAMB         345        2.95         1.17
Promote for Teamwork                              1-5      PROTE         345        3.59         0.95
Breadth of Jobs                                   1-5      BROAD         345        3.25         0.99

Individual Decision Authority
Who Decides Pace of Work (3=workers)              1-3       PACE         345        1.33         0.37

Who Decides Method of Work (same)                 1-3       METH         345        1.39         0.38

Human Capital (Levels)
Skill Level of Work                               1-5      SKILL         345        3.60         0.86
Education Level                                   1-5      EDUC          345        2.48         0.66
Workers w/ High School or Less Ed.              0-100%     %HSED         263       59.3%        27.8%
Workers with Some College Education             0-85%      %SCED         263       23.3%        17.5%
Workers Completed College                       0-100%     %COLL         263       17.4%        21.0%

Human Capital Investment
Pre-Employment Screen for Education               1-5      SCNED         345        3.31         0.89
Training (% workers involved)                   0-100%     TRAIN         345       48.0%        36.1%
Cross-train Workers                               1-5      XTRAI         345        3.16         0.98

Production Worker Composition
Blue Collar (fraction of jobs listed)           0-100%      PRBL         345       61.9%        46.2%
Clerical (fraction of jobs listed)              0-100%      PRCL         345       31.4%        43.4%
Professional (fraction of jobs listed)          0-100%      PRPF         345       4.6%         17.5%

Workforce Composition
Unskilled Blue Collar (%)                        0-95%       %US          337        18.4%      21.4%
Skilled Blue Collar (%)                          0-85%       %SK          337        24.7%      21.1%
Clerical (%)                                     0-80%       %CL          337        19.4%      17.6%
Professionals (%)                                0-90%       %PF          337        20.7%      16.8%
Managers (%)                                     0-50%       %MG          337        16.8%      8.5%
Source: Authors' Survey. Survey Details Appear in Bresnahan, Brynjolfsson and Hitt (1998)
IT, Organization and Labor Demand                                                                                         Page 40


           Table 2: IT and other Inputs and Outputs
                                                                       Variable             N            Mean         Std. Dev.
CII Survey
Log(IT Capital)                                                        LITCAP              333           3.07           1.66
Total MIPS (Millions of instructions/sec.)                              MIPS               333           2,624          8,737
Total PCs                                                              TOTPC               333           4,560         10,997
Organizational Survey
Degree of Computerization of Work                                      COMP                343            3.28          1.11
% Workers using General Purp. Computers                                 %GP                290           53.0%         33.8%
% Workers using E-mail                                                %EMAIL               290           31.0%         32.2%
Compustat (all years pooled)*
log(Output)                                                          LOUTPUT              2466         2,431.59         0.99
log(Value Added)                                                        LVA               2466          946.53          1.02
log(Labor Expense)                                                    LLABOR              2466          530.33          1.08
log(Non-IT Capital)                                                  LNITCAP              2466         1,771.53         1.39
log(Employment)                                                      LEMPLOY              2466           14.41          1.09
log(IT Capital)                                                       LITCAP              2466           11.86          1.42
* - Standard deviation is in log(millions of dollars), while the geometric mean is reported in millions of dollars.


           Table 3: Definitions of Composite Variables
Description                                  Variable              Formula
Work Organization                            WO                    SMTEA+QUALC+TEAMB+PROTE+
                                                                   PACE+METH
Human Capital Investment                     HKI                   SCNED+TRAIN+XTRAI
Composite Decision Authority                 DA7                   PACE+XSCHED+XDIST+METH+
                                                                   XPROB+XCUST+XCOMPL
All composites are formed by summing standardized values (except the Information
Worker Percentage). The sum is then restandardized to mean 0, unit variance.
IT, Organization and Labor Demand                                                                 Page 41


        Table 4: Correlations between IT and Human Capital

Measure                                                       %
(scale in parenthesis)                        %GP          EMAIL         COMP        ITCAP        MIPS        TOTPC
Skills/Education (N=371)
Skill Levels (SKILL)                          (+)***      (+)***       (+)***      (+)          (+)***       (+)**
Education (EDUC)                              (+)**       (+)***       (+)***      (+)          (+)          (+)
Education Distribution (N=237)
High School Education (%HSED)                 (-)***      (-)***       (-)***      (-)*         (-)***       (-)***
College Graduate (%COLL)                      (+)***      (+)***       (+)***      (+)          (+)          (+)
Skill Acquisition (N=370)
Training (TRAIN)                              (+)***      (+)**        (+)***      (+)**        (+)***       (+)**
Screen for Education (SCNED)                  (+)*        (+)***       (+)***      (+)***       (+)***       (+)***
Skill Acquisition (controlling for SKILL
and EDUC)
Training (TRAIN)                              (+)**       (+)*         (+)***      (+)***       (+)***       (+)***
Screen for Education (SCNED)                  (+)         (+)          (+)**       (+)***       (+)***       (+)***
Spearman partial rank order correlations controlling for industry (9 sector dummy variables), employment
(EMPLOY) and production worker composition (PRBL, PRCL). Sample size varies due to non-response.
Key: (+) positive correlation; (-) negative correlation; * - p<.1, ** - p<.05, *** - p<.01; test is against the
null hypothesis that the correlation is zero.
IT, Organization and Labor Demand                                                                     Page 42



         Table 5: Correlations between IT and Workforce Composition

Measure                                                       %
(scale in parenthesis)                       %GP          EMAIL          COMP         ITCAP        MIPS  TOTPC
Workforce Composition (N=303)
Clerical (%CL)                               (-)         (+)           (-)          (-)         (-)     (-)
Unskilled Blue Collar (%US)                  (-)***      (-)***        (-)***       -.08        (-)**   (-)
Skilled Blue Collar (%SK)                    (-)         (-)           (+)          (+)         (+)     (+)
Managers (%MG)                               (+)**       (+)**         (+)*         (+)**       (+)**   (+)
Professionals (%PF)                          (+)**       (+)***        (+)***       (+)***      (+)***  (+)***
Spearman partial rank order correlations controlling for industry (9 sector dummy variables), employment
(EMPLOY) and production worker composition (PRBL, PRCL). Key: (+) positive correlation; (-)
negative correlation; * - p<.1, ** - p<.05, *** - p<.01; test is against the null hypothesis that the
correlation is zero.



         Table 6: Correlations between IT and Work Organization

Measure                                                       %
(scale in parenthesis)                        %GP           EMAIL        COMP         ITCAP         MIPS        TOTPC
Our Main Measure
Decentralization (WO)                         (+)***       (+)***       (+)***       (+)***       (+)***       (+)***
Subcomponents of WO
Self-Managing Teams (SMTEA)                   (+)***       (+)***       (+)***       (+)***       (+)***       (+)***
Employee Inv. Grps. (QUALC)                   (+)***       (+)***       (+)          (+)          (+)          (+)
Team Building (TEAMB)                         (+)***       (+)***       .13**        (+)***       (+)***       (+)***
Promote for Teamwork (PROTE)                  (+)**        (+)**        (+)**        (+)          (+)*         (+)
Pace of Work (PACE)                           (+)*         (+)*         (+)**        (+)          (+)          (+)
Method of Work (METH)                         (+)***       (+)***       (+)***       (+)***       (+)***       (+)***

Other Organizational Structure Measures
Broad Jobs (BROAD)                            (+)***       (+)***       (+)***       (+)          (+)**        (+)*
Scheduling of Work (XSCHED)                   (+)***       (+)***       (+)***       (+)*         (+)***       (+)**
Distrib. Work to Wrkrs. (XDIST)               (+)*         (+)***       (+)***       (+)*         (+)**        (+)**
Production Problems (XPROB)                   (-)          (+)          (+)          (+)          (+)          (+)
Customer Interaction (XCUST)                  (+)**        (+)*         (+)          (+)          (+)          (+)
Handling Complaints (XCOMPL)                  (+)***       (+)***       (+)**        (+)          (+)          (+)
Composite of 7 measures (DA7)                 (+)***       (+)***       (+)***       (+)*         (+)**        (+)***
Individual Control (ICDA)                     (+)**        (+)***       (+)***       (+)*         (+)**        (+)**

Spearman partial rank order correlations controlling for industry (9 sector dummy variables), employment
(EMPLOY) and production worker composition (PRBL, PRCL). N=240-372, due to non-response and
some measures limited to second and third wave surveys. Key: (+) positive correlation; (-) negative
correlation; * - p<.1, ** - p<.05, *** - p<.01; test is against the null hypothesis that the correlation is zero.
IT, Organization and Labor Demand                                                                     Page 43


Table 7: Correlations between Human Capital and Work Organization
Measure                                        SKILL         EDUC         %COLL       SCNED            TRAIN
(scale in parenthesis)
Our Main Measure
Decentralization (WO)                        (+)***        (+)***        (+)***       (+)***         (+)***
Subcomponents of WO
Self-Managing Teams (SMTEA)                  (+)***        (+)**         (+)***       (+)***         (+)***
Employee Inv. Grps. (QUALC)                  (+)***        (-)           (+)          (+)            (+)***
Team Building (TEAMB)                        (+)***        (+)           (+)**        (+)***         (+)***
Promote for Teamwork (PROTE)                 (+)**         (+)           (+)          (+)            (+)
Pace of Work (PACE)                          (+)**         (+)***        (+)***       (+)***         (+)
Method of Work (METH)                        (+)***        (+)***        (+)***       (+)***         (+)*
Other Measures of Organizational Structure
Broad Jobs (BROAD)                           (+)***        (+)***        (+)**        (+)***         (+)
Scheduling of Work (XSCHED)                  (+)***        (+)           (+)          (+)**          (+)**
Distrib. Work to Wrkrs. (XDIST)              (+)***        (+)*          (+)          (+)**          (+)*
Production Problems (XPROB)                  (+)**         (-)           (-)          (+)            (+)
Customer Interaction (XCUST)                 (+)           (-)           (-)          (+)            (+)***
Handling Complaints (XCOMPL)                 (+)           (+)*          (+)          (+)            (+)***
Composite (DA7)                              (+)***        (+)           (+)***       (+)**          (+)***
Individual Control (ICDA)                    (+)***        (+)           (+)***       (+)***         (+)*
Spearman partial rank order correlations controlling for industry (9 sector dummy variables), employment
(EMPLOY) and production worker composition (PRBL, PRCL). N=240-372, due to non-response and
some measures limited to second and third wave surveys. Key: (+) positive correlation; (-) negative
correlation; * - p<.1, ** - p<.05, *** - p<.01; test is against the null hypothesis that the correlation is zero.


Table 8: Correlations between IT and Human Capital, Controlling for Work
Organization (WO)

                                                             %
                                             %GP           EMAIL         COMP         ITCAP        MIPS        TOTPC
Skills/Education (partialling WO)
Skill Levels (SKILL)                         (+)*         (+)***       (+)***       (+)          (+)         (+)
Education (EDUC)                             (+)**        (+)***       (+)***       (-)          (+)         (-)
High School Education (%HSED)                (-)***       (-)***       (-)***       (-)          (-)**       (-)**
College Graduate (%COLL)                     (+)***       (+)***       (+)***       (+)          (+)         (+)
Same Analysis without controls
Skill Levels (SKILL)                         (+)***       (+)***       (+)***       (+)          (+)***      (+)**
Education (EDUC)                             (+)**        (+)***       (+)***       (+)          (+)         (+)
High School Education (%HSED)                (-)***       (-)***       (-)***       (-)*         (-)***      (-)***
College Graduate (%COLL)                     (+)***       (+)***       (+)***       (+)          (+)         (+)
Spearman partial rank order correlations controlling for industry (9 sector dummy variables), employment
(EMPLOY) and production worker composition (PRBL, PRCL). First four rows also include WO as a
covariate. Key: (+) positive correlation; (-) negative correlation; * - p<.1, ** - p<.05, *** - p<.01; test is
against the null hypothesis that the correlation is zero.
IT, Organization and Labor Demand                                                        Page 44



        Table 9: Productivity with Matches and Mismatches on Complements

Table 9A: IT x HK (As measured by ITCAP and SKILL, respectively)
              IT
       \                         Low                      High
HK
High                            -.0293                   .0422
                               (.0221)                  (.0199)
                               N=552                    N=762
Low                                0                     -.0321
                                (N/A)                   (.0174)
                               N=561                    N=358
Standard Error in parenthesis; estimates are theδs as shown in the equation.
Pearson chi-square Test for Association:χ2=82.4 (p<. 001)
Number of firms in each half of the table is unbalanced due to ties and discrete scales (SKILL)

Table 9B: HK x WO (As measured by SKILL and WO, respectively)
              HK
        \                       Low                     High
WO
High                            -.0481                  .0372
                               (.0208)                 (.0165)
                               N=492                   N=822
Low                                0                    -.0522
                                (N/A)                  (.0178)
                               N=627                   N=284
Standard Error in parenthesis
Pearson chi-square Test for Association:χ2=211 (p<. 001)
Number of firms in each half of the table is unbalanced due to ties and discrete scales (SKILL,
WO)
Table 9C: IT x WO (As measured by ITCAP and WO, respectively)
              IT
       \                         Low                      High
WO
High                           .00356                    .0664
                               (.0179)                 (.0197)
                               N=448                    N=664
Low                               0                     .00153
                                (N/A)                  (.0199)
                               N=671                    N=442
Standard Error in parenthesis
Pearson chi-square Test for Association:χ2=89.0 (p<. 001)
Number of firms in each half of the table is unbalanced due to ties and discrete scales (WO)
IT, Organization and Labor Demand                                                               Page 45


      Table 10: Changes in IT demand as a function of human capital and
organization - controlling for workforce composition


Dependent Variable             log(ITCAP)         log(ITCAP)         log(ITCAP)
            Specification         Base+               Base+           Base+Ed.+
                                   WO             Education+           WO w/o
Variable                                               WO             WOxTime
Worker Skill x Time              .000255             -.0194            -.00557
(SKILL x YEAR)                   (.00759)            (.0220)           (.0203)
College Ed. x Time                                   .00656             .0109
(%COLLxYEAR)                                         (.0210)           (.0207)
WO x Time                        .0183***             .0358
(WO x YEAR)                       (.00766)           (.0219)
Worker Skill                     .0438***          .0560***           .0543***
(SKILL)                            (.0191)           (.0247)            (.0247)
College Education                                     .0388              .0392
(%COLL)                                              (.0276)            (.0277)
Decentralization                  .0668***         .0876***           .0890***
(WO)                                (.0186)          (.0238)            (.0238)
log(Value-Added)                   .647***          .600***            .599***
log(VA)                             (.0186)          (.0219)            (.0219)
Professionals                      .133***         .0967***           .0958***
(%PF)                               (.0206)          (.0291)            (.0291)
Controls                             Sector           Sector             Sector
                                      Year             Year               Year
                                 Composition      Composition        Composition
                                (PRBL, PRPF      (PRBL, PRPF        (PRBL, PRPF
                                 %MG, %CL,        %MG, %CL,          %MG, %CL,
                                     %SK)             %SK)               %SK)
                                   %SCED            %SCED              %SCED
R2                                  53.7%            51.0%              50.9%
N                                     1854             1331               1331
Key:     * - p<.1, ** - p<.05, *** - p<.01
All variables standardized to mean 0, unit variance except interaction terms which represent a standardized
variable multiplied by a mean 0 time measure (units are years).
