0. Introduction.

In much of applied welfare economics, income—real income, consumption, or consumption per

equivalent—serves as our measure of individual welfare. But the goods and services provided by

income are not all that there is to well-being. Health is not only instrumental in enabling people

to earn a living, and to enjoy the fruits of their labors, but is an important element of well-being

in it own right. Health status is correlated with income, both for individuals within nations, and

across nations in aggregate. But the correlation is far from perfect so that looking at health leads

to different assessments of well-being than come from looking only at income. Much the same

can be said for education, and such considerations have led to simple measures such as the UN’s

Human Development Index, a composite of life-expectancy, income, and literacy. In this paper, I

consider only two of the three components, health and income. In particular, I am concerned with

what it means to talk about inequality in health, and whether, according to some useful definition

of the concept, health inequality in the United States is rising in tandem with the rise in income

inequality. I also investigate the possibility that income inequality itself is a health hazard, a

hypothesis advocated by Richard Wilkinson (1996).

    The first section of the paper is concerned with the concept of health inequality, with alter-

native definitions, and with the evidence that health inequalities in the United States are in-

creasing. The second section turns to the Wilkinson hypothesis. In an attempt to develop its

theoretical underpinnings, I present two simple models in which there is a link between aggregate

inequality and individual health, in only one of which is inequality a fundamental risk factor in

its own right. It is widely understood that a nonlinear (typically concave) relationship between

health and income at the individual level will generate an aggregate relationship in which average


                                                   1
health depends (negatively) on the degree of inequality. But I also show that if health status

depends not on income, but on income relative to the incomes of members of some reference

group, then the relationship between income and health, unconditional on information about the

reference group—and such information is typically unavailable—depends on the relative size of

within- and between-group inequality. The model can readily be extended to incorporate a more

fundamental role for inequality in the determination of health status, for example by making each

individual’s health within the reference group depend on the shortfall of individual income from

that of the richest person in the group. But I argue that such mechanisms can just as well generate

a positive as a negative link between inequality and health. That individual health depends on

relative income is consistent has no direct implication for the relationship between inequality and

average health. Section 3 presents some empirical evidence on mortality in the United States at a

hitherto unexplored level of aggregation, that of a birth cohort. By matching cohort mortality

rates to cohort income and income inequality data from the Current Population Surveys, I can test

whether the rising income inequality in the 1980s played any role in the contemporaneous slow-

down in mortality decline. Although the inequality hypothesis is hardly well-enough developed

to permit a sharp and convincing test, I find little or no evidence of a direct link between income

inequality and mortality. However, the cohort data suggest that increasing inequality increases

the slope of the regression of mortality on income, a finding that is predicted by the theory if the

increase in income inequality acts to increase inequality within reference groups by more than

inequality between them. Section 4 concludes and discusses a number of important caveats.




                                                  2
1. Rising health inequality?

A good way to approach health inequality is to start with income inequality, and to ask whether

the theoretical and measurement structure of the latter can be transferred to the former. Measures

of income inequality are measures of dispersion of the (univariate) distribution of income across

persons. Questions of why such quantities are of interest, or whether some are of more interest

than others, can be answered through the theoretical apparatus developed by Anthony Atkinson

(1970) and Amartya Sen (1973). Inequality aversion, or a preference for a more equal distribution

is coded into a social welfare function according to which mean-preserving but equalizing trans-

fers increase social welfare or, alternatively, one in which there is diminishing (social) marginal

utility to income. As Atkinson showed, these formulations lead to an aggregate measure of

welfare which can be thought of as the product of mean income and income equality, which is

the complement of inequality, and is a number between zero and one.

   Health promotes well-being, just as income promotes well-being, and some people have

better health than others; statements like A is healthier than B are meaningful in much the same

way as are statements such as A has more income than B. But an immediate problem is measure-

ment; we have a cardinal measure of income, but no comparable measure of health status. For

populations, life-expectancy is a useful statistic with convenient properties, but is much less use-

ful at the individual level. Life expectancy at a given age in a given year is not the expected years

of life of a person of that age in that year; period estimates of life expectancy are based on age-

specific mortality rates at a fixed moment in time, rates that can be expected to change (typically

decline) by the time the individual reaches those ages. The expected lifespan for each individual

would be a good tool for measuring well-being, but its calculation among the living requires an


                                                  3
assessment of health status with a view to assessing individual mortality probabilities in the

future. The measurement of health status is extremely difficult, except among the elderly among

whom functional impairments are sufficiently widespread and apparent to allow useful calibra-

tion. Self-reported measures of self-reported health status (my health is “poor,” “fair,” “good,”

“very good” or “excellent”) have been shown to predict later health conditions, but estimates of

inequality based on such reports are typically not invariant to the wide range of equally reason-

able ways of scoring or scaling the responses. Discussions of how to measure inequality using

qualitative data can be found in Deaton and Paxson (1998b) and Allison and Foster (1998).

    Suppose that there were no measurement problems, and that for each individual we could

readily calculate a measure of life expectancy. One could imagine doing this long after everyone

has died, so that we have an actual distribution of years lived for a birth cohort, or we might be

prepared to accept the period life-tables and calculate for each person alive now an expected age

at death. Inequality in years lived could then be calculated, as for 32 developed countries in

Julian Le Grand (1987). But as Le Grand recognizes, the axioms that underlie inequality mea-

surement are not obviously applicable in this context. For example, it is unclear how many

people would assent to the proposition that society would be better-off if a fifty year-old died at

49 instead of 50 in order to extend the life of a 45 year-old by one year. Unlike income, where

policies for effecting transfers can readily be imagined, transfers of life are not readily linked to

health policy, so that it is unclear that reduction in inequality in health outcomes is a worthy (or

feasible) target for policy.

    There is another literature on “health inequalities” which defines inequality quite differently.

In the public health, psychology, sociology, demography, and epidemiology literatures, inequali-


                                                   4
ties in health are taken to refer to the differences in health across different socio-economic

groups, typically defined by income, occupation, or education. That mortality was higher for

members of lower status occupations was noted in Britain from the middle of the last century,

and the failure of this “gradient” to vanish in response to the introduction of the National Health

Service after the Second World War has been the impetus for an enormous amount of subsequent

research as well as political acrimony, see Sally McIntyre (1997) for a fine review.

   Although much of the best work on the gradient is still done in Britain, particularly the

Whitehall study run by Michael Marmot and his collaborators, socioeconomic differences in

health status are also well-established in the United States. For example, the National Longi-

tudinal Mortality Study has merged subsequent death certificates back into Current Population

and Census data from the late 1970s until the mid-1980s, and has generated very large samples

for examining differences in mortality by income. Using these data, Rogot et al (1992) calculate

life expectancy by age for seven family income groups. Comparing the bottom income group,

defined as those with less than $5,000 of family income in 1980, with the top group, which had

more than $50,000, life expectancy for men at age 25 was 43.6 years at the bottom as opposed to

53.6 years at the top. Although the absolute difference is smaller for older men, the proportional

difference remains more or less constant, 26.2 versus 39.0 years at age 45, and 13.3 versus 17.2

years at age 65. Family income differences are less important for women’s mortality than for

men’s mortality, but the gradient is still apparent for women. Life-expectancy appears to increase

monotonically with income; excess mortality is not associated only with poverty. Nor can the

gradient readily be removed by controlling for other factors, such as race or smoking behavior.

Causality almost certainly runs both ways, from health to income—for example through the


                                                  5
effects of ill-health on employment—but there is fairly wide agreement that the effects that run

from income to health are a major part of the story. And while income almost certainly is

standing in for other factors such as education, both factors are separately important, Elo and

Preston (1996).

   Most commentators see these health inequalities as deeply offensive, more so than the econo-

mic and social inequalities to which they are related. Their elimination is seen as an urgent prior-

ity for public health policy, and some governments and international agencies have accepted the

reduction of health inequalities as target. For example, the countries of the European Region of

the World Health Organization unanimously adopted a resolution in 1984 that “by the year 2000

the actual differences in health status between countries and between groups within countries

should be reduced by at least 25 percent.” Many people who are prepared to accept inequality in

the allocation of goods as a (possibly) necessary evil are not prepared to accept similar inequal-

ities in health outcomes. However, since health inequalities appear to be much the same whether

or not health care is provided through the market, for example in the U.S. versus Britain, and to

be much the same whether diseases are treatable or not, the remedy is not the provision of access

to health care without reference to financial resources, Adler et al (1993). Indeed, the literature

makes a good case that inequalities in mortality seem to have relatively little to do with better

access to health care by better-off people. Health status may not be much affected by health care,

and health inequalities may be as deeply rooted and as intractable as the social inequalities within

which they are set.

   One issue in the current debate is the claim that health inequality is increasing, not in the

sense that the univariate distribution of health status is widening, but in the sense that the gradi-


                                                  6
ent is steepening, so that the same difference in socio-economic status, income or education, is

now associated with a larger difference in the probability of death. (Univariate measures of health

inequality in terms of years lived have decreased with reductions in infant mortality; because the

univariate distribution is bimodal, reductions in the mass at the lower mode are a powerful force

in reducing inequality.) Studies by Feldman et al (1989) and by Pappas et al (1993) have con-

cluded that the differences in mortality across educational groups are larger than those in 1960

documented in the pioneering study of Kitagawa and Hauser (1973). Deaton and Paxson (1998a)

find positive time trends in the variance of self-reported health status and in its correlation with

income, so that the gradient between (this measure of) health status and income has been

trending upward, something that is true for both men and women. The best estimates of the

changes in the relationship between mortality and education come from Preston and Elo (1995),

again using the NLMS. They confirm that for white males, moving from the bottom to the top of

the education distribution reduced the standardized death rate in 1979–85 by three times as much

as it did in 1960. They find no similar effect for females. Among the possible causes for the

changes, the authors point out that the changing distribution of heart disease over education

groups accounts for much of the change, and argue that improvements in prevention and treat-

ment may have diffused more rapidly among more educated men. Other potential causes are the

widening income difference associated with educational differences—the increasing rate of

return to education—and the decrease in income differences between men and women.

   Both of these arguments point to a protective role for income that operates independently of

education, and implicate in health inequalities the same factors (particularly the increase in the

returns to education) that are usually identified as contributing to increases in income inequality.


                                                  7
Such a mechanism provides a link between income inequality and both concepts of health in-

equality; growing income differences are associated both with an increase in spread in the uni-

variate distribution of health, as well as with an increase in the gradient linking education and

health. In the simplest model, we might write an earnings function as

                                     yi  ȳ  β (S i  S¯ )  εi                                   (1)

where y is the logarithm of income, and S years of schooling, coupled with a health status

equation

                                    Hi H̄  α ( yi  ȳ )  η i                                    (2)

where H is some measure of health status that is (negatively) linked to mortality. As the rate of

return to education β increases with a fixed distribution of schooling, the distribution of income

widens, as does the distribution of health. The slope of the health to education gradient is αβ,

which also increases with increases in the rate of return to schooling, β. This model works much

better for men than for women, for whom β has also risen. Other factors at work include the fact

that α appears to be smaller for women than men, and that the feedback from health to income is

more important for men whose participation in the labor force is higher.

   Health inequality, like income inequality, is not always undesirable. In the Atkinson frame-

work, social welfare is the product of mean income and equality so that even if rises in inequality

pull down the second factor, the effect may be offset by increases in the first. We must judge the

outcome by both factors, not just one. Focusing on an increase in inequality by itself is no less

(and no more) incorrect than focusing on mean income and ignoring distribution. The major con-

cern with income inequality in the US today is the lack of growth of real wages for all but the top

of the distribution, not the increase in earnings inequality per se. A pertinent example is provided


                                                    8
by the consequences of an increase in the rate of return to education, whether generated by skill-

biased technical change or, to take a more hypothetical example, by an increase in the quality of

schools. Such a change raises wages for everyone and encourages people to become better edu-

cated. At the same time, because some people get more schooling than others, it raises inequality.

   Similar considerations appear to apply to much of the change in health inequality. If new

knowledge about preventive methods for reducing heart disease—particularly exercise and diet—

are adopted more readily by people with higher incomes (and education), the new knowledge has

brought about a Pareto improvement, in spite of the increase in health inequality. Another ex-

ample is infant mortality among whites in the U.S., which is roughly twice as high among the

least educated as it is among the most educated mothers, a difference that is almost entirely ex-

plained by differential rates of cigarette smoking, even though both sets of mothers understand

the risks, see Ellen Meara (1998). Once again the knowledge that became widely available and

widely credible after the publication of the Surgeon General’s report on smoking in 1964 has led

to a (Pareto) improvement in public health, but one that has been unequally distributed. Of

course, the reduction of infant mortality rates among poorly educated women remains a major

priority for public health, though improvements, like improvements in mortality from heart

disease, are likely to require, not technical improvements in medicine or even better access to

health care, but some understanding of why low incomes and poor education make it so difficult

to benefit from the relevant knowledge. But it is the lack of improvement in health among the

poorly educated—like the lack of growth in their real wages—that is the central policy issue, not

the increase in inequality per se. We would surely not condemn the Surgeon General’s report on

the grounds that it led to an increase in health inequality.


                                                   9
2. Inequality in incomes and the level of health

A different link between incomes and health has been proposed by Wilkinson (1996) who sees

income inequality itself as a principal determinant of poor health. This is quite different from the

linkage discussed in the previous paragraph where the level of income was tied to the level of

health, so that income inequality was tied to health inequality. The Wilkinson hypothesis is that

inequality itself poses a risk to health that, at any given age, those who live in a more unequal

society have a higher probability of death. Although Wilkinson does not rule out the possibility

that average health is affected by income inequality through the aggregation of a concave rela-

tionship between risk and mortality, he makes it clear that the hypothesis goes further and asserts

that inequality itself is a risk to each individual. There are some good theoretical reasons why

such a relationship might exist; for example, the proximity of rich and poor might lead to crime

and violence, as in many South African cities today. More generally, the precise mechanisms are

hard to pin down, and in some of the discussions in the literature, inequality seems to be standing

proxy for a wide range of social ills; indeed, in the non-economics literature, the terms “inequal-

ity” and “poverty” are not always carefully delineated. Some mechanisms are hard to understand.

How, for example, would an increase in property taxes for wealthy homeowners in Phoenix,

Arizona lead to a decrease in the probability of a middle-aged man in New York dying from heart

disease?

   Yet the potential importance of establishing a link between mortality and inequality makes it

worth serious theoretical and empirical investigation. For example, a more progressive income

tax could be defended on public health grounds, or as argued by Lynch, Kaplan and Salonen

(1997, p. 809), “efforts to reduce socioeconomic inequalities in health must recognize that


                                                 10
economic policy is public health policy.” The creation of individual saving accounts as part of

social security reform would cause greater inequality at the time of retirement, and would cost

lives. Raising the quality of schools would raise the return to education, the inequality of

earnings, and the risk of death. Better teachers are a health hazard. In the next section, I shall

present some evidence, but first it is worth considering a simple but plausible model in which

inequality is directly related to individual health.

    One of the difficulties with national income inequality as a cause of individual mortality is

the requirement of “action at a distance,” and the absence of any obvious mechanism through

which it can operate. But local action is a different matter, especially if we switch the emphasis

from inequality to relative income or rank; it is quite plausible that individual health should

depend on the individual’s rank or status within the group to which that individual relates.

Academics should have little difficulty with the notion that their health might depend on their

salaries relative to those of their departmental colleagues. Studies of resilience in the face of

disease and adverse shocks often identify the importance of high social status, if not in employ-

ment, then in another part of life, as when a janitor is an elder in his church. There is also a

growing experimental and biomedical literature for both animals and humans that demonstrates

the protective effects of rank on health, see in particular Robert Sapolsky (1993) and Sheldon

Cohen (1991, 1997). This literature is beginning to put together a biochemical story for these

effects which is currently the leading explanation for the link between socioeconomic status and

health. But why should the existence of the gradient lead to an effect of inequality?

    In human populations, we usually do not observe the reference group to which the individual

belongs so we cannot make the ideal calculation relating individual health to individual income


                                                  11
relative to other members of the reference group. Instead, we observe only individual health and

individual income. But individual income is partly informative about relative income. Someone

with a very high income is more likely to have high income within his or her group, though it is

always possible that he or she is a poor member of a very rich club; we have hit upon the poorest

Wall Street speculator in the firm. Exactly how much individual income tells us about relative

standing depends on the relative sizes of the variances within and between groups. If reference

groups have little internal inequality, but there is great disparity between groups, individual

income tells us little about relative income. Conversely, if the major source of inequality is

within reference groups, which are themselves large and diverse, income tells us much more

about relative income.

   To formalize, consider the simple model

                                       H  α  β ( y  µ)                                         (3)

where H is some suitable measure of individual health, y is the (logarithm of) income, µ is mean

income of the reference group to which the individual belongs, and α and β > 0 are parameters.

The mean income of the group µ is distributed across the population of groups with mean µ̄ , so

that taking expectations unconditional on reference group, we have

                                      E ( y )  E ( µ )  µ̄ .                                    (4)

We do not observe µ, only y, so that the best that we can do is to examine the expectation of H

conditional on y,

                                E ( H | y )  α  β ( y  E(µ | y) ) .                            (5)

To calculate the expectation on the right-hand side, we need to make assumptions about the

distributions of both. Although the argument can be made much more general, I work with the


                                                   12
simplest possible case. Suppose that, within the group, individual income is normally distributed

around the group mean

                                                                 2
                                          y |µ ~ N ( µ, σε )                                        (6)
           2
so that σε is the within-group variance, which serves as my measure of within group inequality.

(Note that with y as the logarithm of income, neither (6) nor the following (7) are unrealistic.)

Group mean incomes are themselves normally distributed around their mean

                                                             2
                                           µ ~ N( µ̄ , σµ )                                         (7)
       2
with σµ the between-group variance.

   Because (6) and (7) ensure that y and µ are jointly normally distributed, the expectation of µ

conditional on y is a linear function of y and can be calculated from the least squares projection

of µ on y. Write the conditional expectation as

                                          E(µ| y)  a  by                                          (8)

for some a and b, and note that we can always write

                                             µ  y  ε,                                             (9)

where ε is the distance of y from the group mean. Then we have

                                                                     2
                                      cov ( y , µ )      σµ
                                  b                                                           (10)
                                        var y          2    2
                                                      σε  σµ

                                                                 2
                                                             σε µ̄
                                    a  µ̄  b µ̄                                              (11)
                                                             2       2
                                                            σε  σµ

so that, substituting into (8), we have

                                                        2
                                                    σµ
                                E( µ | y)  µ̄                  ( y  µ̄ ) .                   (12)
                                                    2     2
                                                   σε   σµ


                                                   13
This equation is readily interpreted. If we know nothing about an individual, our best guess of his

or her reference group mean income is the grand mean µ̄. But once we observe income, we can

do better, adjusting out expectation up if income is greater than the grand mean, and down if it is

below. The extent of the adjustment depends on how informative y is about µ, which depends on

the two variances or, more precisely, on their ratio. Another useful interpretation comes from

thinking about income y as an error-ridden estimate of the group mean µ. If we had data on µ,

and we regressed µ on itself, we would get a slope of one and an intercept of 0. But if we regress

µ on y, which is an imperfect measure of µ, the coefficient is asymptotically biased down by the

familiar attenuation bias of least-squares in the presence of measurement error. (Note however

that this argument rests on the linearity of the regression function (8) and that, without joint

normality, the conditional expectation of µ will typically not be linear in y.)

   As a final step, combine equation (12) with equation (5) to give the relationship between the

expectation of individual health and individual income; the regression function is

                                                      2
                                                   β σε
                                E(H | y)  α                 ( y  µ̄ ).                          (13)
                                                  2       2
                                                 σε  σµ

Equation (13) formalizes the initial argument. When within group variance is large relative to
                                   2                           2
between group variance, so that σε is large relative to σµ , income is a good indicator of relative

income and is a strong predictor of health. In the opposite situation, when the groups are much
                                                          2                       2
more homogeneous than the population as a whole, σµ is much larger than σε , and there is little

or no relationship between health and individual income. The model therefore has predictions

about how the gradient should change as we work with different comparison groups. For ex-

ample, if we had data on a firm or on a single employer—the Whitehall study is perhaps the most


                                                 14
obvious example—the gradient should be steeper than the gradient between health and income in

the population as a whole, or between populations in international comparisons. If people tend to

sort themselves into reference groups of people with rather similar incomes, then we would ex-

pect to see very little gradient in the population as a whole.

    As interesting as the implications of the model for the gradient is its prediction that, at a

given income level, the ratio of within- to between-group inequality has an effect on individual

health. This is true in spite of the fact that inequality has no explicit role in the determination of

health in equation (3); note for example that spreading within-group incomes away from the

group mean will raise within-group inequality but have no effect on average group health. The

effect works by rotating the relationship between health and income around the point of mean

income and mean health. An increase in overall income inequality will have different effects

depending on how it breaks down into between and within group components. If within group

inequality is not affected, as might be the case if wage structures within industries of firms stay

fixed but spread out across firms then, conditional on income, individual health will decline for

those above the mean and increase for those below the mean. If the inequality increase comes

from a within-group increase, health will improve for the rich and decline for the poor. And if

inequality increases happen equally within groups and between them, the relationship between

health and income will be undisturbed. Since we know very little about the relevant reference

groups for these purposes, all of these possibilities are worth serious investigation, as is the

general proposition that inequality changes work through a rotation of the gradient.

    It is important to note that, in spite of the relationship between health, income, and inequality

in (13), changes in inequality have no effect on anyone’s health except to the extent that they


                                                  15
change people’s relative incomes within their reference groups. To see the point, suppose that the

structure of reference groups is such that we can design a change in tax policy that reduces the
                             2                                              2
between-group inequality σµ without affecting within-group inequality σε . By (13), the policy

change will increase the average health of people within income groups above average income,

and decrease the average health of within income groups below the average. But the change in

inequality has no effect on anyone’s health. Health is determined by relative income in the

reference group which, by assumption, is unchanged. But because the relative variances have

changed, there has been a change in the composition of (reference group) relative incomes among

those in any given (absolute) income group, which is why average health changes conditional on

income. Just because inequality plays a role in the regression of health on income does not imply

that policy-induced changes in inequality will have any effect on average health.

   This simple model of health and relative income can be straightforwardly modified to permit

a more fundamental role for within-group inequality. Suppose that instead of making health

depend on relative income within the reference group, we make health a declining function of the

distance of each individual from the top-ranked member of the group. In a linear form, this can

be written

                                                    µ
                                     H  α̃  β ( ymax  y )                                     (14)

so that α̃ is the health of the best-off member of the group and β measures the effect of having

less than the best-off member of the group and is, as it was in (3), the slope of the within-group

gradient. Indeed, in a single cross section, (14) is indistinguishable from (3). For simplicity, and

to relate this model to the earlier one, suppose that, within each group, the top person’s income is

θ standard deviations above the mean, so that


                                                 16
                                          µ
                                         ymax  µ  θ σε.                                        (15)

Combining (14) with (15) gives a health equation that is a straightforward modification of the

equation (3) with which we began, i.e.

                                  H  α̃  β ( y  µ )  β θ σε .                                (16)

   This formulation seems more in the spirit of Wilkinson’s book in that inequality has a direct

negative effect on individual health. In the original, purely relative formulation (3), an increase in

within group spread had no effect on average group health, because the decrease in health of

those who became worse-off was offset by the increase in the health of the more fortunate mem-

bers of the group. But in (15), it is the income gap from the top that matters, so that the health of

the top person is not improved if his income rises, while that of everyone below him is hurt by

the widening gap from the top. As a result, inequality has a direct effect on health of each mem-

ber of the group as well as on the average health of the group. Note also that the choice of the top

person as reference is entirely arbitrary, and thus unsatisfactory without further argument. If in-

stead of (15), the health of the bottom person was made unresponsive to income, with the health

of others increasing with the income gap from the bottom, increased income inequality would

increase health on average, and the last term in (16) would appear with a positive rather than a

negative sign. The model is therefore silent on why inequality should be a health hazard, though

it provides a usual framework for empirical analysis. Together with the original model, it also

provides a useful counterexample to a proposition that is sometimes asserted in the literature, that

the dependence of health on relative income implies that average health is negatively linked to

inequality. It is possible to write down plausible models of individual health and relative income

which generate positive, negative, or no relationship between inequality and average health.


                                                  17
    In the absence of information on the groups, the new formulation is no more directly useful

than was the original. But the same arguments used for the original model can be used for the

new model to derive an observable relationship between health and income. Since the calcula-

tions are identical, I simply record the final result. Instead of equation (13), there is a additional

term in inequality and we now have

                                                   2
                                               β σε
                            E(H | y)  α                  ( y  µ̄ )  β θ σε .                   (17)
                                               2       2
                                              σε  σµ

Within group inequality now plays two roles, its original one of rotating the gradient, and a new,

more fundamental one, as a direct determinant of average health. Once again, it is not income

inequality for the economy as a whole that has the direct role, only inequality within each refer-

ence group.



3. Empirical evidence

Much of the evidence in favor of a link between inequality and growth is provided in Wilkin-

son’s book and articles, in particular Wilkinson (1995, 1996). For the United States, George

Kaplan et al (1996) and Bruce Kennedy et al (1996) have linked state-level mortality to state

level income inequality, though their results, like Wilkinson’s, have been challenged on a

number of fronts, including the choice of inequality measure, lack of robustness to inclusion or

exclusion of alternative plausible controls—such as fraction black—and aggregation fallacies,

especially the failure to allow for the effect of inequality that results from the aggregation of a

nonlinear relationship between income and mortality at the individual level, Jennifer Mellor and

Jeffrey Milyo (1999).


                                                   18
   Some of the most spectacular evidence is given in Figures 3, 5, and 6 in Wilkinson (1994).

The first of these scatter diagrams shows no relationship across OECD countries between the

changes from 1970 to 1990 in life expectancy and GDP per capita in PPP $. The second graph,

for about half of the countries in the first, shows life expectancy in 1970 and the gini coefficient

of post-tax income inequality, standardized for household size, and has a correlation coefficient

of –0.81. The final graph, for 12 EEC countries, shows the relationship between the annual rates

of change from 1975 to 1985 in life-expectancy and the percentage of the population in relative

poverty, with a correlation of –0.73. The problem with such comparisons, of course, is the quality

and difficulty of interpretation of the distributional data, even among OECD countries, see Ken

Judge (1995) and Wilkinson (1995) for an exchange over this issue (among others.) While I

suspect that the hypothesis is probably not ultimately resolvable using cross-country compari-

sons, or at least not without detailed examinations of and adjustments to the survey data for each

country, it is useful to begin by reporting these data.

   I have taken international data on gini coefficients of the distribution of household income

from Deininger and Squire (1994); I have used data from “industrialized” countries and included

only those measurements whose quality is graded “acceptable” by Deininger and Squire, exclud-

ing measurements based on household expenditures rather than income. Data on life expectancy

are taken from the 1998 edition of the World Bank’s World Development Indicators. In the top

left panel of Figure 1, I show those observations available for any year in the interval 1980 to

1982, in most cases with two observations for each country. In the top right panel, the exercise is

repeated for data for the years 1987 to 1990. The dates are chosen so as to maximize the number

of countries for which data are available. In the left-hand graph, the simple correlation coefficient


                                                  19
is –0.26, which has the right sign, though the scatter is wide. In the right hand panel, on average

seven to eight years later, life expectancy is higher—the points are shifted upwards—but the

correlation has fallen to only –0.14. Note that the United States and Japan are reported as having

high income inequality in both periods, while the United Kingdom, which starts out as one of the

most equal countries in the earlier picture, is in the middle of the rankings in the later one. The

bottom-left panel shows the relationship between the changes in life expectancy and the changes

in the gini coefficients. The points shown are the differences in the averages (in the case of mul-

tiple observations) in the top two figures, and excluding Denmark, which appears only in the

later period. Here the negative correlation has become a positive correlation. In these data, there

is no clear and consistent correlation between inequality and life expectancy.

   Three countries, the Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United States, have enough data to

allow tracking of both life expectancy and the gini coefficient on a consistent basis over a run of

years. The bottom right panel shows what happened for each country for some years from 1970

to 1990 (1991 for the United Kingdom.) In all three countries, life expectancy rose over these

two decades, and it rose by the largest amount in Japan, which had no increase in income in-

equality. In the United States, life expectancy also rose, more rapidly in the 1970s than in the

1980s (a fact to which we shall return), and in total over the two decades by almost the same

amount as the rise in the United Kingdom. But the increase in income inequality in the United

Kingdom was about twice as large as the increase in the United States. With enough imagination,

proponents and opponents of the thesis could each find something in these figures but the im-

mediate visual impression is of a simultaneous increase in income inequality and life-expectancy.

   Figure 2 shows more detail on the trends in males and female mortality in the United States;


                                                 20
these data are taken, as are those used below, from the Berkeley Mortality Database (BMD)

website at http://demog.berkeley.edu/wilmoth/mortality. I have used the estimated US population

by sex in the fourth quarter of 1984 (from the Bureau of the Census website) to weight the mort-

ality rates. The rapid decline in mortality from about the mid-1960s (earlier for women than for

men) was much slower after about 1980, a phenomenon that could come from many causes,

including the increase in inequality. The decrease in female relative to male mortality, which is

apparent in the figure until the mid-1960s, is the end of a long secular trend in favor of females,

mostly associated with the relative reduction in mortality among young women compared with

young men.

   To investigate more closely the relationship between mortality and inequality, I have com-

bined the mortality data from the BMD with data on household income and household income

inequality from the March Current Population Surveys (CPS) from 1981 to 1993. My basic unit

of analysis is a birth cohort; defined as the group of people born in a single year, and I examine

the relationship between mortality for that cohort in any particular calendar year in relation to the

level and inequality of income of that cohort. Note that the March CPS collects data on income

for the previous year, so that by matching mortality and CPS data for the same date, I am

matching deaths in 1985(say) with incomes and income inequality in 1984. A one year lag is a

reasonable specification with which to start.

   Note that I am not claiming that cohorts are the relevant reference groups within which health

is determined as in the theory of Section 2. But birth cohorts are likely to contain a higher ratio of

relevant to irrelevant reference people, which should steepen the gradient and make it easier to

detect than is the case in the aggregate or international data. The use of cohort data also solves


                                                 21
the scarcity of microeconomic data containing full economic information on decedents, and

allows the combination of different sources, here the CPS for economic information, and vital

statistics for mortality. Cohorts also have decisive advantages over aggregate data in terms of

sample size. With an age restriction to those between 25 and 75 inclusive, the 13 years of CPS

data yield 663 cohort-year observations, from those born between 1906 (observed at age 75 in

1981) and 1968 (observed at age 25 in 1993.)

   The cohorts in the CPS are defined by the age (or date of birth) of the household head, (or

more accurately, the reference person) and income and income inequality are represented by the

cohort mean of the logarithms of income and the cohort variance of the logarithm of income,

again calculated on a household basis. When I merge these data with the mortality data, I am

merging in the mortality rates for individuals. While the conjunction of households and indivi-

duals is uncomfortable, particularly for females who are less likely to be household heads, there

is no ideal method of reconciling the household data in the CPS with death rates of individuals,

and the difficulty would exist even with unit record data. Income is observed for households, not

individuals. Even so, it would be useful to redo the calculations imputing household incomes to

individuals, and merging on individual birth cohorts, something that would also allow me to look

at individual earnings and other components of income. I hope to report these results in subse-

quent versions of this paper. My use of the variance of logarithms as the measure of inequality

should also be seen as a first cut. Trends in income inequality in the U.S. are not invariant to the

selection of inequality measure; the variance of logarithms is (too) sensitive to developments at

the bottom of the distribution, and thus to imputation procedures for zero or non-reporting, while

another obvious measure, the gini, is (too) sensitive to the top of the distribution, and thus to


                                                 22
details of top-coding. Again, more work remains to be done.

   There are a number of important issues that have to be borne in mind when thinking about

the results. One is that I have made no attempt to correct the estimates for the attenuation bias to

the coefficients that comes from the fact that the cohort income and inequality estimates are

subject to sampling errors. A correction is feasible following the methods in Deaton (1985); for

the moment the important thing to note is that the estimates given here are conservative, in the

sense of being biased toward zero and insignificance.

   Perhaps the most central issue is the dependence of mortality rates on age, and how this

dependence is taken into account in testing the hypotheses. Between ages 25 and 75, and except

possibly for the first two or three years, the probability of dying rises monotonically with age. So

does the variance of household income, see Deaton and Paxson (1994) for evidence and reasons.

But the hypothesis is presumably not that inequality rather than biology is the fundamental deter-

minant of aging and death. There are various ways of adjusting mortality rates for age, and the

effects of some of these are explored in the tables. It should be noted that age profiles of mort-

ality have not been constant over time in the US, for either males or females. The biggest de-

creases in female mortality rates have been at younger ages, and in male mortality rates at older

ages, so that the female age-profile has become steeper and the male age-profile flatter.

   The entries at the top left of Table 1 show what happens with the simplest form of age adjust-

ment, which is the inclusion of age and its square in the log odds regression. These baseline reg-

ressions, run on 663 cohort-year observations and separately for men and women, have the log

odds of dying on the left-hand side and age, age squared, and the mean and variance of the loga-

rithms of household income on the right hand side. They show a significant negative effect of


                                                 23
income and a significant positive effect of the variance, as hypothesized. Income is more pro-

tective for men than for women; the male coefficient is twice as large. It is tempting to attribute

this to the matching procedure, which by matching individual age to the age of the household

head, typically serves men better than women, but even in studies with unit record data, the

mortality gradient with household income tends to be steeper for males than for females, see e.g.

Rogot et al (1992). The effect of income is large; doubling household income would reduce a

man’s risk of death by about a third, about two thirds of the way to his wife’s level. The esti-

mated effect of inequality is absolutely smaller. Between 1981 and 1993, the average over

cohorts of the variance of log income rose from 0.67 to 0.82, so that according to the estimates,

which are very similar for men and women, the average log odds of dying should have risen by

0.026. But this is quantitatively important relative to the reduction in the cohort average of the

log odds, which from 1981 to 1995 was 0.07 for both men and women, so that this estimate

attributes about half of the slowdown in the rate of mortality decline to the rise in income in-

equality.

   However, the estimated effects of inequality are not robust to the way in which the mortality

schedule is age standardized. In the second pair of columns, I report what happens if, instead of

using the log odds of dying as the left-hand side variable, I subtract out the estimated age effects

from a regression of the log odds on an unrestricted set of age and cohort dummies. In order to

obtain maximum accuracy, this preliminary regression is estimated on (almost) the full set of

data in the BMD, i.e. on all ages between 0 and 85 for all years from 1900 to 1995. The unres-

tricted age effects allow for any shape in the age mortality profile, and the unrestricted cohort

effects allow for parallel shifts down (or up) in the age-profiles across cohorts. I included the


                                                 24
cohort effects in order to limit possible bias to the age effects if they were omitted, but the results

in the tables are almost identical if the cohort effects are excluded, and the adjustment made by

using the residuals from a regression of the log odds on unrestricted age effects. Even after ad-

justment, I still include age and age squared in the regressions to capture age effects that remain.

Cohort age-profiles of the log odds of mortality are not perfectly described by the sum of age and

cohort effects—though the approximation is quite good after age 25, especially for men.

    This superior age-adjustment procedure leaves the estimated effects of income more or less

unaltered, but eliminates the effect of inequality for men, and reduces it for women. Very similar

results are shown in the next pair of estimates in the same row, where I adjust the log odds of

dying by subtracting the age-specific log odds of dying in 1940, a simpler procedure which gives

results very close to those obtained by first eliminating age and cohort (or just age) effects.

    The last pair of estimates in the first row shows what happens when I use the raw log odds (or

indeed any of the adjusted measures) and include in the regression an unrestricted set of age

dummies. Once again, the highly significant and (somewhat smaller but still large) protective

effect of income remains, but the signs on the variance terms have changed, and increases in

inequality are estimated to be protective, albeit with a small coefficient. In this first set of reg-

ressions, it appears to be the positive relationship between income inequality and age that gives

an apparent positive effect of inequality on mortality. When age is controlled for in a flexible

way, the effect either vanishes or is reversed.

    One argument against this first set of models is that inequality and income take time to work

themselves through into mortality, and that we should not expect to see a relationship on a year

to year basis. To test this rigorously would require more information on how long the process is


                                                   25
supposed to take; for example, it would be possible to test for lagged effects, or a hypothesis that

inequality is most harmful at specific ages. One plausible hypothesis is that it is lifetime exposure

to income and income inequality that determines mortality. This hypothesis can be tested by

projecting the average logarithm of income and the variance of income on a set of cohort dum-

mies and including only the projections in the regression. In the case of the mean logarithm of

income, this is the same decomposition that is used in life-cycle models of saving to recover esti-

mates of lifetime resources, or permanent income. In practice, it is convenient to run these regres-

sions as before, but using unrestricted cohort dummies as instrumental variables for income and

income inequality. In the second panel of Table 1, I instrument only for the mean of log income,

so that income works through permanent income, and inequality works instantaneously. In the

bottom panel, I instrument for both income and inequality, so that both work only over the

lifetime.

    The most important result in the middle panel—repeated in the bottom panel—is that per-

manent income is more protective than current income, twice or three times as much. If income

is protective at all, it is perhaps not surprising that permanent income is more protective, or

indeed that current income appears only as a proxy for permanent income. Note that, as before,

the effects are smaller for females than males, but the larger effect of permanent over current in-

come appears for females just as for males.

    Instrumenting for permanent income has relatively little effect on the inequality estimates,

when inequality itself is not instrumented. Inequality is significant when mortality is not fully

adjusted for age, but its effect becomes small, insignificant, or perverse in the later columns.

However, the situation is rather different in the final row, where both income and inequality are


                                                 26
instrumented. Permanent inequality is estimated to raise mortality, and to do so by much more

than when we use only contemporaneous inequality. These effects, although reduced by better

age adjustment in the second and third sets of estimates, remain quantitatively large and statistic-

ally significant until the last pair of columns, where age effects are fully controlled, at which

point the effects of inequality vanish. Once again, it is the age structure of inequality that is gene-

rating the estimated effects on mortality, which disappear once inequality is prevented from

working though age by the inclusion of a full set of age dummies.

   If we had prior knowledge of the non-economic determinants of the age-profile of mortality,

and could thus perfectly adjust the age profile, it would be possible to investigate whether in-

come inequality over the life-cycle plays a role in shaping the age-profile of mortality. But absent

that knowledge, and given the strong (nonlinear) relationships between age on the one hand and

both mortality and inequality on the other, it is necessary to include the full set of age dummies,

and to conclude that there is no evidence in these data that higher inequality raises the risk of

dying. The lack of robustness of the effects of inequality on mortality, and in particular the

sensitivity to methods of age-adjustment, should also sound a note of caution for other attempts

to study this mechanism.

   Table 2 contains an important set of cross-checks. Because both the level of income and its

dispersion are rising over time, and because mortality is declining over time, there is some risk

that the results might be affected by a spurious correlation whereby one or other of income and

its inequality picks up the trend in mortality. A simple way of testing for this possibility is to in-

clude a time trend in all the regressions. But the results in Table 2, although differing in detail, do

not differ in their broad import. In the preferred specification, with both variables instrumented


                                                  27
and a full set of age dummies, the effect of mean income on male mortality is larger than before,

and that on female mortality smaller. Inequality has a negative (i.e. perverse) but insignificant

effect on male mortality, and a positive effect on female mortality.

    Finally, I turn to the theoretical model developed in Section 2 and its prediction that in-

equality should change the slope of the gradient. Testing this hypothesis requires entering the

product of the mean of log income and the variance of log income in the regressions. In most of

the regressions in Tables 1 and 2, it is not possible to reject the hypothesis that the interaction is

zero, a partial exception being an estimated positive interaction term for females in the regression

in the first column of the third row, where both the variance and the mean (as well as their inter-

action) are instrumented, but where the mortality schedule is unadjusted except for the inclusion

of age and age squared in the regression. Since the age-adjustment here is almost certainly

inadequate, this result is of little consequence.

    More interesting is what happens in the preferred specification in the last cell of the table,

where both income and income inequality are instrumented by cohort dummies and where the

regression includes a full set of age dummies. Table 3 shows the three coefficients for males and

for females, with and without time trends. It also shows the derivatives of the log odds of mort-

ality with respect to the mean and the variance calculated at the mean values of both. As always,

income exerts a strong protective effect and, as in the original preferred specification, inequality

has no effect at the mean. But the interaction terms are highly significant and always negative so

that, according to these estimates, increases in inequality rotate the mortality to income gradient

around the mean, with higher inequality steepening the gradient. This is what the reference

group-theory predicts in the model without a fundamental effect of inequality and provided


                                                    28
inequality acts in such a way as to increase within-group inequality relative to between group

inequality. Of course, there is no independent evidence that inequality works in this way, but the

results are certainly consistent with that version of the theory.



4. Conclusions and caveats

This paper has proposed a simple model in which an individual’s health is affected by the in-

dividual’s income relative to the average income of members of a reference group. Because

reference groups can be defined in myriad ways, reference group incomes are hard to observe.

Nevertheless, individual income is informative about reference group income, to an extent that

depends on the ratio of between-group and within-group variances of income, with the result that

the “gradient,” the slope of the expectation of health conditional on income, depends on the ratio

of the variances. In this way, inequality affects the relationship between income and health. My

preliminary examination of mortality in the United States is consistent with this story. Increasing

inequality does not appear to have a direct influence on mortality, but the protective effect of in-

come against mortality has become stronger as income inequality has increased. According to the

theory, these results do not imply that policy changes that affect inequality will necessarily have

any effect on aggregate (or even individual) mortality. When the ratio of between-group to

within-group inequality changes, any given income group has a different mix of high status and

low status individuals, and it is the change in this mix that changes health conditional on income,

not any change in health.

   While I hope that these theoretical and empirical findings will be a useful addition to the

debate on socio-economic differences in health, I wish to conclude by referring to some of the


                                                  29
important issues that I have ignored. First, the model developed here makes no concession to the

other direction of causality, from health to income. This “reverse” link is undoubtedly present,

but it is not the topic of this paper. Second, in order to focus on relative income, I have ignored

other determinants of health. Some researchers believe that the effect of income on health is the

result of the association between income and education, and while my own view is that is that

both education and income are separately protective, I do not wish to downplay the independent

importance of education. Again, I have ignored it only to focus on other matters. Finally, by

working with linear models, I have ignored one of the leading candidates for explaining the

effects of inequality on average health, which is aggregation over a concave relationship between

health and income. While such a mechanism is plausible, the lack of a link between aggregate

mortality and inequality in my data could be interpreted as a defense of linearity.




                                                 30
5. List of works cited:

Adler, Nancy, W. Thomas Boyce, Margaret A. Chesney, Susan Folkman, and Leonard Syme,
    1993, “Socioeconomic inequalities in health: no easy solution,” Journal of the American
    Medical Association, 269, 3140–5.
Allison, R. Andrew and James E. Foster, 1998, “Measuring health inequality using qualitative
    data,” Vanderbilt University, processed.
Atkinson, Anthony B., 1970, “On the measurement of inequality,” Journal of Economic Theory,
    2, 244–63.
Cohen, Sheldon, D. Tyrrell, and A. Smith, 1991, “Psychological stress and susceptibility to the
    common cold,” New England Journal of Medicine, 325, 606–12.
Cohen, Sheldon, S. Line, S. B. Manuck, B. S. Rabin, E. R. Heise, and J. R. Kaplan, 1997,
    “Chronic social stress, social status, and susceptibility to upper respiratory infections in
    nonhuman primates,” Psychosomatic Medicine, 59,:213–21
Deaton, Angus and Christina H. Paxson, 1994, “Intertemporal choice and inequality,” Journal of
    Political Economy, 102, 437–67.
Deaton, Angus and Christina H. Paxson, 1998a, “Aging and inequality in income and health,”
    American Economic Review, papers and proceedings, 88, 248–53.
Deaton, Angus and Christina H. Paxson, 1998b, “Health, income and inequality over the life-
    cycle,” in David A. Wise, ed., Frontiers in the Economics of Aging, Chicago. Chicago
    University Press for the NBER, 431–57.
Deininger, Klaus and Lyn Squire, 1996, “A new data set measuring income inequality,” World
    Bank Economic Review, 10, 565–91.
Elo, Irma T., and Samuel H. Preston, 1996, “Educational differentials in mortality: United States,
    1979–85,” Social Science and Medicine, 42, 47–57.
Feldman, Jacob J., Diane M. Makuc, Joel C. Kleinman, and Joan Cornoni-Huntley, 1989,
    “National trends in educational differentials in mortality,” American Journal of Epidemi-
    ology, 129, 919–33.
Judge, Ken, 1995, “Income distribution and life expectancy: a critical appraisal,” British Medical
    Journal, 311, 1282–5
Kaplan, George, Elsie R. Pamuk, J. M. Lynch, Richard D. Cohen and Jennifer L. Balfour, 1996,
    “Inequality in income and mortality in the United States: analysis of mortality and potential
    pathways,” British Medical Journal, 312, 999—1003.
Kennedy, Bruce P., Ichiro Kawachi, and Deborah Prothrow-Stith, 1996, “Income distribution and
    mortality: cross sectional ecological study of the Robin Hood index in the United States,”
    British Medical Journal, 312, 1004–7.
Kitigawa, Evelyn M. and Philip M. Hauser, 1973, Differential mortality in the United States: a
    study in socioeconomic epidemiology, Cambridge, MA. Harvard.
Le Grand, Julian, 1987, “Inequalities in health: some international comparisons,” European
    Economic Review, 31, 182–91.
Lynch, J. W., G. A. Kaplan and J. T. Salonen, 1997, “Why do poor people behave poorly?”
    Social Science and Medicine, 44, 809–31.
Macintyre, Sally, 1997, “The Black report and beyond: what are the issues?” Social Science and

                                               31
   Medicine, 44, 723–45.
Meara, Ellen, 1998, “Why is health related to socioeconomic status?” Department of Economics,
   Harvard University, processed.
Mellor, Jennifer M. and Jeffrey Milyo, 1999, “Income inequality and health status in the United
   States: Evidence from the current population survey,” Departments of Economics, The
   College of William and Mary and Tufts University, processed.
Pappas, G., S. Queen, W. Hadden and G. Fisher, 1993, “The increasing disparity in mortality
   between socioeconomic groups in the United States, 1960 and 1986,” New England Journal
   of Medicine, 329, 103–15.
Preston, Samuel H. and Irma T. Elo, 1995, “Are educational differentials in adult mortality
   increasing in the United States?” Journal of Aging and Health, 7, 476–96.
Rogot, E., P. D. Sorlie, N. J. Johnson, and C. Schmitt, eds, 1992, A mortality study of 1.3 million
   persons by demographic, social, and economic factors: 1979–1985 Follow-up, Bethesda,
   Md. NIH.
Sapolsky, Robert M., 1993, “Endocrinology alfresco: psychoendocrine studies of wild baboons,”
   Recent Progress in Hormone Research, 48, 437–68.
Sen, Amartya K., 1973, On economic inequality, Oxford. Clarendon Press.
Wilkinson, Richard G., 1994, “The epidemiological transition: from material scarcity to social
   disadvantage,” Daedalus, 123, 61–77.
Wilkinson, Richard G., 1995, “Commentary: a reply to Ken Judge: mistaken criticisms ignore
   overwhelming evidence,”British Medical Journal, 311, 1285–7.
Wilkinson, Richard G., 1996, Unhealthy societies: the afflictions of inequality, London,
   Routledge.




                                                32
                                                                             Table 1

     Effects of mean log income and the variance of log income on the log odds of dying: birth cohorts observed in 1981–93


                             Age unadjusted                        Age adjusted                  Adjusted relative to 1940            Including full age effects

                         males            females            males             females            males            females            males             females

 OLS

 mean lny            –0.45    (8.9)    –0.22    (6.0)     –0.42   (10.)     –0.27      (8.1)   –0.54   (13.)    –0.29    (8.0)     –0.35   (7.6)     –0.28    (11.)

                      0.17    (6.3)      0.16   (7.9)      0.02   (1.0)      0.12      (6.7)    0.02   (1.1)      0.15   (7.8)     –0.09   (3.7)     –0.06    (4.5)
 var lny

 IV for m(lny)

 mean lny            –1.15    (13.)    –0.62    (10.)     –1.04   (15.)     –0.64      (12.)   –1.15   (16.)    –0.67    (12.)     –0.73   (11.)     –0.53    (14.)

 var lny              0.12    (4.0)      0.13   (6.0)     –0.02   (0.7)      0.09      (4.8)   –0.02   (0.6)      0.12   (5.8)     –0.12   (4.6)     –0.08    (5.4)

 IV for both

 mean lny            –1.38    (12.)    –0.81    (9.3)     –1.18   (14.)     –0.81      (10.)   –1.30   (14.)    –0.80    (10.)     –0.82   (10.)     –0.62    (12.)

 var lny              0.71    (9.3)      0.59   (11.)      0.32   (5.8)      0.52      (10.)    0.35   (6.2)      0.58   (11.)      0.03   (0.4)      0.06    (1.3)

Notes: t-values in parentheses. The dependent variable is the log odds of dying for each birth cohort in each of the 13 years, 1981 to 1993. Age and age squared
are included in all regressions except those with a full set of age effects. In the “age unadjusted” regressions, the dependent variable is the unadjusted log odds.
In the “age adjusted” regressions, the dependent variable is log odds less the estimated age-effects from a regression of the log odds on unrestricted age and birth
cohort dummies, calculated for ages 0 to 85 for all years from 1900 to 1995. “Adjusted relative to 1940" means that the dependent variable is the log odds of
dying minus the log odds of dying in 1940. In the final columns, the dependent variable is the unadjusted log odds and an unrestricted set of age dummies are
included in the regression. The instrumental variables are cohort (date of birth) dummies, so that the IV procedure is equivalent to projecting the mean or
variance (or both) on lifetime cohort effects prior to inclusion in the regression.




                                                                                  33
                                                                             Table 2

     Effects of mean log income and the variance of log income on the log odds of dying: birth cohorts observed in 1981–93
                                          (with a time trend included in all regressions)

                             Age unadjusted                  Age and cohort adjusted             Adjusted relative to 1940            Including full age effects

                         males            females            males             females            males            females            males             females

 OLS

 mean lny            –0.39    (6.8)    –0.05    (1.2)     –0.39   (8.4)     –0.12    (3.3)    –0.55    (11.)    –0.14    (3.5)     –0.30   (5.2)     –0.07    (2.8)

 var lny              0.18    (6.6)      0.20   (11.)      0.03   (1.5)      0.15    (8.9)     0.02    (1.1)      0.19   (10.)     –0.07   (2.8)     –0.01    (0.6)

 IV for m(lny)

 mean lny            –1.70    (12.)    –0.43    (5.2)     –1.61   (13.)     –0.50    (6.7)    –1.82    (14.)    –0.56    (6.9)     –1.13   (10.)     –0.39    (6.8)

 var lny              0.03    (0.8)      0.16   (7.1)     –0.11   (3.2)      0.11    (5.7)    –0.13    (3.5)      0.14   (6.4)     –0.22   (6.2)     –0.05    (3.3)

 IV for both

 mean lny            –1.68    (10.)    –0.41    (3.4)     –1.60   (12.)     –0.48    (4.4)    –1.81    (13.)    –0.53    (4.5)     –1.24   (10.)     –0.44    (6.4)

 var lny              0.62    (7.1)      0.72   (12.)      0.20   (3.0)      0.61    (11.)     0.20    (2.9)      0.67   (12.)     –0.18   (1.9)      0.15    (2.9)

Notes: t-values in parentheses. The dependent variable is the log odds of dying for each birth cohort in each of the 13 years, 1981 to 1993. Age and age squared
are included in all regressions except those with a full set of age effects. In the “age unadjusted” regressions, the dependent variable is the unadjusted log odds.
In the “age adjusted” regressions, the dependent variable is log odds less the estimated age-effects from a regression of the log odds on unrestricted age and birth
cohort dummies, calculated for ages 0 to 85 for all years from 1900 to 1995. “Adjusted relative to 1940" means that the dependent variable is the log odds of
dying minus the log odds of dying in 1940. In the final columns, the dependent variable is the unadjusted log odds and an unrestricted set of age dummies are
included in the regression. The instrumental variables are cohort (date of birth) dummies, so that the IV procedure is equivalent to projecting the mean or
variance (or both) on lifetime cohort effects prior to inclusion in the regression.




                                                                                34
                                        Table 3
   Interactions between means and variances in mortality regression with full age effects


                                                  Males                                          Females

 With no time trend
 mean lny                                     –0.386      (2.3)                               0.012    (0.1)
 variance lny                                  7.309      (3.0)                               10.58    (6.1)
 mean * variance                              –0.732      (3.0)                              –1.058    (6.1)
 j/j m at mean                                –0.951      (9.9)                              –0.805    (12.)
 j/j v at mean                                 0.042      (0.5)                               0.078    (1.3)

 With time trend
 mean lny                                     –0.615      (2.9)                               0.036    (0.3)
 variance lny                                  12.68      (4.0)                               10.02    (5.6)
 mean * variance                              –1.302      (4.1)                              –0.998    (5.5)
 j/j m at mean                                –1.621      (9.3)                              –0.735    (7.5)
 j/j v at mean                                –0.236      (2.1)                               0.107    (1.7)

Notes: t-values in parentheses. The means of mean(lny) and var(lny) are 9.93 and 0.77 respectively, and the last two
rows in each panel show the derivatives evaluated at those values. Except for the inclusion of the interaction terms,
these regressions correspond to those shown in the last columns of Tables 1 and 2.




                                                          35
                                    80                                                                                                                         80
                                                                   1980-1982                                                                                                                  1987 -1990                          Japan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Japan
                                    78                                                                                                                         78
                                                                                                                                                                                    Canada                  Sw eden




                                                                                                                                            Life-expectancy
                                                                                                         Japan
     Life-expectancy




                                                     Netherlands      Sweden                                                                                                                         C anada               Italy
                                    76                                          Sw eden                                                                                                   Netherlands                                          Italy
                                                                                               Japan                                                           76
                                                                                                                                                                                                          UK                                                    USA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Denm ark
                                                              Canada                Italy
                                                                                                                  US                                                                                        UK                                NZ
                                                                                                Italy                                                                                              UK
                                    74                                                                                                                         74         Finland
                                                                    Finland               NZ              US
                                           UK                                                                                                                                                                                 Ireland
                                                                                               NZ                                                                                                                                                   Portugal
                                                                                                             Ireland
                                    72                                                                                                                         72

                                                                                                                 Portugal                                                                co rrelation=-0.14
                                                      correlation=-0.26
                                    70                                                                                                                         70
                                          25                         30          gini               35                      40                                           25                            30        gini                   35                                40

                                    2.5
                                               (87-90)-(80-82)                                           Japan                                                80
                                                                              Portugal                                                                                                                                                         90             89

                                     2
        Change in life expectancy




                                                                                                                                                              78
                                                                                                Italy                                                                                                                                         82




                                                                                                                                  Life-expectancy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            91      80
                                                                                                                                                              76                                                                             Japan
                                    1.5                                                  Canada                                                                                                              87     88                                          90
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             90
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            84 87    89
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       82
                                                                                                        NZ                                                                               82
                                                                    Ireland                                                 UK                                74                    80                                              74         80
                                           Finland                                                                                                                                            United K ingdom                                 77
                                                                                 Sweden                                                                                                                                            72                  U nited States
                                     1                                                                                                                                        77     74
                                                                                                 US                                                                                               72
                                                                                                                                                              72                                                                                     70
                                                                                                                                                                                         70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         70
                                                correlation=0.10                                   N etherlands
                                     .5                                                                                                                       70
                                                -4             -2            0            2                            4     6                                      20                   25                       30                           35                         40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   gini
                                                                      C hange in gini coefficient




Figure 1: Inequality and life expectancy: some international comparisons

                                                                                                                                 36
                                 .012
   Standardized mortality rate




                                                                      males

                                 .010




                                                females
                                 .008




                                 .006

                                        1950   1960       1970        1980    1990   2000




Figure 2: Standardized mortality rates for males and females: United States, 1950–1995




                                                                 37
