1

Introduction

It is by now a commonplace observation that the volatility of the aggregate stock market
is not constant, but changes over time. Economists have built increasingly sophisticated
statistical models to capture this time-variation in volatility. Simple filters such as
the rolling standard deviation used by Officer (1973) have been replaced by parametric
ARCH or stochastic-volatility models. Partial surveys of the enormous literature on
these models are given by Bollerslev et al. (1992), Hentschel (1995), and Campbell, Lo,
and MacKinlay (1997, Chapter 12).
Aggregate volatility is of course important in almost any theory of risk and return,
and it is the volatility experienced by holders of aggregate index funds. But the aggregate
market return is only one component of the return to an individual stock. Industry-level
and idiosyncratic firm-level shocks are also important components of individual stock
returns. There are several reasons to be interested in the volatilities of these components.
First, many investors have large holdings of individual stocks; they may choose not
to diversify in the manner recommended by financial theory, or their holdings may be
restricted by corporate compensation policies. These investors are affected by shifts in
industry-level and idiosyncratic volatility, just as much as by shifts in market volatility.
Second, arbitrageurs who trade to exploit mispricing of individual stocks face risks that
are related to idiosyncratic return volatility, not aggregate market volatility. Larger
pricing errors are possible when idiosyncratic firm-level volatility is high (Ingersoll 1987,
Chapter 7, Shleifer and Vishny 1997). Third, firm-level volatility is important in event
studies. Events affect individual stocks, and the statistical significance of abnormal
event-related returns is determined by the volatility of individual stock returns relative
to the market or industry (Campbell, Lo, and MacKinlay 1997, Chapter 4). Fourth,
the price of an option on an individual stock depends on the total volatility of the stock
return, including industry-level and idiosyncratic volatility as well as market volatility.
Disaggregate volatility measures also have important relations with aggregate output
in some macroeconomic models. Models of sectoral reallocation, following Lilien (1982),
imply that an increase in the industry-level volatility of productivity growth may reduce
output as resources are diverted from production to costly reallocation across sectors.
Models of cleansing recessions (Caballero and Hammour 1994, Eden and Jovanovic
3

1994) emphasize similar effects at the level of the firm. An exogenous increase in the
arrival rate of information about management quality may temporarily reduce output as
resources are reallocated from low-quality to high-quality firms; alternatively, a recession
which occurs for some other reason may reveal information about management quality
and increase the pace of reallocation across firms.
There is surprisingly little empirical research on volatility at the level of the industry
or firm. A few papers use disaggregate data to study the leverage effect, the tendency
for volatility to rise following negative returns (Black 1976, Christie 1982, Duffee 1995).
Engle and Lee (1993) use a factor ARCH model to study the persistence properties of
firm-level volatility for a few large stocks. Some researchers have used stock-market data
to test macroeconomic models of reallocation across industries or firms (Bernard and
Steigerwald 1993, Brainard and Cutler 1993, Loungani et al. 1990), or to explore the
firm-level relation between volatility and investment (Leahy and Whited 1996). Malkiel
and Xu (1995), following the first version of this paper (Campbell, Kim, and Lettau
1994), study long-run trends in disaggregate volatility. Roll (1992) and Heston and
Rouwenhorst (1994) decompose volatility in industry and country-specific effects and
study the implications for international diversification.
The purpose of this paper is to provide a simple summary of historical movements
in market-, industry-, and firm-level volatility. To keep things as simple as possible, we
average industry-level volatility across industries, and idiosyncratic firm-level volatility
across firms. We report a few results for individual industries but none for individual
firms.
In the interest of simplicity we also use daily data within each month to construct
sample variances for that month, without imposing any parametric model to describe
the evolution of variances over time. Multivariate volatility models are notoriously complicated and difficult to estimate. Furthermore, while the choice of a parametric model
may be essential for volatility forecasting, it is less important for describing historical
movements in volatility because all models tend to produce historical fitted volatilities
that move closely together. The reason for this was first given by Merton (1980) and
was elaborated by Nelson (1992): with sufficiently high-frequency data, volatility can be
estimated arbitrarily accurately over an arbitrarily short time interval. Recently Ander-

4

sen et al. (1999) have used a similar approach to produce daily exchange rate volatilities
from intradaily data on exchange rate movements.
Our results can be summarized as follows. Besides the volatility of the market,
industry-level and, especially, firm-level volatility are important components of the total
volatility of the return of a typical firm. All three volatility measures experience substantial variations over time. They are positively correlated as well as autocorrelated.
Over our 196297 sample period, firm-level volatility has a significant positive trend
whereas market-level and industry-level volatility do not. Thus the idiosyncratic risk of
a typical stock has increased over time relative to its systematic market or industry risk;
equivalently, the explanatory power of market or industry models for individual stocks
has declined over time.
We also study the lead-lag relations among our volatility measures and various indicators of the state of the aggregate economy. Granger-causality tests suggest that market
volatility tends to lead the other volatility series. All three volatility measures increase
substantially in economic downturns and tend to lead recessions. To explore this effect
in detail, we run OLS regressions of GDP growth on the three volatility measures lagged
by one quarter. We also include other variables which are known to forecast GDP, such
as its own lag and the return of the CRSP value-weighted portfolio. All three volatility
variables but particularly industry-level volatility help to forecast economic activity
and reduce the significance of other commonly used forecasting variables.
The organization of the paper is as follows. Section 2 discusses data construction,
Section 3 presents basic empirical results, Section 4 studies the cyclical properties of
our volatility measures, Section 5 presents selected results for individual industries, and
Section 6 concludes.

5

2

Data Construction

2.1

Methodology

We decompose the return on a typical stock into three components: the market-wide
return, an industry-specific residual, and a firm-specific residual. Based on this return
decomposition, we construct time-series of volatility measures of the three components
for a typical firm. Our goal is to define volatility measures that sum to the total return
volatility of a typical firm, without having to keep track of covariances and without
having to estimate betas for firms or industries. In this subsection, we discuss how
we can achieve such a representation of volatility. The next subsection presents the
estimation procedure and some details of the data sample.
Industries are denoted by an i subscript while individual firms are indexed by j.
The simple excess return of firm j that belongs to industry i in period t is denoted
as Rijt . This excess return, like all others in the paper, is measured relative to the
contemporaneous Treasury bill rate. Let wijt be the weight of firm j in industry i.
In principle, our methodology is valid for any arbitrary weighting scheme, however in
the application below we use a value-weighting based on market capitalization. The
excess return of industry i in period t is given by Rit =

P

j∈i

wijt Rijt . Industries are

aggregated correspondingly. The weight of industry i in the total market is denoted by
wit (=

P

j∈i

wijt ) and the excess market return is Rmt =

P

i

wit Rit .

The next step is the decomposition of firm and industry returns into the three components. We first write down a decomposition based on the CAPM, and we then modify
it for empirical implementation. The CAPM implies that we can set intercepts to zero
in the following equations:
Rit = βmi Rmt + it ,

(1)

Rijt = βmj Rmt + βij it + ηijt ,

(2)

for industry returns and

for individual firm returns.1 In (1) βmi denotes the beta for industry i with respect to
the market return, and it is the industry-specific residual. Similarly, in (2) βmj is the
1

We could work with the market model, not imposing the mean restrictions of the CAPM, and allow

free intercepts αi and αij in equations (1) and (2). However our goal is to avoid estimating firm-specific

6

beta of firm j with respect to the market, βij is the beta of firm j in industry i with
respect to its industry shock, and ηijt is the firm-specific residual. The weighted sum of
the different betas equals unity:
X

X

wit βmi = 1,

i

wijt βmj = 1,

j∈i

X

wijt βji = 1.

(3)

j∈i

The CAPM decomposition (1) and (2) guarantees that the different components
of a firm’s return are orthogonal to one another. Hence it permits a simple variance
decomposition in which all covariance terms are zero:
2
Var(Rmt ) + Var(it ),
Var(Rit ) = βmi

(4)

2
Var(Rmt ) + βij2 Var(it ) + Var(ηijt ).
Var(Rijt ) = βmj

(5)

The problem with this decomposition, however, is that it requires knowledge of firmspecific betas which are difficult to estimate and may well be unstable over time. Therefore we work with a simplified model that does not require any information about betas.
We show that this model permits a variance decomposition similar to (4) and (5) on an
appropriate aggregate level.
First, consider the following simplified industry return decomposition which drops
the industry beta coefficient βmi from (1):
Rit = Rmt + it .

(6)

Equation (6) defines it as the difference between the industry return Rit and the market
return Rmt . Campbell, Lo, and MacKinlay (1997, Chapter 4, p.156) refer to (6) as a
market-adjusted-return model in contrast to the market model of equation (1).
Comparing (1) and (6), we have
it = it + (βmi − 1)Rmt .

(7)

The market-adjusted-return residual it equals the CAPM residual of (4) only if the
industry beta βmi = 1 or Rmt = 0.
parameters; despite the well-known empirical deficiencies of the CAPM, we feel that the zero-intercept
restriction is reasonable in this context.

7

The apparent drawback of this decomposition is that Rmt and it are not orthogonal,
and so one cannot ignore the covariance between them. Computing the variance of the
industry return yields
Var(Rit ) = Var(Rmt ) + Var(it ) + 2Cov(Rmt , it )
= Var(Rmt ) + Var(it ) + 2(βmi − 1)Var(Rmt ),

(8)

where taking account of the covariance term once again introduces the industry beta
into the variance decomposition.
Note, however, that although the variance of an individual industry return contains
covariance terms, the weighted average of variances across industries is free of the individual covariances:
X

wit Var(Rit ) = Var(Rmt ) +

i

X

wit Var(it )

i

2
2
,
+ σt
= σmt
2
2
≡
≡ Var(Rmt ) and σt
where σmt

out since from (3)

P

i

P

i

(9)

wit Var(it ). The terms involving betas aggregate

wit βmi = 1. Therefore we can use the residual it in (6) to construct

a measure of average industry-level volatility that does not require any estimation of
betas. The weighted average

P

i

wit Var(Rit ) can be interpreted as the expected volatility

of a randomly drawn industry (with the probability of drawing industry i equal to its
weight wit ).
We can proceed in the same fashion for individual firm returns. Consider a firm
return decomposition that drops betas from (2):
Rijt = Rmt + it + ηijt ,

(10)

ηijt = ηijt + (βmj − 1)Rmt + (βij − 1)it .

(11)

where it is defined in (7) and

Just as with industry residuals, ηijt = ηijt only if firm betas equal one or market and
industry shocks are zero.
The variance of the firm return is
Var(Rijt ) =

Var(Rmt ) + Var(it ) + Var(ηijt )
+ 2Cov(Rmt , it ) + 2Cov(it , ηijt ) + 2Cov(Rmt , ηijt ).
8

(12)

We can express the covariances in terms of betas and volatilities:
Cov(it , ηijt ) = Cov(it + (βmi − 1)Rmt , ηijt + (βmj − 1)Rmt + (βij − 1)it )
= (βij − 1)Var(it ) + (βmi − 1)(βmj − 1)Var(Rmt ),
Cov(Rmt , ηijt ) = (βmj − 1)Var(Rmt ).

(13)
(14)

The weighted average of firm variances in industry i is therefore
X

2
+ 2(βmi − 1)Var(Rmt ),
wijt Var(Rijt ) = Var(Rmt ) + Var(it ) + σηit

(15)

j∈i

2
≡
where σηit

P

j∈i

wijt Var(ηijt ) is the weighted average of firm-level volatility in industry

i. Computing the weighted average across industries yields again a variance decomposition without any betas since the industry betas sum to one:
X

wit

X

wijt Var(Rijt ) = Var(Rmt ) +

j∈i

i

=
2
≡
where σηt

P

i

2
=
wit σηit

P

i

wit

P

j∈i

2
σmt

+

2
σt

+

X

wit Var(it ) +

i
2
σηt ,

X

2
wit σηit

i

(16)

wijt Var(ηijt ) is the weighted average of firm-level

volatility across all firms. As in the case of industry returns, the simplified decomposition
of firm returns (10) yields a measure of average firm-level volatility that does not require
estimation of betas.
We can gain further insight into the relation between our volatility decomposition
and that based on the CAPM if we aggregate the latter (equations (4) and (5)) across
industries and firms. When we do this we find that
2
2
2
,
+ CSVt (βmi )σmt
= σt
σt
2
≡
where σt

P

CSVt (βmi ) ≡

i

(17)

wit Var(it ) is the average variance of the CAPM industry shock it , and

P

i

wit (βmi − 1)2 is the cross-sectional variance of industry betas across

industries. Similarly,
2
2
2
2
,
+ CSVt (βij )σt
+ CSVt (βmj )σmt
= σηt
σηt
2
≡
where σηt

P

i

wit

P

j∈i

wijt Var(ηijt ), CSVt (βmj ) ≡

P

i

wit

P

j

(18)

wijt (βmj − 1)2 is the cross-

sectional variance of firm betas on the market across all firms in all industries, and
9

CSVt (βij ) ≡

P

i

wit

P

j

wijt (βij − 1)2 is the cross-sectional variance of firm betas on

industry shocks across all firms in all industries.
Equations (17) and (18) show that cross-sectional variation in betas can produce
2
2
2
, even if the CAPM
, and σηt
, σt
common movements in our variance components σmt
2
2
2
. We
do not move at all with the market variance σmt
and σηt
variance components σt

return to this issue later in the paper.

2.2

Estimation

We use the firm-level return data in the CRSP data set to estimate the volatility components in (16) based on the return decomposition (6) and (10). We aggregate individual firms into 49 industries according to the classification scheme in Fama and French
(1997).2 We refer to their paper for the SIC classification. Our sample period runs from
July 1962 to December 1997. Obviously, the composition of firms in individual industries
has changed dramatically over the sample period. The total number of firms covered by
the CRSP data set increased from 2047 in 62:7 to 8927 in 97:12. The industry with the
most firms on average over the sample is Financial Services with 6884 (253 in 62:7 to
16873 in 97:12) while the industry with the fewest firms is Defense with 86 (13 to 140
over the sample). Based on market capitalization the three largest industries on average over the sample are Petroleum/Gas (11%), Financial Services (7.8%) and Utilities
(7.4%). Table 9 includes a list of the ten largest industries. To get daily excess return,
we subtract the 30-day T-bill return divided by number of trading days in a month.
We use the following procedure to estimate the three volatility components in (16).
Let s denote the frequency at which returns are measured. We will use daily returns for
most estimates but also consider weekly and monthly returns to check the sensitivity
of our results with respect to the return frequency. Using returns of frequency s we
construct volatility estimates of frequency t. Unless otherwise noted t refers to months
and s to days in this paper. To estimate the variance components in (16) we use timeseries variation of the individual return components within each period t. The sample
volatility of the market return in period t, which we denote from now on as MKTt , is
2

They actually use 48 industries but we group the firms which are not covered in their scheme in an

additional industry.

10

computed as
2
=
MKTt = σmt

X

(Rms − µm )2 ,

(19)

s∈t

where µm is defined as the mean of the Rms over the sample.3 To be consistent with
the methodology presented above, we construct the market returns as the weighted
average using all firms in the sample in a given period. The weights are based on market
capitalization. Although this market index differs slightly from the value-weighted index
provided in the CRSP data set, the correlation is almost perfect at 0.997. For weights in
period t we use the market capitalization of a firm in period t − 1 and take the weights
as constant within period t.
For volatility in industry i we sum the squares of the industry-specific residual in (6)
within a period t:
2
=
σit

X

2is .

(20)

s∈t

As shown above, we have to average over industries to ensure that the covariances of
individual industries cancel out. This yields the following measure for average industry
volatility INDt :
INDt =

X

2
.
wit σit

(21)

i

Estimating firm-specific volatility is done in a similar way. First we sum the squares of
the firm-specific residual in (10) for each firm in the sample:
2
=
σηijt

X

2
.
ηijs

(22)

s∈t

Next, we compute the weighted average of the firm-specific volatilities within an industry:
2
=
σηit

X

2
,
wijt σηijt

(23)

j∈i

and lastly we average over industries to obtain a measure of average firm-level volatility
FIRMt as
FIRMt =

X

2
.
wit σηit

(24)

i

As for industry volatility this procedure ensures that the firm-specific covariances cancel
out.
3

We also experimented with time-varying means but the results are almost identical.

11

3

Empirical Results

3.1

A First Look at Dispersion and Volatility

Before plunging into econometric analysis, consider first the plots of market volatility
MKT, industry-level volatility IND and firm-level volatility FIRM in Figures 1 to 3.
The top panel shows the raw monthly time-series while the bottom panel plots a lagged
moving average of order 12. Note that the scales on the y-axes differ in each figure.
Market-level volatility shows the well-known patterns that have been studied by
countless papers on the time-variation of index return variances. Comparing the monthly
series with the smoothed version in the bottom panel suggests that market volatility
has a slow-moving component along with a fair amount of high-frequency noise. Market
volatility was particularly high around 1970, in the mid-70’s, around 1980 and towards
the end of the sample. Of course, the stock market crash in October 1987 caused an
enormous spike in market volatility which is cut off in the plot. The value of MKT in
10/87 is 0.056, about six times as high as the second highest value. The plot also shows
the NBER dated recessions shaded in grey. A casual look at the plot suggests that
market volatility increases in recessions. We will study the cyclical behavior of MKT
and the other volatility measures below.
Next, consider the behavior of industry volatility IND in Figure 2. Compared with
market volatility, industry volatility is slightly lower on average. As for MKT, there is
a slow-moving component and some high-frequency noise. IND was particularly high
in the mid-70’s and around 1980. It is also noteworthy that the effect of the crash in
October 1987 is quite significant for IND, although not as much as for MKT. More
generally, industry volatility seems to increase during macroeconomic downturns.
Lastly, Figure 3 plots firm-level volatility FIRM. The first striking feature is that
FIRM is on average much higher than MKT and IND. This implies that firm-specific
volatility is the largest component of the total volatility of an average firm. The second
important characteristic of FIRM is that it trends up over the sample. The plots of
MKT and IND do not exhibit any visible upward slope while for FIRM it is clearly
visible. This indicates that the stock market has become more volatile over the sample
but on a firm level instead of a market or industry level. We will analyze this issue in
12

some detail below. Apart from the trend, the plot of FIRM looks similar to MKT and
IND. Firm-level volatility seems to be higher in NBER-dated recessions and the crash
also has a significant effect.
Looking at the three volatility plots together, it is clear that the different volatility
measures tend to move together, particularly at lower frequencies. For example, all
three volatility measures increase during the oil price shocks in the early to mid-1970s.
However, there are also some periods in which the volatility measures move differently.
For example, IND is very high compared to its long-term mean during the early 1980’s
while MKT and FIRM remain fairly low during this period. Another interesting episode
is the last year of our sample. Market volatility increased significantly in 1997 while
IND and FIRM did not. We will study the comovement of the three series below.
It is obvious from the plots that the stock market crash in October 1987 had a
significant effect on all three volatility series. This raises the issue whether this one-time
event might overshadow the rest of the sample and distort some of the results. To avoid
this we report many results for both the raw data set and a winsorized version where
we replace the October 1987 observation with the second largest observation in the data
set. This procedure decreases the magnitude of the crash but leaves it as an important
event in the sample.

3.2

Stochastic versus Deterministic Trends

The possibility of increased stock market volatility in recent decades has attracted attention in both the academic literature and the popular press. Using our decomposition
of return volatility we can not only establish whether the return on a typical stock has
become more volatile, but we can also ask what are the sources of increased volatility.
But first we have to establish whether any potential trend is stochastic or deterministic
in nature. The plots suggest that all our volatility measures exhibit a fairly high amount
of positive autocorrelation, a fact that is well-known for market volatility. This raises
the possibility of unit roots in the series.
To check this we employ augmented Dickey and Fuller (1979) tests. These tests
include higher-order autoregressive terms in the regression to account for serial correlation. The test consists of regressing the series under investigation on its lagged value
13

and lagged difference terms. The number of lagged differences to be included can be
determined by the standard t-test of significance on the last lagged difference term. In
Table 1, the ρ-test is the augmented Dickey-Fuller test, and the t-test is based on OLS
estimates using the estimated standard errors under the null hypothesis of a unit root.
Either statistic can be used to test the hypothesis of the presence of unit root in the
series under investigation. The table also presents the number of lagged difference terms
included in the regression estimated for the unit root tests. The hypothesis of a unit
root is rejected for all three volatility series at the 5% level against several plausible
alternative stationary autoregressive processes whether we include or exclude the crash.
Note that the rejection is weakest for firm-level volatility.
After rejecting the unit root hypothesis, we report some descriptive statistics and
trend regressions in Table 2. The top panel presents results for daily volatility series
while the two following panels report results for volatility series based on weekly and
monthly returns, respectively. Consider first the absolute magnitudes of the volatility
components in our benchmark sample based on daily returns. The annualized mean of
MKT is about 0.015 which implies an annual standard deviation of 12.3%. IND has
a slightly lower mean of 0.010 implying an annual standard deviation of about 10%,
while FIRM is on average substantially larger than both MKT and IND with a mean
of 0.064 implying an annual standard deviation of 25%. These numbers imply that
over the whole sample the share of the total unconditional variance that is due to the
market variance, or the R2 of a market model, is only about 17%. Thus industry and
in particular firm uncertainty are important components of the total volatility of an
average firm. The means for the winsorized data are of course somewhat lower since the
the crash is replaced by the second largest observation.
As can be seen from the plots all three volatility measures exhibit substantial variation over time. The second row in Table 2 reports unconditional standard deviations of
the variance series. Market and firm volatility are more variable over time than industry
volatility, but a large portion of the time-series variation in market volatility is due to
the crash in October 1987. Taking the crash out of the sample reduces the standard
deviation of market volatility by 60%. The crash has much smaller effects on industry
and firm volatility.

14

Now we revisit the issue of trends. In Table 1 we rejected the unit root hypothesis for
all three volatility series. An alternative hypothesis is the existence of a deterministic
linear time trend. Table 2 reports regressions of the volatility series on deterministic
trends. The t-statistics are Newey-West corrected with the optimal lag length chosen
according to Newey and West (1994). The trend regression for daily data confirms the
visual evidence from the plots. MKT and IND have a small positive trend coefficient
which is weakly significant for IND. The trend in FIRM is much larger and strongly
significant. Note that the large trend coefficient does not depend on whether the crash is
included or not. Using the point estimates of the coefficients for winsorized data implies
that firm-level volatility has more than doubled over the sample, while MKT and IND
have increased by only about one third. Thus the increase in total volatility (which
has also roughly doubled over the sample) is almost entirely due to the higher level of
firm volatility. Another way to make the same point is to note that the share of FIRM
volatility in total winsorized volatility has increased from 65% to 76% while the shares
of MKT and IND have decreased from 20% to 14% and 15% to 10%, respectively.
Table 2 also reports standard deviations of the detrended volatility series. A time
trend biases the unconditional time-series variation upwards. Since FIRM has the largest
trend among the three measures, the standard deviation decreases the most when the
data are detrended. The effects of detrending are modest for MKT and IND. Even
for detrended data, however, FIRM exhibits the greatest time-series variation once the
effect of the crash is controlled through winsorization.
It is well known that daily stock returns exhibit a significant amount of serial correlation. This might affect our volatility series, in particular if the pattern of serial
correlation is changing over our sample period (Froot and Perold (1995) document that
autocorrelations of individual daily stock returns have fallen in the post-war period). To
check the robustness of the results based on daily returns, we construct volatility series
based on weekly and monthly returns for which autocorrelation is much weaker. Panels
2 and 3 in Table 2 show that the means of MKT and IND increase somewhat for longer
horizon returns, confirming the fact that daily index and industry returns are positively
autocorrelated. Firm-specific returns, by contrast, are negatively autocorrelated since
the mean of FIRM decreases when weekly and monthly returns are used. These findings

15

are consistent with French and Roll (1986) who show that daily returns of individual
stocks are slightly negatively autocorrelated. The return horizon also affects the OLS
coefficient in the trend regressions. The weekly and monthly series have a lower trend
than the daily series. The point estimate of the trend coefficient for weekly market
volatility is even negative (but insignificant) in the winsorized data. It is also interesting
to note that winsorization has little effect on IND and FIRM once weekly or monthly
returns are used. This suggests that industry and firm returns took a few days to adjust
after the crash but within a week the effect of the crash died out at the industry and
firm level.
We perform two additional sensitivity checks. As noted above, the number of firms
in the data set has more than quadrupled over the sample. Thus many smaller firms
are now listed on stock markets. To see how this influences our results, we compute
the volatility series using only the 2047 largest firms (the minimum number of firms
in a month of our sample). The results are shown in the panel denoted large firms.
In contrast to MKT and IND, which are not much affected by the exclusion of smaller
firms, the mean and trend of FIRM are somewhat lower for large firms. However, the
trend of FIRM is still positive and highly significant. The effect of firm size can also be
seen in the last panel on Table 2 which reports results for equally-weighted series. As
in the large-firm case, MKT and IND are not affected much by the weighting scheme.
However, the impact on FIRM is enormous. The mean is five times larger than for the
value-weighted series, and the standard deviation is eight times larger. Moreover, the
trend coefficient increases about twelve-fold. The point estimates imply that firm-level
volatility is about 30 times higher in 1997 than in 1962 for an average firm (chosen among
all firms with equal probability). This demonstrates the significant effect on volatility
of many small firms entering the market over our sample period.

3.3

Covariation and Lead-Lag Relationships

Besides the trend, two other aspects of the three volatility measures can be seen in
Figures 1 to 3: they tend to move together contemporaneously and each series appears
to exhibit a significant amount of serial correlation. These features of the data are
examined in Table 3, both for raw and detrended winsorized data. The contemporaneous
16

correlations among the series are around 0.7 and even slightly higher for detrended data.
The table also shows that the series have positive and slowly decaying autocorrelations.
Detrending reduces the autocorrelations significantly for FIRM, but has little effect for
MKT and IND.
Table 4 asks how important the three volatility components are relative to the total
volatility of an average firm. First, consider the mean. Over the whole sample, market
volatility accounts for about 16% of the unconditional mean of total winsorized volatility,
while IND accounts for 12%. However, by far the largest portion of total volatility is
firm-level volatility with about 72%. Consistent with the observation of trends in the
three series, the share of firm-level volatility has increased from 71% in the first 12
months of the sample to 77% in the last 12 months.
A variance decomposition using winsorized data shows that most of the time-series
variation in total volatility is due to variation in MKT and FIRM. Industry volatility
is more stable over time. The two largest components are FIRM variance and the
covariation of MKT and FIRM; together they account for about 60% of the total timeseries variation in volatility. The market component by itself is much less important,
only 15% of the total variation in volatility. Relative to its mean, however, MKT shows
the greatest time-series variation.
Given the substantial low-frequency variation in our volatility measures, it may be
of interest to isolate the longer-run movements. One crude way to do this is to compute
moving averages as we did in the lower panels of Figures 1 to 3. Of course, this approach
is ad hoc. An alternative natural way to smooth the series is to decompose each volatility
time series into an expected and an unexpected part:
σt2 = Et−1 σt2 + ξt .

(25)

We compute the conditional expectation of each volatility series by regressing it on its
own lag and lags of the other series. We choose a lag length of four when forming the
conditional expectations based on significance of individual lags.
At the bottom of Table 4 we report a variance decomposition for the conditional
expectations of the volatility series. This puts even more weight on the terms involving
FIRM; about 80% of the total variation is due to variance and covariance terms of
17

FIRM. The contribution of MKT is below 10%. The industry-level terms for conditional
expectations are more or less unchanged compared to the raw data.
One issue that arises in interpreting these results is whether the common variation in
MKT, IND, and FIRM might be explained by cross-sectional variation in betas. In equation (17), we showed that movements in MKT might produce variation in IND if betas
differ across industries and the volatility of industries’ CAPM residuals is independent
of MKT. Under this hypothesis, the coefficient in a regression of IND on MKT would
equal the cross-sectional variance of betas across industries. Empirically, the regression
coefficient is 0.27 in our full sample while a direct estimate of cross-sectional variance
of industry betas is only 0.03; this calculation suggests that cross-sectional variation in
betas cannot explain more than a small fraction of the common movement in MKT and
IND. A similar calculation based on equation (18) gives the same result for covariation
between FIRM and the other two volatility measures. In our full sample, a regression of
FIRM on MKT and IND gives coefficients of 0.72 and 1.40 respectively, much too large
to be explained by plausible cross-sectional variation in firms’ beta coefficients.
As a final exercise in this section, we ask whether the volatility measures help to
forecast each other. Table 5 investigates this question using Granger-causality tests.
The top panel reports p-values for bivariate VARs while the bottom panel uses trivariate
VARs including all three series. The data are detrended and winsorized. The lag-length
was chosen using the Akaike information criterion. In bivariate VARs MKT appears to
Granger-cause both IND and FIRM at very high significance levels. IND does not help
to predict MKT or FIRM but FIRM helps significantly to forecast MKT and IND. Much
of the causality survives in trivariate systems. MKT Granger-causes IND and FIRM
(although at lower significance levels than in the bivariate case). FIRM Granger-causes
MKT but the effect on IND is now insignificant. IND fails to Granger-cause the other
series as in the bivariate case.

18

4

Cyclical Behavior

Studies of financial volatility in relation to the business cycle have historically focused
on the volatility of a broad stock market index, i.e. market volatility. Schwert (1989)
presents an extensive analysis of the relation of market volatility with economic activity
confirming Officer’s (1973) earlier results that market volatility is higher in economic
downturns. In response to Officer (1973), Christie (1982) argues that this effect is due to
increased financial leverage in recessions. However, Schwert (1989) shows that leverage
by itself cannot account for the strong negative correlation of market volatility with
economic activity. More recently, Hamilton and Lin (1996) model the joint behavior of
stock returns and industrial production growth in a more sophisticated regime-switching
model. They find that economic recessions are the single most important factor for
explaining market volatility accounting for about 60% of its movements. In this section
we extend the Schwert (1989) results and study the cyclical behavior of market, industry
and firm-level volatility. As mentioned before, a casual look at the plots of the series
suggests that all three volatility components tend to be higher in recessions (recall that
the NBER dated recessions are shaded in grey). Now we characterize this relation more
rigorously.
We start by reporting simple correlations of the volatility series with NBER business
cycle dates in the top panel of Table 6. The table reports correlations of the volatility
series at various lags with a variable that is set to 1 in NBER dated expansions and
0 in recessions. Hence a negative correlation implies that volatility tends to be higher
in recessions. In addition to correlations for the raw series we also include results for
conditional expectations and innovations of volatility (all series are detrended and winsorized). Consider first the raw series. All lead and lag correlations up to a year are
negative, hence stock market volatility at the market, industry and firm level is higher in
economic contractions. All three raw series have a strongly negative contemporaneous
correlation between -0.420 for MKT and -0.508 for FIRM. The correlation is decreasing in absolute value when volatility is lagged or led (we highlighted the most negative
correlation in each column in bold). Among the three volatility measures, FIRM tends
to have the most negative correlation with NBER dates. The pattern for conditional
expectations is more or less the same as for the raw data. The values tend to be slightly
19

more negative than for the raw data which is not surprising since the the conditional
expectations are less noisy. The innovations of volatility are also negatively correlated
with NBER dates. But in contrast to the raw data and conditional expectations, the
correlations peak (in absolute value) when innovations lead the NBER dates by three
months. This pattern holds for all three volatility measures. These results are consistent with Whitelaw (1994) who analyzes the properties of conditional expectations and
innovations of market volatility in more detail.
These results provide strong evidence that market, industry, and firm-level volatility
are all higher in economic downturns. But how big are the magnitudes? For raw data,
the level of market volatility is about three times as high in NBER dated recessions as
in expansions. While this ratio is surprisingly high, Schwert (1989) shows that it is even
higher if the Great Depression is included in the sample. Industry-level and firm-level
volatility roughly double in recessions. Recessions have a somewhat smaller effect on
the predictable component of volatility; for conditional expectations, MKT is about 1.9
times higher in recessions than in booms, IND about 1.6 times and FIRM about 1.5
times.
While the NBER dates provide a benchmark case, some useful information is probably lost in the binary NBER classification scheme. Therefore, we next study the cyclical
behavior of volatility using GDP data. GDP is measured on a quarterly frequency, hence
we construct new volatility series on that frequency. We use daily returns within each
quarter as before. The quarterly series behave very much like the monthly ones. The
pattern of correlations of volatility with GDP growth, in the bottom panel of Table 6,
is almost identical to the pattern of correlations with NBER dates. All volatility series
are negatively correlated with GDP growth up to a lead and lag of about one year. The
absolute values of the correlations are somewhat lower than before; this is not surprising
given the noisiness of GDP data. As before, innovations in volatility show the highest
correlation (in absolute value) leading GDP growth by one quarter.
After establishing that all three volatility measures move countercyclically, we now
ask whether they have any power to forecast GDP growth. In Table 7 we present the
results of OLS regressions with GDP growth as a dependent variable. As regressors we
use lagged GDP growth and the lagged return on the value-weighted CRSP index as

20

well as combinations of lagged volatility series. All t-statistics are Newey-West corrected
with the optimal lag length chosen according to Newey and West (1994). The volatility
series are detrended and winsorized. Regressing GDP growth on its own lag and the
lagged CRSP index return yields an R2 of 14%. Both variables are individually significant. Next, we add each of the lagged volatility measures in turn. Each is individually
significant and the R2 increases to around 20%. Interestingly, each volatility variable
drives out the return of the CRSP value-weighted portfolio while lagged GDP growth
remains significant.
Next, we include pairs of volatility variables as regressors. Since all three series are
positively correlated it is not surprising that the individual significance levels are lower
when more than one volatility series is included. While none of them is individually
significant, they are strongly jointly significant. The p-values for F -tests that all coefficients of the volatility variables are zero are between 0.2% and 0.8%. Furthermore,
the R2 ’s increase to up to 22.2% when IND and FIRM are included in the regression.
The results are similar when all three volatility variables are included. None of them is
individually significant but the joint significance level is 0.6%. There is no conclusive
evidence which of the three volatility measures has the most forecasting power, but the
t-values of IND are slightly higher (in absolute value) than those of MKT and FIRM
and the R2 is higher once IND is included in the regression.4

4

We have also checked whether the correlation of the volatility series and led GDP growth translates

to any power of GDP growth in forecasting volatilities. However, regressions of this type did not show
any significance of lagged GDP growth.

21

5

Individual Industries

So far we have studied volatilities averaged over industries. While such aggregated
volatility measures contain information about an average industry, there is obviously
a lot of variation across industries. The nature and composition of the industries in
our sample differ tremendously, and there is little reason to believe that industry and
firm-level volatility in the agricultural sector behave in the same way as volatility in
the computer industry. To get some idea about the behavior of volatility in individual
industries we study the ten largest industries separately in this section. The industries
are selected according to their average weight (based on market capitalization) over the
entire sample. Table 9 lists the individual industries by weight.
Constructing volatility measures for individual industries requires an adjustment in
our estimation procedure. In section 2 we showed that the three return components in
(10) are orthogonal when we average over firms and industries. Once we study individual
industries we no longer average over industries. Therefore, we have to alter the return
composition in the following way. Consider a decomposition which includes a beta for
each industry:
Rit = βmi Rmt + it
∗
Rijt = βmi Rmt + it + ηijt

(26)
(27)

Note that Rmt and it are by construction orthogonal and therefore the volatility of the
industry return is
2
Var(Rmt ) + σit2 ,
Var(Rit ) = βmi

where σit2 is the variance of it . We still sum over all firms in the industry. Therefore we
have for the average firm volatility in industry i (from (15)):
X

2∗
2
,
Var(Rmt ) + σit2 + σηit
wijt Var(Rijt ) = βmi

j∈i

∗
∗
2∗
. Therefore we can use the residuals it in (26) and ηijt
is the variance of ηijt
where σηit

in (27) to construct industry and firm-level volatility for individual industries without
having to estimate covariances or firm-level betas. The only additional parameters to be

22

estimated are the industry betas on the market βmi . We use OLS regressions assuming
that the betas are constant over the sample.
Table 9 reports results for the ten largest industries in the sample. Petroleum/Gas
is the largest industry in our sample with an average share of 11% of the total market
capitalization over the whole sample period followed by financial services and utilities.
Most of the large industries have an industry-beta of around unity, with the exception
of utilities and telecommunications firms which have a substantially lower beta. Next,
consider the descriptive statistics of industry and firm-level volatility. As in the aggregated data FIRM is on average substantially larger the IND. However, the means of IND
vary much more from industry to industry than do the means of FIRM. For example,
the mean of IND for utilities is only about one-third of IND in aggregated data. The
spread for firm-level volatility is much lower. Overall industries with a high average
industry-level volatility also tend to have a high firm-level volatility (the correlation of
the means of IND and FIRM across industries is 0.323). Moreover, large industries tend
to have low IND and FIRM on average (the correlations of industry weights with the
means of IND and FIRM are -0.394 and -0.491).
Previously we established the existence of an upward trend in FIRM volatility for
aggregated data. Now we ask whether individual industries also exhibit significant trends
in volatility. First, we perform unit root tests on all industry and firm volatility series.
The results are not reported here but we reject the unit root hypothesis for all industries.
In regressions on a linear time trend, six of the ten largest industries show a significant
positive trend in IND while two have a significant negative trend. Among all 49 industries
16 (12) have a significant positive (negative) trend. This confirms the finding that the
properties of industry-level volatility vary considerably among industries. The picture
for FIRM is more uniform. We find that the time trend coefficient is significantly positive
for seven of the ten largest industries and 27 out of all 49 industries, while none of the ten
largest industries and only four industries in the entire sample exhibit a negative trend.
We do not attempt to interpret the results for individual industries in detail, but it might
not be surprising that the telecommunications, computer, and retail sectors exhibit a
particularly large upward trend in firm-specific volatility. We should stress that this fact
is not due to an unusual increase in the number of listed firms in these industries. The

23

time trend in the sample that includes only large firms (see the discussion of Table 2
for details of this sample) shows the same large trend in firm-level volatility for these
industries.
In the previous section, we showed that aggregate volatility measures are strongly
countercyclical and are able to forecast aggregate GDP growth.

Now we examine

whether there are similar patterns on the level of individual industries. Since output
data for individual industries are only available on an annual basis we convert all volatility series accordingly. The output data were obtained from the BLS and range from
1972 to 1997. Data for industry 23 (miscellaneous manufacturing) and 49 (miscellaneous
firms) were not available. To construct industry-specific output data we first regress
the output growth rate in industry i, ∆yit , on total industrial output growth ∆yt . Denote the industry specific residual νit . Table 10 reports simple correlations of νit with
contemporaneous and one-period lagged industry and firm-specific volatility for the ten
largest industries. Almost all of the correlations are negative indicating that industry
and firm-level volatility are countercyclical even at the industry level. A similar picture
holds for the sample of all industries. For IND, 33 (14) of the 47 industries have a
negative (positive) contemporaneous correlation with industry output, and 36 (11) have
a negative (positive) correlation when volatility is lagged relative to output. For FIRM,
the corresponding numbers are 36 (11) and 35 (12), respectively.
Next, we investigate whether the volatility components have forecasting power for
future industry-specific output. As regressors we use lagged values of the industry output residual, the return on the industry portfolio, and the three aggregate volatility
measures as well as industry and firm-specific volatility in the particular industry. The
annual sample contains 26 years of data, hence separate estimation for each industry
is not feasible. We therefore pool the data cross-sectionally and perform a restricted
estimation. For an industry i, consider the following regression:
νit = α0 + α1 νit−1 + α2 Rit−1 +
α3 M KTt−1 + α4 IN Dt−1 + α5 F IRMt−1 +
α6 IN Dit−1 + α7 F IRMit−1 + ωit ,

(28)

where Rit is the return on the industry portfolio, and IN Dit−1 and F IRMit−1 are indus24

try and firm-level volatilities computed from the decomposition (26) and (27). We stack
all industries into a single system and estimate the model imposing the restriction that
the coefficients are identical across all industries. Using Newey-West corrected standard
errors, we find that the only significant variable is firm-specific volatility in the industry.
The point estimate of α7 is -0.158 with a t-statistic of -2.345. However, the R2 of the
regression is only 1.2% indicating that industry-specific output residuals are very noisy.
The forecasting power increases somewhat if we use raw industry output data instead of residuals. While the above specification constructs pure industry effects net of
aggregate output, it cannot be used to forecast industry output since aggregate output
in period t is not known at time t − 1. We therefore use the following pooled regression:
∆Yit = α0 + α1 ∆Yit−1 + α2 ∆Yt−1 + α3 Rit−1 +
α4 M KTt−1 + α5 IN Dt−1 + α6 F IRMt−1 +
α7 IN Dit−1 + α8 F IRMit−1 + ωit .

(29)

As for the industry output residuals, the coefficient on industry-level FIRM is significantly negative. The point estimate is α8 = −0.190 with a t-statistic of -2.559. The
only other significantly variable is lagged output growth: α1 = 0.216 with a t-statistic
of 3.996. The R2 is 6.3% which is still moderate but significantly larger than in the
regression using output residuals. Despite the modest forecasting power, it is interesting
to note that firm-level volatility in a given industry is significantly negatively related to
future output growth in that industry.

25

6

Conclusion

In this paper we have tried to characterize the behavior of stock market volatility not
only at the level of the market as a whole, but also at the industry and idiosyncratic
firm levels. Our approach has two characteristic features.
First, we have used daily data to construct monthly volatility which we then treat as
observable. This allows us to use standard econometric methods to describe the timeseries variation of volatility, rather than the more advanced methods that are necessary
when volatility is treated as an unobserved latent variable. Andersen et al. (1999) use a
similar approach to study volatility in the foreign exchange market. Second, we define
volatility components in such a way that we can construct the total volatility of a typical
firm by adding up components, without regard to covariance terms, and yet we avoid
the estimation of industry or firm-level beta coefficients. Both these features can be
modified in future research, but they help enormously in the initial exploration of the
data.
Our main results are as follows. First, in our 196297 sample period there is no
evidence that any of our volatility components have stochastic trends; but there is strong
evidence of a positive deterministic trend in idiosyncratic firm-level volatility. This trend
is not due merely to an increase in the number of publicly traded companies, or to
changes in the serial correlation of daily data. It implies that the R2 of a market model
or market-industry model for a typical stock has been declining over time.
Second, firm-level volatility both accounts for the greatest share of total firm volatility
on average, and for the greatest share of the movements over time in total firm volatility.
Relative to its mean, however, market volatility displays the greatest variation over time.
Third, industry-level volatility tends to be more stable than the other volatility
components and those components help to forecast its movements over time.
Fourth, all the components of volatility are countercyclical and tend to lead variations
in GDP. The volatility measures help to forecast GDP growth and greatly diminish the
significance of stock index returns in forecasting GDP.
Finally, we obtain broadly similar results when we disaggregate to the level of individual industries, using estimates of industry betas on the aggregate market but still
avoiding the estimation of firm-level betas.
26

References
Andersen, T.G., T. Bollerslev, F.X. Diebold, and P. Labys, 1999, The Distribution
of Exchange Rate Volatility, unpublished paper, Northwestern University, Duke
University, and University of Pennsylvania.
Bernard, A.B. and D.G. Steigerwald, 1993, Cleansing Recessions: Evidence from Stock
Prices, working paper, MIT and UC Santa Barbara.
Black, F., 1976, Studies of Stock Price Volatility Changes, Proceedings of the 1976
Meetings of the Business and Economic Statistics Section, 177181, American Statistical Association.
Bollerslev, T., R. Chou, and K. Kroner, 1992, ARCH Modeling in Finance: A Review
of the Theory and Empirical Evidence, Journal of Econometrics 52, 559.
Brainard, S.L. and D.M. Cutler, 1993, Sectoral Shifts and Cyclical Unemployment
Reconsidered, Quarterly Journal of Economics 108, 219243.
Caballero, R.J. and M. Hammour, 1994, The Cleansing Effect of Recessions, American Economic Review 84, 13501368.
Campbell, J.Y., 1996, Understanding Risk and Return, Journal of Political Economy
104, 298345.
Campbell, J.Y., S. Kim, and M. Lettau, 1994, Dispersion and Volatility in Stock
Returns: An Empirical Investigation, unpublished paper, Princeton University.
Campbell, J.Y., A.W. Lo, and A.C. MacKinlay, 1997, The Econometrics of Financial
Markets, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Campbell, J.Y. and P. Perron, 1991, Pitfalls and Opportunities: What Macroeconomists Should Know about Unit Roots, NBER macroeconomics annual, Blanchard, O.J and S. Fischer, eds., MIT Press, Cambridge and London, 141201.
Christie, A., 1981, The Stochastic Behavior of Common Stock Variances: Value,
Leverage, and Interest Rate Effects, Journal of Financial Economics 10, 407432.
27

Duffee, G.R., 1995, Stock Returns and Volatility: A Firm-Level Analysis, Journal of
Financial Economics 37, 399420.
Eden, B. and B. Jovanovic, 1994, Asymmetric Information and the Excess Volatility
of Stock Prices, Economic Inquiry 32, 228235.
Engle, R.F. and G.G.J. Lee, 1993, Long Run Volatility Forecasting for Individual
Stocks in a One Factor Model, unpublished paper, University of California at San
Diego.
Fama, E.F. and K.R. French, 1997, Industry Costs of Equity, Journal of Financial
Economics 43, 153194.
Ferson, W.E. and C.R. Harvey, 1991, The Variation of Economic Risk Premiums,
Journal of Political Economy 99, 385415.
French, Kenneth and Richard Roll, 1986, Stock Return Variances: The Arrival of
Information and the Reaction of Traders. Journal of Financial Economics 19,
3-30.
Froot, Kenneth and Andre Perold, 1995, New Trading Practices and Short-Run Market Efficiency. Journal of Futures Markets 15, 731-765.
Hamilton, J.D. and G. Lin, 1996, Stock Market Volatility and the Business Cycle,
Journal of Applied Econometrics 11, 573593.
Hentschel, L., 1995, All in the Family: Nesting Symmetric and Asymmetric GARCH
Models, Journal of Financial Economics 39, 71104.
Heston, Steven L. and K. Geert Rouwenhorst, 1994, Does Industrial Structure Explain
the Benefits of International Diversification? Journal of Financial Economics 36,
3-27.
Leahy, J.V. and T.M. Whited, 1996, The Effect of Uncertainty on Investment: Some
Stylized Facts, Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 28, 6483.

28

Loungani, P., M. Rush, and W. Tave, 1990, Stock Market Dispersion and Unemployment, Journal of Monetary Economics 25, 367388.
Malkiel, B.G. and Y. Xu, 1995, The Structure of Stock Market Volatility, unpublished
paper, Princeton University.
Merton, R.C., 1980, On Estimating the Expected Return on the Market: An Exploratory Investigation, Journal of Financial Economics 8, 323361.
Nelson, D., 1992, Filtering and Forecasting with Misspecified ARCH Models I: Getting
the Right Variance with the Wrong Model, Journal of Econometrics 52, 6190.
Newey, Whitney and Kenneth D. West, 1994, Automatic Lag Selection in Covariance
Matrix Estimation, Review of Economic Studies 61, 631654.
Officer, R.R., 1973, The Variability of the Market Factor of the New York Stock
Exchange, Journal of Business 46, 434453.
Roll, Richard, 1992, Industrial Structure and the Comparative Behavior of International Stock Market Indices, The Journal of Finance 47, 3-42.
Schwert, G.W., 1989, Why Does Stock Market Volatility Change Over Time?, Journal of Finance 44, 11151153.
Shleifer, A. and R.W. Vishny, The Limits of Arbitrage, Journal of Finance 52, 3555.
Whitelaw, Robert F., 1994, Time Variations and Covariations in the Expectation and
Volatility of Stock Market Returns, The Journal of Finance 49, 515-41.

29

TABLE 1
Unit Root Tests
raw

winsorized

MKT

IND

FIRM

MKT

IND

FIRM

ρ-test

-328

-103

-80.3

-175

-88.5

-46.5

t-test

-12.17

-4.59

-3.98

-8.55

-4.28

-3.29

2

5

5

1

4

5

ρ-test

-330

-125

-145

-177

-91.7

-79.1

t-test

-12.24

-5.60

-6.35

-8.60

-4.36

-4.34

1

3

2

1

4

5

constant

lag order
constant & trend

lag order

Note: This table reports unit root tests for monthly volatility series constructed from daily data.
ρ-test is the Dickey-Fuller test statistic. Critical values at the 5% level are -8.00 when a constant is
included in the regression and -21.5 when a constant and a linear trend are included. The 5% critical
values for the t-test under the null hypotheses of a unit root are -2.87 with a constant and -3.42
with a constant and a trend. The number of lags is determined by the ‘general to specific’ method
recommended in Campbell and Perron (1991).

TABLE 2
Descriptive Statistics and Linear Trends
raw

daily
mean ∗100
std. dev. ∗100
std. dev. ∗100 detrended
linear trend ∗105
weekly
mean ∗100
std. dev. ∗100
std. dev. ∗100 detrended
linear trend ∗105
monthly
mean ∗100
std. dev. ∗100
std. dev. ∗100 detrended
linear trend ∗105
daily - large Firms
mean ∗100
std. dev. ∗100
std. dev. ∗100 detrended
linear trend ∗105
daily - EW
mean ∗100
std. dev. ∗100
std. dev. ∗100 detrended
linear trend ∗105

Notes: see next page

winsorized

MKT

IND

FIRM

MKT

IND

FIRM

1.542
1.009
1.007
0.156
(1.287)

1.032
0.119
0.119
0.062
(1.934)

6.436
0.840
0.732
0.965
(7.126)

1.409
0.424
0.423
0.090
(1.037)

1.027
0.180
0.179
0.060
(1.880)

6.383
0.706
0.581
0.939
(7.029)

1.897
0.728
0.728
0.003
(0.024)

1.218
0.210
0.209
0.053
(1.309)

5.842
0.638
0.555
0.737
(5.132)

1.858
0.623
0.623
-0.017
(-0.141)

1.218
0.210
0.209
0.053
(1.309)

5.842
0.638
0.554
0.737
(5.132)

N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
(N/A)

1.269
0.298
0.298
0.026
(0.518)

5.039
0.636
0.557
0.720
(5.950)

N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
(N/A)

1.269
0.298
0.298
0.026
(0.518)

5.039
0.636
0.557
0.720
(5.950)

1.599
1.061
1.058
0.185
(1.454)

1.090
0.203
0.200
0.087
(2.601)

5.877
0.771
0.738
0.524
(3.375)

1.145
0.435
0.433
0.116
(1.254)

1.086
0.195
0.190
0.085
(2.563)

5.828
0.638
0.602
0.499
(3.286)

1.211
0.756
0.754
-0.114
(-1.409)

1.251
0.160
0.160
0.022
(0.515)

33.903
6.672
4.075
12.386
(9.308)

1.149
0.496
0.492
-0.145
(-1.975)

1.251
0.119
0.160
0.022
(0.515)

33.903
6.672
4.075
12.386
(9.308)

Note: Descriptive statistics and linear trend regression based on monthly data. Means and standard
deviations are annualized. The trend regression σt2 = α + β t + t is estimated using OLS with NeweyWest corrected t-statistics. The bottom panel is based on an equal-weighting scheme (denoted EW)
as opposed to a value-weighting for all other results. The panel denoted ‘large Firms’ uses only the
2026 (the total number of firms in 7/62) largest firms in each month (based on market capitalization).

TABLE 3
Correlation Structure
raw

contemporaneous

detrended

MKT

IND

FIRM

MKT

IND

FIRM

1.000

0.645

0.708

1.000

0.641

0.800

1.000

0.705

1.000

0.767

correlation

1.000

1.000

autocorrelation
ρ1

0.494

0.591

0.776

0.490

0.583

0.670

ρ2

0.383

0.463

0.727

0.378

0.453

0.600

ρ3

0.313

0.438

0.686

0.309

0.428

0.543

ρ4

0.160

0.415

0.584

0.154

0.404

0.394

ρ6

0.183

0.384

0.572

0.178

0.373

0.380

ρ12

0.087

0.316

0.471

0.083

0.306

0.253

Note: Table reports the correlation structure of monthly volatility measures constructed from daily
data (winsorized).

TABLE 4
Mean and Variance Decomposition

Mean - raw

MKT

IND

FIRM

0.160
0.162
0.134

0.116
0.126
0.097

0.724
0.712
0.769

with trend
7/62-12/97
7/62- 6/71
1/88-12/97

Variance

detrended
0.149

raw

MKT
IND
FIRM

0.081
0.027

0.328
0.133
0.282

0.099

Cond. Expect.

MKT
IND
FIRM

0.067
0.026

0.334
0.137
0.337

Note: Entries are the shares in the total mean and variance of a typical stock computed from
2
2
2
+ E(F IRMt )/Eσrt
+ E(IN Dt )/Eσrt
1 = E(M KTt )/Eσrt

for the mean and
2
2
2
)
) + var(F IRMt )/var(σrt
) + var(IN Dt )/var(σrt
1 = var(M KTt )/var(σrt
2
2
)
) + 2cov(M KTt , F IRMt )/var(σrt
+ 2cov(M KTt , IN Dt )/var(σrt
2
).
+ 2cov(IN Dt , F IRMt )/var(σrt

for the variance. All series are monthly constructed from daily data and are winsorized. Unless
otherwise noted, results based on the full sample (7/62-12/97) are reported. Conditional expectations
are formed by regressing each volatility series on four lags of all three volatility series.

TABLE 5
Granger-Causality
Bivariate VAR
MKTt
MKTt−l
INDt−l

0.548
(5)

FIRMt−l

0.008
(2)

INDt

FIRMt

0.000
(5)

0.000
(4)
0.472
(5)

0.002
(5)

Trivariate VAR
MKTtT
MKTt−l
INDt−l
FIRMt−l

0.416
0.016
(4)

INDt

FIRMt

0.027

0.004
0.155

0.108
(5)

(5)

Note: The table reports p-values of Granger-causality VAR tests. The optimal lag-length (shown in
brackets) is chosen using the Akaike information criterion. The data is detrended and winsorized.

TABLE 6
Cyclical Behavior: Correlation with NBER dates
expansion: nt = 1, contractions: nt = 0


2
, nt
ρ σt+j



MKT

IND

FIRM

(months)

σt2

Et−1 σt2

ξt

σt2

Et−1 σt2

ξt

σt2

Et−1 σt2

ξt

-12

-0.091

-0.075

-0.063

-0.208

-0.178

-0.120

-0.125

-0.080

-0.098

-6

-0.162

-0.149

-0.098

-0.320

-0.310

-0.155

-0.230

-0.196

-0.126

-3

-0.354

-0.346

-0.198

-0.436

-0.454

-0.182

-0.434

-0.363

-0.246

-1

-0.413

-0.466

-0.192

-0.461

-0.518

-0.159

-0.515

-0.487

-0.230

0

-0.420

-0.498

-0.178

-0.472

-0.529

-0.164

-0.508

-0.525

-0.180

+1

-0.381

-0.498

-0.131

-0.438

-0.533

-0.116

-0.477

-0.529

-0.129

+3

-0.316

-0.417

-0.099

-0.328

-0.425

-0.094

-0.399

-0.452

-0.098

+6

-0.248

-0.322

-0.085

-0.280

-0.335

-0.076

-0.330

-0.368

-0.085

+12

-0.083

-0.135

-0.008

-0.163

-0.170

-0.066

-0.175

-0.192

-0.046

Correlation with GDP Growth


2
, gt
ρ σt+j



MKT

IND

FIRM

(quarters)

σt2

Et−1 σt2

ξt

σt2

Et−1 σt2

ξt

σt2

Et−1 σt2

ξt

-4

-0.021

-0.022

-0.001

-0.060

-0.003

-0.059

-0.023

0.033

-0.037

-2

-0.226

-0.023

-0.260

-0.262

-0.103

-0.260

-0.223

-0.048

-0.253

-1

-0.359

-0.208

-0.289

-0.399

-0.227

-0.328

-0.381

-0.180

-0.345

0

-0.321

-0.335

-0.162

-0.412

-0.368

-0.214

-0.342

-0.341

-0.146

+1

-0.258

-0.369

-0.073

-0.328

-0.369

-0.102

-0.297

-0.312

-0.114

+2

-0.216

-0.352

-0.038

-0.214

-0.324

0.006

-0.235

-0.292

-0.053

+4

-0.151

-0.278

0.033

-0.254

-0.285

-0.073

-0.195

-0.262

-0.018

Note: The volatility measures are detrended and exclude the crash. The panel reporting correlation
with NBER dates is based on monthly data while the panel with GDP correlation is based on
quarterly data (both constructed from daily returns). The three entries for each volatility measure
are computed from σT2 = ET −1 σT2 + ξT where the conditional expectations are formed by regressing
each volatility series on four lags of all three volatility series. The largest values (in absolute value)
for each column are written in bold. The data is detrended and winsorized.

TABLE 7
Cyclical Behavior: GDP growth
GDPt−1

RVWt−1

MKTt−1

0.330
(4.200)

0.020
(2.548)

0.251
(2.947)

0.012
(1.367)

0.211
(2.270)

0.015
(1.762)

0.238
(2.536)

0.014
(1.583)

0.199
(2.308)

0.013
(1.415)

-0.314
(-0.883)

0.236
(2.561)

0.013
(1.659)

-0.073
(-0.180)

0.201
(2.339)

0.013
(1.481)

0.200
(2.135)

0.013
(1.532)

INDt−1

FIRMt−1

R2 (p-value)
0.143

-0.701
(-2.383)

0.190

-1.841
(-2.432)

0.213

-0.477
(-2.999)

-0.058
(-0.138)

-1.470
(-1.625)

0.206

0.219
(0.002)
-0.441
(-1.710)

0.206
(0.008)

-1.239
(-1.184)

-0.250
(-0.997)

0.222
(0.002)

-1.237
(-1.249)

-0.222
(-0.735)

0.222
(0.006)

Note: The table reports results of various OLS regressions with GDP growth as the dependent
variable. The respective regressors are lagged by one quarter. RVW denotes the return of the CRSP
value-weighted portfolio. The p-values in the last column are for an F -test of joint significance of the
volatility measures. All t-statistics in parentheses are computed using Newey-West standard errors.
The volatility are quarterly constructed from daily returns, detrended and winsorized.

TABLE 9
Individual Industries
IND

FIRM

Industry

weight

β

mean

s.d.

trend

t-stat

mean

s.d.

trend

t-stat

Petroleum/Gas

11.031

0.86

1.013

0.302

0.249

5.683

5.498

0.774

0.583

2.864

Fin. Services

7.833

0.97

0.362

0.102 -0.125 -6.422

6.361

0.871

0.224

0.835

Utilities

7.446

0.66

0.311

0.097

0.033

2.295

4.032

0.500

0.125

0.993

Consumer Goods

6.117

1.02

0.562

0.122

0.016

0.700

4.590

0.598 -0.006

-0.043

Telecomm.

5.699

0.70

0.811

0.176 -0.065 -2.166

3.729

0.826

1.555

10.259

Computer

4.995

1.06

1.654

0.398

0.070

1.075

6.123

1.536

2.867

9.068

Retail

4.596

1.09

0.586

0.132

0.049

2.070

7.332

0.919

1.367

9.162

Auto

4.295

1.02

1.115

0.231

0.138

3.557

4.862

0.695

0.754

5.336

Pharmaceutical

4.206

1.00

0.792

0.228

0.167

3.158

6.126

0.745

0.780

5.043

Chemical

3.812

1.05

0.517

0.103

0.077

4.906

5.281

0.618

0.448

2.762

Note: This table reports statistics of industry and firm dispersion measures for the ten largest
individual industries. The industry measure is constructed using (26), the firm component according
to (27). Means and standard deviations are annualized (in %). The columns labeled ‘trend’ reports
the OLS coefficient of the volatility series on a linear time trend and a constant. The t-statistics
are Newey-West corrected. For IND, 16 (12) out of the 49 industries have a significantly positive
(negative) trend. For FIRM, the corresponding numbers are 27 (4).

TABLE 10
Correlation of Volatility Measures with Industry Output
volatility measures converted to annual data
IND

FIRM

contemporaneous

lagged

contemporaneous

lagged

Petroleum/Gas

-0.297

-0.132

-0.165

-0.270

Fin. Services

-0.153

0.090

-0.332

-0.042

Utilities

-0.153

-0.032

-0.094

0.020

Consumer Goods

-0.290

-0.308

-0.201

-0.272

Telecomm.

-0.142

-0.124

-0.457

-0.176

Computer

-0.021

0.109

0.162

0.303

Retail

-0.287

-0.212

-0.215

-0.305

Auto

-0.272

0.245

-0.308

0.133

Pharmaceutical

-0.045

-0.108

0.281

-0.054

Chemical

0.101

-0.002

-0.139

0.018

Industry

Note: This table reports correlations of contemporaneous and lagged annualized volatility of the
ten largest industries with output residuals in the respective industry. The residuals are computed
from OLS regressions of industry output on aggregate industrial production. The output data is
annual and ranges from 1972-97 (obtained from the BLS). Output data for industry 23 (miscellaneous
manufacturing) was not available. For IND, 18 (5) out of the 49 industries have a significantly
negative (positive) contemporaneous correlation with industry output, for 15 (3) the correlation of
lagged IND with output is negative (positive). For FIRM, the corresponding numbers are 21 (3) and
18 (3), respectively.

66

66

68

68

69

69

71

71

72

72

73

73

76

Year

79
80
82
83

76
78

Year

78

75

79
80
82
83

85

85

86

86

88

88

89

89

90

90

92

92

93

93

95

95

96

96

97

97

Figure 1A : MKT

75

0.01

65

0.008

65

0.006

63

0.004

63

Figure 1B : MKT MA (12)

62

0.002

0

0.008

0.006

0.004

0.002

0
62

63

65

65

66

66

67

68

69

0.006

63

0.004

62

0.002

0

0.003

0.002

0.001

0
62

69

70

71

71

72

73

77
78

81
82
83

75
76
78

Year

Year

79

73

79
80
82
83

85

85

86

86

87

88

89

89

90

90

91

92

93

93

94

95

95

96

97

97

Figure 2A : IND

75

Figure 2B : IND MA (12)

74

65

66

66

67

68

69

69

70

71

71

72

73

77

Year

79
81
82
83
85

75
76
78

Year

78

73

79
80
82
83
85

86

86

87

88

89

89

90

90

91

92

93

93

94

95

95

96

97

97

Figure 3A : FIRM

75

Figure 3B : FIRM MA (12)

74

0.02

65

0.016

63

0.012

63

0.008

62

0.004

0

0.015

0.012

0.009

0.006

0.003

0
62

