                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              CAPITAL GOODS PRICES, GLOBAL
                                  CAPITAL MARKETS AND
                                 ACCUMULATION: 1870-1950

                                          William J. Collins
                                        Jeffrey G. Williamson


                                         Working Paper 7145
                                 http://www.nber.org/paperslw7145

                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 1999




Revised version of a paper delivered at the Cliometrics Session, ASSA Meetings, New York, January 3-5,
1999. Our thanks to Michael Bordo and Alan Taylor for use of their unpublished real interest rate data, to
Brad DeLong, Kevin O'Rourke, Peter Rousseau, and Alan Taylor for useful comments, and to participants
at the Clio session of the ASSA Meetings. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 1999 by William J. Collins and Jeffrey G. Williamson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Capital Goods Prices, Global Capital Markets
and Accumulation: 1870-1950
William J. Collins and Jeffrey G. Williamson
NBER Working Paper No. 7145
May 1999
JELNo: E22,F21,N1

                                           ABSTRACT

       Conventional wisdom has it that global financial markets were as well integrated in the 1 890s
as in the 1 990s, but that it took several post-war decades to regenerate the connections that existed
before 1914. This view has emerged from a variety of tests for world financial capital market
integration ranging from the correlation of saving and investment aggregates to the dispersion of
security prices and real interest rates. Presumably, we care about global capital market integration
because it can have an impact on accumulation performance and the global distribution of the capital
stock. Oddly enough, however, the relative price of capital goods, an important component of the
user cost of capital, has never been incorporated into studies of capital market integration and almost
never in comparative studies of pre-1950 economic growth. This could be an important omission.
This paper explores the issue with a panel data base 1870-1950 for eleven OECD countries. It turns
out that capital goods prices have been central to accumulation, and therefore to growth and
convergence. They have also been as important to the evolution of global capital markets as have
been interest rates and other financial costs.

William Collins                                    Jeffrey G. Williamson
Vanderbilt University                              216 Littauer Center
Department of Economics                            Harvard University
Nashville, TN 37235                                Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER                                           and NBER
william collins@vanderbilt.edu                     jwilIiamkuznets .fas.harvard.edu
        The conventional wisdom is that global financial markets were as well integrated in the 1 890s as the

1 990s but that it took several post-war decades to regenerate the connections that existed before 1914. This

view emerged from a variety of tests for world financial capital market integration ranging from the

correlation of saving and investment aggregates (Feldstein and Horioka 1980; Taylor 1998) to the dispersion

of security prices and real interest rates (Neal 1985; Obstfeld and Taylor 1998). The ultimate importance of

these connections has been justified in terms of accumulation responses, the growth of nations, and income

convergence. Thus, when growth equations are applied to historical cross-sections from the Atlantic

economy, measures of financial saving capacity and access to foreign capital are often included (Prados et al.

1993; O'Rourke and Williamson 1997, 1998: Clip. 11; Obstfclt and Taylor 1998). Yet, financial capital

markets cannot by themselves speak to the issue of growth without making explicit connections with capital

goods and their accumulation.

        More specifically, per capita income growth depends to a large extent upon capital accumulation,

accumulation depends upon investment, and the investment decision is informed by a comparison of capital's

cost with its marginal product. Ignoring taxes, the user cost of capital can be written as u = (PK/P)(i+ô-

APk/Pk),1 and therefore, du = [i+ô-APk/PkId(PK/P)+ (PkIP)d[i+ô-zWk/PkI. Ultimately, u* = (PK/P)* + (i+ô-

APk/Pk)*, where "t" denotes percentage changes, i the nominal interest rate, 6 the depreciation rate, Pk the

price of capital goods, and P the price of output. Changes in the user cost of capital are driven by changes in

the interest rate 4 by changes in the relative price of capital goods. Given these facts, it is very surprising

that the price of capital goods has rarely been incorporated into studies of global capital market integration,



           The user cost of capital is often written in a simpler form u = (r + 6) where r is the real interest rate.
This can be derived from the expression in the text by assuming that Pk = P which also implies that PkIPk =
AP/P or simply the inflation rate. Since this paper focuses on the relative price of capital goods, we refrain
from making these simplifying assumptions. Jorgenson (1963) illustrated that the user cost of capital could
be characterized as a function of the price of capital goods, the rate of depreciation, the interest rate, and tax
policies. The latter can be ignored for most of our period.
accumulation and growth.2

        This could be an omission that matters. First, it is possible that the international dispersion of the

user cost of capital was wider and moved very differently than real interest rates alone suggest. If so, then the

incentive to invest and accumulate would also have been far different than real interest rates suggest.

Conventional tales about epochs of integrated and disintegrated capital markets may require some revision

after evaluating trends in capital goods prices over time; so too may assertions about the contribution of

global financial capital markets to convergence before 1914 and divergence afterwards. Second, the relative

price of capital goods (and machinery in particular) has been featured prominently in recent studies of post-

war growth (De Long and Summers 1991; Jones 1994; Lee 1995; Greenwood and Jovanovic 1998), where

the view that "low equipment prices operate to promote growth by increasing the quantity of equipment

investment" has gained some credence (DeLong and Summers 1991: p. 474)•3 Some have used this idea to

explain important historical cases. For example, Argentina's import-substitution policy in the 1 940s and

195 Os has been used to demonstrate how protection-induced high equipment prices can lead to low

accumulation rates and slow growth (De Long 1992; Taylor 1992, 1998). Nonetheless, the exploration of

Argentina's experience is more the exception than the rule: quantitative studies of pre-1950 growth have been

nearly silent on the issue.

         By combining capital goods and equipment price time series from national accounts with data from

the Penn World Tables (PWT), this paper explores levels and trends in capital goods prices relative to

consumption goods prices from 1870 to 1950 for eleven countries, nine from the Atlantic economy, plus

Australia and Japan. After discussing the limitations and imperfections of the data, the paper describes the

evolution of the relative price of capital goods over these eight decades. It then establishes which countries

had cheap capital goods and when. From that point, the paper goes on to show how the conventional wisdom


      2 There are exceptions that will be noted in a moment, Simon Kuznets (1961) certainly being one.
        See Auerbach et al. (1994) for a comment on the empirical fragility of the link that De Long and
Summers make between machinery investment and growth.

                                                        2
regarding "world capital market integration" must be revised with the rightful presence of capital goods

prices The paper also offers some tentative assessments of the capital goods price impact on accumulation

and growth, and explores some possible demand-side and supply-side determinants of the relative price of

capital goods. We conclude with an agenda for the future.



                                                  The Data



        Capital goods price indices underlie the real investment series of all national accounts, and in some

cases machinery or equipment price indices are available separately. We have drawn on these national

accounts price series for eleven countries to construct a database covering Australia, Canada, Demnark,

Finland, Germany, Italy, Japan, Norway, Sweden, Great Britain, and the United States.4 For each country a

relative price index can be formed by dividing the capital goods price index by the consumption goods price

index.5 The resulting series tell us how this relative price (PkIPc) has changed over time within each country,

but they do not tell us anything about differences between countries: we can say with certainty that the

relative price of capital goods fell in Japan and rose in the US from the 1870s to the 195 Os, but so far we

cannot say whether the relative price of capital goods in the US was higher or lower than it was in Japan at

any time over the eight decades. To establish a cross-country benchmark for 1950, we use the price level

variables for investment and consumption reported by the Penn World Tables for each country.6 The


           We would like to expand the sample, but most countries do not have long and detailed national
accounts stretching back to the 19th century.
           Consumption goods are chosen for the comparison rather than the overall GDP deflator because the
investment goods index is included in the GDP deflator. Using Gordon's (1990) postwar data for the US,
Greenwood, Hcrcowitz and Krusell (1997) as well as Greenwood and Jovanovic (1998) also relate capital
goods prices to consumption goods prices. Jones (1994, p. 361) shows that the choice does not matter for the
 1960-1985 period. Later in this paper, we also relate capital goods prices to wage rates, a relative price of
men versus machines that motivates capital deepening.
         6
           The 1950 figures are themselves linked to benchmarks constructed by the United Nations'
International Comparison Program which was initiated in 1970 and extended in 1975, 1980, and 1985
(Summers and Heston 1991).

                                                       3
benchmark permits a double comparison similar to that made by Charles Jones (1994): we observe whether

the price of capital goods relative to the price of consumption goods in a particular country is high or low

compared to the same ratio in other countries. Thus, we can say something about the relative cost of capital

goods between countries as well as over time.

        Unfortunately, the Penn World Tables do not provide price series for the sub-components of capital

goods, and at the same time it is evident that producer durables prices may differ substantially from the

overall capital goods price. This implies that the 1950 PWT figures for overall investment goods prices are

probably not reliable approximations of equipment or machinery prices. Instead, we take the producer

durables and consumer goods price data from the U.N.'s International Comparison Program (ICP) for 1980

and extend these prices back to 1950 by using the producer durables and consumer goods price indices

implicit in the OECD national accounts.

        Admittedly, this is not an ideal measure of relative capital goods prices over time or across countries,

as Simon Kuznets pointed out long ago (Kuznets 1961, p. 15). The national accounts capital goods price

series are often combinations of input prices rather than actual observations of capital goods prices — that is,

they often ignore productivity advance within the capital goods sector. Furthermore, the methods of price

estimation are not identical across countries, and so we cannot even hope that the biases work the same way

and to the same extent in every country. Finally, using a single benchmark to anchor time series running back

to 1870 could, of course, produce misleading comparisons.7 The farther we travel from the benchmarks, the

less certain our estimates become. Nevertheless, Robert J. Gordon, after employing similar national accounts

price series almost forty years ago, observed that "To deny the existence of these differential price trends is to

deny the validity of the deflated estimates of the components of GNP on which we all so heavily rely" (1961,

p. 937). It is no surprise that historical national accounts data are quite imperfect, and so it is clear that we



           See Nuxoll (1994) and Dowrick and Quiggin (1997) for considerations of the problems associated
with intertemporal and international price data.

                                                         4
must proceed with caution. At the same time, it seems foolish to postpone the exploration of potentially

important determinants of long-term economic growth simply because the data are not ideal. Until the next

round of revision of historical national accounts (and their underlying price series) and the appearance of

comprehensive cross-country capital goods price data for the 19th century, the comparisons we make here

rely on the best available characterizations of each economy's evolution.



                     The Evolution of the Relative Price of Capital Goods 1870-1950



        Tables 1 a and lb document the movements in capital goods prices relative to consumption goods

prices over eighty years, country by country, with each series set equal to 100 in 1900. Table 1 a reports the

quinquennially-averaged relative price of all capital goods (equipment plus structures) for each country from

1870 to 1950, whereas Table lb reports the relative price of equipment alone for a somewhat smaller sample

of countries (data are not available for Australia and Finland).

        The first notable fact is the time series variety across countries. Australia, Canada, Denmark,

Sweden, and the United States all exhibit a rising relative cost of capital goods between the 1870s and just

prior to World War I. Some of these increases are quite marked: the Swedish relative price rose 17.5 percent,

the Danish by 14.4 percent, the Canadian by 11.7 percent, and the US by 10.6 percent. If the price elasticity

of investment demand was about unity, these relative price changes would, by themselves, have served to

choke off real investment in these economies anywhere between a tenth and a sixth by the end of the period.

Had those relative prices been constant, annual investment in those four decades just prior to World War I

would have been quite a bit higher.

         Other countries underwent a decline in the relative price of capital goods. Japan experienced a

spectacular fall of 46 percent, much of which took place during the 1870s and 1880s, an event which must




                                                        5
certainly have stimulated accumulation there.8 Although not as spectacular as Japan, other countries

underwent a decline up to 1910-1914 too: Germany by 19.2 percent, Italy by 8.3 percent and the United

Kingdom by 7.9 percent. That these four countries recorded a significant decline in relative capital goods

prices is all the more surprising given that the late 19th century investment boom was raising investment

shares in GDP almost everywhere in the world economy. These demand-side forces should have tended to

raise relative capital goods prices, suggesting that strong cost-reducing supply side forces must have been at

work in the capital goods sector in each of these four countries. The decline in the relative price of equipment

(Table ib) was even more dramatic in all four countries: between 1870/74 and 19 10/14 the relative price of

machines in Japan fell by more than 66 percent; in Germany by 36 percent; in Italy by almost 12 percent; and

in the UK by more than 17 percent. Indeed, every country in our sample experienced a decline in the relative

price of equipment over the period, even though in some cases the aggregate capital goods price was on the

rise.

         The second notable fact is the regime switch around World War I. That is, the ubiquitous and strong

downward drift in the relative price of equipment leveled out in all but one case and even started rising in

some. Between the early 1920s and 1950, the relative price of equipment rose in Denmark, Norway, the UK

and the US. In Canada, Japan and Sweden, the late 19th century fall in the relative price of equipment slowed

down markedly, and in Germany the decline ceased entirely. Only in Italy did the pre-WWI decline resume its

rapid rate of fall after the 1920s.

         The third notable fact is that the Great Depression and the two World Wars, which one might expect

to have had quantitatively different demand-side effects on the prices of capital goods and consumer goods,

appear not to have had a large impact on the relative price of capital goods or equipment.9 Since investment


         8
           This theme for late Meiji and early Taisho Japan was stressed some time ago by DeBever and
Williamson (1977). The Japanese machine industry is discussed in some detail later in the paper.
            Of course, this stylized fact is somewhat qualified since some countries drop from the sample
during war years. Wars generally led to inflation of both consumer and investment goods prices, but the
relative price of the two did not change by much.

                                                        6
contracted so much more than did consumption during the Great Depression, one would have expected those

demand effects to have lowered the relative price of capital goods. Although the relative price of capital

goods fell slightly in a number of countries from the late 1920s to the early 1930s (and more than slightly in

Germany), only in Italy and Germany did this relative decline persist into the late 1930s. Similarly, only in

Italy did the relative price of equipment fall from the late 1 920s into the late 1 930s. This result cannot be

explained by some exceptional stickiness of capital goods prices since they dropped enormously into the

Great Depression, but less so than did the price of consumption goods. The examination of price trends

during wartime is a bit obscured because some countries drop out of the sample during the wars. As the

demand for military hardware rose, presumably the prices of factors and materials used intensively in the

production of capital goods (especially private producers durables) also increased. This should have raised

the prices of capital goods relative to others in the economy. This appears to have been true everywhere

during World War I except for Finnish and British capital goods, and British equipment. However, it was not

everywhere true during World War II. Capital goods prices in Denmark, Italy and Sweden appear to have

fallen relative to consumption goods prices; and relative equipment prices in Italy and Sweden also appear to

have fallen. Even where the relative price of capital rose during these wars, it rarely rose by much because

consumption goods prices kept pace with the inflation of capital goods prices.'0

         Tables la and lb simply report time series over the eight decades 1870-1950. What can be said

about the variance in relative prices across countries? Where were capital goods cheap and where were they

expensive? Tables 2a and 2b employ the benchmark from 1950 to make the comparisons, and all figures are

expressed relative to the United States in 1950.

         In the benchmark year of 1950, only Germany and Finland had lower relative capital goods prices

than the United States (Table 2a) and only Canada had lower relative equipment prices (Table 2b). Despite



         '° The exception being Australia in World War II when the relative price of capital goods rose from
107.85 in 1935-39 to 122.78 in 1940-44.

                                                         7
Japan's spectacular capital goods price decline up to World War II, it still had a much higher relative price

than the US in 1950, 75.3 percent higher. Ceteris paribus (and ignoring international capital mobility for a

moment), Japan would have required a savings rate 75 percent higher than the US to make the same real

investment in its productive capacity. Thus, Japan's historically high savings rate has had to compensate for

the relative high price of capital goods there compared to other countries. Over the eighty years as a whole,

Australia, Canada, Denmark, Italy, Japan, Sweden and the UK appear to have had relatively expensive capital

goods implying, ceteris paribus, a relatively disadvantageous price structure for capital accumulation. Japan,

Sweden and the UK in particular carried the heaviest burdens. Finland, Germany, Norway and the US appear

to have had relatively cheap capital goods implying, ceteris paribus, a favorable price structure for capital

accumulation.

        The relative price of equipment declined in each of the nine sampled countries up to World War I,

but the decline was much steeper in some than others. Those with the most expensive equipment in the

1 870s enjoyed the steepest relative price decline up to World War I, just as one would expect for tradable

goods in an increasingly global economy. The between-country spread in relative prices in the late 1 870s was

far larger than just prior to World War I. In the 1870s, the relative price of equipment in Japan and Italy was

7.9 and 3.0 times that of the United States, but those ratios had fallen to 3.0 and 2.8 by World War I.

Throughout the eight decades, the United States and Canada maintained the lowest relative prices of

machinery.



                                 The Evolution of a Global Capital Market?



         In measuring the evolution of a global financial market over the past century, Maurice Obstfeld and

Alan Taylor (1998) point out that the dispersion of real interest rates for ten countries fell slightly between

1885 and 1914, jumped up during World War I, declined somewhat during the 1920s, increased again during


                                                        8
the 1930s achieving a secular peak in the mid-1940s, and then declined sharply from that peak to 1960.

Despite the ballyhooed financial "globalization" of the 1980s and 1990s, the dispersion of interest rates

across these countries has not changed much since the 1960s (Obstfcld and Taylor 1998, p. 366)11 The

dispersion of real interest rates after 1960 was similar in magnitude to its level prior to 1914, despite the

dislocation of the interwar years. Hence the now standard view about the timing and extent of international

(financial) capital market integration asserts that global capital markets were as well integrated in 1914 as

they are now and that what had been gained up to 1914 was lost during the de-globalization episode up to the

1940s. So much for intcrest rates and financial markets. Did the dispersion of capital good prices, and

ultimately the user cost of capital, follow the same pattern?

        Table 3 reports the coefficient of variation of relative capital goods and equipment prices from 1875

to 1990, both with and without Japan,12 and in many ways the time path of the capital goods price dispersion

is quite different from that of real interest rates.13 Obstfeld and Taylor find that the dispersion of real interest

rates in the 1950s was larger than in the 1870s and 1880s. But even when Japan is excluded from the

samples, the dispersion of both relative capital goods prices and relative equipment prices were about half as

large in 1950 as in 1870: excluding Japan, the epochs of big decline in the dispersion of capital goods prices

are 1885-1895, 1945-1950, and 1965-1985. It could be that our measure of relative capital price dispersion

becomes less reliable the further we travel from the benchmark year, so what happens when we chop off some

of the more distant 19th century decades? Obstfeld and Taylor find that the dispersion of interest rates was



            Obstfeld and Taylor's sample includes Australia, Belgium, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, the
Netherlands, Sweden, Great Britain, and the United States.
         12 The magnitude of the relative price change in Japan tends to dominate the change in the overall
dispersion, and so we calculate the dispersion statistics both with and without Japan to provide a clearer
picture of the Atlantic economy's experience. Yet, no matter how global capital goods market integration is
calculated in Table 3, there is clear evidence of an unambiguous decline in price dispersion over the century
or so between 1875 and today.
         13 Our sample is somewhat different from that of Obstfeld and Taylor (1998), and our measure of
dispersion is different as well. Obstfeld and Taylor measure the dispersion as the standard deviation of the
absolute interest rate differential relative to the US.

                                                         9
about the same in 1974-1989 as in 1890-1913, but, once again, the dispersion of relative capital goods and

equipment prices was markedly lower in the post-war period than at the turn of the century. Capital goods

prices underwent a secular decline in dispersion over the full century since the 1 890s, while real interest rates

did not. Given that Obstfeld and Taylor have found evidence confirming that financial capital markets were

as well integrated in the 1890s as in the 1980s, our findings suggest that capital markets (i.e., when capital

goods prices are included) are much better integrated today than they were prior to 1914, at least if we are

willing to use price dispersion as a measure of integration.'4

        What about 1914-1950, decades of autarky and de-globalization? During the two world wars, the

dispersion figures rise in six out of eight cases in Table 3, the puzzling exception being for equipment

between 1940 and 1945. Between 1910 and 1915 the equipment price dispersion rises from 0.44 to 0.54 and

the capital goods price dispersion rises from 0.29 to 0.31 before jumping to 0.43 in 1917. During WWII, the

dispersion measure for relative capital goods prices rises from 0.25 to 0.43 between 1940 and 1945.15 This

wartime leap in the dispersion of international capital goods prices is also present in the real interest rate

evidence (Obstfeld and Taylor 1998), and they both might be related to the breakdown in global markets, one

in the goods market and one in the financial market.

         An important distinction between our version of global capital market integration and that of the

financial historian emerges from Table 3. The widening in the dispersion of real interest rates (Obstfeld and

Taylor 1998, Figure 11.3) took place during wartime and interwar episodes which were associated with

government interventions that destroyed well-integrated global financial markets. That is, policy had a clear



         14 One could take the view that a decline in the price dispersion does not necessarily imply that
market integration has increased if declining transport costs are doing all the work rather than the appearance
of better institutions and more liberal policy. Clearly, one's definition of integration matters to one's
interpretation of the evidence. However, there should be no debate about epochs of integration.
            These comparisons are inexact because some countries leave the sample during the wars.
However, we constructed coefficient of variation time series for samples that always exclude these subsets of
countries and found that the rise in the dispersion is not merely the result of these countries leaving the
sample.

                                                        10
impact on the functioning of global financial markets. In capital goods markets, however, it appears that the

globalization backlash during the interwar years had very little to do with the evolution of relative capital

goods prices. The years 19 10-1940 show very little change in the dispersion of relative capital goods prices;

in fact, these years show a decline in the dispersion of relative equipment prices.

        This strikes us as an important finding. While government intervention had a predictable impact in

first destroying and then reconstructing global financial capital markets, it did not have the same impact on

relative capital goods prices. If changes in capital goods prices dominated changes in the user cost of capital,

then we have a revisionist finding of some note and the literature on financial history can be said to have

missed a crucial point.

         Tables 4a and 4b make an effort to identify changes in the two components of the user cost of capital

over time (Table 4a) and differences across countries (Table 4b).'6 In Table 4a for the period 1870-1914,

there are six countries for which the data can say something about the components of user costs. Both

components of the user cost of capital fell in the United Kingdom, and so the observed decline in the interest

rate understates the decline in the user cost of capital, the latter nearly twice the former. In the other five

cases, the fall in one component of the user cost was at least partially offset by a rise in the other. The

relatively large changes in the (i + ô - Pk/Pk) component of user costs reflects the relatively large swings in

nominal interest rates and inflation rates compared to changes in the relative cost of capital to consumer

goods. For the period 19 10-1949 there are eight countries for which the data can say something about user

costs. Changes in the components of the user cost reinforce one another in Australia, Canada, Italy and

Sweden, but move in opposite directions in Germany, Norway, the UK, and the US. The rise in relative

capital goods prices more than offsets the fall in (i + ô - Pk!Pk) for Germany and very nearly so for Norway.

The offsetting effect of the relative price of capital goods was more modest but not insignificant for the UK



          To facilitate the calculation of percentage changes in the (i +ô - Pk/Pk) component of user costs,
         16

we simply assume that ô = 0.10 for all countries and periods.

                                                         11
and the US.

         Table 4b measures at various points in time differences across countries in the two components of

the user cost of capital (all expressed relative to the US). In the 1870s, the US appears to have had a

relatively high effective interest rate, but a relatively low relative price of capital goods.   Thus, the high

financial cost of capital in the US was partially offset by the relatively low cost of the capital goods being

purchased. Note that the total user cost of capital appears to have been very similar in the US and UK in the

1 870s despite the US having relatively high interest rates, a revisionist finding given the established tradition

which characterizes the US as capital-scarce compared to Britain at that time. As pointed out in the

discussion of Table 2a, the US maintained this relatively low price of capital goods throughout the period

under consideration, and by the late 1 940s, it also had a relatively low real interest rate. Low interest rates

and cheap capital goods imply low user costs of capital, and that fact should have made investment in the US

very attractive.



                                Capital Goods Prices, Investment and Growth



         The relative price of capital goods has been featured prominently in a number of recent cross-section

studies of economic growth (Dc Long and Summers 1991; Easterly 1993; Jones 1994; Lee 1995;

Greenwood, Hercowitz, Krusell 1997; Greenwood and Jovanovic 1998). Charles Jones, for example, uses

data underlying the Penn World Tables to argue that "an increase in the relative price of machinery reduces

capital accumulation and therefore reduces the growth rate of the economy" (Jones 1994, p. 372). But have

capital goods prices always had this influence on investment and growth, or is it only a late 20th century

phenomenon? We will use the capital goods relative price data 1870-1950 to test the durability of this link.


         17
            The high interest rate finding may arise from differences in the assets whose nominal rates are
used in the calculation. The US series is based on corporate bond yields whereas other countries' rates are
usually based on government bonds (Bordo and Jonung, p. 159).

                                                          12
        The effect of capital goods prices on growth is indirect, while its effect on accumulation is direct.

Thus, we should find more convincing evidence of the importance of relative capital goods prices by focusing

first on the quantity of investment undertaken. An empirical assessment of the link between capital goods

prices and investment rates is offered in Tables 5 and 6. Each observation in the regression represents a

particular country over one of the following six periods: 1870-85, 1885-1900, 1900-13, 1913-29, 1929-39,

and 1939-50. Across columns, the sample size changes depending on the availability of data.18 The

investment share in GDP is regressed on the log of GDP per capita, the relative price of capital goods (or

machinery), and the real interest rate on long term assets at the beginning of each period.19 We also include

time period dummies. Table 5 calculates the investment share in current prices whereas Table 6 calculates it

in constant prices.20

        The relative price of capital goods is not exogenous, and so this kind of estimation procedure does

not offer a clean identification of the effect of relative capital goods prices on investment and accumulation,

an issue we will consider in the next section. Non-price forces which shift the demand curve for investment

goods to the right will also raise the relative price of capital goods, a fact which will be true even for tradable

equipment if the investment boom is world-wide. This will tend to generate a positive relationship between

investment rates and relative capital goods prices, and thus a downward bias on the true influence of capital

goods prices on accumulation and growth. The same will be true for real interest rates. We attempt to

minimize this bias by observing prices and interest rates at the beginning of the period rather than in the

middle, as would be implied by an average over the period. Furthermore, the specification fails to introduce


           For example, of the eleven countries which have sufficient national accounts for the construction of
relative capital goods price series, real interest rate data exist only for seven (Canada, Germany, Italy,
Norway, Sweden, Britain, and the United States).
         19 The real interest rate figures are derived from unpublished data supplied by Michael Bordo and
Alan Taylor. Of course, cross-country comparisons of such rates are necessarily inexact.
         20 The constant price investment and GDP series from each country are used to form a series
representing the constant price investment share over time, and then intemationally comparable figures for
investment and GDP from the PWT for 1950 are used to benchmark each country's constant price investment
share in that year.

                                                         13
demographic variables (Bloom and Williamson 1998; Williamson 1998), measures of protection (O'Rourke

1997a), economic geography (Krugman 1991; Gallup, Sachs and Mellinger 1998) and other variables that

have been shown to influence growth and ought to affect investment and accumulation as well. Nevertheless,

we press bravely ahead with the simple OLS specification, expecting to improve it in future versions of this

paper.

         The correlation of the investment rate with capital goods or equipment prices is in all cases negative

and in all cases but one statistically significant. According to Table 6, column 1, a one-standard-deviation

increase in the relative price of capital goods is associated with a decline in the investment share of about 3.6

percentage points, a significant figure in an era when the investment rate was around 17 percent, and it

implies an elasticity of -0.68. According to column 2, a one standard deviation increase in the relative price

of equipment is associated with a decline in the (total) investment share of 3.4 percentage points (an elasticity

of -0.45). If in 1870 the US had had the relative price of capital goods of the other countries (not including

Japan), the regression suggests that the US investment share would have been about 2.4 percentage points

lower than it was between 1870 and 1885. Since the US always had cheap capital goods, one may conclude

that its investment rate, its rate of accumulation, and ultimately its rate of growth were always favored by this

characteristic of its price structure. Thus, we have found that relative capital goods prices were an important

determinant of investment, and, by extension, that they were also important to growth.

         Columns 3 and 4 add the real interest rate at each period's beginning to the regressions.2' This

changes the sample composition considerably because interest rate data are not available for every country.

The real interest rate is negatively related to investment rate, but the coefficient estimate is very imprecise.

This might be due to demand side forces that tend to raise investment and interest rates simultaneously or to

problems with the intemational comparability of the interest rates, or both.



         2! The real interest rate is calculated as the difference between the nominal interest rate and in the
inflation rate for all goods.

                                                        14
        So far, we have suggested that because capital goods prices appear to affect investment, they must

also affect growth. Table 7 looks for direct evidence of this link between capital goods prices and growth. In

the manner of Robert Barro (1991), we regress average annual per capita GDP growth over each period on

the log of GDP per capita, the relative price of capital goods (or machinery), and time period dummies. As

with the investment equations, this version of the paper excludes from the growth equation other conditioning

variables like geography, demography, and policy. Both columns in Table 7 yield the expected negative

coefficient on initial GDP per capita, that is, poor countries grow faster than rich, ceteris paribus. Most

importantly for the theme of this paper, the relative price of capital goods (or machinery) has a consistent

negative impact on growth. True, the estimate for total capital goods prices is far from statistically

significant, but this is hardly surprising given the confounding demand side effects on the relative price of

capital goods, the limited number of conditioning variables present in the specification, and the indirect

nature of the link between capital goods price and growth.

        According to colunm 2, a one-standard-deviation increase in the relative price of equipment lowered

annual growth by almost 0.37 percentage points (an elasticity of -0 .55). According to the column 1, a one-

standard-deviation increase in the relative price of all capital goods lowered annual growth by almost 0. 19

percentage points (an elasticity of -0.30). If the United States had had a relative price of equipment equal to

the average price in the other countries (excluding Japan), then the regression coefficient from column 2

predicts that the per capita annual growth rate would have been 1.55 percent between1870 and 1885 rather

than 1.9 percent. Compounded over those fifteen years, this counterfactual suggests that per capita income

would have been 5 percent lower in 1885 than it actually was. While that number may seem small, it would

have contributed significantly to greater convergence over the period. We constructed another simple

counterfactual by regressing average annual per capita growth from 1870 to 1950 on (log) initial GDP per




                                                        15
capita and the relative price of all capital goods at the beginning of the period (around 1870)22 Using the

coefficient on capital goods prices from this regression and replacing the US actual capital goods price with

the average price of the other ten countries in the sample, we estimate that US per capita growth would have

been about 1.55 percent per year rather than 1.7. When compounded over an 80 year period, this implies that

real income per capita might have been about 12 percent lower in 1950 than it actually was ($8500 versus

$9573 in 1990 Geary-Khamis dollars). The US would still have been among the world's richest countries,

but it would not have been the unrivaled world leader in income per capita since it would have ranked about

on par with the New Zealand and somewhat below Switzerland.

        Previous studies of international income convergence have found that the United States' growth rate

outpaced the predictions of convergence regressions estimated with long run data (Wright 1990; Williamson

1996). The US was a rich country which continued to grow quickly relative to the rest of the world despite

the implications of neoclassical convergence models. We have now identified one reason why: the US was

favored by cheap capital goods throughout the period.



                              Explaining the Relative Price of Capital Goods



         Thus far, capital goods prices have been taken as given and used as if they were exogenous in the

growth and investment regressions reported above. Now we consider some of the factors that might explain

differences in relative capital goods prices across countries and their changes over time. After discussing

Japan and the United States in some detail, we explore the determinants of the relative price of capital goods



         22
            Unlike the previous growth regressions this one does not break up each country's performance
into six periods, rather the dependent variable is average annual growth over the full 80 years and the
independent variables are initial GDP per capita and initial relative price of capital goods. The coefficient on
the relative price variable is 0.00003 18 (t-statistic = 4.97). Similar counterfactual results are attained if
Japan is excluded from the regression and from the calculation of the average price of capital in countries
other than the US.

                                                        16
econometrically.

         One of the outstanding characteristics of Tables 2a and 2b is the high ratio of capital goods prices to

consumer goods prices in Japan, especially in the 1 870s and 18 80s and especially for producer durables. The

small size of the domestic machine tool industry at the time of the Meiji Restoration, and its evolution

thereafter, is discussed at length by Toshiaki Chokki (1986). Imported machines were crucial to the

establishment of Japanese arsenals in the 1 870s, and subsequently the process of military modernization

appears to have provided an important impetus to the development of domestic machine production

(Yamamura 1977). During World War I, domestic production of machinery expanded rapidly to fill the

growing demand which (for the time being) could not be satisfied by imports from Britain, the US, or

Germany. Tables la through 2b all show that the relative price of capital goods rose substantially in Japan

during these years reflecting the increase in domestic demand coupled with an inelastic wartime import

supply. Imports bounced back after the war, however, and the relative price of capital goods fell. The

invasion of Manchuria in 1931 and the years of war that followed again cut off foreign supplies of machinery,

and it is reflected in the rise of the relative price of machinery.

         These temporary shocks drove the expansion and evolution of the domestic capital goods industry

and in doing so may have contributed to the long-run permanent decline in Japanese capital goods prices.

When looking at United States 19th century experience, Nathan Rosenberg (1 963b, p. 223) linked the

emergence and development of the domestic capital goods industry with the size of the market for such

goods. He argued that "with the growth in the demand for machinery the capital-goods industry became

gradually more and more highly specialized and subdivided in order to undertake the production of machines,

the cost of producing machines was thereby sharply reduced. . ." Presumably, the Rosenberg hypothesis is

more likely to survive the more is machinery non-tradable. With the hypothesis in mind, we will test

econometrically whether the size of the domestic economy, ceteris paribus, had a noticeable impact on the

relative price of capital goods between 1870 and 1950.


                                                          17
        When studying l9 century American capital accumulation, Jeffrey Williamson (1979) argued that it

was important to distinguish between those capital goods which were labor-intensive, non-tradable and

undergoing slow rates of productivity advance (structures and infrastructure) and those capital goods which

were skill-intensive, tradable and undergoing fast rates of productivity growth (equipment and machinery).

Given those attributes, we would expect the relative price of machines to decline faster than the price of

structures and thus of all capital goods combined, as Tables 1 a and lb confirm. American economic

historians have always argued that the rate of productivity advance in the producer durables sector was

relatively fast (Rosenberg 1963a, 1963b, 1969; David 1975; Williamson 1979). If what was true of the US

was also true at the global level, then we should see a declining price of producers durables relative to

consumer goods world-wide, and in fact this is also confirmed in Table lb. Furthermore, in a world of

imperfect commodity market integration, we would expect the relative price of capital goods to be higher in

poor agrarian countries which have not yet experienced the unbalanced productivity growth associated with

industrialization.

        Williamson (1974, 1979) also argued that part of the decline in the US relative price of capital goods

between the 1 840s and the 1 870s was due to Civil War tariffs that raised the price of manufactured goods

relative to investment goods, tariffs which persisted for almost a century after the Civil War ended. It may

appear that Argentine import substitution experience in the 1940s and 1950s is inconsistent with the

American Civil War tariff experience almost a century earlier, the former contributing to slow growth and the

latter to fast growth. The inconsistency is resolved, however, if capital goods in the 1 6Os were for the most

part nontradable structures and homemade machines, while over the course of the next century, the tradable

machine component became much more important. In the American case, tariffs would have decreased the

relative price of then nontradable capital goods, while in the Argentine case they would have increased the

relative price of now tradable (and imported) capital goods.

         On the other hand, US demand shifted away from structures and infrastructure and towards machines


                                                       18
as settlement and town-building slowed down, and as agriculture contracted (relatively) while manufacturing

expanded (Kuznets 1961: p. 40). These events should have contributed to the shift in capital from structures

to equipment, thus raising the relative price of equipment from the demand side. In the long run, however,

these demand forces should have been overwhelmed by changing cost conditions on the supply side.

        Endowments of labor and skills may also matter to the relative price of capital goods. The

construction of structures is very labor intensive, while the construction of machines is very skill intensive. In

countries and epochs where labor is cheap and skills are expensive, and where world commodity markets are

only imperfectly integrated, the relative price of machines should be high. In countries and epochs where

labor is expensive and skills are cheap, the relative price of machines should be low. In the Anglo-American

debate over ante bellum dual scarcity, it emerged that the relative price of skills and machines were low in

America (Rosenberg 1967; Brito and Williamson 1973). More generally, this fact offers another reason to

expect a positive correlation between level of development and cheap capital goods.

        We explore these hypotheses econometrically in Table 8 where the log relative capital goods price (or

equipment price) is regressed on the log of initial GDP per capita, the log of total GDP, and a measure of

tariff rates. There are three key findings reported there. First, GDP per capita has a negative impact on the

relative price of capital goods (especially equipment), a result Charles Jones (1994) also reports for the late

20th century. This finding is consistent with our discussion of unbalanced factor productivity growth as well

as with the suggestion that rich countries with relatively abundant skills will also be characterized by

relatively cheap capital goods. Furthennore, the coefficient on GDP per capita is larger and more significant

for equipment than for all capital goods, just as we would have predicted. Second, columns 2 and 5 show that

for a given level of GDP per capita, the overall size of the domestic economy is positively, not negatively,

correlated with relative capital goods prices, a clear rejection of the Rosenberg hypothesis. This suggests that

cost reductions due to scale were more far important for consumption goods than for capital goods. Third,

higher tariffs were associated with lower relative capital goods prices. In colunm 3 a 10 percentage point


                                                       19
increase in the tariff rate (say, from 0.10 to 0.20) lowers the relative price of capital goods by 7.6 percent,

and in column 6 a 10 percentage point increase in the tariff rate lowers the relative price of equipment by 25.6

percent. To the extent that tariffs distorted prices prior to 1950, they did so in a way that lowered the price of

capital goods relative to consumer goods, a price twist consistent with what Williamson (1974, 1977) has

argued for US Civil War tariffs. The fact that tariffs appear to be negatively associated with capital goods

prices might help explain the otherwise puzzling positive correlation between late 19th century growth and

tariffs, the "Bairoch effect" (Bairoch 1989) recently confirmed by 0 'Rourke (1 997b).23



                                    The Relative Price of Men and Machines



         The price of capital goods is most often expressed relative to the price of other goods, but capital

goods are, after all, factors of production too, and so it may be useful to compare the price of capital goods

with the price of another factor of production, unskilled labor. Table 9 reports five-year averages of the price

of capital goods relative to the price of labor for ten countries between 1870 and 1950. Every country

experienced a rise in the price of men relative to the capital goods with which they worked between 1870 and

1914. Alternatively, the price of capital goods fell relative to the unskilled worker's wage, and the decline in

Denmark, Germany, Italy, and Nonvay was especially large. The wage gains driven by mass European

emigration would help account for the fact that the downward trend was more dramatic in Europe than in the

New World. The US, Canada, and Australia all underwent comparatively small declines in the Pk/W ratio up

to 1914, and Japan's ratio increased substantially before declining after 1890. After 1915, and with the end

of mass migration, there was a regime switch: the US and Canada now joined Italy, Japan, Norway and


         23
              We call this 19th century growth-tariff or growth-openness positive correlation puzzling since it is
negative for the late 20th century (Sachs and Warner 1995; Vamvakidis 1997). For the equipment price, the
coefficient on the tariff variable remains negative and statistically significant even when the US (a high tariff,
low PkIPc country) is omitted from the regression. The tariff coefficient becomes positive but statistically
insignificant in the regression with all capital goods prices when the US is omitted.

                                                        20
Sweden in recording substantial declines in the Pk/W ratio. Over the full 80 year period, onlyAustralia had

no lasting decline in its Pk/W ratio.

         International comparisons of the capital goods price/wage ratio can be made by using price data from

the PWT and internationally comparable wage data from Williamson (1995) to form abenchmark in 1950.24

The series underlying Table 9 can then be used to extend the international comparisons back to 1870 as we

do in Table 10. In the benchmark year of 1950, the US had the lowest Pk/W ratio by far, and it appears to

have held that position throughout the period under consideration (though Norway occasionally challenged).

Denmark, Sweden, and Italy had the highest ratios in 1870, but all three experienced a rapid decline in Pk,'W

over the subsequent 80 years.



                                                 The Agenda



         The user cost of capital has two components, the cost of finance and the cost of the capital good.

Thus, any attempt to understand the integration and disintegration of world capital markets over time should

pay attention to both components. The same should be true of any comparative assessment across epochs or

across countries of investment behavior, accumulation performance and growth. Oddly enough, however, the

relative price of capital goods has not been incorporated into studies of capital market integrationand long-

term growth. To rectify this omission, we developed a panel data base for elevenOECD countries over the

eight decades between 1870 and 1950.

         While this paper must be viewed as only a start on a long term historical assessment ofthese issues,

and while the underlying capital goods price data base is fragile, some stylized facts seem to be robust. First,



         24 The benchmark relies on the ratio of PkIPc from the PWT to the real wage from Williamson
 (1995) where both PkIPc and the real wage are expressed relative to the US in 1950. The series are extended
 back from this benchmark on the basis of changes in the nominal price of capital goods relative to nominal
 wages within each country.
                                                       21
there was enormous variance in trends in the relative price of capital goods across countries before 1950.

Some, like Japan, underwent a spectacular decline in the aggregate capital goods price from 1870 to 1914,

while others, like Scandinavia, underwent a rise. This divergence was possible even during a period of

globalization in trade since only equipment was traded, while structures, of course, were not. Second, the

relative price of equipment fell everywhere, an event which appears to support the view that productivity

growth was faster in the producer goods sector world-wide. Yet, and third, there was a notable regime switch

around World War I, after which the downward drift in the relative price of equipment stopped and in some

cases reversed. Finally, there was also enormous variance in the relative price of capital goods and the user

cost of capital across countries. Some, like Japan and Sweden, were disadvantaged by relatively expensive

capital goods, and thus needed higher savings rates to achieve the same growth as their competitors. Some,

like Germany and the United States, were favored by relatively cheap capital goods, and thus could achieve

the same rates of growth with lower savings rates.

        Do these capital goods price facts change our conventional views of the evolution of a global capital

market? They do indeed. Using the more comprehensive user cost criteria, capital markets were far better

integrated in the 1980s than they were in the 1890s, not equally well-integrated as the financial historian

usually argues. Furthermore, the time path of the capital goods price dispersion is very different than that of

real interest rates, and thus will require different explanations. The dispersion of real interest rates increases

between 1910 and 1940, decades which were associated with government interventions that destroyed well-

integrated world financial markets. Yet, globalization backlash after 1914 seems to have had very little to do

with the evolution of capital goods prices.

         The remainder of the paper takes a stab at three difficult questions: First, did the relative price of

capital goods have a statistically significant and big impact on investment? The answer is yes: expensive

capital goods choked off investment. The impact was statistically significant and powerful, so that on

average the investment share responded to the relative price of capital goods with an elasticity of about -0.7.


                                                        22
Did the relative price of capital goods also have a statistically significant and big impact on GDP per capita

growth? Here the answer is more tentative. Yes, the annual growth rate of GDP per capita was dampened by

high capital goods prices with an elasticity of almost -0.6. But significance tests suggest that caution be

attached to that conclusion, perhaps confirming that while the impact of capital goods prices on investment

and accumulation was direct, its impact on growth was indirect. Finally, what explains the relative price of

capital goods? Here we find that prior to 1950 rich countries had lower relative capital goods prices

compared with poor countries, large economies had higher relative prices compared with small ones (holding

constant GDP per capita), and economies with tariffs had lower relative prices compared with those which

went for free trade.

          The agenda for future research has four parts. First, we would like to extend and improve the capital

goods price data base. Second, the investment and growth equations must be augmented by more conditional

variables to better isolate the impact of capital goods prices. Third, while we know that capital deepening

raises the relative price of labor and lowers the relative price of machines, we need to learn more about the

causal direction that goes from the relative price of labor or machines to capital deepening. History shows

that countries trace out very different trends in the relative price of men versus machines, and we need to

know the reasons why. Fourth, the determinants of the price of capital goods relative to consumption goods

must be better understood. This last agenda item is especially important since only by so doing can we

isolate the roles of policy and institutions in accounting for the evolution of world capital markets and their

impact.




                                                       23
                                               References



A. Auerbach et al. (1994), "Reassessing the Social Returns to Equipment Investment," Quarterly Journal

        of Economics 109 (August): 789-802.

P. Bairoch (1989), "European Trade Policy, 1815-1914," in The Cambridge Economic History of Europe,

        vol. III, ed. by P. Mathias and S. Pollard (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).

R. Barro (1991), "Economic Growth in a Cross-Section of Countries," Quarterly Journal of Economics

        106 (May): 407-43.

D. Bloom and J. G. Williamson (1998), "Demographic Transitions and Economic Miracles in Emerging

        Asia," World Bank Economic Review 12 (September): 419-55.

M. D. Bordo and L. Jonung (1987), The Long-Run Behavior of the Velocity of Circulation: The

        International Evidence (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).

D. L. Brito and J. G. Williamson (1973), "Skilled Labor and Nineteenth Century Anglo-American

        Managerial Behavior," Explorations in Economic History 11 (Spring): 235-52.

G. Bry (1960), Wages in Germany 1871-1945 (Princeton: Princeton University Press).

T. Chokki (1996), "A History of the Machine Tool Industry in Japan," in M. Fransman (ed.), Machinery

        and Economic Development (London: Macmillan Press).

W. Collins, K. O'Rourke, and J. Williamson (1997), "Were Trade and Factor Mobility Substitutes in

        History?" NBER Working Paper 6059, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

P. David (1975), Technical Choice, Innovation and Economic Growth (Cambridge: Cambridge

        University Press).

L. DeBever and J. G. Williamson (1977), "Saving, Accumulation and Modem Economic Growth: The

        Contemporary Relevance of Japanese History," Journal of Japanese Studies 4 (Fall): 125-67.

J. B. DeLong (1992), "Productivity Growth and Machinery Investment: A Long-Run Look, 1870-1980,"

                                                    24
       Journal of Economic History 52 (June): 307-24.

J. B. DeLong and L. H. Summers (1991), "Equipment Investment and Economic Growth," Quarterly

       Journal of Economics 106 (May): 445-502.

S. Dowrick and J. Quiggin (1997), "True Measures of GDP and Convergence," American Economic

       Review 87 (March): 4 1-64.

W. Easterly (1993), "How Much Do Distortions Affect Growth?" Journal of Monetary Economics 32

       (November): 187-212.

M. Feldstcin and C. Harioka (1980), "Domestic Savings and International Capital Flows," Economic

       Journal 90 (June): 3 14-29.

J. Gallup, J. Sachs and A. Mellinger (1998), "Geography and Economic Development," HIER Discussion

       Paper No. 1856, Department of Economics, Harvard University, Cambridge, Mass. (November).

R. J. Gordon (1961), "Differential Changes in the Price Indexes for Capital Goods," American Economic

        Review 51 (December): 937-57.

   (1990), The Measurement of Durable Goods Prices (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).

J. Greenwood, Z. Hercowitz, and P. Krusell (1997), "Long-Run Implications of Investment-Specific

        Technological Change," American Economic Review 87 (June): 342-62.

J. Greenwood and B. Jovanovic (1998), "Accounting for Growth," NBER Working Paper 6647, National

        Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass. (July).

International Labour Office (1953), Yearbook of Labour Statistics (Geneva: ILO).

C. I. Jones (1994). "Economic Growth and the Relative Price of Capital," Journal of Monetary Economics

        34 (December): 359-82.

D. Jorgenson (1963), "Capital Theory and Investment Behavior," American Economic Review 53 (May):

        247-59.

P. Krugman (1991), Geography and Trade (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press).

                                                   25
S. Kuznets (1961), "Quantitative Aspects of the Economic Growth of Nations: VI: Long Term Trends in

        Capital Formation Proportions," Economic Development and Cultural Change 9 (July, Part 2).

J-W. Lee (1993), "International Trade, Distortions, and Long-Run Economic Growth." IMF Staff Papers

        40 (June): 299-328.

A. Maddison (1991), Dynamic Forces of Capitalist Development: A Long-Run Comparative View (New

        York: Oxford University Press).

   (1995), Monitoring the World Economy 1820-1992 (Paris: OECD Development Centre Studies).

B. R. Mitchell (1998a), International Historical Statistics: Europe 1750-1993 (New York: Stockton

        Press).

   (1998b), International Historical Statistics: Africa, Asia, and Oceania 1750-1993 (New York:

        Stockton Press).

L. Neal (1985), "Integration of International Capital Markets: Quantitative Evidence from the Eighteenth to

        Twentieth Centuries," Journal of Economic History 50 (June): 2 19-26.

D. Nuxoll (1994), "Differences in Relative Prices and International Differences in Growth Rates," American

        Economic Review 84 (December): 1423-3 6.

M. Obstfeld and A. M. Taylor (1998), "The Great Depression as a Watershed: International Capital Mobility

        Over the Long Run," in M. Bordo et al (eds.), The Defining Moment: The Great Depression and

        the American Economy in the Twentieth Century (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).

K. O'Rourke (1997a), "The European Grain Invasion, 1870-1913," Journal of Economic History 57

        (December): 775-801.

   (1997b), "Tariffs and Growth in the Late 19th Century", CEPR Working Paper WP97/18, Department

        of Economics, University College Dublin (July).

K. O'Rourke and J. G. Williamson (1997), "Around the European Periphery: Globalization, Schooling and

        Growth," European Review of Economic History 1 (August): 153-90.

                                                     26
   (1998), Globalization and History: The Evolution of a l9 Century Atlantic Economy (Cambridge,

        Mass.: MIT Press, forthcoming).

L. Prados de la Escosura, T. Sanchez and J. Oliva (1993), 'Dc Te Fabula Narratur? Growth, Structural

        Change and Convergence in Europe, 19th and 20th Centuries,' Working Paper No. D-93009,

        Ministerio de Economia y Hacienda, Madrid (December).

N. Rosenberg (1963a), "Technological Change in the Machine Tool Industry, 1840-1910," Journal of

        Economic History 23 (December): 4 14-43.

   (1963b), "Capital Goods, Technology and Economic Growth," Oxford Economic Papers 15

        (November): 217-27.

   (1967), "Anglo-America Wage Differences in the 1820s," Journal of Economic History 27 (June): 221-

        29.

   (1969), "The Direction of Technological Change: Inducement Mechanisms and Focussing Devices,"

        Economic Development and Cultural Change 17 (October): 1-24.

J. D. Sachs and A. Warner (1995), "Economic Reform and the Process of Global Integration," Brookings

        Papers on Economic Activity, I (Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution).

R. Summers and A. Heston (1991), "The Penn World Table (Mark 5): An Expanded Set of International

        Comparisons, 1950-1988," Quarterly Journal of Economics 106 (May): 327-68.

A. M. Taylor (1992), "External Dependence, Demographic Burdens and Argentine Economic Decline after

        the Belle Epoque," Journal of Economic History 52 (December): 907-36.

— (1998), "On the Costs of Inward-Looking Development: Price Distortions, Growth, and Divergence in

        Latin America," Journal of Economic History 58 (March): 1-28.

United Nations (1987), World Comparisons of Purchasing Power and Real Product for 1980: Phase IV

        of the International Comparison Project (New York: United Nations).

A. Vamvakidis (1997), "How Robust Is the Growth-Openness Connection?" Chp. 3 of International

                                                    27
        Integration and Economic Growth, PhD thesis, Department of Economics, Harvard University.

J. G. Williamson (1974), "Watersheds and Turning Points: Conjectures on the Long Term Impact of Civil

        War Financing," Journal of Economic History 34 (September): 636-6 1.

   (1979), "Inequality, Accumulation, and Technological Imbalance: A Growth-Equity Conflict in American

        History?" Economic Development and Cultural Change 17 (January): 23 1-53.

    (1995), "The Evolution of Global Labor Markets Since 1830: Background Evidence and Hypotheses,"

        Explorations in Economic History 32 (April), pp. 14 1-96.

—(1996), "Globalization, Convergence and History," Journal of Economic History 56 (June): 1-30.

   (1998), "Growth, Distribution and Demography: Some Lessons from History," Explorations in

        Economic History 35 (July): 241-7 1.

G. Wright (1990), "The Origins of American Industrial Success, 1879-1940," American Economic Review

         80 (September): 65 1-68.

K. Yamamura (1977), "Success Illgotten? The Role of Meiji Militarism in Japan's Technological Progress,"

         Journal of Economic History 37 (March): 113-33.




                                                     28
                   Appendix: Capital Goods Price and Investment Data 1870-1950

                                               Australia
Price Index for Capital Goods:
         1870-1939: N. G. Butlin (1962), Australian Domestic Product, Investment and Foreign Borrowing
         1861-1938/39, p. 33. The series is for gross domestic capital fonnation.
         1939-1950: M. W. Butlin (1977), "A Preliminary Annual Database 1900/01 to 1973/74." The
         series is for private non-dwelling investment.
Price Index for Machinery and Equipment:
         Not available.
Price Index for Consumption Goods:
         1870-1950: B. R. Mitchell (1995), InternationaiHistoricaiStatistics: Africa, Asia & Oceania
         (hereafter IHSAAO). A consumer price index is used because none for the consumption goods
         component of GDP has been found.
Current Price Value of Investment:
          1870-1939: N. G. Butlin (1962), pp. 6-7.
          1940-1950: B. R. Mitchell (1995), pp. 1017-18.
Current Price Value of GDP:
          1870-1939: N. G. Butlin (1962) pp. 6-7.
          1940-1950: B. R. Mitchell (1995), pp. 10 17-18.
 Constant Price Value of Investment:
          1870-1939, 1949-50: B. R. Mitchell (1995), pp. 1017-18.
          1939-1949: M. W. Butlin (1977).
 Constant Price of GDP:
          1870-1939, 1949-50: B. R. Mitchell (1995), 1017-18.
          1939-1949: M. W. Butlin (1977).

                                                 Canada
Price Index for Capital Goods:
         1870-1929: 0. J. Firestone (1958), "Canada's Economic Development 1867-1953," Incomeand
         Wealth Series VII, p. 178. Missing data (except 1916-1919 which are left blank) are interpolated.
         1929-1950: M. C. Urquhart (1965), Historical Statistics of Canada, p. 305.
Price Index for Machinery and Equipment:
         1870-1929: 0. J. Firestone (1958), p. 178. Missing data (except 1916-1919) are interpolated.
         1929-1950: F. H. Leacy (1983),Historical Statistics of Canada, series K160-171.
Price Index for Consumption Goods:
         1870-1929: 0. J. Firestone (1958), p. 178. Missing data (except 1916-1919) are interpolated.
         1929-1950: M. C. Urquhart (1965), p. 305.
Current Price Value of Investment:
         1870-1900: Investment shares are from S. Kuznets (1961) who based figures on 0. J. Firestone
         (1958) for 1870, 1890, and 1900. Missing data are interpolated.
          1901-1930: Leacy (1983), series F179-182. Leacy provides quinquennial sums. Investment shares
         are calculated for five year periods by dividing by the quinquennial sumof GNP.
          1930-1950: B. R. Mitchell (1993), International Historical Statistics: The Americas (hereafter
         IHSA), pp. 750, 754.
 Current Price Value of GNP:
         1901-1930: Derived from M. Altman (1992), "Revised Canadian GNP Estimates and Canadian
         Economic Growth, 1870-1926," Review of Income and Wealth.

                                                    29
        1930-1950: B. R. Mitchell (1993), JHSA, pp. 750, 754.
Constant Price Value of Investment:
        1870-1929: 0. J. Firestone (1958), p. 275. Using series for gross investment in new residentialand
       non-residential construction and new machinery and equipment.
        1929-1950: B. R. Mitchell (1993), JHSA, pp. 750, 754.
Constant Price Value of GNP:
        1870-1929: 0. J. Firestone (1958), p. 275.
        1929-1950: B. R. Mitchell (1993), IHSA, pp. 750, 754.

                                                 Denmark
Price Index for Capital Goods:
         1870-1950: Derived from current and constant price investment series in Okonomisk vct'kst I
         Danmark (1974).
Price Index for Machinery and Equipment:
          1870-1950: Derived from K. Bjerke (1955), "TheNational Product of Denmark, 1870-1952," in
         Income and Wealth Series V edited by S. Kuznets.
Price Index for Consumption Goods:
          1870-1950: Derived from             vukst I Danmark (1974).
Current and Constant Price Value of Investment:
          1870-1950: B. R. Mitchell (1992), Intern ational Historical Statistics: Europe (hereafter IHSE), pp.
        890, 893, 899.
Current and Constant Price Value of GDP:
         1870-1950: B. R. Mitchell (1992), IHSE, pp. 890, 893, 899.

                                                   Finland
Price Index for Capital Goods:
         1870-1950: Derived from current and constant price investment series in R. Hjerppe (1989), The
         Finnish Economy, 1860-1985, pp. 201-204, 211-213.
Price Index for Machinery and Equipment:
         Not available.
Price Index for Consumption Goods:
         1870-1950: Derived from R. Hjerppe (1989), pp. 201-204, 211-213. Using series for private
        consumption.
Current and Constant Price Value of Investment:
        1870-1950: R. Hjerppe (1989), pp. 201-204,211-213.
Current and Constant Price Value of GDP:
        1870-1950: R. Hjerppe (1989), pp. 201-204,211-213.

                                                  Germany
Price Index for Capital Goods:
         1870-1950: W. Hoffmann (1965), Das Wachstum c/er deutschen Wirtschaft seit der Mitte des 19.
         Jahrhunderts, pp. 598-600.
Price Index for Machinery and Equipment:
         1870-1950: Index for agricultural machinery from W. Hoffmann (1965), pp. 569-70.
Price Index for Consumption Goods:
         1870-1950: W. Hoffmann (1965), pp. 598-600.
Current and Constant Price Value of Investment:
         1870-1950: Series for net investment fromW. Hoffmann (1965), pp. 825-28.

                                                      30
Current and Constant Price Value of GDP:
         1870-1950: Series for net national product from W. Hoffmann (1965), pp. 825-28.

                                                     Italy

Price Index for Capital Goods:
         1870-1950: P. Ercolani (1978), "Documentazione statistica di base," inLo Sviluppo Economico in
        Italia III, edited by G. Fuà, pp. 434-35.
Price Index for Machinery and Equipment:
         1870-1950: 0. Vitali (1978), "La stima del valore aggiunto a prezzi costanti per rami di attivita," in
         Lo Sviluppo Economico in ItaliallI, edited by G. Fuà, pp. 5 11-12.
Price Index for Consumption Goods:
         1870-1950: P. Ercolani (1978), pp. 434-35.
Current and Constant Price Value of Investment:
         1870-1950: B. R. Mitchell (1992), IHSE, pp. 891, 895, 901.
Current and Constant Price Value of GDP:
         1870-1950: B. R. Mitchell (1992), JHSE, pp. 891, 895, 901.

                                                    Japan
Price Index for Capital Goods:
         1870-1940: K. Ohkawa et al. (1967), Estimates ofLong-Term Economic Statistics of Japan since
         1868, Vol. 8,p. 134.
         1952: K. Ohkawa et al. (1979), Patterns of Japanese Economic Development, p. 389.
Price Index for Machinery and Equipment:
         1870-1950: K. Ohkawa et al. (1967), Vol. 8, p. 161.
Price Index for Consumption Goods:
         1870-1940: K. Ohkawa et al. (1967), Vol. 6, p. 106.
         1952: K. Ohkawa et al. (1979), p. 389.
Current and Constant Price Value of Investment:
         1870-1950: B. R. Mitchell (1995), IHSAAO, pp. 1002-08.
Current and Constant Price Value of GDP:
         1870-1950: B. R. Mitchell (1995), JHSAAO, pp. 1002-08.

                                                    Norway
Price Index for Capital Goods:
         1870-1930: LangtidslinjerlNorskOkoflOmi (1966), pp. 142, 148, 150.
         1930-1950: Nasjonalregnskap (1952), pp. 3 16-17.
Price Index for Machinery and Equipment:
         1870-1930: LangtidslinjerlNorsk            (1966), pp. 142, 148, 150.
         1930-1950:NasjonalregnskaP (1952), pp. 3 18-19.
Price Index for Consumption Goods:
         1870-1930: Private consumption goods prices from Langtidslinjer I Norsk         (1966), pp.
         142, 148, 150.
         1930-1950: Private consumption goods prices from Nasjonalregnskap (1952), pp. 316-17.
Current and Constant Price Value of Investment:
         1870-1950: Mitchell (1992), IHSE, pp. 891, 896, 902.
Current  and Constant Price Value of GDP:
         1870-1950: Mitchell (1992), IHSE, pp. 891, 896, 902.

                                                       31
                                                 Sweden
Price Index for Capital Goods:
         1870-1950: Implicit price index from 0. Johansson (1967), The Gross Domestic Product of Sweden
         and its Composition, pp. 134-37.
Price Index for Machinery and Equipment:
         1870-1950: Implicit price index from Johansson (1967), pp. 134-37.
Price Index for Consumption Goods:
         1870-1950: Implicit price index for total consumption from Johansson (1967), pp. 122-29.
Current and Constant Price Value of Investment:
         1870-1950: Johansson (1967), p. 134-37.
Current and Constant Price Value of GDP:
         1870-1950: Johansson (1967), p. 150-53.

                                             United Kingdom
Price Index for Capital Goods:
         1870-1920: C. H. Feinstein and S. Pollard (1988), Studies in Capital Formation in the United
         Kingdom, 1750-1 920, pp. 470-71.
         1920-1950: C. H. Feinstein (1972),National Income, Expenditure and Output of the United
         Kingdom, 1855-1965, Table 61.
Price Index for Machinery and Equipment:
         1870-1920: C. H. Feinstein and S. Pollard (1988), pp. 470-71.
         1920-1950: C. H. Feinstein (1972), Table 63.
Price Index for Consumption Goods:
         1870-1950: C. H. Feinstein (1972), Table 61.
Current and Constant Price Value of Investment:
         1870-1950: B. R. Mitchell (1992), IHSE, pp. 891, 897, 905.
Current and Constant Price Value of GDP:
         1870-1950: B. R. Mitchell (1992), IHSE, pp. 891, 897, 905.

                                               United States

Price Index for Capital Goods:
         1870-1950: Implicit price index for gross capital formation from S. Kuzncts (1961), Capital in the
        American Economy, pp. 5 72-74. All of his data are reported as five-year moving averages.
Price Index for Machinery and Equipment:
         1870-1950: Implicit price index for gross producers' durables from S. Kuznets (1961), pp. 596-97.
Price Index for Consumption Goods:
         1870-1950: Implicit price index from S. Kuznets (1961), pp. 561-564.
Current and Constant Price Value of Investment:
         1870-1950: S. Kuznets (1961), p. 572.
Current and Constant Price Value of GDP:
         1870-1950: S. Kuznets (1961), p. 561.




                                                     32
                    Table la: Relative Capital Good Prices 1870-1950 (1900=100)

          AUS CAN DEN                FIN      GER     ITA      JAP NOR SWE UK                      US
1870-74 79.08       84.98    88.16    87.70 105.59 100.30        96.35           79.04 100.93      89.33
1875-79 76.90       87.80    84.48    84.06 85.84 103.53 141.99 100.24           82.86 97.06       90.41
1880-84 65.56       89.70    78.02    83.62 78.87 100.79 98.70 91.11             84.44    93.88    93.06
1885-89 61.28       90.22    87.85    94.21 84.97 97.82 118.35 92.61             86.18    90.90    93.20
1890-94 69.51       92.42    89.12    85.05 81.49 94.23 108.27 95.29             83.79    91.39    90.30
1895-99 80.34 97.16          97.77    97.81 86.47 87.02 107.33 96.42             90.64 93.02       95.44
1900-04 86.71       98.09    96.69    95.14   90.91      98.79 93.77 98.04 93.09 94.48             99.26
1905-09 82.80 93.32          98.49    93.93   89.14      98.30 85.87 99.62 91.94 90.72             99.91
1910-14 85.96       94.91 100.84      85.39   85.32      92.00 76.04 95.19 92.86 92.95             98.81
1915-19 107.92                        83.78              127.10 94.65 128.65 114.56 92.07 105.34
 1920-24 109.10 108.74 108.48         97.63              104.35 89.77 110.50 108.58 83.04 109.85
 1925-29 106.91 98.81 98.65 106.16 91.41 94.28 75.89 82.62 100.21 73.35 106.19
 1930-34 99.00 98.52 113.09 104.69 76.85 92.85 73.99 83.82 109.07 73.84 118.87
 1935-39 107.85 103.82 110.60 118.47 88.62 87.17 79.78 91.26 113.51 78.26 120.01
 1940-44 122.78 108.67 84.93 121.46                       51.68 85.82              103.89 81.30 121.14
 1945-49 142.92 111.05 106.77 131.10                      77.73            119.97 104.62 97.30 119.41
    1950 133.85 116.05 120.66 148.58 95.45 91.22                   87.99   127.09 101.88 100.14 130.57
Notes: The figures show changes in the price of capital goods relative to consumption goods over timein
each country. These prices are drawn from each country's national accounts. Each series is scaled to equal
100 in 1900.
Sources: National accounts sources are cited in the appendix.




                                                    33
                     Table ib: Relative Price of Equipment 1870-1950 (1900=100)

             CAN        DEN        GER        ITA           JAP   NOR         SWE          UK        US
 1870-74      117.17     85.31      105.74     99.37                 112.83    118.47      118.74    111.29
 1875-79      120.80     69.07       70.25     109.04      216.82    115.90     88.77      122.52    101.95
  1880-84     117.79     66.86       65.97      90.69 132.62          99.45     84.24      110.06      96.58
  1885-89     104.82     69.65       61.83      84.16      131.66    100.68     81.16      101.66      92.72
  1890-94      97.63     72.54       69.15      85.99      120.67     95.52     78.35        99.94     87.06
  1895-99      99.11     80.99       71.71      91.38      105.96     95.97     82.25        96.60     92.27
  1900-04      93.12     85.42       78.16      95.31       94.78     96.82       83.17    100.37      96.87
  1905-09      75.93     82.87       73.07      98.81       86.02     91.30       80.50      97.03     92.40
  1910-14      70.76     81.01       67.65      87.85       72.47     86.61       82.71      98.10     94.61
  1915-19                                      126.34       99.41    109.11      129.86      95.29    103.13
  1920-24      85.39      105.98               110.37       60.71     89.78       80.77      75.88    101.91
  1925-29      70.54       85.74     67.50       93.79      48.53     75.14       63.39      71.16     98.47
  1930-34      69.76      104.72      70.69      86.57      53.48     70.88       61.54      70.25    106.35
  1935-39      78.00       99.14      66.88      83.59      58.54     76.60       75.14      82.48    112.56
  1940-44      80.52                             54.93      50.96                 73.70      86.98    116.82
  1945-49      71.14      112.65                 69.75                91.49       70.40      96.91    103.66
     1950      75.14      115.28      69.40      78.32      56.73    102.25       71.81     101.46    111.76
Notes: The figures show changes in the price of equipment relative to consumption goods over time each
                                                                                                    in
country. These prices are drawn from each country's national accounts. Each series is scaled to equal 100 in
1900. Due to data limitations, Japan's reported figure in the 1950 row is actually for 1952.
Sources: National accounts sources are cited in the appendix.




                                                       34
                Table 2a: Relative Capital Goods Prices 1870-1950 (US = 100 in 1950)

            AUS CAN DEN               FIN   GER    ITA    JAP           NOR SWE UK                   US
1870-74 81,44       84.76     89.82   49.88 94.44 119.03                  78.54    94.56 125.34 68.42
1875-79 79.19       87.58     86.08   47.81 76.77 122.86 282.95           81.71    99.13 120.54 69.24
1880-84 67.51       89.48     79.5070.54 119.61 196.69 74.27 101.02 116.59 71.27
                                      47.56
1885-89 63.10 90.00           89.5176.00 116.09 235.85 75.50 103.10 112.89 71.38
                                      53.58
1890-94 71.58 92.19 90.80          72.88 111.82 215.77 77.68 100.24 113.49 69.16
                                      48.37
1895-99 82.73 96.92 99.62          77.34 103.27 213.89 78.60 108.44 115.52 73.09
                                      55.63
1900-04 89.30 97.85 98.51 54.11 81.32 117.23 186.87 79.92 111.36 117.34 76.02
1905-09 85.27 93.09 100.35 53.42 79.73 116.65 171.12 81.21 109.99 112.66 76.52
1910-04 88.53 94.68 102.74 48.56 76.31 109.17 151.53 77.60 111.09 115.44 75.68
1915-19 111.13               47.65        150.83 188.62 104.87 137.05 114.34 80.67
1920-24 112.36 108.47 110.53 55.53        123.83 178.90 90.08 129.89 103.13 84.13
1925-29 110.10 98.56 100.52 60.38 81.76 111.88 151.24 67.35 119.88 91.09 81.33
1930-34 101.95 98.28 115.23 59.54 68.74 110.18 147.45 68.33 130.49 91.70 91.04
1935-39 111.07 103.56 112.69 67.38 79.26 103.44 158.98 74.40 135.80 97.19 91.91
1940-44 126.44 108.40 86.54 69.08          61.33 171.01         124.28 100.96 92.77
1945-49 147.18 110.77 108.78 74.56         92.24         97.80 125.16 120.83 91.45
   1950 137.84 115.76 122.94 84.50 85.37 108.25 175.34 103.60 121.88 124.37 100.00
Notes: The figures show the relative price of capital goods in each country compared to the relative priceof
capital goods in the United States in 1950. The movement of each series over time is determined by the price
series of that country's national accounts. Internationally comparable price data from the Penn WorldTables
are used to benchmark these national account series relative to the United States in 1950.
Sources: Summers, et al., Penn World Tables Mark 5.6 (1995). National accounts sources are cited in the
appendix.




                                                     35
                 Table 2b: Relative Price of Equipment 1870-1950 (US =100 in 1950)

               CAN        DEN         GER       ITA         JAP      NOR       SWE          UK          US
 1870-74      119.38     133.22     184.45    286.90                137.68    242.18      178.92      99.58
 1875-79      123.08     107.86     122.55    314.83      717.17    141.42    181.48      184.62      91.23
 1880-84      120.01     104.40     115.07    261.85      438.68    121.35    172.20      165.84      86.41
 1885-89      106.80     108.77     107.86    243.00      435.48    122.85    165.90      153.19      82.96
 1890-94       99.48     113.28     120.62    248.28      399.14    116.55    160.17      150.59      77.90
 1895-99      100.98     126.48     125.09    263.83      350.50    117.10    168.13      145.55      82.56
 1900-04       94.88     133.39     136.34    275.18      313.49    118.14    170.03      151.24      86.68
 1905-09       77.36     129.41     127.46    285.29      284.53    111.40    164.57      146.20      82.67
  19 10-14     72.09     126.50     118.01    253.65      239.69    105.68     169.08     147.83      84.65
  1915- 19                                    364.76      328.83    133.14     265.46     143.59      92.28
   1920-24      87.01      165.50             318.67      200.82    109.55     165.10     114.35        91.19
   1925-29      71.88      133.90    117.75   270.78       160.53    91.69     129.59     107.23        88.11
   1930-34      71.08      163.53    123.31   249.94       176.88    86.48     125.80     105.86        95.16
   1935-39      79.47      154.83     116.67  241.35       193.63    93.47     153.60     124.28       100.71
   1940-44       82.04                           158.61                        150.66     131.07       104.52
   1945-49       72.49     175.91                201.38              111.63    143.92     146.03        92.75
      1950       76.56     180.02     121.06 226.12        189.81    124.77    146.79     152.88       100.00
Notes: The Penn World
are derived using the benchmark for producers durables and consumption prices from the 1980 report of the
U.N.'s International Comparison Project (ICP) in combination with the OECD national accounts in current
and constant prices from 1980 back to 1950. Due to data limitations, Japan's reported figure for 1950 is
actually calculated for 1952 (relative to U.S. in 1950). Sweden did not participate in the ICP in 1980,and so
its 1950 relative price of equipment is estimated by multiplying Norway's figure by the ratio of the relative
price of investment goods in Sweden and Norway in 1950 (reported in Table 2a).
Sources: United Nations, World Comparison of Purchasing Power and Real Product for 1980 (Phase IV of
the International Comparison Project, Part 2). National accounts sources are cited in the appendix.




                                                     36
                 Table 3: Dispersion of the Relative Price of Capital Goods 1875-1950
                                    (Coefficient of Variation = CV)

                     Capital Goods        Capital Goods         Equipment            Equipment
                     CV of Full Sample CV w/o Japan             CV of Full Sample CV wlo Japan
        1875         0.60(11)          0.26(10)                 0.88 (9)          0.45 (8)
         1880        0.35(11)          0.26 (10)                0.56 (9)          0.35 (8)
         1885        0.45 (11)         0.35 (10)                0.52 (9)          0.36 (8)
         1890        0.41 (11)         0.22 (10)                0.56 (9)          0.33 (8)
         1895        0.46 (11)          0.19 (10)               0.56 (9)          0.37 (8)
         1900        0.33 (11)          0.21 (10)               0.43 (9)          0.37 (8)
         1905        0.30(11)           0.19 (10)                 0.48 (9)              0.40 (8)
         1910        0.29(11)           0.21 (10)                 0.44 (9)              0.42 (8)
         1915           0.3 1(9)            0.23 (8)              0.54 (7)              0.52 (6)
         1920           0.31 (9)            0.23 (8)              0.40 (7)              0.43 (6)
         1925           0.25(11)            0.21 (10)             0.45 (9)              0.48 (8)
         1930           0.27 (11)           0.25 (10)             0.38 (9)              0.40 (8)
         1935           0.23 (11)           0.20 (10)             0.36 (9)              0.38 (8)
         1940           0.25 (9)            0.17 (8)              0.32 (6)              0.36 (5)
         1945           0.43 (8)            0.43 (7)              0.24 (5)              0.24 (5)
         1950           0.21 (11)           0.15 (10)             0.31 (8)              0.31 (8)
         1955           0.20 (11)           0.16 (10)
         1960           0.22(11)            0.16(10)
         1965           0.17(11)            0.16(10)
         1970           0.12(11)             0.12(10)
         1975           0.13 (11)            0.13 (10)
          1980          0.11 (11)            0.11 (10)            0.19 (9)              0.18 (8)
          1985          0.09(11)             0.09(10)
          1990          0.10(11)             0,10(10)
Notes: The full sample includes Australia, Canada, Denmark, Finland, Gennany, Italy, Japan, Norway,
Sweden, the United Kingdom, and the United States. Equipment price series for Australia and Finland are
not available for the 1870 to 1950 period. The Penn World Tables do not include separate price infonnation
for equipment, and so a 1950 benchmark for relative equipment prices was constructed by using the 1980
ICP data for producer durables and OECD national accounts price series. See the text and appendix for
details. Sweden and Australia did not participate in the 1980 ICP and are not included in the equipment CV
calculation for that year.
Sources: Relative price of investment goods is from the Penn World Tables for 1950 to 1990. Relative price
of equipment in 1980 is from World Comparisons of Purchasing Power and Real Product for 1980 (Phase IV
of ICP, Part 2: Detailed Results for 60 Countries). The 1950 figures from the PWT are used to benchmark
relative price series from each country's national accounts. See the appendix for national accounts sources.




                                                     37
             Table 4a: Percentage Changes in the User Cost of Capital Over Time, 1870-1949

                    AUS CAN          DEN     FIN     GER      ITA     JAP      NOR     SWE      UK      US
1870/74-1945/49
%i(i+ô-Pk/Pk) 2.16 -109.24                                                     16.63   34.81 -32.64 -126.7
%iPk          59.18 26.76            19.15   40.20 -10.09 -25.50               21.92   28.03 -3.66 29.02
Total         61.34 -82.48                                                      5.29   62.84 -36.30 -97.68


1880/84-1945/49
%(i+ô-Pk/Pk) -28.68 -106.27                          28.46 -88.55        104.46 -39.94 -68.01 -109.1
%iPk                77.94 21.34 31.36 44.96          19.09 -25.98 -11.49 27.52 21.42    3.58 24.93
Total               49.26 -84.93                      9.37 -114.53       76.94 -18.52 -64.43 -84.17


1870/74- 19 10/14
                                                                               10.07   -3.14   -14.79 -65.55
%i(i+ô-iPk/Pk) -36.81 -184.67
%iWk                 8.35   11.06    13.44   -2.67 -21.31    -8.64              1.22   16.11   -8.23    10.09
Total               -28.46 -173.61                                              8.85   12.97   -23.02 -55.46

1880/84-1910/14
%z(i+ô-PkJPk) -67.66 -181.71                         25.52    10.77            77.76 -77.90 -50.15 -47.96
%iPk                 27.10 5.64 25.65        2.09    7.87     -9.13   -26.08   4.38   9.50 -0.99 6.00
Total               -40.56 -176.07                   17.65    1.64             73.38 -68.4 -51.14 41.96


1910/14-1945/49
%(i+ô-Pk/Pk) 38.98 75.44                              2.94       -99.32            26.69 37.95 -17.86 -61.13
%Pk          50.84 15.70              5.71 42.87 11.22 -16.85 14.60 23.14 11.93 4.57                       18.93
Total        89.82 91.14                                 8.28 -116.17               3.55 49.88 -13.29 -42.20
Notes: Depreciation rate is assumed to be 0. 10 in all countries and all periods. For the 1945/49 figures,
Germany's change in (i+ô-Pk/Pk) is calculated using 1950/54 whereas Italy's is calculated using 1950.
Germany and Japan's changes in Pk and Pm are calculated using 195 0's figures. Percentage changes are
calculated as log changes.
Sources: Unpublished interest rate data were supplied by Michael Bordo and Alan Taylor. Capital goods relative
price changes are from Table 1 a.




                                                      38
              Table 4b: Percentage Differences Across Countries in the User Cost of Capital
                          (expressed relative to the United States in same years)

                          AUS      CAN      DEN      FIN      GER      ITA      JAP     NOR SWE             UK
1870/74
%diffin(i+ô-Wk/Pk) -49.54 -23.61                                                        102.60 -85.82 -57.64
%differenceinPk     17.43 21.43 27.22 -31.60 -32.24 55.38                               13.81 32.37 60.54
Total                    -32.11    -2.18                                                 88.79 -53.45 2.90

1880/84
                          -1.10    -8.98                      -8.57   -68.05             2.83     6.52      4.68
%diffin(i+ô-iPk!Pk)
%differenceinPk           -5.42    22.76    10.93   -40.45    -1.03    51.77 101.51      4.12     34.89    49.22
Total                     -6.52    13.78                      -9.60   -16.28             6.95     41.41    44.54


1910/14
%diffin(i+ô-Pk/Pk) -20.80 -142.73                             13.88    -9.32             26.98 -23.41      -6.87
%differenceinPk           15.68 22.40 30.58         -44.36    0.84     36.64   69.43     2.50     38.39    42.22
Total                     -5.12 -120.33                       14.72    27.32             24.48 14.98       35.35


1945/49
                          79.30    -6.17                      10.86     -92.02               7.45     75.67 36.39
%diffin(i+ô-APk/Pk)
%differenceinPk           47.59       19.17 17.36 -20.42 -15.82 0.86              56.16 6.71          31.38 27.86
Total                       126.89 13.00                          -4.96 -91.16               14.16 107.05 64.25
Notes: Depreciation rate is assumed to be 0.10 in all countries and all periods. For the "1945/49" figures,
Germany's (i+ô-Pk/Pk) differential is calculated using 195 0/54 relative to the U.S. for the same periodwhereas
Italy's is calculated using 1950. Germany and Japan's Pk and Pm differentials are calculated using 1950's figure
relative to the U.S. in that year. Since all country's are being compared to the U.S., there is no separate column
for the U.S.
Sources: Unpublished interest rate data were supplied by Michael Bordo and Alan Taylor. Relative prices of
capital goods are from Table 2a.




                                                        39
              Table 5: Current Price Investment Shares and Capital Goods Prices 1870-1950
                (Dependent Variable: average gross investment share in GDP over period)


                  (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)            (5)             (6)

                -0.0003046                      -0.001141                      -0.00 1098
Capital
Goods Price     (1.47)                          (3.69)                         (3.48)
                                -0.0004233                      -0.0004869                      -0.0004766
Equipment
Price                           (3.66)                          (3.10)                          (3.51)

                -0.008581       -0.06073        -0.02025        -0.05522        -0.01965        -0.05386
GDPper
capita          (0.65)          (3.22)          (1.52)          (2.49)          (1.56)          (2.49)

Real Interest                                   -0.1688         -0.1418
Rate                                            (0.86)          (0.60)

 1885-1900      0.01227         0.01644         0.009612        0.006584        0.007568        0.005340
                (0.79)          (1.02)          (0.50)          (0.29)          (0.44)          (0.27)

 1900-1913      0.03993         0.07052         0.05023         0.06218         0.04671         0.05934
                (2.22)          (3.86)          (2.29)          (2.31)          (2.38)          (2.54)

 1913-1929       0.03819        0.06287         0.04019         0.05351         0.04230         0.05330
                 (2.08)         (4.00)          (2.22)          (2.19)          (2.53)          (2.47)

 1929-1939       0.02756         0.05467        0.03525         0.04737         0.02509         0.0395 1
                 (1.40)          (2.46)         (1.24)          (1.26)          (1.10)          (1.25)

 1939-1950       0.06281         0.1072         0.04172         0.05842         0.05070         0.06718
                 (2.11)          (3.15)         (1.57)          (1.58)          (2.09)          (2.02)

 Constant        0.2217          0.6533          0.4021         0.6314          0.3864          0.6136
                 (2.05)          (4.23)          (3.71)         (3.62)          (3.89)          (3.65)
 N               63              51              43             37              43              37

 R2              0.16            0.34            0.32           0.33            0.30            0.32
  Mean           0.1537          0.1571          0.1504           0.1510        0.1504          0.1510
  Dependent
  Variable
Notes: Capital goods price and real interest rate figures are those pertaining at the beginning of each period. The
real interest rate is defined as the difference between the nominal rate of interest on long-term assets and the
inflation rate.
Sources: Current price investment rates are calculated from investment and GDP figures available in the various
volumes of Mitchell. See the appendix for details. Capital goods price data are described in the text. The
interest rate data were shared with us by Michael Bordo and Alan Taylor.




                                                          40
             Table 6: Constant Price Investment Shares and Capital Goods Prices 1870-1950
               (Dependent Variable: average gross investment share in GDP over period)


                  (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)             (6)

Capital         -0.001233                     -0.001844                      -0.001802
Goods Price     (6.03)                        (3.59)                         (3.50)

Equipment                      -0.0005184                     -0.0005361                    -0.0005272
Price                          (3.20)                         (2.27)                        (2.32)

GDPper          0.005147       -0.02384       0.008906        -0.03812       0.009494       -0.03695
capita          (0.30)         (0.73)         (0.33)          (0.83)         (0.36)         (0.83)

Real Interest                                 -0.1646         -0.1232
Rate                                          (0.59)          (0.30)

 1885-1900      0.02192        0.01199        0.02703         0.02209        0.02504        0.02101
                (0.92)         (0.42)         (0.77)          (0.49)         (0.76)         (0.51)

 1900-1913      0.03312        0.04463        0.04637         0.05548        0.04293        0.05301
                (1.43)         (1.43)         (1.33)          (1.11)         (1.32)         (1.17)

 1913-1929      0.01549        0.01676        0.01204         0.03060        0.01410        0.03041
                (0.66)         (0.55)         (0.34)          (0.61)         (0.43)         (0.64)

 1929-1939      0.003668       0.003372        0.005974       0.02644        -0.003933      0.01962
                (0.14)         (0.10)          (0.13)         (0.40)         (0.11)         (0.36)

 1939-1950      0.03948         0.04272        0.01957        0.03590        0.02832        0.04352
                (1.27)          (0.95)         (0.39)         (0.53)         (0.64)         (0.69)

 Constant       0.2373          0.4194         0.2707         0.5316         0.2555         0.5162
                (1.79)          (1.59)         (1.21)         (1.48)         (1.16)         (1.48)
 N              63              51             43             37             43              37
 R2             0.36            0.23           0.33           0.17           0.32            0.16
  Mean          0.1773          0.1703          0.1774        0.1736         0.1774          0.1736
  Dependent
 Variable
Notes: The constant price investment series are calculated by taking the ratio of each country's constant price
investment and GDP series, and then bcnchmarking this series to that implied by the Penn World Tables in 1950.
Sources: See the appendix.




                                                        41
                            Table 7: Growth and Investment Good Prices
                   (Dependent Variable: average annua' GDP per capita growth rate)

                                      (1)                                 (2)

Relative Price Capital Goods        -0.0000576
                                    (0.87)

Relative Price Equipment                                                 -0.0000543
                                                                         (2.31)

Initial GDP per capita              -0.005242                            -0.007844
                                    (1.51)                               (1.29)

1885-1900                           0.006165                             0.007638
                                    (1.98)                               (3.06)

1900-1913                            0.01064                             0.01194
                                     (3.56)                              (3.40)

1913-1929                            0.005121                            0.006849
                                     (1.67)                              (1.73)

1929-1939                            0.01006                             0.009879
                                     (2.32)                              (1.58)

1939-1950                            0.01085                             0.009870
                                     (1.47)                              (0.81)

Constant                             0.05475                             0.07786
                                     (2.22)                              (1.62)
N                                    64                                  52
R2                                   .10                                 0.11
 Mean Dependent Variable             0.0 1459                            0.0 1494
Notes: See Table 5 notes.
Sources: Growth rates over each period and initial GDP per capita are from Maddison (1995).




                                                     42
                                  Table 8: Explaining Relative Prices
             (Dependent Variable: Natural log of relative price of capital goods or equipment)

                                Capital Goods                                     Equipment
                      (1)            (2)             (3)              (4)            (5)              (6)

in GDP per         -0.07751         -0.2003         -0.1003         -0.6040          -0.7593         -0.8614
capita              (0.62)           (1.94)          (0.83)          (4.97)           (6.60)          (5.02)

lntotalGDP                          0.09033         0.03127                          0.1047           0.1594
                                     (3.23)          (1.25)                          (3.15)           (4.36)

Tariff                                              -0.7648                                           -2.556
                                                     (2.12)                                            (4.51)

 1885-1900          0.1088          0.07937         0.02381         0.03661          0.00661         -0.07265
                    (0.72)           (0.61)          (0.21)          (0.21)           (0.05)           (0.61)

 1900-1913          0.1869           0.1495          0.1392          0.3086          0.2758           0.1595
                    (1.58)           (1.38)          (1.56)          (1.76)          (1.82)           (1.21)

 1913-1929          0.1479           0.1026         0.06249          0.2481          0.2099          0.05756
                    (1.00)           (0.79)          (0.58)          (1.36)          (1.30)           (0.39)

 1929-1939          0.1891           0.1359         0.06958          0.2629          0.2203          0.09342
                    (1.24)           (1.04)          (0.54)          (1.35)          (1.23)           (0.56)

 1939-1950          0.3049           0.2583          0.2143          0.4750          0.4410           0.4062
                    (1.92)           (1.89)          (1.68)          (2.33)           (2.35)          (2.21)

 Constant            4.994           5.072           5.043            9.53 1          9.683            10.34
                     (5.23)          (6.63)          (6.11)          (10.29)         (11.82)          (9.52)

 N                     64              64              52              52               52              46

 R2                   0.07            0.24            0.19            0.38             0.49            0.56

 Mean                4.533          4.533           4.543            4.944             4.944           4.88 1
 Dependent
 Variable
Sources: The text and appendix describe the construction of the price series. Initial GDP per capita and total
GDP is from Maddison (1995). The tariff data are used in Collins, O'Rourke, and Williamson (1997).




                                                        43
                Table 9: Price of Capital Goods Relative to Wages 1870-1950 (1900=100)

          AUS         CAN        DEN GER             ITA       JAP       NOR SWE              UK         US
  1870-74  94.28      114.15     199.55    170.31    163.23               181.18      131.44 131.98       123.99

  1875-79  86.48      111.72      156.16 118.59      139.13       76.29 154.18 132.14 113.61              122.28
  1880-84  80.51      111.05      135.75 117.10 118.80 104.89 149.58                  124.72 108.96       115.49
  1885-89  74.96      103.49      130.09 105.65 105.83 142.58 127.96 110.70                      99.81    101.55
  1890-94  72.15       95.51      123.57      89.28 100.05 127.15 109.26               99.35     95.53      94.88
  1895-99      76.57   99.63      103.93      88.90     88.64 113.88         95.72     95.78     90.80      94.99
  1900-04      96.39      95.22    93.48      87.70     91.98      91.10     93.07     91.49     94.92      97.30
  1905-09      87.81      81.72    87.24      74.83     81.64      81.99     84.27     83.81     92.71      97.17
  1910-14      89.35      86.60    84.19      64.93     70.91      70.14     81.56     77.83     97.85     100.57
  1915-19 121.57 106.71                                107.35      84.57 107.31 103.07          108.64      96.81
  1920-24 101.68          93.71    61.44                72.01      52.84     77.27     67.55     85.47      81.00
  1925-29      89.67      81.31    53.24      57.04     68.24      40.87     57.39     58.24     76.56      72.26
  1930-34      86.59      72.09    51.28      47.76     58.62      44.64     52.10     51.44     72.71      72.72
  1935-39      91.41      71.20    54.62      59.74     64.36      55.42     54.10     53.84     74.81      57.43
  1940-44 101.53 69.57             53.58                52.52                          51.52     82.87      51.02
  1945-49 110.57 62.27             52.95                69.55                69.50     43.47     95.02      46.80
      1950     98.24      63.15    54.01      67.20     51.70      48.88     69.67      38.97    94.35      47.73
Notes: Figures are quinquennial averages of the ratio of the capital goods price index to a nominal wage index.
The Japan 1950 figure is actually for 1952. We do not have wage data for Finland.
Sources: The capital goods price data are documented in the appendix. Nominal wage rate data are typically
unskilled, male, daily or weekly wage rates in the urban building trades. They are taken from Williamson (1995
revised) with the following exceptions: Sweden (1870-1913) nominal wages are from Mitchell (1998a); Australia
(1870 to 1950) wages are from Mitchell (1998b); and for Germany (1870-1940), wages are forunskilled
building laborers from Bry (1960) and in 1950 are from the International Labour Office Yearbook ofLabour
Statistics (1953).




                                                       44
             TabLe 10: Price of Capital Goods Relative to Wages 1870-1950 (US100 in 1950)


               AUS          CAN       DEN       GER          ITA        NOR         SWE           UK         US
    1870-74 338.76           430.80    851.72    668.19       875.21     487.62      744.11       370.31     259.77
    1875-79     310.73       421.61    666.49    465.27       745.96     414.98      748.09       318.78     256.18
    1880-84     289.28       419.11    579.40    459.43       636.98     402.60      706.07       305.72 241.95
    1885-89     269.34       390.55    555.25    414.50       567.45     344.40      626.71       280.06      212.76
    1890-94     259.24       360.47    527.39     350.27      536.42     294.07      562.47       268.05      198.79
                275.14       376.01    443.60     348.79      475.29     257.61      542.26       254.77      199.02
    1895-99
    1900-04 346.36           359.35    399.00     344.08      493.19     250.50      517.94       266.33      203.85
    1905-09 315.53           308.40    372.36     293.59      437.75     226.81      474.49       260.12      203.58
    1910-14 321.05           326.82    359.34     254.75      380.21     219.51      440.63       274.54      210.70
    1915-19 436.83           402.71                           575.56     288.82      583.53       304.82      202.82
    1920-24 365.35           353.65    262.22                 386.12     207.98      382.44       239.82      169.70
    1925-29      322.21      306.88    227.23     223.77      365.85      154.45     329.71       214.83      151.38
    1930-34      311.12      272.05    218.86     187.36      314.31      140.23     291.23       204.02      152.35

    1935-39      328.45      268.71    233.12     234.37      345.06      145.60     304.80       209.91      120.32
    1940-44      364.84      262.57 228.67                    281.58                 291.67       232.52      106.88
    1945-49 397.29           235.01    225.99                 372.89      186.57     246.09       266.61        98.04
        1950     352.98      238.34    230.53     263.65      277.21      187.50     220.64       266.49       100.00
Notes: The figures show the price of capital goods relative to wages in each country compared to    the relative
price in the United States in 1950. The 1950 benchmark is established by taking the ratio of (Pk/Pc) from the
Penn World Tables over the internationally comparable real wage data of Williamson (1995 revised). Movement
over time in each series is determined by changes in the capital goods price index relative to a nominal wage index
as in Table 9. We do not have wage data for Finland, and we do not have abenchmark for Japan in 1950.
Sources: The capital goods price data are described in the appendix. The nominal wage rate series areextracted
from data underlying Williamson (1995 revised). (See "sources" to Table 9.) The benchmark requires data from
Summers, et al. Penn World Tables Mark 5.6 (1995).




                                                         45
                           Table 11: Summary Statistics of Regression Variables

                                  N                    Mean                       Standard Deviation
Regression and Variables
Growth & Pk
                                  64                   0.1459                     0.01127
    Growth
                                  64                   7.967                      0.5143
    Ln Initial GDP per Capita
                                  64                   96.96                      29.08
    Initial Pk


Growth & Pm
                                   52                     0.01494                 0.01158
    Growth
                                   52                     7.960                   0.50 15
    Ln Initial GDP per Capita
                                   52                     152.5                   67.26
    Initial Pm


Investment & Pk
    Current Price mv. Share        62                     0.1773                  0.06152

    Constant Price mv. Share       62                     0.1537                  0.04663
                                   62                     7.962                   0.5 172
    Ln Initial GDP per Capita
                                   62                     97.26                   29.22
     Initial Pk


 Investment & Pm
     Cunent Price mv. Share        51                     0.1703                  0.06569

     Constant Price mv. Share      51                     0.1571                  0.05063
                                   51                     7.954                    0.5047
     Ln Initial GDP per Capita
                                   51                      153.0                   67.79
     Initial Pm




 Explaining Pk
                                   64                     4.533                    0.2898
     LnlnitialPk
                                    64                     7.967                   0.5143
     Ln Initial GDP per Capita
                                    64                     10.36                   1.539
     LnTotalGDP
                                    52                     0.1304                  0.07697
     Tariff


 Explaining Pm
                                    52                     4.944                   0.40 18
      Ln Initial Pm
                                      52                   7.960                   0.5015
      LnlnitialGDPperCapita
                                      52                   10.64                   1.523
      LnTotalGDP
                                      46                   0.1232                  0.07472
      Tariff

                                                     46
