                                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             THE IMPACT OF GLOBALIZATION ON
                            PRE-INDUSTRIAL, TECHNOLOGICALLY
                                   QUIESCENT ECONOMIES:
                           REAL WAGES, RELATIVE FACTOR PRICES,
                           AND COMMODITY PRICE CONVERGENCE
                              IN THE THIRD WORLD BEFORE 1940

                                            Jeffrey G. Williamson


                                            Working Paper 7146
                                    http://www.nber.org/papers/w7 146

                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                        May 1999




Revision of a paper presented to the Conference on Growth in the 19th and 20th Century: A Quantitative Economic
History, December 14 - 15, 1998, Valencia, Spain. I happily acknowledge the comments of participants at the Valencia
conference, and to Bob Allen, Loren Brandt, Greg Clark, John Coatsworth, Bill Collins, Roberto Cortes-Conde, Brad
DeLong, Dave Feeny, Ron Findlay, John Latham, Peter Lindert, Sevket Pamuk, Ken Pomeranz, Jeff Sachs, Pierre van
der Eng, Yasukichi Yasuba, and Tank Yousef. The paper draws heavily on three working papers which appeared
recently in the HIER Discussion Paper series, Harvard Institute for Economic Research, Department of Economics,
Harvard University: "Real Wages and Relative factor Prices in the Third World 1820 - 1940: The Mediterranean Basin"
(DP Number 1842; July 1998b); "Real Wages and Relative factor Prices in the Third World 1820 - 1940: Asia" (DP
Number 1844; August 1998a) and "Real Wages and Relative factor Prices in the Third World 1820 - 1940: The
Mediterranean Basin" (DP Number 1853; November 1998c). While these three working papers are available upon
request, the data for Asia, the Mediterranean, and Latin America, and the papers themselves can be downloaded from
my web site: http://www.economics.harvard.edu/.—jwilliam. All opinions expressed are those of the authors and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 1999 by Jeffrey G. Williamson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Impact of Globalization on Pre-Industrial, Technologically
Quiescent Economies: Real Wages, Relative Factor Prices and
Commodity Price Convergence in the Third World Before 1940
Jeffrey G. Williamson
NBER Working Paper No. 7146
May 1999
JEL No: Ni, 04

                                             ABSTRACT

        This paper uses a new pre-1940 Third World data base documenting real wages and relative
factor prices to explore their determinants. There are three possibilities: external price shocks, factor
endowment changes, and technological change. As the paper's title suggests, technological change
is an unlikely explanation. The paper lays out an explicit econometric agenda for the future,
although more casual empiricism suggests that external price shocks were doing most of the work,
and declining-transport-cost-induced commodity price convergence in particular. Real wages in
Asia, the Middle East, and Latin America never showed any signs of catching up with the European
industrial leaders prior to 1914, but they    hold their own. The ratio of wages to land rents, on the
other hand, declined up to World War I, and so did the ratio of wages to GDP per capita. The trend
reversed thereafter. These relative factor price movements help sharpen our understanding of the
sources of growth (or lack of it) in Asia and Latin America prior to 1940. They also offer strong
hints about changes in income distribution there.

Jeffrey G. Williamson
216 Littauer Center
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
jwilliamkuznets. fas.harvard.edu
                                          New Data, Old Questions



        Two important features of the world economy after 1950 also characterized the economy after 1850.

First, there was rapid globalization during the previous century too: capital and labor flowed across national

frontiers in unprecedented quantities, and at rising rates; and commodity trade boomed as transport costs

dropped sharply. Second, the late 19th century underwent an impressive convergence in living standards, at

least within most of what we would now call the OECD, but what historians call the Atlantic economy. Poor

countries around the European periphery tended to grow faster than the rich industrial leaders at the European

core, and often even faster than the richer countries overseas in the New World. This club excluded most of

what is now called the Third World and eastern Europe, and even around this limited periphery there were

some who failed to catch up. Nonetheless, there was convergence.

         It was not always that way: unambiguous divergence took place earlier. In the first half of the

previous century and before, the Atlantic economy was characterized by prohibitively high transport costs,

mercantilist protection, modest levels of commodity trade, no mass migrations, and an underdeveloped global

capital market. Two profound shocks occurred in this environment still hostile to liberal globalization policy:

early industrialization in Britain which then spread to a few countries on the European continent; and resource

"discovery' in the New World, set in motion by technological advances which produced sharply declining

transport costs linking overseas suppliers to European markets, so much so that real freight rates fell by an

enormous 1.5 percent per annum between 1840 and 1910 (O'Rourke and Williamson, 1998: ch. 3). These

two shocks triggered a divergence in real wages and living standards across the Atlantic economy that lasted

until the middle of the century (Williamson 1996, 1 998e). However, Robert Allen (1998) has shown that the

divergence probably started in Europe long before the early 19th century, perhaps as early as the 16th




                                                        1
century.'

        Figure 1 shows that the convergence which started in mid-century continued up to 1914: a plot of the

dispersion of real wages is given there, documenting what the modern macro economists call beta-

convergence. The line with the diamonds on the upper left of Figure 1 is based on a 13-country Atlantic

economy sample including Australia, Belgium, Brazil, France, Germany, Great Britain, Ireland, the

Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden and the United States. The dashed line in Figure 1 documents

convergence for an expanded 17-country Atlantic economy sample, now including in addition Argentina,

Canada, Denmark and Italy. This measure shows the convergence tide ebbing around 1900. If we exclude

Canada and the United States, two "exceptional" rich countries which bucked the convergence tide,

convergence continues rapidly up to 1914 (the 15-country sample plotted with the triangles). If we exclude in

addition two Mediterranean Basin countries which failed to play the globalization game, Portugal and Spain,

convergence up to 1914 is faster still (the 13-country sample plotted with the squares).

            Meanwhile, what happened in the Third World? Angus Maddison's (1995) GDP per capita estimates

document a widening gap between Europe and Asia, although the gap with Latin America is more stable. But

is it obvious that GDP per capita and real wage gaps should have behaved the same way? Maybe not, if

relative factor prices behaved differently in the periphery than in the center, and if the price of wage goods

behaved differently than GDP price deflators. So, what happened to relative factor prices generally, and to the

relative cost of labor specifically, when Latin America and Asia responded to the challenge of both the

European industrial revolution and the first great globalization boom? And what happened to them during de-

globalization after 1914?

            These are the questions that motivate this paper. They are in the tradition of W. Arthur Lewis who

was the first to ask whether the core pulled along the periphery during this first great globalization boom



                work is important since it challenges the conventional wisdom that the industrial revolution
was the prime mover of the center-periphery gap.

                                                         2
(Lewis 1969, 1978a, 1978b). It was he, together with Alexander Gerschenkron (1952), who first tried to

break the economic historian's tenacious fixation on the industrial leaders, Lewis focusing on the Third

World and Gerschenkron on European late corners like Italy and eastern Europe. Thus, these questions are

not new to Latin American or Asian economic history, but they could not be attacked very well even only a

decade ago since the data had not been gathered in such a way as to make these comparative judgments

possible. Now we have enough to make some real progress.



              Globalization and the Third World: Breaking Down the Tyranny of Distance



        In a book entitled The Tyranny of Distance (1966), Geoffrey Blame showed how distance shaped

Australian history. Distance had the same impact on the rest of Asia until late in the 19th century, isolating

the Asian periphery from the European core where, after all, the industrial revolution was unfolding. By the

late 19th century, transport innovations had started to change all that, although not completely. The

appearance of the Suez Canal, cost-reducing innovations on sea-going transport, and railroads penetrating the

interior did not completely liberate Asia from the tyranny of distance by 1914. Indeed, economists have

shown that growth performance today is tjil associated with whether a country is landlocked, whether the

length of its coastline is limited, and whether it is far removed from OECD centers like New York, Rotterdarn

or, in 1999 but not in 1899, Tokyo (Radelet, Sachs and Lee 1997; Gallup, Sachs and Mellinger 1998; Bloom

and Sachs 1998). Yet, it was the change in economic distance between core and periphery which triggered

economic change in late 19th century Asia, even though economic distance was still extensive and trade

shares low long after 1940.

        Transport cost declines from interior to port and from port to Europe ensured that Asian economies

became more integrated into world markets. Price gaps between Britain and Asia were driven down by the

completion of the Suez Canal (Fletcher 1958), by the switch from sail to steam, and by other productivity'


                                                       3
advances on long distance sea lanes. The cotton price spread between Liverpool and Bombay fell from 57

percent in 1873 to 20 percent in 1913, and the jute price spread between London and Calcutta fell from 35 to

4 percent (Collins 1996: Table 4). The same events were taking place even farther East, involving Burma and

Java. The freight rates on sugar between Java and Amsterdam fell by 50-60 percent between 1870 and World

War I (Yasuba 1978: Graph 2). They fell by about 65 percent on rice shipments between Burma and Britain

(Yasuba 1978: Graph 2). Indeed, the rice price spread between London and Rangoon fell from 93 to 26

percent in the four decades prior to 1913 (Collins 1996: Table 4). These events had a profound impact on the

creation of an Asian market for wheat and rice, and, even more, on the creation of a truly global market for

grains (Latham and Neal 1983; Brandt 1985, 1993; Kang and Cha 1996). These technological events had

their impact on trade and transport costs within the region as well. The freight rate on coal (relative to its

export price) between Nagasaki and Shanghai fell by 76 percent between 1880 and 1910, and it has been

estimated that the total factor productivity growth rate on Japan's tramp freighter routes serving Asia

advanced at 2.5 percent per annum in the thirty years between 1879 and 1909 (Yasuba 1978: Tables 1 and

5).

        This commodity price convergence generated an Asian trade boom between 1870 and 1913,just as it

did in the Atlantic economy. Export shares in GDP (constant price, Maddison 1995: 190 and 237) almost

doubled in India (3 to 5.7 percent); they more than doubled in Indonesia (ito 2.2 percent); and they more

than tripled in Thailand (2.1 to 6.7 percent). But the greatest 19th century globalization shock in Asia did not

involve transport revolutions at all. Under the persuasion of American gun ships, Japan switched from virtual

autarky to free trade in 1858. It is hard to imagine a more dramatic switch from closed to open trade policy,

even by the standards of the recent Asian Miracle. In the fifteen years following 1858, Japan's foreign trade

rose 70 times, from nil to 7 percent of national income (Huber 1971). The prices of (labor-intensive)

exportables soared in Japan, rising towards world market levels; the prices of (land and machine-intensive)

importables slumped in Japan, falling towards world market levels. One researcher estimates that Japan's


                                                        4
terms of trade rose by a factor of 3.5 between 1858 and the early 1870s (Huber 1971); another thinks the rise

was even bigger, a factor of 4.9 between 1857 and 1875 (Yasuba 1996: 548). Whichever estimate one

accepts, this combination of declining transport costs and the dramatic switch to free trade unleashed

exceptionally powerful globalization forces in Japan. Other Asian nations followed this liberal path, most

forced to do so by colonial dominance or gunboat diplomacy. Thus, China signed a treaty in 1842 opening her

ports to trade and adopting a 5 percent ad valorem tariff limit. Siam adopted a 3 percent tariff limit in 1855.

Korea emerged from it's autarkic "Hermit Kingdom" about the same time, undergoing market integration

with Japan long before colonial status became formalized in 1910 (Cha 1998). India went the way of British

free trade in 1846, and Indonesia mimicked Dutch liberalism. In short, by the 1 860s commodity price

convergence was driven entirely by the sharply declining transport costs in Asia without much change in

tariffs one way or the other. Asian commitment to globalization started (and stuck) more than a centuiy ago,

while Europe and its overseas offshoots began to show plenty of signs of globalization backlash before the

interwar race to autarky (Williamson 1 998e).

         This account of Asia's emergence from economic isolation applies to Latin America as well. First of

all, the economic distance to the European core varied considerably depending upon location in Latin

America. The Panama Canal was not completed until 1914, and before then the Andean economies -- Peru

and Ecuador -- were veiy seriously disadvantaged in European trade except for very high value and low bulk

commodities produced along the coast, like guano. And prior to the introduction of a railroad network, the

landlocked countries of Bolivia and Paraguay were at an even more serious disadvantage. This was also true

of the Mexican interior (Coatsworth 1981), the Colombian interior, and the Argentine interior (Newland

1998). A close observer of early 19th century Latin America, Belford Hinton Wilson, reported in 1842 the

costs of moving a ton of goods from London to the following capital cities (in pounds sterling): Buenos Aires

and Montevideo 2; Lima 5.12; Santiago 6.58; Caracas 7.76; Mexico City 17.9; Quito 21.3; Sucre or

Chuquisca, 25.6; and Bogata 52.9. The variance is huge, with the costs to Quito, Sucre, Chuquisca, Bogata,


                                                        5
and Mexico City nine to twenty-seven times that of Buenos Aires and Montevideo, the latter well placed on

either side of the Rio de la Plata (Brading 1969: 243-4).

        Geographic isolation helps explain much of the subsequent dismal growth performance in these

(mostly poor) parts of Latin America in the 19th century. Even after the Latin American late 19th century

railroad boom, much of the region's interior was still isolated: for example, railway track per 1,000

population in Bolivia, Ecuador, Paraguay and Peru were still only about a tenth that of Australia, New

Zealand and Canada in 1912 (Bulmer-Thomas 1994: Table 4.4, p. 107). Furthermore, and as I noted above,

the tyranny of distance did not disappear as a development obstacle in these poor and initially-isolated parts

of Latin America even after 1940 (Radelet, Sachs and Lee 1997; Gallup, Sachs and Mellinger 1998). Bolivia,

Ecuador, Paraguay, Peru, the Argentine interior and the Mexican interior all faced and still face a trade

disadvantage, and if trade matters to growth, those countries face a growth disadvantage as well.

         In contrast, the Latin American countries bordering on the Atlantic, with long coastlines and with

good navigable river systems, have always been favored by a trade advantage and thus a growth advantage as

well. These include Argentina, Brazil, Venezuela, Central America, Cuba and the other Caribbean islands.

These regions may have failed for other reasons, but geographic isolation certainly wasn't one of them.

         Transport cost declines from interior to port, and from port to Europe or to the East and Gulf Coast

of the United States, ensured that Latin American economies became more integrated into world markets after

around 1850. Price gaps between Britain and both Americas were driven down and trade stimulated as a

consequence. True, transport costs and price differentials involving trade between Europe and North America

are far better documented than are those between Europe and South America. Yet, the qualitative literature

suggests that the same was happening south of the US border. Investment in river and harbor improvements

increased briskly everywhere in the Atlantic economy, and the Panama Canal had a specific impact on Latin

American trade. The switch from sail to steam was gradual, but it accounted for a steady decline in transport

costs across the Atlantic (Harley 1988). A series of innovations in subsequent decades helped make


                                                       6
steamships more efficient: the screw propeller, the compound engine, steel hulls, bigger size and shorter turn-

around time in port. Refrigeration was another technological innovation with major Latin American trade

implications. Mechanical refrigeration was developed between 1834 and 1861, and by 1870 chilled beef was

being transported from the United States to Europe (Mokyr 1990: 141). In 1876, the first refrigerated ship,

the Fri gorfique, sailed from Argentina to France carrying frozen beef. By the 1880s, South American meat

was being exported in large quantities to Europe. Not only did railways and steamships mean that European

farmers were faced with overseas competition in the grain market, but refrigeration also deprived them of the

natural protection distance had always provided local meat and dairy producers. The consequences for

European farmers of this overseas competition would be profound (O'Rourke 1997; O'Rourke and

Williamson 1998: Chp. 6).

        The impact of these productivity improvements on transport costs around the Atlantic economy can

be seen graphically in Figure 2. What is labeled the North index (North 1958) accelerates its fall after the

1830s, and what is labeled the British index (Harley 1988) is fairly stable up to mid century before

undergoing the same, big fall. The North freight rate index among American export routes dropped by more

than 41 percent in real terms between 1870 and 1910. The British index fell by about 70 percent, again in

real tenns, between 1840 and 1910. These two indices imply a steady decline in Atlantic economy transport

costs of about 1.5 percent per annum, for a total of 45 percentage points up to 1913, a big number indeed.

There is another way to get a comparative feel for the magnitude of this decline. The World Bank reports that

tariffs on manufactures entering developed country markets fell from 40 percent in the late 1940s to 7 percent

in the late 1970s, a 33 percentage point decline over thirty years (Wood 1994: 173). While impressive, this

spectacular postwar reclamation of "free trade" from interwar autarky is still smaller than the 45 percentage

point fall in trade barriers between 1870 and 1913 due to transport improvements.

         What was the impact of changing transport costs on trans-Atlantic commodity price gaps between

Latin America and European markets? If they behaved anything like Anglo-American price differentials, they


                                                       7
must have produced powerful commodity price convergence. Liverpool wheat prices exceeded Chicago wheat

prices by 58 percent in 1870, by 18 percent in 1895, and by 16 percent in 1912.2 Moreover, these wheat price

quotes understate the size of the price convergence because they ignore the collapse in price gaps between

farm and interior railhead. The second biggest tradable foodstuff consisted of meat and animal fats such as

beef, pork, mutton and butter. Based on London-Cincinnati price differentials for bacon, there was no

convergence across the 18 70s and 18 80s, but the price convergence after 1895 was even more dramatic for

meat than it was for wheat: price gaps were 93 percent in 1870, 92 percent in 1895, and 18 percent in 1913.

The price convergence for meat and dairy products required those advances in refrigeration made towards the

end of the century. Anglo-American price data are also available for many other non-agricultural

commodities. The trans-Atlantic cotton textile price gap, which had been 14 percent in 1870, completely

vanished by 1913; the iron bar price gap fell from 75 to 21 percent, while the pig iron price gap fell from 85

to 19 percent, and the copper price gap fell from 33 percent to almost zero. More relevant to Argentina and

Uruguay, the trans-Atlantic hides price gap fell from 28 to 9 percent, while the wool price gap fell from 59 to

28 percent.

        What was the impact of these transport innovations on Latin American trade? While the estimates

offered by Victor Bulmer-Thomas (1994: Table A.2. 1, p. 439) may be rough, they show a huge increase: the

share of Latin American exports in GDP rose from about 10 percent in 1850, to about 25 percent in 1912.

When historians look at this period, they tend to focus on the trade boom, ignoring the fact that the world-

wide decline in transport costs after mid century was enormous. This is a mistake. The volume of trade is not

by itself a satisfactory index of commodity market integration. It is the cost of moving goods between

markets that counts. The cost has two parts, that due to transport costs and that due to policy (such as tariffs).

The price spread between markets is driven by changes in these costs, and they need not move in the same

direction. Tariffs in the Atlantic economy did     fall from the 1870s to World War I; the globalization which


         2 The remainder of this paragraph draws its evidence from O'Rourke and Williamson (1994).

                                                        8
took place in the late 19th century cannot be assigned to more liberal trade policy. Instead, it was falling

transport costs which provoked globalization. Indeed, rising tariffs were mainly a defensive response to the

competitive winds of market integration as transport costs declined (O'Rourke and Williamson 1998: Chps. 3

and 6).

          The decline in transport costs created commodity price convergence in the world economy up to the

Great War, and most of Asia, Latin America and the Middle East were a very big part of it. Indeed, the Third

World may have been even           a part of it to the extent that tariffs were rarely raised there to mute the

impact of globalization, in contrast with the European continent, North America and Australasia (Williamson

1 998e).3 Trade boomed. Pre-1940 Third World globalization forces are now on the agenda, just where W.

Arthur Lewis (1969, 1978a, 1978b) insisted they should be. Note, however, that I have said nothing about

that old chestnut, the North-South terms of trade. In contrast to that enormous literature (Diakosavvas and

Scandizzo 1991), I have tried to emphasize that the transport cost declines influencing the trade connection

between the Third World periphery and European core were so great that practically every country underwent

an improvement in its terms of trade. It was      a zero-sum game. Prior to the Great War, the use of history to

shed light on the North-South terms of trade debate is badly misplaced. The history after the Great War is

another matter entirely.

          Let us now explore the behavior of real wages and relative factor prices in the Third World periphery

relative to the European core.



                  A Word About Measurement: Factor Prices Versus Output Aggregates



          Most economists who have written about the comparative growth of nations have used GDP per



           There are obvious exceptions, like Japan's restrictions on rice imports after the turn of the century
and tariffs in many parts of Latin America. I will deal with the Japanese exception below.

                                                         9
capita or per worker to measure catching up and convergence, or falling behind and divergence. There are at

least four good reasons why it is a mistake for the convergence debate to used these output aggregates

exclusively while ignoring wages and other factor prices. The arguments apply with special force to the pre-

1940 Third World where industrialization and technological advance were mostly absent.

         First, the pre-1940 real wage data for the Third World are of far better quality than the GDP data,

and they are certainly available for a wider sample.4 Indeed, while that vigorous pioneer Angus Maddison

(1995) is able to document real GDP per capita for a surprisingly large part of early Asia, he still can only

record observations for the following: Burma, the Philippines, Korea and Taiwan start only with the turn of

this century and offer nothing for the previous one; Thailand starts with 1870, and repeats only every twenty

years until 1913; Bangladesh and Pakistan start in 1820 but then leap over eighty years to 1900; China and

Japan start in 1820 but then leap fifty years to 1870; and India and Indonesia start in 1820, leap to 1850 and

then report observations only for every twenty years up to 1913. While impressive, such GDP per capita data

are usually not enough to deal adequately with the questions raised in the introduction to this paper. Similarly,

Maddison is able to document real GDP per capita for a surprisingly small part of 19th century Latin

America: for 1820, he gives estimates of GDP per capita only for Brazil and Mexico, two countries which

based on 1900 population data would have accounted for only 53 percent of Latin America; a half century

later, he offers estimates for one more, Argentina, raising the share of Latin America covered to 61 percent

(again, based on 1900 population); thirty years later, he offers estimates for four more, but there are still

many missing. Real wages in Latin America can be documented for the following (Williamson 1998c):

Argentina from 1864; Southeast Brazil from 1830; Northeast Brazil from 1855; Colombia from 1863; Cuba

from 1905; Mexico from 1877; and Uruguay from 1880. Furthermore, we can make statements about ppp-

adjusted urchasing-power-parity adjusted) real wages relative to the European core for both Asia and Latin


        ' The real wage data are purchasing-power-parity adjusted, they are typically daily or weekly, and
they are typically for urban unskilled male workers. See any of my working papers on either Asia, Latin
America or the Mediterranean (Williamson 1998a, 1998b, 1998c).

                                                        10
America. In addition, these real wage time series are typically available annually, so that epochs and major

ti.irning points can be identified with much greater clarity than is true of the GDP data which are usually

reported for every two decades or even longer.

         Second, income distribution matters, and wage rates (especially when combined with other factor

prices) offer a window by which to look in on distribution issues. Real people earn wages or skill premiums

or profits or rents, not that statistical artifact known as GDP per capita. By averaging all incomes, growth

economists (and economic historians that mimic them) throw away valuable information.

         Third, factor price movements help us understand the growth of nations. For example, productivity

catch-up in a poor country is more likely to increase all factor prices equally than is mass emigration (easing

population pressure on the land) or an export boom for agricultural products (increasing the demand for

land). The open economy forces which are likely to have been most important in driving late 19th century

economic change in Asia and Latin America -- trade and factor flows -- operated directly on factor prices, and

thus only indirectly on GDP per capita. An exclusive focus on GDP per capita misses most of the story.

        Fourth, economic change nearly always involves winners and losers, a fact which is crucial in

accounting for the evolution of policy and the survival of empires, perhaps more so in politically independent

societies like Japan, Siam and post-revolutionary Latin America, than in dependent colonial societies like

Indonesia and India. Still, changes that would increase GDP per capita but would also cause losses to some

politically powerful group are often successfully resisted even in colonial economies, and examining the

behavior of factor prices is a good way to start the search for the sources of such political resistance.




                      When Did the Core-Periphery Gap Open Up? Looking at Asia



        When did the gap between core and periphery open up in Asia? Table 1 offers an answer by using

my ppp-adjusted, urban, unskilled, daily or weekly real wages for males from eight countries in Asia, all


                                                        11
reported relative to Britain. The reader may think the comparison with Britain is unfair since the leader

showed signs of failure in the late 19th century. It turns out that comparisons with the Netherlands make

things a little worse for Asia, and comparisons with the average of Britain, France and Germany makes things

a little better for Asia (Williamson 1998a: Table 4). But using alternative definitions of the European core

does not change inferences about the evolution of the core-periphery gap.

        Let us begin with the extreme version of the labor surplus model and 19th century real wage trends.

The extreme version of W. Arthur Lewis's (1954) labor surplus model predicted a constant real wage, as did

the classical model developed by British economists who had not appreciated when they were writing how the

first industrial revolution was making a break with the past. Economists using 20thcentury data dealt the

labor surplus model severe blo's in the 1960s, and it is no longer the dominant paradigm that it was four

decades ago. But might the model do better in pre-industrial 19th century Asia?5 It does not. Prior to 1914,

real wages in Asia underwent enormous short and long run variation, even when standardized by British

performance. They collapsed by 42 percent in India between the early l870s and the Great War. They more

than doubled in Indonesia between the early 1 820s and 1910-1914. In Siam, they surged, from the early

1820s to the early 1880s, then lost all of those gains by World War I. In Japan, real wages showed no long

run trend at all until the 1880s, after which they started a steady climb which has persisted for a century.

Furthermore, in the 1 870s Asian real wages varied by a factor of five to one between the poorest we can

document, Egypt, and the richest, Thailand. True, theory tells us that even in steady state countries can reach

different equilibrium living standards (Barro and Sala-I-Matin 1995; Lucas 1998), but these differences seem

much too big to be explained by culture and attitudes towards family size. In addition, and as we have seen,

these real wage time series exhibit enormous variance, even when expressed as British relatives. Thus, real

wages and workers' living standards were hardly constant. The real wage data offer no support for the view



         The odds are not good even here, given that the classical model cannot even explain British
experience between 1780 and 1820, the period for which it was originally constructed (Williamson 1985).

                                                       12
that 19th century Asia was in steady state, or even that it was approaching steady state asymptotically.

Instead, the region seems to have been frequently perturbed by big shocks that took a long time to dissipate.

        Next, note that the real wage relatives for Japan and Indonesia imply that the core-periphery gap was

no bigger in the 1 920s and 1 930s than it was a century earlier, about one-third and one-fifth of Britain. Thus,

Asian living standards were way behind Britain when the tyranny of distance held sway, long before the first

great globalization boom and even before the European industrial revolution really took hold in the first half

of the 19th century. While it would be unwise to infer the behavior of the rest of Asia from that of Japan and

Indonesia, their experience is not quite consistent with the revisionist findings of Kenneth Pomeranz (1997)

and others who recently developed the case that early 1 gth century living standards in the lower Yangzi and

Lingnan — China's two most advanced regions — were at least as high as they were in southern England and

the Lowlands — Europe's two most advanced regions. Nor is the experience of Japan and Indonesia quite

consistent with the revisionist findings of Prasannan Parthasarathi (1998) who has recently developed the

case that living standards in south India were at least equal to that of England in the early 1 8th century. These

revisionist findings on China and India invite the inference that the European industrial revolution must

account for the gap between core and periphery. If that is so, why was there already a huge gap in the 1 820s

and 1830s? The 1820s may have been preceded by a half-century of industrial revolutionary events in Britain

but every historian agrees that those decades between 1780 and 1820 recorded only the most modest real

wage improvements in Britain (Lindert and Williamson 1983; Lindert 1994). There are only four ways to

resolve this paradox: the Pomeranz and Parthasarathi data grossly overstate living standards in 18th century

China and India; or the Williamson data grossly understate living standards in early 19th century Indonesia

and Japan; or there were 18th century events that mattered to the evolution of British economy just as much

as the industrial revolution; or Japan and Indonesia misrepresent the rest of Asia. On the latter, we do note

that the gap between Thailand and Britain widened a lot between the beginning and the end of the 19th

century, but all of that widening took place after the late 1880s. The paradox remains.


                                                        13
        Consider now Burma, Indonesia and Thailand, the southeast frontier of Asia. The available time

series for Burma is short, but what we do have suggests that living standards (relative to Britain) peaked

twice, in the 1870s and the 1900s. Indonesia and Thailand peaked in between. The enormous rise in living

standards in these parts of the southeast Asian frontier is consistent with globalization, rising export prices,

and settlement on an extensive margin. The collapse after the 1870s and 1880s must be explained by other

factors since the positive globalization forces were still at work until primary product prices collapsed after

the Great War. Presumably, the extensive margin disappeared and continued immigration into the region

began to press downwards the still-relatively-high-compared-to-emigrating-areas living standard. These are

only speculations, and we may need different ones to explain the same trends in India. Real wages in India

collapsed sharply between the late 1880s and the Great War (again, relative to Britain), and it was happening

everywhere on the subcontinent (Williamson 1998a: Table 8). India seemed to share the same dismal post-

1 880s experience that was true of Southeast Asia.

        Korean and Taiwanese experience seems at first sight to be consistent with the nationalist critique

that Japanese imperialism eroded workers' living standards there (Kimura 1995; Kang and Cha 1996).

Certainly living standards fell there after occupation. But correlation is not necessarily causation. How much

of these trends can be attributed to Japanese imperial policy? If the answer is most of it, then exactly how did

Japanese policy in Korea and Taiwan differ from US policy in the Philippines, and can the policy differences

explain their strikingly different experience with the evolution of living standards? On the other hand, the

decline in Korean and Taiwanese living standards might be explained by the collapse in primary product

prices in world markets facing these relatively small economies that were heavily dependent on trade. If so,

why weren't living standards sagging elsewhere in Asia from the turn of the century to the late 1920s,

especially in the Philippines? We add these questions to a growing agenda, but some of them will be

confronted again when we look below at relative factor price trends.

        So, how did Asian living standard growth measure up with Britain? Japan's real wage was 33


                                                       14
percent of Britain in the early 1830s, and it was 32 percent of Britain in the late 1920s. No catching up here,

but at least Japan was able to hold her own, first by switching in the 1 850s from autarky to free trade, and

second by mounting a very successful industrialization program after the 1880s. While the former didn't stick

(the real wage gains up to the late 1 850s and early 1 860s disappeared by the 1 870s), the latter certainly did.

The other two success stories in 1 9th century Asia were brief. Indonesia and Thailand were actually catching

up on Britain during their real wage surge from the 1 820s to the 1 880s, which was impressive since Britain

was undergoing unusually fast real wage growth during that period. Table 1 documents that Egypt and

Turkey also rose to a secular peak (relative to Britain) about the same time. With the exception of the

Philippines, the rest of Asia was falling behind the European core. The core-periphery gap was already wide

by the end of the first third of the 9'' century, but it got even wider during the rest of the 1 9thcentury,

especially after the 1 880s. Finally, note that compared with Britain every Asian country had real wages in the

late 1930s (1935-1939) equal to or a little greater than real wages just prior to World War 1(1910-1914).

Asia did a much better job holding its own with Britain during the quarter century after 1914 than during the

quarter century before.

        Asia's real wage performance over the century from the 1 820s to the 1930s was impressive. No,

there was no catching up on the European industrial leaders. Yes, Asia grew pretty much at the same rate.

And Asia did it without any industrial revolution and under conditions of technological quiescence.



                When Did the Core-Periphery Gap Open Up? Looking at Latin America



        Table 2 documents that Argentina was catching up with Britain in the half-century before World War

I. There is also some modest evidence that the Brazilian Southeast started catching up from mid-century. But

catch up with the European leaders doesn't seem to have been taken place anywhere else in Latin America.

Colombia, Mexico and Uruguay were able to hold their own up to the Great War, but real wages there did not


                                                        15
catch up with those in Britain. Nor is there any evidence of catchup in the Brazilian Northeast or in Cuba.

        Like Asia, Latin America did not exhibit much evidence of catchup on Europe's industrial leaders

     to 1914, but it did hold its own. In contrast with Asia, there is plenty of evidence of Latin American

slowdown and fall back .fici 1914. Why the difference? Relative to the world leaders, better growth

performance in Latin America prior to World War I than afterwards seems to be highly correlated with an

open policy on one side of that divide and a closed policy on the other. But any agenda whose goal it is to

isolate the role of policy in accounting for the different growth experience on either side of 1914 needs to

control for eveiything else that might matter: bad luck in world commodity markets, bad luck in world factor

markets, demography, the tyranny of distance and other forces. The examination of relative factor price

perfonnance might help sort these factors out.



                         Third World Trends in Wage-Rental Ratios Before 1940



        The move to free trade in much of Asia, plus the revolutionary decline in transport costs everywhere

in the Third World, steadily eroded price gaps between the European core and the periphery in the half-

century before 1914. It probably eroded them even more within the periphery, since there was far less

globalization backlash there. Prices of exportables boomed in the exporting countries. Price trends reversed

after World War I, but on either side of that great divide one would have thought that the relative rewards to

land and labor should have been dramatically affected. Exactly how they were affected should have depended,

of course, on whether the abundant factor was land -- as in Argentina and the Punjab -- or labor -- as in

Japan. Consider the canonical land-scarce and labor-abundant case, Japan. When Japan emerged from

isolation after 1858, prices of its labor-intensive exportables soared, rising towards world market levels,

while prices of its land and machine-intensive importables slumped, falling towards world market levels. The

Heckscher-Ohlin model predicts that the abundant factor (labor) should have flourished while the scarce


                                                       16
factor (land) should have languished over the fifteen years or so following 1858. Did they?

         The available factor price evidence for Japan in mid-century is limited. Table 3 confirms that data on

land rents or land values are not available until 1885, long after Japan's leap to openness had taken place. But

we do have some crude evidence, and it seems to confirm the Heckscher and Ohlin hypothesis. Maddison

(1995: 182) estimates that real GDP per capita increased by only 17 percent between 1820 and 1870.

Assume that all of that increase took place between 1850 and 1870, an unlikely event that argues against the

thesis. J. Richard Huber (1971) estimates that the real wage for unskilled workers in Osaka and Tokyo

increased by 67 percent in this period. True, this huge increase is much bigger than the real wage growth I

have estimated; we would have to go all the back in my data to the late 1830s to find a real wage increase

between then and 1870 (about 63 percent) anything like that estimated by Huber (Williamson 1998a:

Appendix Table 5.3). Nevertheless, consider the implication of Huber's estimates: the wage of unskilled

labor, the abundant factor, increased by 43 percent relative to average incomes in Japan. And under plausible

assumptions,6 this implies that land rents 1Q11 by more than 50 percent in Japan. Thus, the wage-rental ratio

rose by more than 3.3 times (from 1.0 to 1.67/0.50). To repeat, this is exactly what one would have predicted

when a technologically quiescent economy is hit with a huge price shock which favors the exportable and

disfavors the importable: in a land-scarce economy like pre-industrial Japan, the wage-rental ratio should

have soared, with obvious distributional (and, one supposes, political) implications.



         6 The aritlmietic is trivial. Let national income (Y) equal the sum of wages (wL, the wage per worker
times the total labor force) and land rents (rD, rent per hectare times total hectares), and ignore skills, capital
and all else: Y = wL + rD. Then per worker income growth is (where an "*" refers to the percentage growth
over the full fifteen years):

        Y*L* = %VOL + L*(OLl) + r'O.

I assume that labor and lands share exhausted national income, and that labor got 60 percent. I also assume
that land hectarage was fixed, and that labor force growth (assumed equal to population growth) was 7.6
percent between 1850 and 1870 (Maddison 1995: 106). If some of the GDP per capita growth between 1820
and 1870 actually took place before 1850, then land rents fell by even more than what I guess here. This
calculation is taken from O'Rourke and Williamson (1998: Chp. 4).

                                                        17
        These are only informed guesses, of course, but Table 3 reports the real thing. Wage-rental ratio

trends can be constructed for Japan starting 1885, Korea starting 1909 and Taiwan starting 1904. In contrast

with the Punjab after 1873 or Japan after 1858, the early 20th century was not a period of technological

quiescence in East Asian agriculture. Instead, the region was undergoing land-saving and labor-using

innovation (Hayami and Ruttan 1971), forces which should have served by themselves to raise the wage-

rental ratio. It was also a period of dramatic industrialization, at least in Japan, which served to pull labor off

the farms (Brandt 1993), another force serving to raise the wage-rental ratio. The period after 1910-1914 was

also one of unfavorable farm price shocks (Kimura 1993; Kang and Cha 1996), yet another force serving to

raise the wage-rental ratio. In short, we might expect those wage-rental ratio trends for Japan, initiated by

globalization forces in the mid-19th century, to have continued everywhere in East Asia in the 20th century.

That is exactly what Table 3 shows: East Asian wage-rental ratios surged up to the 1920s and 1930s. Indeed,

land-scarce Europe experienced the same surge in wage-rental ratios during the so-called grain invasion after

the 1 870s, at least where trade policy remained liberal (O'Rourke, Taylor and Williamson 1996).

Furthermore, the magnitudes were not so different. Between 1910/14 and 1925/29, the wage-rental ratio rose

by 88 percent in Japan, by 46 percent in Korea, and by 40 percent in Taiwan (Table 3). The average increase

in the wage-rental ratio for Britain, Ireland, Denmark and Sweden was 39 percent between 1890 and 1910,

and 120 percent between 1870 and 1890 (O'Rourke, Taylor and Williamson 1996: Table 1). It might also be

relevant to add that politically powerful landed interests were able to secure some protection from these

globalization forces in both continental Europe with tariffs on grain (O'Rourke 1997; Williamson 1998e) and

in Japan with import restrictions on rice (Brandt 1993).

        In contrast with East Asia and Europe, I take the Punjab to have been relatively land abundant, an

assumption that seems to be confirmed by the fact that agricultural exports from that Indian region to Europe




                                                        18
boomed after the 1860s and early 1870s.7 Globalization should have had the opposite effect on the wage-

rental ratio in land-abundant Punjab compared with land-scarce Japan: it should have fallen. And fall it did.

Between 1873-79 and 1910-14, the wage-rental ratio in the Punjab fell by 61 percent. The Punjab' s wage-

rental ratio experience was not so different from that of the Latin American southern cone and other parts of

the New World. From the late 1880s to World War I, the wage-rental ratio fell by 71 percent in the combined

trio of Australia, Argentina and the United States (O'Rourke, Taylor and Williamson 1996: Table 2), and it

fell by 79 percent in Argentina alone. Egypt, riding a cotton boom, conformed to these trends in Asia and

Latin America: from the 1870s to 1915-1919, the wage-rental ratio fell by 56 percent, and from the late

1880s it fell by 87 percent (Table 3).

        The factor-price-convergence theorem seems to have been alive and well in Asia, Latin America and

the Middle East before 1940. So far, however, I have not said a word about changing resource endowments,

labor supplies, and the Lewis model. The next section will do so.



                      Hints about Inequality Trends in the Third World Before 1940



        Eli Heckscher and Bertil Ohlin (Flam and Flanders 1991) argued that the integration of global

commodity markets would lead to convergence of international factor prices, as countries everywhere

expanded the production and export of commodities which used their abundant (and cheap) factor intensively.

As we have seen, limited historical evidence from the pre-1940 Third World seems to be consistent with

Heckscher and Ohlin: the trade boom between the 1 870s and the 1 920s led to rising wage-rental ratios in

relatively labor-abundant East Asia, and to falling wage-rental ratios in relatively land-abundant Argentina,




        71t is relative endowments that count for specialization and trade. Presumably, both labor and land
had low productivity in the Punjab compared with Western Europe. The effective stocks of labor and land
were both very low.

                                                       19
Egypt, the Punjab, and probably Siam and other parts of Southeast Asia.8 As a consequence, conditions

appear to have improved for the poor unskilled worker relative to the rich landlord in East Asia, while the

opposite was probably true of Argentina, Egypt, Siam, Burma, and the Punjab. All of this borders on

speculation, of course, since the globalization inference is guided by wage-rental ratio trends in a very small

sample.

          What about elastic labor supplies? In his famous model of the labor surplus economy, W. Arthur

Lewis (1954) showed how early industrialization could create inequality (and also a rising surplus to finance

domestic-savings-constrained accumulation). Stable real wages implied rising profit shares economy-wide.

According to his model, the worker fails to share in GDP per capita growth since elastic labor supplies keep

wages and living standards stable.

          Lewis thought that his model of development with elastic labor supplies applied to late 19th century

Latin America where European mass migration glutted labor markets and to tropical regions where Chinese

and Indian contract labor did the same (Lewis 1 978a), and many scholars subsequently agreed. Carlos Diaz-

Alejandro wrote that the labor supply in Argentina before 1930 was "perfectly elastic at the going wage (plus

some differential) in the industrial centers of Italy and Spain" (1970: 21-2). Nathaniel Leff thought the same

was true of the Brazilian Southeast and that elastic labor supplies could account for stable wages in Sao

Paulo and Santos from the 1880s onwards (see Table 2 and Leff 1992: 6). If the elastic labor supply thesis is

correct, then late 19th century Latin emigration should have been far more responsive to wage gaps between

home and abroad compared with the early emigrants from northwest Europe going to North America,

Australia and New Zealand. The hypothesis has been soundly rejected (Hatton and Williamson 1994; 1998:

Chp. 3): Latin emigrants were no more responsive to wage gaps between home and abroad than was the case


          I do not have adequate wage-rental ratio data for Southeast Asia, a labor-scarce frontier. However,
          S

note in Table 1 that real wages (relative to Britain) were falling in Burma, Indonesia and Thailand after the
1870s, in most cases dramatically. Furthermore, using the data in Feeny (1982: Table 3-10) on land prices
and in Williamson (1998a: Appendix Table 9.1) on nominal wages, we can say something about wage-rental
trends in Thailand        1915: they fell sharply, from an index of 100 to 76.

                                                       20
for other European emigrants. It is simply not true that the Latin economies in the late 19th century had more

elastic emigrant labor supplies than the rest of Europe. This revisionist finding is consistent with Alan

Taylor's (1994) research which shows that Argentina's immigration was no more responsive to wage gaps

than was Australia's. This new evidence seems to do heavy damage to the arguments of Leff, Lewis, and

Diaz-Alejandro: Latin American development did not take place under uniquely elastic labor supplies.

        Still, a rejection of the elastic labor supply hypothesis does not necessarily imply that rapid rates of

labor force growth didn't matter. After all, a rise in labor-land ratios would keep wages from rising in

economies where agriculture was dominant and industrialization only a promise for the distant future. The

Lewis model is quiet about what happens to land rents under those circumstances, but the classical model

from which it was derived certainly predicted a rise. Since the mass migration boom prior to World War I and

the bust thereafter correlates so well with the bust then boom in the wage-rental ratio (Table 3), perhaps there

is something to be said for changing endowments and labor supply.

        It follows that the Heckscher-Ohlin globalization model and the Lewis labor-surplus model both

predict falling wage-rental ratios and rising inequality in Latin America prior to World War I and the opposite

thereafter. The labor surplus model could also be used to predict stable real wages and falling wage-rental

ratios in Southeast Asia, since the migration of surplus labor from India and China might have served to

create an elastic labor supply in, for example, land-abundant Burma, Siam, and the Philippines.9 It follows

that globalization and the Lewis model both predict falling wage-rental ratios and rising inequality in

Southeast Asia. They predict the opposite in labor-abundant East and South Asia. Since they make the same

prediction, discriminating empirically between the competing Lewis and Heckscher-Ohlin views will prove

difficult. Yet, if it can be shown that a good share of the variance in land-labor trends across the Third World

prior to 1940 was driven by labor migration experience, then it can also be said that globalization events --


           assume, of course, that there is no comparable elastic supply of land on these frontiers. For this
endogenous-land argument, see Myint (1958) and Findlay (1995: Chp. 5).HIa Myint's theoretical work was
motivated by Burmese experience.

                                                       21
commodity price convergence and factor mobility -- account for much of the real wage perfomiance, factor

price convergence, and inequality experience there. The case in favor of commodity price convergence would

be even stronger if it can be shown that factor mobility took place in response to the trade-creating price

shocks.

          Changes in relative factor prices can tell us a lot about changes in the distribution of income. This

connection is especially useful since complete income distributions at various benchmarks between the mid-

19th century and World War II are unavailable for any Third World country. But even if such data were

available, it is not obvious that they would be the best way to search for the underlying causes of changing

inequality. Our interest here is factor prices: wages, rents and the structure of pay. How did the typical

unskilled worker near the bottom of the distribution do relative to the typical landowner or capitalist near the

top, or even relative to the typical skilled blue collar worker or educated white collar employee near the

middle? The modem debate over OECD inequality has a fixation on wages, but since land and landed

interests are far more important in pre-industrial agrarian nations, they need to be added to any Third World

distribution inquiry. In any case, we have two kinds of evidence available to get hints about inequality trends

in Asia and Latin America prior to 1940: trends in the wage-rental ratio, which we have already explored; and

trends in the ratio of the unskilled wage to GDP per capita, which we have yet to explore. There is no reason

to expect a perfect correlation between the two measures: after all, GDP includes returns to all factors, not

just land. But since land was such an important asset in the pre-1940 Third World -- in contrast with human

capital, I expect the correlation to be close.

          Table 4 reports for Asia trends in the ratio of the unskilled worker's wage (w) to the returns on all

factors per person as measured by Maddisons (1995) estimates of GDP per capita (y). True, the ratio could

be influenced by changes in the labor participation rate alone. If there was a sharp increase in population from

a rise in fertility or a fall in child mortality, and thus no increase in workers of adult age, w/y would

(spuriously) rise as y fell. In contrast, if there was a sharp increase in population from the immigration of


                                                        22
adult labor, wly would appear more stable. While this was not a period of dramatic demographic transition in

Asia (Bloom and Williamson 1998), the immigration into Southeast Asia probably tends to make downward

trends in w/y overstate rising inequality there. Suppose, in addition, that days or weeks worked per year

increased due to seasonal smoothing and other forces that eroded underemployment? Then GDP per capita

would rise, the daily or weekly wage would not, and thus wly would fall. Some of the observed changes in

w/y could also be driven by the performance of the price of wage goods (in the cost-of-living index

underlying the real wage, dominated by the price of rice and other grains) relative to the GDP deflator

(underlying the real GDP per capita estimates). But such relative price movements have clear distributional

implications on the expenditure side, since the poor are more dependent on rice and other foodstuffs than are

the rich (as a share of their budgets). These qualifications are likely to matter, but one can only hope that

trends in w/y approximate changes in the economic distance between the working poor near the bottom of the

distribution and the average citizen in the middle of the distribution, especially if our primary goal is to

explain differences in those trends across countries and between epochs. I am optimistic since the statistic is

highly correlated with more comprehensive inequality measures in the few cases where both are available for

the Atlantic economy prior to 1940 (\Williamson 1998d: Table 5).

         Table 4 shows that any successful explanation of changes in wly in Asia between 1870 and 1940

will have to be complex: the Heckscher-Ohlin and Lewis models will not, by themselves, account for all the

variety. Still, they seem able to account for much of it. Japan, India, Indonesia and Thailand document the

longest time series, and each underwent a long sharp decline in wly before flattening out or even rising after

World War I. The turning point for Indonesia seems to be the late 1920s, but for the other three it is 1915-

1919. The real wage lag behind GDP per capita in these four Asian countries during the first great

globalization boom seems to offer evidence of some weaker version of the Lewis model, not constant wages

but rather sluggish growth and modest trickling down. But why the common turning point for four economies

with such different attributes? Since it seems unlikely that such dissimilar economies could share the same


                                                        23
Lewis turning point, perhaps a more likely explanation lies with world markets. These four countries were

more likely to have shared similar globalization-induced price shocks which produced the same trends in w/y.

          The Philippine and Burmese time series are much shorter, but what we have obeys the same Asian

laws of motion that we have seen already for the other four countries. The Philippine turning point is 19 10-

1914, and it shares the steep decline up to that point and the sharp reversal thereafter. The experience of

Taiwan and Korea is similar, with their turning points in 1915-1919, although the Korean time series is much

too short to be very confident about long run turning points. As an aside, this evidence also does not offer

much support for the nationalist critique of Japanese imperialist policies. If imperialism tended to exploit the

ordinary native worker in occupied Korea and Taiwan, while favoring landlords in those two regions and

Japanese consumers at home, why do we not see that redistribution in the form of falling wfy after the 1910-

1919 decade? Why does the ratio rise instead? The answer may lie with world markets rather than imperial

policy.

          We have found an important Asian stylized fact. Real wages lagged behind GDP per capita growth

everywhere in Asia up to the World War I decade. Real wages outstripped GDP per capita growth thereafter.

Latin America shares the same stylized fact with Asia. Argentina, Mexico and Uruguay document the longest

w/y time series, and they all underwent a long, steep decline in w/y before it flattened out or even rose after

World War I (Table 5). The turning point for all three is 1915-1919, a result consistent with Argentina's

wage-rental ratio trends. Although Cuba's time series is shorter, it seemed to obey the same laws of motion

and the same turning point. Colombia's time series is even shorter than Cuba's, so we do not know whether

1910-1914 was a turning point for Colombia or not. The only evidence in Table 5 inconsistent with either the

Heckscher-Ohlin or the Lewis model is Brazil, which underwent a steady decline in wlyfrom the turn of the

century onwards in both the Northeast and the Southeast. The behavior of this inequality proxy can be best

summarized for all of Latin America by pooling the annual data underlying the five-year averages in Table 5.




                                                       24
An estimated non-linear regression predicts that w/y reached a minimum in 1918-1919. '°

        Why did the real wage lag behind GDP per capita in so much of the Third World during the first

great globalization boom? Is this evidence of some weaker version of the Lewis model, not constant wages

but rather wage lag? Is it evidence supporting the factor-price convergence theorem where factors are quality-

adjusted? Is it both? The striking fact is that there is a common turning point shared by economies with such

different attributes. Since it seems unlikely that such dissimilar economies in such different parts of the world

could share the same Lewis labor supply turning point, perhaps a more likely explanation lies with world

commodity markets. These countries were more likely to have shared similar globalization-induced price

shocks which produced the same trends in wly. Ofcourse, these two forces might be considered

complementary rather than competing hypotheses, especially if the labor supply changes were driven by

across-border migration, making both globalization-induced. The next section considers other possible

explanations.



                                Explicit Theory and an Econometric Agenda



        Not too long ago, Kevin O'Rourke, Alan Taylor and myself discovered evidence of relative factor

price convergence in the late 19th century Atlantic economy (O'Rourke, Taylor and Williamson 1996). This

is a different fact than the absolute real wage convergence documented in Figure 1. Instead, it was relative

factor price convergence as measured by the wage-rental ratio, where the rents refer to farm rents or farm land

values, as was true of the estimates reported here for Argentina, Korea, Taiwan, Japan and the Punjab. The

convergence was manifested mainly by the collapse of the wage-rental ratio in the land-abundant and labor-

scarce New World, and by the surge of the ratio in the land-scarce and labor-abundant Old World. Relative



        '° The
              ratio wly is regressed on time (estimated coefficient = -1.355, t-statistic = 3.955) and time-
squared (estimated coefficient = +0.0004, t-statistic = 3.934), and the predicted minimum is 1918.8.

                                                       25
factor prices were, of course, never equalized, but a good share of the relative endowment scarcities on either

side of the Atlantic Ocean were eroded by World War I. Furthermore, the rise in the wage-rental ratio was

much greater in those parts of Europe that stuck with free trade -- Britain, Ireland and Scandinavia -- than in

those parts of Europe that retreated behind tariff walls -- France, Germany and Spain. This fact seemed to

offer a clear confirmation of the Heckscher-Ohlin factor price convergence theorem: that the export boom on

both sides of the Atlantic could account for the convergence by causing the derived demand for the abundant

and cheap factor to boom, that is, land and rents in the New World versus labor and wages in the Old World.

'When we turned to the econometrics, this plausible interpretation met with some empirical resistance and it

had to be modified. Would the same be true of the wage-rental and wage-GDP per capita trends I have

documented in this paper for the Third World?

         As my frequent reference to the Lewis labor surplus model was meant to suggest, there are certainly

other explanations of relative factor price trends that might compete with the Heckscher-Ohlin model."

        First, one might appeal to the discovery and exploitation of land and natural resources at the open

frontiers in the post-1850 Third World. Classical theories of pre-mdustnal performance argued that

population growth would cause the relative price of land to rise as long as land scarcity did not choke off that

growth. Certainly Maithus saw it that way: demographic events pushed up man-land ratios, lowered real

wages, raised land rents, and caused the wage-rental ratio to fall to a new long run equilibrium where zero

population growth was reattained. David Ricardo and John Stuart Mill told similar, but more explicit, stories.

This theoretical tradition of European pre-industrial pessimism was carried into the late 19th century by the

writings of Alfred Marshall, and Henry George. It has also influenced late 20th century mathematical models

of growth, debates over sustainable growth provoked in the 1 970s by the Club of Rome, and concern about

the deteriorating natural resource environment in the Third World. Indeed, it is implied by Lewis' (1954)

famous paper on economic development with unlimited labor supplies.


        "The remainder of this section draws heavily on O'Rourke, Taylor and Williamson (1996: 505-9).

                                                      26
         But since European emigrants moved to Cuba and the Southern Cone in massive numbers in the late

 19th century, wage-rental ratios should have fallen there by much more than in Europe, a Mill-Ricardo

argument that should help account for the opposing factor-price trends in these two parts of the world.

Similarly, there was a huge migration from labor surplus parts of South and East Asia to labor scarce parts of

Southeast Asia: Indian emigrants went in large numbers to Burma, Ceylon, and Malaya, while Chinese

emigrants went in large numbers to Burma, Malaya, the Dutch East Indies, Siam, French Indo-China and the

Philippines (Latham 1986: 11). But if factor migration was the only economic event taking place in Asia,

why the similar trends in relative factor prices at various locations? Were land and natural resources in

Southeast Asia exploited just as fast, or even faster, than the rate of immigration (Myint 1958; Findlay

1995)? Was land (relative to labor) in East Asia extended on the intensive margin (by double-cropping) just

as fast as on the extensive margin (by settlement) in Southeast Asia?

        In general, then, this paradigm places heavy emphasis on international factor reallocation and

endogenous resource exploitation as the mechanisms by which a fundamental disequilibrium in history was

partially resolved: capital and labor chased higher returns (and each other) by migrating from land-scarce to

land-abundant regions. Of course, a world policy commitment to integrated factor markets is needed to give

the paradigm a chance to explain reality -- unrestricted mass migration and capital flows. The language of

this paradigm sounds very much like John Stuart Mill, who, in 1848, anticipated the factor-price convergence

debate by stressing the contribution of factor migration while ignoring what I have stressed thus far, the

impact of commodity price convergence.

        Second, one could explore accumulation forces. Capital deepening should, after all, raise the wage-

rental ratio. Industrialization and capital deepening usually go together, and to that extent capital-deepening

cannot have played an important part in the Third World. After all, industrialization was not an important

part of Latin American and Asian experience, at least up to 1914. Paraphrasing Lewis (1978a), the Third

World had a choice between importing European industrialization or exporting primary products, and they


                                                      27
 choose the latter prior to the Great War. Thus, accumulation and capital-deepening are unlikely to play a

 major role in accounting for the relative factor price trends observed for the Third World.

          Third, one might appeal to economic forces associated with changes in technology. As we have seen,

 there was real wage and living standard improvement in Asia and Latin America up to 1914. True, there was

 very little evidence of catching up with the European industrial leaders, but there is abundant evidence that

 much of the Third World was at least holding its own. Industrial revolutions typically embody productivity

 growth which favors industiy. Since industrial output makes little use of farmland, industrialization tends to

 be relatively land-saving, raising instead the relative demands for labor and capital. Such industrial

revolutionaiy events should, therefore, tend to raise the wage-rental ratio. According to this prediction, more

rapid industrialization in Japan compared with Siam (Feeny 1996; Yasuba and Dhiravegin 1985) should also

have served to raise the wage-rental ratio by more in Japan than in Siam. Such events should have contributed

to factor-price convergence within Asia. This prediction would be reinforced if productivity advance in pre-

1940 East Asia was land-saving and labor-using, while the opposite was true in Southeast Asia, justas the

induced-innovation hypothesis would suggest (Hayami and Ruttan 1971).

         Fourth, what about relative output prices and the terms of trade? The Third World terms of trade

must have been driven by two forces: first, there were the globalization forces which caused commodity

prices to converge world wide and caused export prices to boom everywhere; and second, there were

independent supply side forces driving the relative price of primary products world wide. The globalization

forces were driven by the decline in transport costs world wide, declines that were probablygreater in the

periphery, where they were rarely muted by tariff increase, than the core, where they were often muted by

tariff increases. On these grounds alone, the relative price of exportables probably increased bymore in the

periphery in response to globalization forces than in the core. Supply-side forces were dominated by

unbalanced productivity advance favoring industry. This tended to lower the relative cost of quality-adjusted

industrial goods world wide, and, thus, to raise the relative price of Third World primary' products still


                                                       28
 further. These two forces reinforced each other in the primaiy-product-producing periphery while they offset

 each other in the industrial core. Thus, the pre-1914 price shocks favoring exportables were bigger in the

 periphery than in the core. Both forces reversed around World War I: there was de-globalization with the

 move towards autarky; and there was an industrial productivity slowdown at the center.'2

         The theoiy just reviewed makes the empirical agenda clear. I am in the process of developing a pre-

 1940 Third World data base that includes the following: the relative price of exportables in the home market;

 land-labor ratios (where the numerator is adjusted for multiple cropping and irrigation); a Solow residual

 constructed as the log of output per worker minus a factor share times the log of the land-labor ratio (aproxy

 for productivity growth and a correlate with unbalanced productivity advance and aggregate factor saving);

urbanization indices (a proxy for the independent influence of industrialization); and a time dummy to see

whether the World War I turning point evaporates when I control for these other forces. The results should be

informative, especially when they are compared with what W. Arthur Lewis suggested many decades ago.




        12 In the short run, there was also the influence of an excess supply of primary products at the
periphery generated by the long boom from the 1890s to the end of the War.

                                                      29
                                                  References



Allen, R. [1998], "The Great Divergence: Wages and Prices from the Middle Ages to the First World War,"

         paper presented to the Conference on Regions, Queens University, Kingston, Canada (March 6-7).

Barro, it. J., and X. Sala-i-Martin [1995], Economic Growth (New York: McGraw-Hill).

Blainey, G. [1966], The Tyranny of Distance: How Distance Shaped Australia's History (Melbourne:

         Macmillan, revised 1982 ed.).

Bloom, D. and J. D. Saehs [1998], "Geography, Demography, and Economic Growth in Africa," Brookings

        Papers on Economic Activity, 2: 1998.

Bloom, D. and J. G. Williamson [1998], "Demographic Transitions and Economic Miracles in Emerging

        Asia," World Bank Economic Review 12: 419-55.

Brading, C. W. [1969], "Un analisis comparativo del costo de la vida en diversas capitales de

        hispanoamerica," Boletin Historico de Ia Fundacion John Boulton 20 (March 1969): 229-63.

Brandt, L., [1985], 'Chinese Agriculture and the International Economy 1870-1913: A Reassessment,"

        Explorations in Economic History 22: 168-80.

   [1993], "Interwar Japanese Agriculture: Revisionist Views on the Impact of the Colonial Rice Policy and

        Labor-Surplus Hypothesis," Explorations in Economic History 30: 259-93.

Bulmer-Thomas, V. [1994], The Economic History of Latin America Since Independence (Cambridge:

        Cambridge University Press).

Cha, Myung Soo [1998], "The Evolution of Markets in Korea," mimeo., Department of Economics,

        Yeungnam University, Kyungsan, South Korea.

Coatsworth, J. [1981], Growth Against Development -- The Economic Impact of Railroads in Porfirian

        Mexico (Dekalb, Ill.: Northern Illinois University Press).

Collins, W. J. [1996], "Regional Labor Markets in British India," mimeo., Department of Economics,

                                                      30
        Harvard University (November).

Diakosavvas, D. and P. L. Scandizzo [1991], "Trends in the Terms of Trade of Primaiy Commodities, 1900-

        1982: The Controversy and Its Origins," Economic Development and Cultural Change 39: 231-

        64.

Diaz-Alejandro, C. F. [1970], Essays on the Economic History of the Argentine Republic (New Haven,

        Conn.: Yale University Press).

Feeny, D. [1996], "Thailand versus Japan: Why Was Japan First?," paper presented to the Conference on

        East and Southeast Asian Economic Change in the Long Run, April 11, Honolulu.

Findlay, R. F. [1995], Factor Proportions, Trade, and Growth (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT).

Flam, H., and M. J. Flanders [1991], Heckscher-Ohlin Trade Theory (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press).

Fletcher, M. E. [1958], "The Suez Canal and World Shipping, 1869-1914," Journal of Economic History

        18: 556-73.

Gallup, J. K., J. D. Sachs, and A. D. Mellinger [1998], "Geography and Economic Development," HIER

        Discussion Paper No. 1856, Harvard Institute of Economic Research, Department of Economics,

        Harvard University (November).

Gerschenkron, A. [19521, "Economic Backwardness in Historical Perspective," in B. Hoselitz (ed.), The

        Progress of Underdeveloped Areas (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).

Harley, C. K. [1988], "Ocean Freight Rates and Productivity, 1740-1913: The Primacy of Mechanical

        Invention Reaffirmed," Journal of Economic History 48: 851-76.

Hatton, T. J. and J. G. Williamson [1994], "Late-Corners to Mass Emigration: The Latin Experience," in T.

        J. Hatton and J. G. Williamson (eds.), Migration and the International Labor Market, 1850-

        1939 (London: Routledge).

   [1998], The Age of Mass Migration: An Economic Analysis (New York: Oxford University Press).

Hayami, Y. and V. W. Ruttan [1971], Agricultural Development: An International Perspective

                                                    31
        (Baltimore, Md.: The Johns Hopkins Press).

Huber, J. R. 111971], "Effect on Prices of Japan's Entiy into World Commerce after 1858," Journal of

        Political Economy 79: 6 14-28.

Kang, K. H. and M. S. Cha [1996], "Imperial Policy or World Price Shocks? Explaining Interwar Korean

        Living Standards," paper presented to the Conference on East and Southeast Asian Economic

        Change in the Long Run, Honolulu (April 11).

Kimura, M. [1993], "Standards of Living in Colonial Korea: Did the Masses Become Worse Off or Better

        Off Under Japanese Rule?," Journal of Economic History 53: 629-52.

Latham, A. J. H. [1986], "Southeast Asia: A Preliminary Survey, 1800-1914," in I. Glazier and L. De Rosa

        (eds), Migration Across Time and Regions (New York: Molmes and Meirer).

Latham, A. J. H. and L. Neal [1983], "The International Market in Rice and Wheat 1868-1914," Economic

        History Review 36: 260-75.

Leff, N. H. [1992], "Economic Development in Brazil, 1822-1913," First Boston Working Paper FB-92-

        02, Columbia University.

Lewis, W. A. [1954], "Economic Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labour," Manchester School of

        Economic and Social Studies 22: 139-9 1.

   [19691, Aspects of Tropical Development (Uppsala: Wiksell).

   [1978a], The Evolution of the International Economic Order (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University

        Press).

   [1978b], Growth and Fluctuations 1870-1913 (Cambridge: Allen and Unwin).

Lucas, R. E. [1998], The Industrial Revolution: Past and Future (forthcoming).

Maddison, A. [1995], Monitoring the World Economy 1820-1992 (Paris: OECD Development Centre

        Studies).

Mill, J. S. [1848], Principles of Political Economy (London: Longmans).

                                                   32
Mokyr, J. [1990], The Lever of Riches: Technological Creativity and Economic Progress (New York:

        Oxford University Press).

Myint, H. [1958], "The Classical Theory of International Trade and the Underdeveloped Countries,"

        Economic Journal 68: 317-37.

Newland, C. [1998], "Economic Development and Population Change: Argentina 1810-1870," in J.

        Coatsworth and A. Taylor (eds.), Latin America and the World Economy Since 1800

        (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press).

Nichols, D. A. [1970], "Land and Economic Growth," American Economic Review 60: 332-40.

North, D. C. [1958], "Ocean Freight Rates and Economic Development 1750-1913,' Journal of Economic

        History 18: 538-55.

O'Rourke, K. H. [19971, "The European Grain Invasion, 1870-1913," Journal of Economic History 57

        (December): 775-80 1.

O'Rourke, K. H.; A. M. Taylor; and J. G. Williamson [1996], "Factor Price Convergence in the Late 19th

        Century," International Economic Review 37: 499-530.

O'Rourke, K. H. and J. G. Williamson [1994], "Late 19th Centuiy Anglo-American Factor Price

        Convergence: Were Heckscher and Ohlin Right?" Journal of Economic History 54 (December):

        892-9 16.

   [1998], Globalization and History (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, forthcoming).

Parthasarathi, P. [1998], "Rethinking Wages and Competitiveness in the Eighteenth Century: Britain and

        South India," Past and Present 158: 79-109.

Pomeranz, K. [1997], "Re-thinking 18th Century China: A High Standard of Living and Its Implications,"

        paper presented to the All-UC Group in Economic History Conference on Rethinking the History

        of Wages, Prices and Living Standards, Davis, California (November 14-16).

Radalet, S., J. Sachs and J.-W. Lee [1997], "Economic Growth in Asia," Chp. 2 in Emerging Asia (Manila:

                                                   33
        Asian Development Bank).

Taylor, A. M. [1994], "Mass Migration to Distant Southern Shores,' in T. J. Hatton and J. G. Williamson

        (eds.), Migration and the International Labor Market, 1850-1939 (London: Routtedge).

Williamson, J. G. [1985], "The Historical Content of the Classical Labor Surplus Model," Population and

        Development Review 11: 171-91.

   [1996], "Globalization, Convergence and History," Journal of Economic History 56: 277-306.

   [1998a], "Real Wages and Relative Factor Prices in the Third World 1820-1940: Asia," HIER

        Discussion Paper No. 1844, Department of Economics, Harvard University (August).

   [1998b], "Real Wages and Relative Factor Prices in the Third World 1820-1940: The Mediterranean

        Basin," HIER Discussion Paper No. 1842, Department of Economics, Harvard University (July).

   [1998c], "Real Wages and Relative Factor Prices in the World Economy 1820-1940: Latin America,"

        HIER Discussion Paper No. 1853, Department of Economics, Harvard University (November).

   [1998d], "Growth, Distribution and Demography: Some Lessons from History," Explorations in

        Economic History 35: 241-71.

   [1998e], "Globalization, Labor Markets and Policy Backlash in the Past," Journal of Economic

        Perspectives 12: 51-72.

Wood, A. [1994], North-South Trade, Employment and Inequality: Changing Fortunes in a Skill-

        Driven World (Oxford: Clarendon Press).

Yasuba, Y. [1978], "Freight Rates and Productivity in Ocean Transportation for Japan, 1875-1943,"

        Explorations in Economic History 15: 11-39.

   [1996], "Did Japan Ever Suffer from a Shortage of Natural Resources Before World War II?," Journal of

        Economic History 56: 543-60.

Yasuba, Y. and L. Dhiravegin [1985], "Initial Conditions, Institutional Changes, Policy, and their

        Consequences: Siam and Japan, 1850-19 14," in K. Ohkawa and G. Ranis (eds), Japan and the

                                                     34
Developing Countries: A Comparative Analysis (Basil Blackwell: Oxford).




                                        35
                                                            Table 1

                                     Real Wage in Asia Relative to Britain 1830-1 939
                                                      (in percent)

Period                 Burma India                                                        Thailand Egypt          Turkey
             Japan                           Ludonesia Korea       PhillipinesTaiwan
1820- 1824                                       18                                           32
1825- 1829                                       18                                           32
1830-1834       33                               16                                           25
1835-1839       26                               17                                           29
1840- 1844      32                               16                                           24
1845- 1849      35                               16                                           23
185 0-1854      33                               15                                           27
1855-1859       38                               20                                           30            8.5        12.3

1860- 1864      41                               24                                           35            8.5        12.2

1865-1869       31                               22                                           39            8.5        12.4
1870- 1874      32         22         36         26                                           42            8.0        12.5

1875-1879       25         21         26         22                                           34            9.9        16.9
18 80-1884      24         14         30         26                                           36           11.4        21.5
1885-1889       22         13         27         27                                           30           13.9        23.4
1890- 1894      18         13         21         23                                           23           15.9        23.3

1895-1899       20         15         18         22                     18         21         12           13.3        20.8
1900-1904       22         20         18         19                    27          19         14           15.6        20.9

1905-1909       24         18         15         18         35          26         18         11            9.9        19.1
1910-1914       28         13         15         19         23          28         16         16           13.8        21.5

19 15-1919      35         12         17         20         25         46          19         20           11.0        21.3
1920-1924       31                    18         14         31          55         22         16           12.4        20.3

1925- 1929      32                    18         16         26          39         21         14           14.1        19.3
1930- 1934      33                    28         20         22         40          22         22           12.4        18.4

 1935- 1939     32                    25          19         25          39        19          20           10.1       17.9
Source: For Asia, Williamson (1998a: Table 3). For theMiddle East, Williamson (1998b: Table 1, Appendix Table A1.3
Appendix Table A2.3; 1995: Appendix Table All).
                                             Table 2

              Real Wage in Latin America Relative to Great Britain, 1830-1939
                                       (in percent)

                      Brazil    Brazil
Period      Argentina Southeast Northeast Colombia Cuba              Mexico     Uruguay
1830-1834                   14.9
1835-1839                   14.1
1840-1844                  14.0
1845-1849                  13.2
1850-1854                  16.2
1855-1859                  16.8        4.4
1860-1864                  20.4        8.3
1865-1869      81.8        17.2        7.6         28.6
1870-1874      86.5         17.3       6.2         22.6
1875-1879      65.8        18.2        5.2             16.3
1880-1884      81.2        19.9        4.7             19.0             66.5       95.4
1885-1889      85.3        20.0        3.8         23.8                 58.1      109.2
1890-1894      87.8        16.1        3.3         25.0                 56.4      119.2
1895-1899      85.9        14.8        3.3         26.3                 56.0       91.8
1900-1904      101.0       19.7        5.4                              58.4       86.8
1905-1909      92.0        22.3        7.2                    76.2      61.7       88.2
1910-1914      100.8       23.4        7.4         24.8       74.8      60.6       95.2
1915-1919      91.1        21.5        5.8         36.9       84.3      30.0       81.0
1920-1924      103.9       14.8        3.8         35.0       84.0      29.1      95.3
1925-1929      125.5       17.2        3.8         44.9       95.3      37.0      108.7
1930-1934      116.6       18.8        2.6         60.5       89.9      40.7      111.4
1935-1939      115.2                               48.4       85.1      32.4      104.4
Source: Williamson (1998c: Table 3).
                                          Table 3

             WagelRental Ratio Trends in the Third World 1873-1 939


  Period      Argentina The Punjab         Japan        Korea        Taiwan        Egypt
1873-1879                       2.5807                                                2.5075
1880-1884                       1.9249                                                3.8373
1885-1889          4.8418       1.9874        0.9120                                  7.5873
1890-1894          4.3427       1.3411        0.7864                                  5.1706
1894-1899          3.7043       1.2157        1.0401                                  2.2925
1900-1904          3.4503       1.2549        1.0950                    0.6805        2.1240
1905-1909          1.6100       1.1860        1.2586       0.8331       0.8507        0.9212
1910-1914          1.0001       1.0109        1.2253       0.9876       0.9645        1.2679
1915-1919          0.6379       1.1496        1.1953       0.8867        1.1106       1.1012
1950-1924          0.6324       0.9821        1.8926       1.7624        1.3985       1.7671
1925-1929          0.6072       0.7858        2.3062       1.6965        1.3467       1.5760
1930-1934          0.6951       0.4092        2.6160       1.5728        1.3057       1.5401
1935-1939          0.7089        0.3402        1.7082        1.7463       1.2342       1.2922
Sources and Notes: The base year is 1913 = 1.00. The Argentine figure for 1885-89 is actually
1883-89, and the Egyptian figure for 1873-79 is actually 1877-79. Williamson (1998a: Table 6;
1998b: Appendix Table A1.4; and 1998c: Table 7)
                                                        Table 4

                              Wage/GDP Per Capita Ratio Trends in Asia 1870-1 939



  Period       Japan       Burma        India     Indonesia     Korea     Phillipines    Taiwan       Thailand

1870-1874      1.4016                  2.1486       1.5218                                             1.9264
1875-1879      1.2644                  1.7803       1.5550                                             1.7828
1880-1884      1.2106                  2.0345       1.5882                                             1.9002
1885-1889      1.1526                  2.0515       1.6214                                             1.7687
1890-1894     0.8749                   1.7892       1.6031                                             1.3852
1895-1899      1.0058                  1.5953       1.5074                                             0.8261
1900-1904     0.9981       1.7407      1.4692       1.3885                   1.2781       1.2883       0.8968
1905-1909     0.9794       1.6477      1.2094       1.1887                   1.0525       1.1818       0.6968
1910-1914      1.0123      1.0404      1.0369       1.0221      1.0231      0.9811        0.9377       0.9116
1915-1919     0.8824       0.6210      0.9666       0.8276      0.8667       1.2483       0.7985       0.8963
1920-1924     0.9955                   1.3259       0.7020      1.3046       1.8559       1.1512       1.0046
1925-1929     0.8927                   1.4189       0.6964      1.0986       1.2785       1.0175       0.8913
1930-1934     0.9896                   2.4310       1.0620      1.0060       1.4769       1.0943       1.5066
 1935-1939        0.4103                  2.2626        0.9750       0.9168      1.4729   0.8174        1.3449
Sources and Notes: The real GDP per capita data are taken from Maddison (1995). The wage/GDP per capita ratio
is itself reported in Williamson (1998a: Table 7). The base year is 1913 = 1.00.
                                                            Table 5

                            Wage/GDP Per Capita Ratio Trends in Latin America 1870-1 939


                                 Brazil       Brazil
   Period       Argentina                                   Colombia         Cuba          Mexico       Uruguay
                                Southeast    Northeast
  1870-1874        1.6947
  1875-1879        1.3286
  1880-1884        1.4769                                                                  1.1881         1.9047

  1885-1889        1.5663                                                                  1.0899         2.2004

  1890-1894        1.5191                                                                  1.0387         2.2555

  1895-1899        1.4428                                                                  0.0503         1.6946

  1900-1904        1.4570        1.2209        1.5325                                      0.9702         1.3658
  1905-1909        1.0500        1.1529        1.4431                        1.2108        0.8633         1.0966

  1910-1914        1.0433        1.0318        1.1451         1.3317        0.9924         0.7738         1.0759

  1915-1919       0.9230         0.7899        0.6751         1.5811        0.9329         0.2982         0.8981

 1920-1924         1.1298        0.6280        0.5383         1.9191         1.2210        0.3615         1.1346

 1925-1929         1.2440        0.5912        0.5361         2.2206         1.4785        0.4613         1.1785

  1930-1934        1.4144        0.5760        0.3652         3.0818         1.5704        0.6903         1.4745

 1935-1939         1.3032                                     2.0995         1.4853        0.5129         1.2918
Soures and   Notes: GDP per capita data for Argentina, Colombia and Mex ico are from Maddison 199 5, while the
information for Cuba is from Astorga and Fitzgerald (1998). Income per capita estimates for the regions of Brazil are
from Gomes (1986). These GDP per capita figures were interpolated where necessary and rebased so that 1913 =1.00.
The real wage data and the w/GDP per capita ratio are from Williamson (1998c: Table 8).
                                                                Iigurc I

                       Iiilcr,intiuiizil Ruil Wngc Dispersiwi in the Atlantic Ecuiioniy 1854-1913

     0.500



     0.450



     0,400



     0350
C
C

     0.300
E
C
II
     0.250
C
C
•1

     0.200
C
a
Q
     0.150



     0.100



     0,050



     0.000
             'T
             CC   01   01
                          N 'T CC 0 N'0 NN-
                  CC 0 00CC    CC   CC   CO         N"
                                                         CCN' 0a)
                                                         N.
                                                                00N0
                                                                   t 0
                                                                     CO0
                                                                       C                  N            in        N   '.0   C) 0 Ni
                                    Sourc WiIIio,on (1995, TabI A2.l: rev.ed in ORoork and WiIliarr,son, 1997)
                                  Figure 2

           Atlantic Economy Ocean Freight Rate Indices 1741-1913


      32

(0
a)
0                              NorIhs Index
L.
a-
      16
C,)

1
C)


0
0
I-0 8
C
0                              British Index
I-
a)
a.
(0
U)    4
C

(I)


      2                                         r
           1740 1760 1780 1800 1820 1840 1860 1880 1900 1920

  Souicc: I lade) (1988, Figuic I), dcflaicd by UK GNI' dellator, ratio scale.
