                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 IN SEARCH OF SUBSTITUTION
                               BETWEEN FOREIGN PRODUCTION
                                        AND EXPORTS

                                           Bruce A. Blonigen


                                          Working Paper 7154
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w7 154

                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 1999




I thank Stephen Haynes, Keith Head, William Hutchinson, Robert Lipsey, Raymond Mikesell, Matthew
Slaughter, Wesley Wilson, anonymous referees and participants of the fourth annual Empirical Investigations
in International Trade Conference at Purdue University and the 1998 NBER Summer Institute for helpful
comments. All remaining errors or omissions are the responsibility of the author. All opinions expressed
are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 1999 by Bruce A. Blonigen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
In Search of Substitution Between Foreign
Production and Exports
Bruce A. Blonigen
NBER Working Paper No. 7154
June 1999
JEL No. F21, F23

                                          ABSTRACT


       Are foreign production and exports substitutes or complements? The continuing
globalization of production makes the question of the relationship between trade and foreign direct
investment ever more important. Standard theory of the multinational corporation (MNC) assumes
substitution, while previous empirical work examining the relationship has generally found strong
evidence of complementarity. This study examines product-level data, which more closely fits the
assumption of a single-product firm often used in MNC theory, and finds substantial evidence for
both a substitution and a complementarity effect between affiliate production and exports with
Japanese automobile parts for the U.S. market. I also test for and find evidence of substitution
using product-level data on a set of Japanese-produced final consumer goods. Thus, product-level
data allows one to separately identify substitution from complementarity effects (here from vertical
production relationships), rather than try to infer them from estimates using more aggregate data.
In this sense, the paper highlights the importance of matching the level of data aggregation with
the hypotheses being tested. This is particularly true at a time when there is an increasing
proliferation of available microeconomic data in the field of international economics.


Bruce A. Blonigen
Department of Economics
1285 University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 94703-1285
and NBER
 bruceboregon.uoregon.edu
1. Introduction

       The continuing globalization of production makes the question of the relationship between

trade and foreign direct investment ever more important. An important question that has arisen in

both the theoretical and empirical literature is the extent to which exports and foreign production

are substitutes or complements. More precisely, to what extent do production and affiliate sales

in a foreign market replace or help increase exports to the same market?' While there are

theoretical reasons to suggest both substitution and complementarity effects, surprisingly,

empirical work in this area almost invariably shows a net complementarity relationship between

exports and foreign production (or foreign affiliate sales) across a wide variety of data sets.

Lipsey and Weiss (1981), Graham (forthcoming), and Clausing (forthcoming) are examplesof

studies that find affiliate sales positively correlated with exports at the aggregate country or

industry level. Other studies have examined the relationship between affiliate sales and exports

using firm-level data, including Swedenborg (1979; forthcoming), Lipsey and Weiss (1984),

BlOmstrom et al. (1988), Head and Pies (1997), and Belderbos and Sleuwaegen (1998). One

might expect that the more disaggregated nature of the firm-level data would be more likely to

yield net substitution, yet almost all these studies find net complementarity as well. Thus, we are

left with apparent incongruities between theory and empirical work.

       This paper attempts to shed new light on the empirical relevance of substitution and

complementarity effects between exports and foreign affiliate sales by examining product-level


       1
         The "substitution/complementarity" terminology may be confusing because the question
is not concerning how a quantity changes with respect to changes in a price in this context, as in a
typical demand analysis. Rather, the question addresses how changes in one quantity affect
another quantity. While the terminology may be confusing, I use the "substitution!
complementarity" terminology in this paper because it has become standard in the literature.
                                                                                                        2

data.   The advantage of using highly disaggregated product-level data is the ability to test for a

substitution effect separately from complementarity effects, such as those arising from vertical

linkages. Because of availability, I use data on Japanese production in and exports to the United

States for two types of products.2 First, I examine data on automobile parts, which obviously

have a strong vertical relationship with automobile production. Production of Japanese

automobiles (the input-using industry) in the United States should increase Japanese exports of

automobile parts to the United States (a complementarity effect), while location of Japanese

automobile parts production in the United States should decrease Japanese exports of automobile

parts (substitution effect). Simple plots of Japanese exports and Japanese production in the

United States for ten specific automobile parts products generally show large substitution effects,

even without controlling for the potential increased demand for these products due to increased

Japanese production of automobiles in the United States. Thus, product-level data shows strong

net substitution, unlike previous studies using more aggregated data. I then test more formally for

a substitution effect (from increased U.S. automobile parts production by Japanese firms) and a

complementarity effect (from increased U.S. automobile production by Japanese firms) on

Japanese exports of these automobile parts products, controlling for other factors. The regression

results indicate substantial evidence for both effects.

        While examination of automobile parts is interesting because of its vertical relationship

with automobile production, it may be difficult to generalize the substitution effect results


        2 Japanese data are used primarily because of a unique data set on Japanese production in
the United States published by the Japan Economic Institute which is detailed enough to list
specific products produced at the plant level, rather than a more aggregated industry designation
(such as 4-digit Standard Industrial Classification), as is usually the case. Below I detail the data
constraints that largely dictated the sample of products I was able to examine.
                                                                                                      3

displayed by Japanese automobile parts in the United States because of U.S. pressure for

transplanted Japanese automobile firms to source more inputs domestically (see Swenson [1997]).

In other words, political influences may be driving the large net substitution effects displayed by

these products. This may be the case for any product subject to some form of protectionism.

Therefore, I next examine substitution effects between Japanese exports and Japanese production

in the United States using product-level data on eleven final consumer products which were not

subject to such U.S. government scrutiny over my sample period. The evidence from simple plots

and more formal statistical analysis strongly suggests substitution of local production for exports

with most of these consumer products as well. In fact, both sets of results (automobile parts and

consumer products) are surprisingly strong given the limited number of observations I am able to

employ. In addition, the evidence suggests that when firms locate production abroad, the

substitution effects are large one-time changes, not gradual steps over time.



2. Previous literature

       Theoretical models used to analyze a multinational corporation's (MNC's) decision to sell

to a foreign market often assume the firm chooses between exporting or foreign production in the

host country. In fact, one of the main research questions in this literature is why a MNC chooses

one mode of servicing the foreign market versus the other.3 Buckley and Casson (1981) suggest


        In a standard Heckscher-Ohlin general equilibrium model with factor mobility, the classic
paper by Mundell (1957) showed that factor flows (e.g., capitalin the form of foreign direct
investment) may substitute for trade flows in these general equilibrium models as well. However,
Markusen (1983) and Wong (1986) show that there are numerous theoretical reasons for possible
complementarity when standard Heckscher-Ohlin assumptions are relaxed. This paperwill focus
more on models of MNCs mentioned in the text to motivate the empirical framework, though the
empirical results of this paper may have implications for both types of models.
                                                                                                     4

that while exports naturally incur higher costs per unit than foreign production because of greater

transportation costs and possible tariffs, foreign production involves a higher fixed costof

operation (e.g., building a new plant). This implies that for lower levels of sales, firms will export

to avoid the higher fixed costs associated with foreign production, whereas they will switch to

foreign production for higher level of sales. Markusen (1984; 1995) suggests that firm-specific

assets may lead a firm to locate production abroad rather than export. Firm-specific assets have a

public goods aspect to them in the sense that they can be used across multiple plants for a single

firm-level investment. Thus, it may make sense for the firm to locate production in a variety of

markets rather than have one production plant that exports to the many markets. Finally, the

theory of internalization suggests that foreign direct investment (FDI) substitutes for exports

when there are sufficient costs to external transactions such as exporting or licensing.4 Thus, the

substitution effect plays a prominent role in theory.

       At the same time, there are theoretical channels by which complementarity may occur

between exports and foreign production. Lipsey and Weiss (1984) and Rugman (1990) argue that

a firm's production presence in a foreign market with one product mayincrease total demand for

all of its products through a number of channels including 1) provision of important sales and

after-sale services, 2) commitment-to-market effects on consumers, and 3) more efficient and

quicker deliveries and distribution. In this way, foreign production and sales of one good may

create what Brainard (1993;1997) terms "proximity advantages" by promoting exportsales of



        ' Internalization has its roots in Williamson's (1975) transactions cost work and has
become familiar to international trade economists through Dunning's (1981) ownership-location-
internalization (OLI) framework. Markusen (1995) has a nice discussion of the OLI framework
as it applies to models that use firm-specific assets as a motivationfor MINCs.
                                                                                                    5


goods produced by the firm in its home country. A vertical production relationshipis another

way that complementarity may occur. Investment by a manufacturer may increase exports of

inputs to the host market. Foreign sourcing of parts by transplant firms and its effect on the U.S.

trade deficit has caused concern in recent years. For example, Swenson (1997) finds that

Japanese transplanted automakers import a large amount of parts from Japan and are much less

willing to substitute between U.S. and imported inputs. Thus, there are anumber of reasons why

foreign production may complement exports.

       As mentioned in the introduction, empirical studies almost invariably find net

complementarity. This has been true of not only country- and industry-level studies, but also

firm-level studies. The strength of the complementarity effect even at less-aggregated levels of

data, such as firm-level, is surprising at first glance. However, even firm-level data does not allow

one to separately identify a substitution effect to the extent that thefirm is multiproduct, which is

quite likely given that the companies examined are large MNCs. The multi-product natureof the

firm means that there may be demand complementarities across a firm's products and/or there

may be vertical production relationships across the firm's products. Additionally, even firm-level

data makes it more difficult to disentangle what drives the complementarity. Is it demand

complementarities or vertical relationships?5

        There have been a number of responses in the literature to these empirical findings. First,


         For example, Lipsey and Weiss (1981) suggest that their finding of a positive correlation
at the industry level shows that manufacturing presence in another country "tends to promote" the
firm's exports to that country. This is apparently a demand complernentarity argument, yet one
industry for which Lipsey and Weiss (1981) find a complementary relationship is the industry
classification "automobiles and trucks." This industry comprises production of both finished
autos, as well as automobile parts, which suggests complementarity may stem from a vertical
relationship.
                                                                                                       6

a number of studies have examined whether endogeneity bias is driving the strong

complementarity results. Grubert and Mutti (1991) and Graham (forthcoming) try to control for

endogeneity bias when estimating the relationship between affiliate sales and trade using country-

level data, while Head and Ries (1997) and Swedenborg (forthcoming) control for endogeneity

using samples of Japanese and Swedish firms, respectively. Graham, Head and Ries, and

Swedenborg generally still find net complementarity, while Grubert and Mutti find an insignificant

relationship between affiliate sales and exports after instrumenting for affiliate sales.

        Second, a number of studies have been able to find evidence for vertical relationships

leading to complementarity with firm-level data.6 Lipsey and Weiss (1984) use information on

intermediate versus finished products within the firms in their sample. They find a strong

complementary relationship with respect to affiliate production and exports of intermediate goods

as one would expect, but no evidence for either complementarity or substitution with respect to

finished goods affiliate production and finished goods exports. Yamawaki (1991) also uses firm-

level data to look at another type of vertical relationship: the effect of Japanese FDI in wholesale

distribution in the United States on Japanese exports of goods to the United States for

distribution. As expected, he finds a strong complementary relationship. Head and Ries (1997)

are able to identify "vertical leaders" in their data -- Japanese firms that are known to source a

higher share of intermediate inputs from other firms. Thus, one would expect the

complementarities from vertical production to be less prevalent for these firms. Their results

confirm this and, in fact, they find some evidence for a net substitution effect for vertical leader


       6 A recent paper by Swenson (1998) uses industry-level data to show that less substantial
complementarity and even substitution effects are revealed as one moves from more-aggregated
industry FDI data to less-aggregated data.
                                                                                                     7


firms in their sample. In contrast, Belderbos and Sleuwaegen (1998) find evidence of substitution

between foreign prduction and exports at the firm level by focusing on firms facing actual or

threatened import protection by the destination market. They argue that one should expect a

large substitution effect in these circumstances since the firms facing heightened protection are

likely to substitute foreign production for exports to avoid the protection. Theyfind evidence of

substitution of local production for exports with Japanese electronic firms in the European

Community (EC) during the late 1980s, a period characterized by rising EC protection against

these firms.

       This paper's contribution is to go one step further in the level of disaggregation to analyze

product-level data. This step is taken not because it can be done, but because it makes sense. As

will be shown below, there are a number of advantages to this level of disaggregation. First,it

allows one to naturally model and test in the same equation a complementarity effect fromvertical

production linkages separately from the substitution effect of affiliate productionfor exports. In

this sense, the empirical model is more closely linked to the theory of a single-productfirm-level

decision. In addition, focus on a single product also means that demand complementarities across

products are not masked by the data. One potential disadvantage is data availability.7 However,

the recent National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) dat abase on U.S. imports (see

Feenstra {1996]) and other recent sources of data on Japanese investment in the United States



        A second potential disadvantage is that product-level data may be capturing behavior
across multiplefirms. An ideal data set would have product-level data by firm. If firms are
pursuing different strategies to serve a market (exports versus local production) for a particular
product over a given time period, the substitution and complementarity effects occurring at the
product-level within each firm may be obscured. Unfortunately, I do not have product-level
export data by firm.
                                                                                                     8


have now made this product-level analysis possible. In the end, substitution and complementarity

effects are easily identified with the product-level data I use, which stands in contrast to previous

studies using more aggregated data. Additionally, I find that substitution effects are substantial

and generally occur in large one-time changes for the products I investigate.



3. Empirical Analyses

       This section examines two complementary sets of product-level empirical analyses. In

section 3.1, I analyze whether Japanese production of automobiles and automobile parts in the

United States was complementary toward and/or a substitute for Japanese exports of these

automobile parts to the United States during the late 1970s through the early 1990s. The vertical

production linkage between automobiles and automobile parts is of interest because theory

suggests there should be a complementary relationship between Japanese automobile production

in the United States and Japanese exports of automobile parts. At the same time, there should be

a substitute relationship between Japanese production of automobile partsin the United States

and Japanese exports of those same products to the United States.

       In section 3.2, I examine a separate set of consumer products exported from Japan and

produced in the United States by Japanese affiliates. This is done out of a potential criticism that

the automobile parts regressions (and particularly the substitution effects I fmd) are driven by the

Japanese-U.S. automobile voluntary export restraints (VERs) and the politically-motivated push

for high local domestic content in this trade-sensitive industry. Thus, the consumer products

analysis provides some evidence whether substitution effects are significant for products besides

those that are subject to substantial trade protection.
                                                                                                  9



3.1. Japanese automobile parts and the U S. market

       I analyze product-level data on a specific group of Japanese automobile products in two

ways. First, I look at simple plots of exports and U.S. production of these products over the

period of my sample, 1978-91. For most of the automobile parts products, the graphs show

strong evidence for a substitution effect between Japanese exports and Japanese production of the

product in the United States, despite substantial increases in Japanese-owned U.S. productionof

the downstream product, automobiles. Simple plots do not control for a variety of other forces

that may be factors during this period, including changes in relative prices of inputs and exchange

rates, so I then run seemingly-unrelated regressions (SUR) for the set of products based on a

model of U.S. demand for imported Japanese auto parts. Controlling for relative prices (and

implicitly exchange rate changes), the results show strong evidence for the substitution effect

exhibited by the plots, as well as the complementary effect between Japanese exports of

automobile parts to the United States and Japanese production of automobiles in the United

States. These simple analyses are necessary due to data limitations involved with using available

product-level data, but the results are consistent and strong across these two approaches.



 3.1.1. Descriptive analysis

       The 1980s were an interesting time for the Japanese automobile industry and the U.S.

market. To understand what occurred with Japanese automobile parts, it is informative to briefly

look at the downstream automobile industry. In 1981, Japanese automakers faced a voluntary

export restriction (VER) that was in effect until the mid-1990s. As shown in figure 1, U.S.
                                                                                                  10

automobile production by Japanese automakers began in 1983 and rose annually, reaching over 1

million automobiles by 1992. By 1988, Japanese exports to the United States begin declining

consistently. This may be evidence of the Japanese substituting U.S. production for exports

because of the VER. Alternatively, the export drop may have been purely a response to the sharp

appreciation of the yen relative to the dollar, as shown in figure 1.

       Turning to automobile parts (the focus of this section's analysis), figure 2 shows Japanese

automobile parts exports (Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) 3714) to the United States and

the exchange rate from 1978-1992. As one would expect, there appears to be a substantial

increase in the trend of automobile parts exports beginning in 1983, when Japanese automobile

production began in the United States. However, this high growth in exports flattens

considerably beginning in 1989, perhaps due to the stabilization of U.S. production of Japanese

automobiles as seen in figure 1. In fact, Japanese automobile parts exports follow Japanese

production of automobiles in the United States closely, suggesting a strong complementarity

effect through this vertical linkage.   However, another explanation for the flattening out of

exports may be the substantial FDI by Japanese automobile parts producers into the United States

to substitute for exports. Table 1 shows data on Japanese investment in U.S. automobile parts

production for various years from 1980-1990. Clearly, there was substantial Japanese investment

that began at least as early as 1986 in U.S. automobile parts production. The last column of table

1 shows manufacturing direct investment as a reference for gauging the size of the direct

investment in automobile parts production — from 1986-90, automobile parts production

accounted for 12 to 21 percent of all new Japanese manufacturing investment in the United
                                                                                                      11


States.8 What is difficult to assess from the information in figure 2 and table 1 however, is why

exports of automobile parts did not flatten out sooner or even begin to decrease from a

substitution effect of U.S. production for exports. The substitution effect may not be appearing

as strong because of the strong demand generated by the increasing automobile production. On

the other hand, the plotted U.S. production numbers by Japanese producers may represent very

small levels of substitution. The inability to disentangle these various effects is the crux of the

data aggregation issue.

       To control for the aggregation issue, I next analyze product-level data on ten specific

automobile part products: 1) toughened glass for automobiles, 2) laminated safety glass for autos,

3) automotive mirrors, 4) radio-cassette players for autos, 5) radio receivers for autos, 6) engine

starters, 7) engine coils, 8) door locks for autos, 9) bumpers and parts, and 10) automobile seats

and parts. These products satisf' a couple of crucial criterion. First, it was possible to construct

credible data on Japanese exports to the United States for these products. I use the NEER

database on U.S. imports (described in Feenstra, 1996) to construct time-series data at a detailed

product level. However, there was a complete change in product code classification system in the

United States after 1988 from the Tariff Schedules of the United States Annotated (TSUSA) to

the Harmonized Tariff System (HTS). Unfortunately, there is far from a one-to-one mapping

between these two systems. Often, one TSUSA line item is distributed across numerous HTS

codes (or vice versa) making it impossible to construct a credible time series record of import

activity. This substantially limited which products could be analyzed. Second, to examine the


       8
        Using the same database, Blonigen and Tomlin (1998) also provide evidence that
Japanese automobile parts plants grew much more rapidly during this period than other Japanese
manufacturing plants in the United States.
                                                                                                    12

effect of foreign production, it was necessary that the automobile part product eventually was

produced in the United States by Japanese firms. These ten automobile part products chosen for

study have direct mappings from the TSUSA to HTS system, so that a consistent time series for

Japanese imported automobile parts could be constructed, and saw significant Japanese

production in the United States in the 1980s. A data appendix describes construction of the

database for these automobile part regressions and accompanying data difficulties.

        Figures 3A through 3D present simple plots of Japanese exports and U.S. production by

Japanese firms over time for the four of the ten automobile parts products that show substantial

substitution effects -- laminated safety glass, radio-cassette players, bumpers, and engine starters.

While I do not present similar plots of the other six products for the sake of space (available from

author upon request), three others, toughened glass, radio receivers, and seats and parts, show

plausible evidence of substitution as well. In many ways, these plots are surprising in light of the

fact that I am obviously not controlling for the complementarity effect of increased automobile

production, nor for other factors such as relative input price and exchange rate changes.



  3.1.2. Regression analysis

       To more formally test for both substitution and complementary effects of foreign

production on exports in the case of Japanese automobile parts in the United States, I assume

there are two representative U.S. demanders of automobile parts: Japanese automobile

subsidiaries located in the United States and U.S.-owned automobile plants located in the United
                                                                                                     13

States.9 Thus, derived demand for Japanese-produced automobile parts will be a function of

automobile production by each type of producer, the price of the automobile parts, and prices of

other inputs into the production process. This can be obtained by setting up a standard cost

minimization problem for each type of automobile producer, solving for demand for the

automobile part input and aggregating. Thus we have the following derived demand function in

the United States for Japanese produced automobile parts:


                                       XD = Xj'(P,Y,Y)                                             (1)


where P is a vector of input prices, and Y and Y are production by Japanese-owned and U.S.-

owned automobile producers in the United States, respectively. Supply of Japanese-produced

automobile parts comes either from Japan as exports or from local production in the United

States. I assume these parts are identical across the two locations and necessarily sell for the

same price. If I assume that the local production facilities always operate at capacity'°, then I can

express net export demand as:

                                   D
                                Xjmp
                                        - XD1P,YpY) - Xjjp                                         (2)


where X is the amount of local production supplied by the market. Equation (2) implies that

imports of Japanese automobile parts will be positively related to production of automobiles by


         Okamoto (1998) finds evidence that U.S. firms purchase Japanese-produced automobile
parts.
          The assumption of production at capacity seems more reasonable for these data than for
most because of the rapid growth of Japanese auto-related plants in the United States during this
time period. Blonigen and Tomlin (1998) find employee levels of Japanese auto-related plants in
the United States more than doubled on average from 1987 to 1990.
                                                                                                       14

both Japanese- and U.S.-owned producers and perfectly replaced or substituted by local

production, controlling for relative price changes.

       I use this simple model because of the data limitations I face. A richer model would

specify the supply side in more detail with attention to cost side factors, as well as the supplying

industry's specific trade-off between local production and exports. Equation (2) implies that a

firm always operates local production at capacity and any changes in demand conditions will be

reflected in how much is exported to the market. To the extent that the firm would alter both local

production and exports in the same direction in response to demand changes (e.g., reduce

production in both locales in response to lower demand) there is an endogeneity bias toward

finding complementarity, not substitution as hypothesized.

       To test, I assume there are three types of inputs into automobile production: auto parts

produced by Japanese-owned establishments, auto parts produced by U.S.-owned establishments,

and capital. The associated factor prices are w,       and r, respectively. If factor demands are

homogeneous of degree zero in factor prices, I can rewrite equation (2) as


                               D   =    XDWJ r                   —X                              (3)
                                           wus wus



Because of the small number of observations (14 annual for each automobile part), I specify a

linear version of equation (3) for testing each of the ten automobile part equations:


                                                             +               ÷            +
      [xJIMp]t =       +            +            +
                                                                 Y4['i'us]       y5[Xp]          (4)
                                                                                                    15


where the variables are defined as above, E1 is a normally distributed error term and the y s are

parameters to be estimated. If data on Japanese local production of auto parts were available, the

estimated coefficient on y5 is hypothesized to equal -1; i.e., a pure substitution effect. Instead, I

only know employment levels of Japanese-owned affiliate auto parts plants in the United States

and necessarily use these employment data (measured in hundreds of employees) to proxy for

production data." These data come from the Japan Economic Institute publication Japan 's

Expanding US. Manufacturing Presence, various issues through 1990. Because I use

employment data, rather than production data, there is no reason to expect y to equal -1 in the

estimation below, though clearly it is hypothesized to be negative in sign. Japanese import

quantities (x) and prices (w - measured as unit values) are taken from the NBER import
database. Because w is expressed in U.s. dollars, it implicitly takes into account not only

exchange rate changes, but also firms' "pass through" of those changes to the U.S. market. U.S.

automobile part prices (w) and the price of capital (r) come from Bureau of Labor Statistics

producer price indexes and the Economic Report of the President, respectively. Automobile

production data in the United States measured in millions of vehicles (Y and Y) come from

Ward's Auto World

       Table 2 reports estimation results using Zeliner's iterative SUR technique on the ten

automobile part equations. SUR methodology is justified by the distinct possibility that there

were economywide or industry shocks that would affect the disturbance termsof all automobile


       '   Clearly, some proportion of employees in any manufacturing plant are not directly
involved in production, but to the extent that this proportion is similar across plants in a product,
this implies only a scaling issue with this variable. In addition, I directly contacted the Japanese-
owned U.S. plants in both sets of regressions (automobile parts and consumer products) to verify
that they indeed were manufacturing plants, and not distribution or retail operations.
                                                                                                     16


part regressions, so that they are contemporaneously correlated. While OLS gave qualitatively

similar results, SUR generally improved the precision of the coefficient estimates.

       All ten equations have F-statistics significant at the 95 percent confidence level and

reasonable adjusted R-squareds. For sake of space, the constant and coefficients on the relative

prices are not reported in table 2, but were generally estimated with precision and correct signs.

Both hypothesized relationships between trade and foreign production by the Japanese find strong

support. Japanese automobile parts production in the United States has a statistically significant

negative relationship on U.S. imports of Japanese automobile parts at the 95 percent confidence

level in nine of the ten equations, with correct signs in all of them. The strength of the estimated

substitution between trade and foreign production in these product-level regressions is in sharp

contrast to previous empirical work.

       The results also show a strong positive relationship between Japanese automobile

production in the United States and imported Japanese automobile parts: nine of the ten have t-

statistics at the 95 percent confidence level. Thus, as expected, vertical industrial relationships are

associated with strong complementary relationships between exports and foreign production at

the product level. The relationship between automobile production by U.S-owned automobile

manufacturers and imports of Japanese automobile parts is less strong in general, as one might

expect, but does show a strong positive relationship in automotive glass products, radio cassette

players, engine coils, and bumpers and parts.

        The coefficients relating foreign production and exports are economically significant as

well. For example, estimated coefficients in laminated safety glass imply that an extra 100

employees in U.S. production by Japanese firms means 194,000 square feet less annual exported
                                                                                                  17

laminated safety glass, while an extra 100,000 Japanese autos produced in the United States

translates into an increase of 7 13,300 square feet in annual exports from Japan. An extra 100

employees in U.S. production of door locks leads to 116,000 less exported door locks from

Japan, while an additional 100,000 Japanese autos produced in the United States increases

exports by 101,300 door locks.'2

       Of course, there is the possibility of specification bias with these estimates. One source of

concern is the time-series properties of the data. However, the Durbin-Watson statistics generally

do not indicate autocorrelation across the equations, and when the system was reestimated

allowing for an AR! process, results are qualitatively unchanged. A second concern is

endogeneity of the Japanese automobile production in the United States variable. It is not clear

which way this bias may affect the estimates. On one hand, there may be a third factor, such as

growth in demand that may increase both exports and foreign affiliate production. In this case, as

previous literature has argued and found (Grubert and Mutti, 1991), endogeneity is likely to bias

the estimates toward finding complementarity, not substitution. On the other hand, there may be

a third factor such as exchange rate or tariff changes that would simultaneously move the exports

and foreign affiliate production in opposite fashion, which would bias toward finding substitution.

Unfortunately, the small number of observations here makes correction techniques for

endogeneity inappropriate in the sense that they rely on asymptotic properties for consistency and




        12 The estimated coefficients on Japanese automobile production in the United States seem
higher than they should be for a number of products. However, for these productsthe coefficient
may be capturing the effect of exports being used as replacement parts in the United States, rather
than for construction of new autos. Because of degrees of freedom and collinearity problems it is
difficult to control for this in the estimation.
                                                                                                         18

efficiency, with unknown small-sample properties.'3 Specification bias could also come from

measurement error in my variables, including reliance on import unit values for price data (e.g.,

see Feenstra and Shiells [1994]). Despite these various issues, none necessarily suggest that the

estimates should be systematically biased toward finding substitution.



3.2. Testing for substitution withfinal consumer products

        While the above results on automobile parts cleanly separates out significant

complementarity and substitution effects, it may be of interest to see if product-level data works

well at identifying a substitution effect of affiliate production for other types of products as well.

In particular, Japanese automobile manufacturers in the United States were under political

pressure to increase domestic content, and in response, investment by Japanese-owned automobile

parts suppliers into the United States was quite substantial in the last half of the 1 980s. This may

have intensified substitution effects of foreign production for exports in the case of these goods

and calls into question the generality of the results. Therefore, this section tests for substitution

between Japanese exports and affiliate production in the United States using product-level, time-

series data on eleven final consumer products which were not subject to such U.S. government

scrutiny over this time period.



       13
          Despite these concerns, I estimated the system using three-stage least squares,
instrumenting for both the local production variable and the price term. I tried a number of
possible instrument matrices which included the yen-dollar exchange rate, contemporaneous and
lagged levels of total Japanese manufacturing employees in the United States, and the discount
rate in Japan. Results from the three-stage least squares regression were qualitatively similar to
those reported in table 2. Most estimates on local production increased, which supports the
notion that the substitution coefficients are biased downward in those instances. These results are
available upon request from the author.
3.2.1 Descriptive analysis

       I look for substitution of local production for exports using separate time-series data on

eleven final consumer products: 1) hand-held vacuum cleaners, 2) other vacuum cleaners, 3)

microwave ovens, 4) grand pianos, 5) other pianos, 6) music synthesizers, 7) sake, 8) soy sauce,

9) ballpoint pens, 10) golf balls, and 11) golf clubs. This list of products is the result of a number

of considerations. First, the focus is on products not involved in significant U.S. trade protection,

because one could argue that substitution effects will be unnaturally large with these products as

firms "tariff jump" the trade protection. Second, I was concerned about using intermediate goods,

because it is often difficult to control for the derived demand coming from various downstream

industries. With auto parts this vertical relationship is clear and the mapping is fairly clean from

automobile parts to automobiles. But for intermediates goods like steel, semiconductors, engines,

chemicals, etc., the vertical relationship is far from clean. Thus, I focus specifically on consumer

products for final consumption. Final additional constraints were finding products with some FDI

in the United States and being able to map the product-level export data over time, especially the

switch in 1989 from the TSUSA to HTS import classification schemes, as discussed above. This

issue of mapping proved especially difficult for certain products, such as consumer electronics, as

there were often a number of changes in how these products were classified over time.

       The data for these eleven consumer products come from the same sources as for the

automobile parts regressions. Import data come from the NBER U.S. import database described

in Feenstra (1996), while data on local production by Japanese firms in the United States come

from the Japan Economic Institute publications, Japan 's Expanding US. Manufacturing

Presence. Unlike the automobile parts data, the import data for the consumer products often
                                                                                                    20

remained consistent further back in time (with the exception of data for golf clubsand music

synthesizers). Additionally, there were substantially less FDI occurrences of which to keep track

for these products, so it was feasible to update local employee numbers beyond 1990, the ending

date of my primary source. Thus, most of the time series run from 1972-1994, which are all the

years covered by the NBER U.S. import database. See the data appendix for more details on data

sources and construction.

       Figures 4A through 4D plot Japanese exports and U.S. production by Japanese firms over

time for four of the eleven final consumer products. Once again, for the sake of space I only

present four products where the substitution effects appear substantial, but plots of the remaining

products are available form the author upon request. In addition, a number of the products not

shown display plausible negative correlation between exports and level of U.S. affiliate

employees. Thus, as with many of the automobile part products, the data often reveal not just

substitution effects for these final consumer products, but large substitution effects. However,

these plots do not control for other factors that may affect the level of exports into the United

States, so I next turn to regression analysis.



 3.2.2 Regression analysis

        As noted above, examination of final consumer products means that there is no vertical

production relationship for which to control. Thus, the derived demand model used in section 3

above to indicate an empirical framework for automobile parts is not applicablehere. Instead, I

begin simply with the following reduced form demand equation for each Japanese product;
                                                                                                     21


                          EX + LP        =   a +        ÷ p2INC     ÷
                                                                        €,                         (5)



where EX is Japanese exports to the United States, LP is local production by Japanese affiliates in

the United States, P is the price of the Japanese product, INC is income of U.S. consumers

measured by real U.S. GDP, and       is an assumed normally distributed error term. To test the

relationship between EX and LP, I can simply move LP to the right side of (5) and expect a

coefficient of-l if there is only a pure substitution effect. However, as with the automobile parts

regressions above, I do not have data on local production, but only employees used for local

production. If we assume there is a linear time-invariant relationship between local production

and local employees (LE) of the form, LP = 33 LE, equation (5) becomes

                         EX =      a +   1P    ÷ p21NC + P3LE +          €.                        (6)



The expected sign on 2 is positive, while I expect negative signs for         and 13

       The above specification is admittedly parsimonious -- I have assumed a linear reduced

form demand model with local production as a perfect substitute for the exported good.

However, this approach is justified by the small number of observations I can employ for

estimating each product's demand. While misspecification bias may cause inefficient estimates

(i.e. higher standard errors), if it systematically biases the coefficient estimate on LE, it should be

toward not finding substitution. This is because, first, any demand-increasing effect from locating

production in the United States (such as proximity advantages) is not separately modeled or

identified from the substitution effect. Second, there is the same endogeneity concern with
                                                                                                     22

respect to local production as encountered with the automobile parts equations.'4

       Table 3 reports SUR regression results for the eleven consumer products using equation

(6) as the testing specification. Because the data for golf clubs and music synthesizers do not

begin until 1979, all product equations in table 3 are estimated with 16 annual observations

running from 1979-1994. Below I report results from estimating the other nine products as a

SIJR system with annual data that goes back to 1972. Overall, the regressions reported in table 3

perform well. Ten of the eleven equations have F-tests that reject the null hypothesis of zero

coefficients at the 95 percent confidence level or higher. In addition, all coefficients on the price

and income terms are as expected (except for income in the microwave ovens equation) with

many statistically significant. This suggests that these are decently identified demand equations.

       There is support for substitution effects across these products as well. Nine of the eleven

regressions show a negative relationship between U.S. production by Japanese firms and Japanese

exports of these products to the United States, with seven of these statistically significant at

standard confidence levels. Only ballpoint pens display a statistically significant positive effect of

local production on the exported good. As with the automobile parts regressions, the coefficients

can be used to gauge the magnitude of the substitution effect. For example, an additional l 00

employees involved in U.S. production of golf galls reduces U.S. imports by 1.757 million dozen,


        14 There is also the concern of endogeneity with the price term and properly identifying a
demand equation. However, all price terms have correct signs in the regressions reported in table
3 using OLS. I also estimated the system of equations using three-stage least squares estimation
and the using the same instruments as those used for the auto parts three-stage least squares
regression discussed in footnote 13. These results were qualitatively similar to those reportedin
table 3 and are available from the author upon request. I also tried specifying and testing a
Japanese export supply equation in place of equation (6). While the variables used to explain
demand in (6) almost always had correct signs and explained the data nicely without
instrumenting for price, this was rarely true for various supply equation specifications I tried.
                                                                                                      23

whereas 100 additional U.S. employees lowers U.S. sake imports by 681,000 gallons. While

caution should be made in interpreting these coefficients because of specification and sample size,

these magnitudes seem plausible.

       As mentioned earlier, there may be a number of sources of specification bias. Again, a

source of concern that may be correctable with the limited number of observations is the time-

series properties of the data. With these regressions, the majority of the Durbin-Watson statistics

indicate possible serial correlation. Thus, the coefficients in table 3 are estimated with an ABA

correction. The majority of equations yield a statistically significant correlation between periods,

yet qualitatively, results are quite similar across the equations regardless of whether there is an

AR1 correction or not.'5

       While the effect of exchange rate movements (and firms' pass through decisions) are

controlled for through the import price term in these regressions, there may be concern that other

macroeconomic (besides U.S. GDP) or industry trends may be driving these estimates. Table 4

reports how sensitive the effect of Japanese production in the United States on Japanese exports

to the United States is for a few alternative specifications that control for other general economic

effects. Column 1 of table 4 reports the coefficient on Japanese production in the United States

obtained from the base specification used in table 3. This is reported in order to compare results

across alternative specifications. Column 2 of table 4 reports the coefficient on Japanese

production in the United States when I include a linear time trend to the base specification. The


        15 A number of the estimated AR1 correlations are quite large and cannot reject a
correlation of one, which would suggest a unit root. I estimated all eleven equations in first
differences. For the majority of equations an F-test rejects the first-differences specification. For
the two equations where the first-differences specification is accepted, results are qualitatively
identical to the levels regressions.
                                                                                                     24

time trend is statistically significant for a number of equations, but it has little impact on our

coefficient of interest for most products. The exception is soy sauce, which changes signs from

positive to negative, but is still estimated imprecisely.

       Perhaps the exports of these final consumer products are behaving in a similar matmer to

other products in their associated industry. Or in other words, if one plotted Japanese exports of

other products in the same industry for which there is U.S.-based Japanese production, would one

get similar plots to the products estimated in table 3? To control for this, column 3 of table 4

reports the coefficient on Japanese production in the United States when I include both a linear

time trend and a variable capturing the quantity of Japanese exports to the United States in the

product's 4-digit SIC industry.'6 This industry variable is constructed by taking the export value

of the associated 4-digit industry minus the product's export value, converting this to yen and

deflating by a Japanese export price index. In this manner, one can construct a measure of the

associated industry's "quantity" movements. Because of data availability on the industry quantity

variable, the data now span the period 1979-1992 (see data appendix for more details). For most

of the products, this specification yields almost identical results to the base specification.'7 The

exceptions are soy sauce and ball point pens which now yield results more consistent with a

substitution effect. Soy sauce now displays a statistically significant negative correlation between



       16 An alternative analysis would be to gather data on other products in these industries for
which there was no U.S.-based Japanese production and create plots similar to tables 4A through
4D. This would be an immensely time consuming process and many products would have
TSUSA to HTS mapping problems.

        17 While I do not report the coefficients on the industry quantity controls because of space
limitations, many of them are statistically significant. Interestingly, there were nearly as many
with a negative sign, as with a positive sign.
                                                                                                      25

production in the United States and exports as hypothesized, and ballpoint pens no longer has a

statistically significant positive correlation. In summary, table 4 shows the relative insensitivity

of the estimates on Japanese production in the United States to these alternative specifications.

        A final sensitivity test is to eliminate the music synthesizer and golf club equations from

the SUR so that the number of observations for each equation can be expanded to start from 1972

rather than 1979. Given the limited number of observations for each equation in the base

specification, this is obviously a large percentage increase in observations. Table 5 reports results

from estimating the remaining nine products using SUR on 21 annual observations from 1972-

1992. The estimates include an AR1 correction, a time trend and industry quantity control for

each equation, though these coefficients are not reported in the interest of space. Once again,

results do not change significantly from estimates in tables 3 and 4. Eight of the nine coefficients

relating Japanese exports and Japanese production in the United States have a significant negative

sign, with four statistically significant.'8



4. Conclusion

        This paper was motivated by the many empirical studies showing complementarity

between exports and foreign production. Why is it so difficult to find substitution effects?

Previous papers had explored statistical concerns, including endogeneity and aggregation bias.


        ' Another concern raised by a referee is that Japanese firms may have began substantial
production of these products in other countries, using these countries as export platforms to the
United States. Since my dependent variable only measures exports from Japan, this could bias the
substitution effects I find. Upon the referee's suggestion I examined the behavior of U.S. imports
from other Asian countries in the eleven consumer products during this time period, but found no
systematic trends indicating increased exports to the United States from these other Asian
countries as Japanese exports to the United States fell.
                                                                                                    26

This paper provides evidence that aggregation bias may be playing a large role. I show

substitution effects are relatively easy to identify in product-level data. In fact, product-level data

allows one to separately identify substitution from complementarity effects (here fromvertical

production relationships), rather than try to infer them from estimates using more aggregate data.

In this sense, the paper highlights the importance of matching the level of data aggregation with

the hypotheses being tested. This is particularly true at a time when there is an increasing

proliferation of available micro economic data in the field of internationaleconomics.

       There are a number of extensions that can follow from this paper. First, while I was able

to separately test for complementarity from vertical production relationships, mydata do not

allow a test of complementarity from other channels mentioned in the literature, such as demand

complementarities across a firm's related products. Thus, there is room forfuture work to

identify and estimate the magnitude of these effects. Second, there is more work to be done to

interpret the large shifts in local production versus exports this paper finds for many products.

This paper's analyses (particularly the simple plots) shows that substitution of foreign production

for exports often are large one-time shifts, not gradual changes over time. Many of the products,

including the final consumer products not subject to new U.S. protection during the sample, show

precipitous decreases in exports to the United States once production in the United States began.

This may suggest that within product lines, firms' choice of exports and foreign production is to

some extent an "either/or" decision, as often assumed by theoretical models of MNCs. However,

it is also apparent that there is not complete replacement of exports by local production for the

products I analyze. Thus, firms may be choosing to have some combination of both to serve a

market. One possible reason for this would be to hedge against exchange rate risk, as suggested
                                                                                                 27

by Goldberg and Koistad (1994). On the other hand, if there are multiple firms represented by my

product level data, there may be both positive exports and local production atthe product level,

because some firms in the product line are serving the market with solely local production, while

other firms in the product line are solely exporting. This suggests there is a need for future work

with product-level data by firm to resolve some of these important questions.
                                                                                                 28

References

Belderbos, Rene and Leo Sleuwaegen. (1998) "Tariff Jumping DFI and Export Substitution:
Japanese Electronics Firms in Europe," International Journal ofIndustrial Organization. 16:
601-63 8.

BlomstrOm, Magnus, Robert E. Lipsey, and Ksenia Kuichycky. (1988) "U.S. and Swedish Direct
Investment and Exports," in R.E. Baldwin (Ed.), Trade Policy Issues and EmpiricalAnalysis.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 259-97.

Blonigen, Bruce A. and KaSaundra Tomlin. (1998) "Size and Growth of Japanese Plants in the
United States," mimeo.

Brainard, S. Lael. (1993) "A Simple Theory of Multinational Corporations and Trade with a
Trade-off between Proximity and Concentration," NBER Working Paper No. 4269.

Brainard, S. Lad. (1997) "An Empirical Assessment of the Proximity-ConcentrationTrade-off
Between Multinational Sales and Trade," American Economic Review. 87(4): 5 20-544.

Buckley, Peter J. and Mark Casson. (1981) "The Optimal Timing of Foreign Direct Investment,"
Economic Journal. 91: 75-87.

Clausing, Kimberly. (forthcoming) "Does Multinational Activity Displace Trade?" Economic
Inquiry.

Dunning, John H. (1981) International Production and the Multinational Enterprise. London:
George Allen and Unwin.

Feenstra, Robert C. (1996) "U.S.Imports, 1972-1994: Data and Concordances," NBER Working
Paper No. 5515.

Feenstra, Robert C. and Clinton R. Shiells. (1994) "Bias in U.S. Import Prices and Demand,"
NBER Working Paper No. 4841.

Goldberg, Linda S. and Charles D. Kolstad. (1994) "Foreign Direct Investment, Exchange Rate
Variability and Demand Uncertainty," NBER Working Paper No. 4815.

Graham, Edward M. (forthcoming) "The Relationships Between Trade and Foreign Direct
Investment in the Manufacturing Sector: Empirical Results for the United States and Japan," in
Dennis Encarnation (ed.), Does Ownership Matter?: Japanese Multinationals in East Asia.
London: Oxford University Press.
                                                                                                29

Grubert, Harry, and John Mutti. (1991) "Taxes, Tariffs, and Transfer Pricing in Multinational
Corporate Decision Making," Review of Economics and Statistics. 73(May): 285-293.

Head, Keith and John Ries. (1997) "Overseas Investment and Firm Exports," mimeo.

Lipsey, Robert E., and Merle Yahr Weiss. (1981) "Foreign Production and Exports in
Manufacturing Industries," Review of Economics and Statistics. 63 (Nov): 488-494.

Lipsey, Robert E., and Merle Yahr Weiss. (1984) "Foreign Production and Exports of Individual
Firms," Review of Economics and Statistics. 66(May): 304-307.

Markusen James R. (1983) "Factor Movements and Commodity Trade as Complements," Journal
of International Economics. 14: 341-356.

Markusen, James R. (1984) "Multinationals, Multi-plant Economies, and the Gains from Trade,"
Journal of International Economics. 16(3-4): 205-26.

Markusen, James R. (1995) "The Boundaries of Multinational Enterprises and the Theory of
International Trade," Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 9(2): 169-89.

Mundell, Robert A. (1957) "International Trade and Factor Mobility," American Economic
Review. Vol. 47: 32 1-35.

Okamoto, Yumiko. (1998) "Multinationals, Production Efficiency and Spillover Effects: The Case
of the U.S. Auto Parts Industry," mimeo.

Rugman, Alan M. (1990) Multinationals and Canada-United States Free Trade. Columbia, SC:
University of South Carolina Press.

Swedenborg, Birgitta. (1979) The Multinational Operations of Swedish Firms. Stockholm: The
Industrial Institute for Economic and Social Research.

Swedenborg, Birgitta. (forthcoming) 'Determinants and Effects of MINC Growth: The Swedish Case
Revisited," in Magnus Blomstrom and Linda Goldberg (Eds.), Topics in Empirical International
Economics. Chicago: University of Chicago Press (NBER).

Swenson, Deborah L. (1997) "Explaining Domestic Content: Evidence from Japanese and U.S.
Automobile Production in the United States," in Robert C. Feenstra (Ed.), Effects of US. Trade
Protection and Promotion Policies. Chicago: University of Chicago Press (NBER), 33-53.

Swenson, Deborah U (1998) "Foreign Investment and the Mediation of Trade Flows," mimeo.
                                                                                            30

Williamson, Oliver E. (1975) Markets andHierarchies, Analysis andAntitrusi Implications: A Sludy
in the Economics of Internal Organization. New York: Free Press.

Wong, Kar-yiu. (1986) "Are International Trade and Factor Mobility Substitutes?" Journal of
International Economics. 21:25-43.

Yamawaki, Hideki. (1991) "Exports and Foreign Distributional Activities: Evidence on Japanese
Firms in the United States," Review of Economics and Statistics. 73(May): 294-300.
TABLE 1: Japanese foreign direct investment flows into the United States for automobile parts and
manufacturing, 1980-1990, various years.


                     Number of new
                     Japanese-owned         Number of employees in
                     automobile parts       new Japanese-owned            New U.S. employees
                     plants in the United   automobile parts plants in    for all Japanese-owned
 Year                States                 the United States             manufacturing plants
 1980                          2                          100                       5,232

 1984                          1                           50                      16,940

 1986                         23                        2,817                      23,640

 1987                         47                        8,583                      39,952

 1988                         54                       13,697                      74,801

 1989                         64                       15,171                      80,800

 1990                          36                        6,734                     31,772
Notes: Plant and employee numbers are for year of entry. All data include new plants, acquisitions,
and joint ventures, as well as plants with various shares of ownership, though the vast majority are
fully- or majority-owned. There were a handful of cases where employee numbers for certain plants
were imputed because of missing data the year of entry or because employee numbers were reported
for a group of plants rather than an individual plant.

Source: Japan Economic Institute. Japan 'sExpandingManufacturingPresence in the United States,
various issues.
TABLE 2: SUR regressions of import demand for Japanese automobile parts, 1978-91.
           Regressors:      Japanese        Japanese          U.S.
                            auto part     automobile        domestic
Dependent                 production      production       automobile Adjusted
Variable                   in the U.S      in the U.S.     production       R2                                 F test


                                     0.199***               8.609***             0.419**           0.92
Toughened glass
                                     (0.000)               (0.000)              (0.017)                   (0.000)

Laminated safety glass                                      7.133***            0.348**            0.69      6.86***
                                     (0.000)               (0.000)              (0.019)                    (0.009)

Automotivemirrors                                           6.949***           0.392**             0.91     28.74***
                                     (0.000)               (0.000)              (0.036)                    (0.000)

Radio-cassetteplayers                                       2.053***            0.260*             0.75      8.87***

                                      (0.000)              (0.000)              (0.054)                    (0.004)


Radio receivers                      0.030***               0.215              -0.019              0.79     10.81***
                                      (0.000)              (0.257)              (0.616)                    (0.002)

                                     0.283***               7.039***             0.091             0.65        5.91**
Enginestarters
                                      (0.000)              (0.000)              (0.3 15)                   (0.014)


                                                            4.806***             0.121*            0.89     21.34***
Enginecoils
                                      (0.000)               (0.000)             (0.055)                    (0.000)


Doorlocks                            0.116***                1.013***          -0.031              0.92     29.12***

                                      (0.000)              (0.000)              (0.128)                     (0.000)


                                     0.021**                0.589**              0.335***          0.67        6.21**
Bumpersandparts
                                      (0.039)              (0.019)              (0.000)                     (0.012)


Seatsandparts                        -0.068                  1.760***          -0.080              0.91     26.71***


Notes: P-values are in parentheses. '' ,   and * denote at-statistic at the one, five and ten percent significance levels,
respectively.
                All equations are estimated from 14 annual observations (1978-1991) using Zellner's iterative Seemingly
Unrelated Regressions (SUR) technique.
TABLE 3: SUR regressions of import demand for Japanese final consumer products, 1979-94.
           Regressors:                                       Japanese
Dependent                                                  production     Adj.
Variable                     Price          Income          in the U.S.    R2      F-test


Handvacuumcleaners                 0.0014c                 0.055***                             0.50

                                    (0.001)              (0.008)             (0.000)                    (0.010)


Othervacuumc!eaners                0.005***                0.419***                             0.73     14.32***

                                    (0.000)              (0.000)             (0.000)                    (0.000)


Microwaveovens                     0.039***              1.870*             -0.856              0.56       7•37***
                                    (0.000)              (0.100)             (0.110)                    (0.005)

                                   0.004***                0.010                                0.81     16.76***
Grandpianos
                                    (0.000)              (0.000)              (0.023)                   (0.000)


                                   -0.001                  0.001             -0.001           -0.21       0.12
Otherpianos
                                    (0.374)              (0.307)              (0.254)                   (0.949)


                                                           0.081***                             0.45       5.10**
Music synthesizers


Sake                               - O.332***              0.492***          - 0.681***         0.92 56.90***
                                    (0.000)              (0.000)             (0.000)                     (0.000)

Soy sauce                          -0.796                  4.348***            1.850            0.90 4475***
                                    (0.489)              (0.000)              (0.139)                (0.000)

Ballpoint pens                    - 381.58***             142. 18***          13 .733           0.97 144.02***
                                    (0.00 1)             (0.000)              (0.000)                    (0.000)


Golf balls                         -0.011                  l.581***          - 1.757***         0.90 45.25***
                                    (0.489)              (0.000)              (0.000)                    (0.000)


Golf clubs                          0.002***              0.256***           0.069**            0.73      14.22***

                                    (0.007)              (0.000)              (0.026)                    (0.000)


Notes: P-values are in parentheses. " ,' and *       denote a t-statistic at the one, five and ten percent significance
levels, respectively. All equations are estimated from 16 annual observations (1979-1994) using Zeilner's iterative
Seemingly Unrelated Regressions (SUP.) technique and an AR1 correction. Equations are estimated with a constant,
but its coefficient is not reported here.
TABLE 4: Coefficient on Japanese production in the U.S. for various SUR regressions                           import
demand for Japanese final consumer products, 1979-94.
                                                                                                   Table 3
                                                                        Table 3               specification with
 Dependent                                    Table 3                specification           trend and industry
 Variable                                   specification              with trend             quantity controls

 Hand vacuum cleaners                         - 0.005***                -   0.007***                -   0.009***
                                              (0.000)                   (0.000)                     (0.000)

 Other vacuum cleaners                        -   0.021***              -   0.021***                -   0.025***
                                              (0.000)                   (0.000)                     (0.000)

 Microwave ovens                              -0.856                    -0.472                      0.968***
                                              (0.110)                   (0.329)                     (0.000)


 Grandpianos                                  .0.002**                  0.003***                    -0.001

                                              (0.023)                   (0.001)                     (0.448)


 Otherpianos                                  -0.001                    _0.002***                   -0.001
                                              (0.254)                   (0.000)                     (0.110)

 Music synthesizers                           - 0.03 S                  - 0.008                     - 0.027
                                              (0.074)                   (0.688)                     (0.110)
 Sake                                         _0.681***                  _0.723***                  _0.750***
                                              (0.000)                       (0.000)                 (0.000)

                                                  1.850                  -1.861                     _7.921***
 Soysauce
                                              (0.139)                       (0.280)                 (0.000)

 Ballpointpens                                13.733***                     16.580***               -0.376
                                              (0.000)                       (0.000)                 (0.926)

 Golfballs                                   _1.757***                   _1.539***                  _2.967***
                                              (0.000)                       (0.000)                 (0.000)

 Golfclubs                                   0.069**                     0.073**                    0.082***
                                             (0.026)                        (0.022)                 (0.007)

Notes: P-values are in parentheses.        ,'' and * denote a t-statistic at the one, five and ten percent significance
levels, respectively. All equations are estimated from 16 annual observations (1979-1994) using Zeilner's iterative
Seemingly Unrelated Regressions (SUR) technique and an AR1 correction. Equations are estimatedwith a constant,
but its coefficient is not reported here.
TABLE 5: SUR regressions of import demand for Japanese final consumer products,
           Regressors:                                       Japanese
Dependent                                                   production    Adj.
Variable                     Price         Income           in the U.S.    R2                                  F-test


Handvacuumcleaners                   _Ø•ØØ3***               0.065***           _0.006***           0.44       4.14**

                                     (0.001)                (0.005)             (0.000)                     (0.015)


Othervacuumcleaners                 -0.001                   0.247***           _0.016***           0.78      15.07***

                                     (0.606)                (0.000)             (0.000)                     (0.000)


Microwaveovens                       0.016*                  0.572              -0.271              0.90      36.77***

                                     (0.000)                (0.141)             (0.294)                     (0.000)


                                     0.000'"                 0.008***           -0.001              0.88      30.93***
Grandpianos
                                     (0.000)                (0.000)              (0.530)                    (0.000)

                                     _0.000**              -0.000                 0.001             0.13       1.58
Otherpianos
                                     (0.016)                (0.986)              (0.904)                     (0.225)


Sake                                 _0.374***               0.508***            _0.587***          0.95      73.28***

                                     (0.000)                (0.000)              (0.000)                     (0.000)


                                      0.456                 10.503***          _15.490***           0.76      13.55***
Soysauce
                                     (0.922)                (0.000)              (0.000)                     (0.000)


                                   _600.59***               207.14***           -1.116              0.97 150.12***
Ba!lpointpens
                                     (0.000)                (0.000)              (0.830)                     (0.000)


Golfballs                            -0.055w                  1.086***          -0.455              0.87 27.50***
                                     (0.078)                (0.000)              (0.589)                     (0.000)

Notes: P-values are in parentheses. 'I' ,'I"I' and *   denote a t-statistic at the one, five and ten percent significance
levels, respectively. All equations are estimated from 21 annual observations (1972-1992) using Zeilner' s iterative
Seemingly Unrelated Regressions (SUR) tecimique and an AR1 correction. Equations are estimatedwith a constant,
time trend, and a control for annual output in the product's related 4-digit SIC industry, but their associated coefficients
are not reported here.
        Figure 1: Japanese Automobile Production in the United States, Exports of
        Automobiles to the U.S. Market, and the Yen-Dollar Exchange Rate, 1972-92
                                                                                            350   Yen per
      Millions of 3
                                                                                                    Dollar
     Automobiles
                                                                                            300
                   2.5
                                                                                            250
                    2
                                                                                            200
                   1.5
                                                                                            150

                                                                                            100

                   0.5                                                                      50

                    0                                                                       0


                                                      Year




Figure 2: Japanese Auto Part Exports to the United States and Yen-Dollar Exchange
                                            Rate, 1972-92
                                                                                                    Yen
                                                                                        I 350
Millions of Dollars4000

                  3500                                                            -         300
                                                                                                  per Dollar




                  3000                                                                      250

                  2500
                                                                                            200
                  2000
                                                                                            150
                  1500
                                 paneseAopo,
                                          /
                                        change Rate
                                                                                            100
                  1000
                                                               /
                   500


                                  .    (0
                                            1•   0
                                                      —

                                                               —
                                                                        CO   0)   0    Ci
                                                                                            so

                                                                                            0
                          c'.J
                                       N-   N-   0)
                                                          C
                                                          0)       0)   0)   0)   0)   0)
                          0)      0)   0)   0)   0)       0)       0)   0)   0)   0)   0)

                                                      Year
 FIGURE 3A: Laminated Safety Glass: Japanese Exports to the United States and
                 Production in the United States, 1978-1991
                                                                                                          U.S.
Millions 7                                                                                      5000
                                                                                                       Production
of Units
                                                                                                4500
           6
                                    •    Exports                                                4000

           5                   — •_ U.S. Production
                                                                                                3000
           4
                                                                                 /              2500
           3                                                                     /              2000
                                                                                                1500
           2
                                                                                                1000
           1
                                                                                                500
                                                                                                0
           0
               00
               r-   0N 0 a o c o 0%
                          00
                          o.
                                  00     00   00    00   00   00       00
                                                                            00
                                                                            00
                                                                                 0 0C O
                                                                                 00
                                                                                      0%   0%




 FIGURE 3B: Radio-cassette Players: Japanese Exports to the United States and
                  Production in the United States, 1978-1991
                                                                   5000
                                                                          U.s.
Millions 8                                                                                             Production
of Units
                                                                                                4500
           7
                                                                                                4000
           6
                                                                                                3500
           5                                                                                    3000

           4                                                                                    2500
                         ________________________                                               2000
           3                    •       Exports
                                                                                                1500
                                •— U.S. Productionj
           2,                                                      /                            1000
           1                                                       I                            500

                                                                                                0
               NN
               00
               0%
                    0%
                    0%
                         0 .-
                         00
                         0%
                                 00
                                 0%
                                         4
                                         00
                                         0%
                                              Cfl
                                              00
                                              0%
                                                    00
                                                    0%
                                                         00
                                                         0%
                                                              %0
                                                              00
                                                              0%
                                                                       N
                                                                       00
                                                                       0%
                                                                          00
                                                                           00
                                                                            0%
                                                                                 0%
                                                                                 00
                                                                                 0%
                                                                                      0
                                                                                      0%
                                                                                      0%
                                                                                           0%
                                                                                           0%
FIGURE 3C: Bumpers: Japanese Exports to the United States and Production in the
                         United States 1978-1991
                                                                                                  2000
                                                                                                            U.s.
Millions     3                                                                                           Production
of Units                    _______________________
                            _______ Exports                                                       1800
           2.5                           Production                                               1600

                                                                                                  1400
             2
                                                                                                  1200

           1.5                                                                                    1000
                                                                                                  800
                                                                                                  600

                                                                                                  400
           0.5
                                               F- -' -•—- -V
             0                 i     s
                                           /
                                          r i          i    s    s    a    i        a    a
                                                                                                  200

                                                                                                  0
                 00   0%            —  r4                  '€
                                                           00
                                                                \O
                                                                00
                                                                     F-
                                                                     00
                                                                          00
                                                                          00
                                                                                 0%
                                                                                 00
                                                                                        0    -.
                 F—   r-      00    00  oo     00                                            0%




      FIGURE 3D: Engine Starters: Japanese Exportsto the United States and
                  Production in the United States 1978-1991
                                                                                                  5000
                                                                                                            U.s.
Millions 3.5                                                                                             Production
of Units
                                                                                                  4500
            3
                                                                                                  4000
           2.5                 •     Exports                                                      3500
                               •—        Product io_J                                             3000
            2         L_—
                                                                                                  2500
           1.5                                                                                    2000


                                                                             /                    1500




                                                                     I/
           0.5
                                                                            /                     1000

                                                                                                  500

            0
                 00
                 N
                      0%
                      F--    00
                                    -.
                                   00    F-
                                         00    00     00   00
                                                                %O
                                                                00
                                                                    N 00
                                                                   00  00
                                                                               0%
                                                                               00       0
                                                                                        0%   0%
FIGURE 4A: Hand Vacuum Cleaners: Japanese Exports to the United States
            and Production in the United States, 1972-1 994

 Millions 0.18                                                                        p5000
 of Units                                                                                     Production
            0.16                                                                      4500

                                                                                      4000
            0.14

            0.12    r*      ___________________
                                   Exports
                            ——u.s. Production
                                                                                      3500

                                                                                      3000
             0.1
                                                                                      2500
            0.08
                                                                                      2000
            0.06
                                                                                      1500
            0.04
                                                                                      1000
            0.02                                              V1                      500

              u    .                                          J                       0
                       NNN
                       0%
                              '0
                              0%
                                   00
                                   0%
                                         ©
                                         00
                                         0%
                                              (.4
                                              00
                                              0%
                                                    00
                                                    0%
                                                         '0
                                                         00
                                                         0%
                                                                  00
                                                                  00
                                                                  0%
                                                                       0
                                                                       0%
                                                                       0%
                                                                            (.
                                                                            0%
                                                                            0%
                                                                                 0%
                                                                                 0%




FIGURE 4B: Music Synthesizers: Japanese Exports to the United States and
              Production in the United States, 1979-1 994

Millions 0.25                                                                         500
of Units                                                                                     Production
 FIGURE 4C: Sake: Japanese Exports to the United States and Production in
                      the United States 1972-1994
Millions 3.5                                                                                   500       U.s.
of Units                                                                                              Production
                                                                                               450
              3
                                                                                               400
            2.5                                                                                350
                                                                                               300
              2
                                                                                               250
            1 .5
                                                                                               200

              1                                                                                150
                                                                                               100
            0.5

             0
                 (N N. N N    o        00
                                             00
                                                      c'I
                                                      00    00
                                                                 o00   00
                                                                       00
                                                                                   C.1




      FIGURE 4D: Soy Sauce: Japanese Exports to the United States and
                Production in the United States 1972-1994
Millions 9                                                                                      500
 of Units                                                                                             Production
             8                                                                                  450
                                   •        Exports                                             400
             7
                               —.      U.S. Production
                         _________________________                                              350
             6
                                                                                                300

                                                                                               250
             4
                                                                                               200
             3
                                                                       .- .-.-. - .—            150
             2                                                                                  100
                         —.   9-   S • • •+ _4.-
                                                                                               50

             0     LI                                                                          0
              NNNN
              rI
              0%    O•        0%
                                    00
                                    0%
                                             000
                                             0%
                                                      00
                                                      0%
                                                            00
                                                            0%
                                                                  00
                                                                  0%
                                                                        00
                                                                        00
                                                                        0%
                                                                             0O\
                                                                             0%
                                                                                     0,
                                                                                     0%
                                                                                          0.
                                                                                          0%
                                            Data Appendix
Automobile parts re2ressions:

Import quantity and price data for the ten automobile part regressions come from the recently released
National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) Trade Database, Disk 1: U.S. Imports, 1972-1994,
constmcted by Robert Feenstra. As mentioned in the text, details on this database are found in Feenstra
(1996). The ten products were chosen because there was a clean one-to-one mapping between Tariff
Schedules of the United States Annotated (TSUSA) codes and Harmonized Tariff System (FITS) codes and
there was significant Japanese production of these products in the United States beginning in the 1 980s.
The data collected begin in year 1978, since the classification codes do not clearly separate out many of the
products of interest in earlier years. The following table gives the precise TSUSA and HTS mapping.

Product                              TSUSAJHTS Product Codes                             Measurement Unit
Toughened glass for autos
  1978-1988                          TSUSA: 5443100                                            Square Feet
  1989                               HTS: 7007110000                                         SquareMeters
  1990-1991                          HTS: 7007110010                                         Square Meters

Laminated safety glass for autos
  1978-1988                      TSUSA: 5444120                                                Square Feet
  1989-1991                      HTS: 7007211010, 7007215000                                 Square Meters


Automotive mirrors
  1978-1988                          TSUSA: 5445100                                                Number
  1989-1991                          FITS: 7009910000, 700911000                                   Number

Radio-cassette players   for autos
  1978-1982                          TSUSA: 6785051, 6785052                                       Number
  1983-1988                          TSUSA: 6785009, 6785012                                       Number
  1989-1991                          HTS: 8527211010, 8527211020                                   Number

Radio receivers for autos
  1978-1982                          TSUSA: 6852110, 6852115, 6852125, 6852150                     Number
  1983-1988                          TSUSA: 6851210, 6851215, 6851225, 6851250                     Number
  1989-1991                          HTS: 8527294020, 8527298040, 8527298060                       Number

Engine starters for autos
  1978-1988                          TSUSA: 6836040                                                Number
  1989-1991                          HTS: 8511400000                                               Number

Engine coils for autos
  1978-1988                          TSUSA: 6836070                                                Number
  1989-1991                          HTS: 8511300080                                               Number


Door locks for autos
  1978-1988                          TSUSA: 6469230                                                Number
  1989-1991                          FITS: 8301200000                                              Number
Bumpers for autos
 1978-1979                          TSUSA: 6922720                                         Not Applicable
 1978-1988                          TSUSA: 6923220                                         Not Applicable
  1989-199 1                        HTS: 8708100050                                        Not Applicable

Seats and parts for autos
  1978-1988                         TSUSA: 7270600                                         Not Applicable
  1989-1990                         HTS: 9401200000, 9401901000                            Not Applicable
  1991                              HTS: 9401200000, 9401200090,       9401901000          Not Applicable




For all these products, except bumpers and  parts and seats and parts, U.S. Customs records both customs
values and quantities. Thus, I calculate a "price", or unit value, by dividing value by quantity. For the
other two products, I have used an average of the other imported automobile part prices to proxy for their
price and divide their customs values to get some sort of quantity measure. Quantity data are scaled in
millions.

Production of U.S. and Japanese autos in the United States are specified as millions of yearly
automobiles produced and taken from Ward's Auto World.

Prices of U.S. automobile parts are representive price indexes of U.S. automobile parts from U.S. Bureau
of Labor Statistics (BLS) wholesale price indexes. In most cases it was not possible to fmd indexes for the
exact comparable automobile part. For example, for toughened and safety glass for autos I use the BLS
price index for flat glass as the comparable U.S. automobile part price. I used the 6-month commercial
paper interest rate as the price of capital reported in table B-72 of the Economic Report of the President,
February 1995.

Finally, production of Japanese automobile parts in the U.S. is proxied by the number of employees (in
hundreds) involved in U.S. production of these products for Japanese-owned firms. I have firm-level data
of entry by Japanese automobile part firms (and a very specific listing ofthe product(s) they produce) into
the United States and their 1986, 1988, and 1990 level of employees from the publications, Japan 's
Expanding Manufacturing Presence in the US., published by the Japan Economic Institute in Washington,
DC, on a semi-annual basis. For years in between I interpolated assuming employee growth was constant
over that period (i.e., I assumed it was the average of the two endpoint years). A detailed list of the firms
and employee   levels used for each product is available from the author upon request.


Final   consumer products re2ressions:

Import quantity and price data come from the same source as for the automobile parts regressions. The
following table gives the precise TSUSA and HTS mapping for these products. Output for each product is
in millions. Prices for all products are unit values in U.S. dollars, except grand pianos, other pianos and
music synthesizers, which are in thousands of U.S. dollars.

Product                           TSUSAIHTS Product Codes                                Measurement Unit

Hand vacuum cleaners
  1972-1988                       TSUSA: 6833010                                                  Number
  1988-1994                       HTS: 8509100020                                                 Number
Other vacuum cleaners
  1972-1985                TSUSA: 6833030                                           Number
  1986                     TSUSA: 6833030,6833033, 6833036                          Number
  1987-1988                TSUSA: 6833033, 6833037, 6833038                         Number
  1989-1994                FITS: 8509100030, 8509100050, 8509100070, 8509100080     Number

Microwave ovens
  1972-1979                TSUSA: 6843010                                           Number
  1980-1988                TSUSA: 6842500                                           Number
  1989-1994                FITS:   8516500000                                       Number

Grand pianos
  1972-1988                TSUSA: 7250320                                           Number
  1989-1994                FITS: 9201200000                                         Number

Other pianos
  1972-1988                TSUSA: 7250100, 7250340                                  Number
 1989-1994                 FITS: 9201100000, 9201900000                             Number

Music synthesizers
 1979-1982                 TSUSA: 7254743                                           Number
 1983-1986                 TSUSA: 7254742                                           Number
 1987-1988                 TSUSA: 7254705, 7254710                                  Number
 1989-1994                 FITS: 9207100005, 9207100010                             Number



Soy sauce
  1972-1988                TSUSA: 1824500                                           Pounds
  1989-1994                HTS: 2103100000                                        Kilograms


Sake
  1972-1988                TSUSA: 1672500                                           Gallons

  1989-1994                HTS: 2206004500                                            Liters



Ballpoint pens
  1972-1988                TSUSA: 7600520                                           Number
  1989-1994                HTS: 9608100000                                          Number


Golf balls
  1972-1994                TSUSA: 7347520, 7347540                                  Dozens
  1989-1994                HTS: 9506320000                                          Dozens


Golf clubs, compete sets
  1978-1988                TSUSA: 7347720                                           Number
  1989-1994                I-ITS: 9506310000                                        Number
Production of Japanese firms in the U.S. is proxied by the number of employees (in hundreds) involved in
U.S. production of these products for Japanese-owned firms, as with the automobile parts regressions.
Unlike the automobile parts investment, some of these products were being produced in the United States
before the mid-l980s, so I also used the 1980, 1984, 1986 and 1988 editions of Japan's Expanding
Manufacturing Presence in the US. Estimates of employee levels in between data points (or before 1980)
were interpolated (or extrapolated) assuming employee growth was constant over that period. Because
there were less firms investing in the United States for these products, I was also able to determine or
estimate employee levels for these firms through 1994. This was done either by contacting the firm or
using various recent state-level directories of foreign firms. A detailed list of the firms and employee levels
used for each product are available from the author upon request.

Income is measured as U.S. real GDP (in billions of dollars) as reported in the Economic Report of the
President. Finally, an industry quantity control variable, used for the specifications in tables 4 and 5, was
constructed in the following manner. The NBER Trade Database, Disk 1: U.S. Imports, 1972-1994,
reports annual value of U.S. imports by 4-digit SIC and countly for the years 1972-1992. For each
product I took the value of its associated 4-digit SIC industry imports from Japan and subtracted the
product's import value from that associated industry total. I then converted these adjusted industry U.S.
import values into yen using the annual yen-dollar exchange rate reported in Economic Report of the
President. Finally, I used annual export price indexes reported in the Japan Statistical Abstract, various
issues, to convert these figures into real terms; i.e., into a "quantity" control.
