1. Introduction
Small-group decisions are ubiquitous for decisions under uncertainty. Judgment by a jury of one's peers, not by a single person, is the hallmark of the
American criminal justice system. Committees recommend hiring and tenure
decisions, are essential for project and investment undertakings in business
rms, and are used for many administrative decisions in all organizations.
Group evaluations bring di erent points of view to bear on a question. They
allow the pooling of information that is not otherwise available to a single
decision-maker. But con ict among committee members limits the possibilities for information pooling. It is in the self interest of committee members
to manipulate their evidence|to exaggerate favorable data that supports
their preferred outcome, or conceal unfavorable data that works against it.
This paper studies the tension between information aggregation and strategic
manipulation of information in small committee decisions.
The value of aggregating diverse information among group members
is an ancient idea. It at least goes back to Condorcet, who proved that
voting groups with identical preferences but diverse information make better
decisions the larger the group size. The Condorcet Jury Theorem (1785) is a
very early application of the law of large numbers, and is further developed by
Klevorick, Rothschild and Winship (1984). Only recently have economists
and political scientists begun to study how con icting preferences lead to
strategic considerations that reduce the aggregate value of information in real
committees. Austen-Smith and Banks (1996) show that Condorcet's theorem
holds true only when members vote \sincerely," as if their evidence alone
decides the case. There is a sense in which strategic voting contaminates the
scale economies inherent in larger statistical samples.
{1{

The diculty of eliciting private preferences for public goods in groups
has been thoroughly studied (Arrow, 1954 : Gibbard, 1973; Satterthwaite,
1975). The subject of this paper is how small groups make decisions when
diverse individual preferences are known to all, but when individuals possess private information that must be elicited in committee deliberations.
Only recently has research addressed this issue. See especially the recent
papers by Feddersen and Pessendorfer (1996; 1997), who developed the role
of the pivotal voter in voting games with private information, and the related
works on cheap-talk games by Crawford and Sobel (1982) and Austen-Smith
(1990). Our work is built on a more natural and familiar information structure relevant for many economic quality control decisions. We show how the
likelihood principle is tempered and debased by self-interests of committee
members when preferences con ict. Even though the information structure
in this model is based on continuously distributed private signals, voting
schemes based on rank are the equilibrium outcomes of the committee decision process. The coarsening of cardinal to ordinal information through
voting necessarily renders committee decisions imperfect in the rst-best
sense. Nonetheless, imperfect pooling of information in the committee leads
to better decisions than any individual would make based only on own private
information.
We consider a committee that must choose between two alternatives.
Individual committee members are known to have con icting interests due
to di erent biases towards the alternatives, but their interests are not diametrically opposed. For example, in a recruitment committee evaluating
two candidates in di erent academic elds, each member may be biased in
favor of the job candidate in his own eld, but each is willing to choose the
other candidate if that candidate is suciently better. Con icting interests
{2{

are compounded by incentives to share information. In the recruitment example, committee members may di er in their perspectives or abilities to
evaluate the quality of research in di erent elds. Since assessments are private, committee decision can depend only on members' reports about their
information, not on the actual information itself. This is what causes tension
between incentives to manipulate evidence and incentives to share information.
We characterize equilibria of strategic information-reporting for given
committee decision rules. The rst result is that so long as preferences of
individual members are not perfectly aligned, a member will not submit a report that fully reveals his private information. Obfuscation is the rule rather
than the exception in committees. Speci cally, the equilibrium reporting
strategy is a many-to-one mapping from the private information to the report. We analyze the case where equilibrium strategies transform continuous
data into ordinal information. Members submit one report if the strength
of evidence exceeds a certain personal threshold, and submit another report
otherwise. Equilibria with ner partitions that allow for more ecient utilization of private information typically exist, but con icting interests among
committee members impose an upper bound on how ne information partitioning can be. Great con icts within the committee make ne partitions
impossible.
We analyze in detail the two-partition case, which amounts to an equilibrium of strategic voting. The two reports of each member can be interpreted
as \yes" (pro) and \no" (con) votes. The voting equilibrium is suboptimal
for two reasons. First, information is coarsened and made noisier. Second,
the category thresholds are chosen strategically rather than cooperatively. In
the recruitment example, anticipating manipulation of evidence by a fellow
{3{

committee member, an individual \exaggerates" evidence that the candidate in his eld produces high quality research by voting \yes" to his favored
candidate even though he would have voted \no" with the same evidence
were all information truthfully revealed. He lowers his own bar because he
knows that other members will raise theirs. The incentives for manipulation
and counter-manipulation generate an area of disagreement larger than that
implied by the inherent con icts in preferences. They lower the quality of
committee decisions. Still, exaggeration is limited, and information is aggregated by the committee, albeit imperfectly. The area of disagreement is
bounded from above by the need for members to share their private information. We show that regardless of personal preferences towards the two
alternatives, each committee member casts the decisive vote less frequently
than if he were to make the decision based on his information only. Moreover,
if some committee members are known to have access to more conclusive evidence about the decision, other members will cast their deciding votes less
frequently. Better informed members are decisive more often.
We also study how information manipulation and information sharing
a ect the welfare of committee members. For the committee as a whole, gains
from sharing information outweigh distortions from information manipulation. It is never Pareto improving to dissolve the committee and instead take
turns to make the decision based on individual evidence only, or to delegate
the decision to one member and have him make the decision based on his
evidence alone. We show that the ex ante welfare of each individual committee member decreases as the preferences of fellow members diverge further
from his. When the preferences of fellow members are suciently extreme,
the bene ts to an individual member of sharing information are outweighed
{4{

by biases and distortions in the committee. He would be better o if he were
to dictate the decision.
The strategic voting model is used to address abstention. Although individual committee members always have incentives to in uence the outcome
of committee decision-making to advance their own interests, the gains from
information sharing may be so large that some individual members may nd
it in their self interest to abstain when their private information turns out
to be relatively uninformative. We show that allowing abstention improves
the quality of committee decision by reducing strategic manipulations in the
committee and allowing information to be used more eciently.
In the remainder of the paper, the problem of strategic information aggregation is discussed in the classical context of jury decision-making. The
language of criminal trials o ers a convenient vocabulary that facilitates the
exposition. Jurors play no role in acquiring the information presented to
them. They have di erent evidence due to di erences in perspectives and
capabilities in evaluating the information. For simplicity we assume that
the jury consists of two persons. Section 2 establishes that con icting beliefs and preferences in the committee lead to information garbling. Section
3 studies the strategic voting model, which is a simple equilibrium form of
information garbling, in detail. Simultaneous reporting is assumed for most
of the paper; equilibrium under sequential reporting is described and compared to simultaneous reporting in terms of strategic commitment. Section 4
extends the analysis to committee decision-making situations where abstention is allowed. Section 5 further generalizes to equilibria of the information
game with more partitions and more ecient information aggregation. The
analysis in this paper focuses on the tension between con icting preferences
and common interests to share private information for a given committee
{5{

decision rule. In section 6, we brie y compare committee decision-making
under di erent decision rules.

2. Manipulation Leads to Garbling
A verdict of \guilty" or \innocent" must be made by a jury of two persons,
A and B. Juror A's prior that the suspect is guilty is a, and the personal
costs of type I error of false conviction and type II error of false acquittal
are a1 and a2 respectively. Let k1a = a1 (1 , a) and k2a = a2 a. The ratio
ka = k1a=k2a represents the cost of false conviction relative to false acquittal.
Juror A also receives an observation (evidence) Y a = ya. The distribution of
Y a is continuous with density function fia () if the suspect is innocent, or with
density function fga () if the suspect is guilty. Parameters and variables for
juror B are similarly denoted. We assume that Y a and Y b are independently
distributed conditional on guilt or innocence. Con icts in the jury exist as
long as ka 6= kb, but interests of jurors are not directly opposed as long as
ka and kb are strictly positive and nite. Both care about false conviction
and false acquittal. Note that there is no di erence in this model between
bias as manifested in and preference as manifested in ; only their product
matters.
If the vector of signals (ya ; yb) is publicly observable, the optimal committee decision depends on the comparison of conditional expected loss under
conviction and under acquittal. Let a and b be relative Pareto weights for
jurors A and B. De ne k1 = ak1a + bk1b, and k2 = ak2a + bk2b . It can be
{6{

shown1 that conviction is optimal if and only if
fga (ya) fgb (yb) k1
(2:1)
fia (ya) fib (yb)  k2 :
Throughout this paper, we assume that the signals satisfy a monotone likelihood ratio property. The ratio fgj ()=fij () is strictly increasing for j = a; b.
Under this assumption, the optimal decision is monotone in the evidence ya
and yb.
If Y a and Y b have the same conditional distributions, then for many
special distributions, the mean of the signals is a sucient statistic. In
such cases the optimal statistical decision rule (2.1) takes the linear form:
\convict if and only if ya + yb  ," where  is some pre-determined function
of the preference and distribution parameters representing the \standard of
proof." More generally, take logarithms of (2.1) and denote the value of the
log likelihood ratios by a and b. The optimal rule can be expressed in
terms of a linear aggregation of the evidence, namely, convict if and only if
a + b  log(k1 =k2).2
The above characterization of the optimal decision rule applies to individual decision-making as well. In particular, if juror A has access to both
Y a and Y b, then his optimal decision rule is to convict if and only if
fga (ya ) fgb (yb ) k1a
(2:2)
fia (ya ) fib (yb )  k2a :
1 See, for example, DeGroot (1970). This optimal decision rule is a special case of the

Neyman-Pearson lemma.

2 One can think of the \evidence" as the value of the log likelihood ratio instead of
the value of the observation itself. In fact, the log likelihood ratio summarizes all the
evidence pertinent to the two hypotheses, guilt versus innocence. Under the assumption
of conditional independence, linear aggregation of athe log likelihood
ratio is always the
optimal rule. This result holds whether or not Y and Y b have the same conditional
distributions. See, for example, Edwards (1992).

{7{

Note that as long as the two jurors di er in preferences or in priors (i.e.,
k1a=k2a 6= k1b=k2b), their personal optimal standards of proof also di er. This is
the source of their incentives to misrepresent their own evidence and attempt
to tilt the committee decision to their own advantage when signals are not
publicly observed.
Jury decisions only can be made on the basis of jurors' reports of their
private information. Without loss of generality, suppose that the jury decision rule is to convict if and only if S (ra ; rb )  0, where S () is strictly
increasing in its arguments, and ra and rb are reports of the two jurors on
ya and yb respectively. Consider the reporting game where the two jurors
report ra and rb simultaneously after learning about their private evidence
ya and yb. We want to establish that truthful reporting is not an equilibrium
strategy as long as the jury decision rule di ers from the optimal rule for an
individual juror. Let yb = (ra ) be the implicit solution to S (ra ; yb) = 0, and
let yb = a(ya) be the implicit solution to S a(ya; yb ) = 0, where S a is the
optimal decision function for juror A (that is, if juror A has access to both Y a
and Y b, his optimal decision rule is to convict if and only if S a(ya ; yb)  0.)
Suppose juror B always reports his observation yb truthfully. Juror A does
not know the value of B's observation when he submits his report, so he treats
Y b as a random variable. If juror A submits report ra, the probability of
conviction given the jury decision rule is Pr[S (ra; Y b)  0] = Pr[Y b  (ra )].
On the other hand, conditional on Y a = ya, the optimal probability of conviction for this juror is Pr[S a(ya ; Y b)  0] = Pr[Y b  a(ya )]. Thus, juror
A can achieve his optimal conviction probability by choosing ra such that
(ra ) = a(ya). Since  and a are di erent functions as long as the decision
functions S and S a di er, ra is not equal to ya in general.3
3 With minor modi cations, this results extends to committees with more than two

{8{

An example makes the point transparent. Assume that the jurors are
asked to report the value of the log likelihood ratio for their private observation, and the jury decision rule is to convict if and only if ra +rb  log(k1 =k2).
If juror B reports truthfully (rb = b), then from (2.1) and (2.2) above, juror
A can achieve his rst best by reporting

ra = a + log(k1=k2) , log(k1a=k2a):
Thus, if the cost of conviction for juror A is less than that for the jury
(k1 =k2 > k1a=k2a), juror A will report a greater likelihood of guilt than is
true. Juror A will exaggerate if juror B always tells the truth.4
Given the incentive to manipulate reports under any jury decision rule,
one may wonder whether there is an equilibrium where each juror takes the
other juror's equilibrium manipulation into account when determining his
own report. A simple revelation principle argument shows that such a pure
strategy equilibrium does not exist. Given any jury decision function, there
is no pure-strategy reporting equilibrium where each juror uses an invertible
strategy. To see this point, assume that given the decision function S (ra ; rb )
there is a reporting equilibrium (Ra (ya ); Rb(yb )) with invertible functions
Ra() and Rb(). Without loss of generality, assume that both reporting
functions are strictly increasing. Then reporting truthfully (ra = ya and
rb = yb ) is an equilibrium of the reporting game when the decision function
is T (ra ; rb ), where T = S (Ra(ya); Rb (yb )). Since S (; ) is strictly increasing
members. Truthful reporting can be optimal for some members if others report truthfully,
but it cannot be optimal for all members unless there is no con ict in the committee.
4 To be sure, exaggeration in the above form of overstatement will not be an equilibrium strategy given rational expectations. The detailed analysis of equilibrium will be
presented in the following sections.

{9{

in each argument, and Ra (ya) and Rb(yb) are strictly increasing functions,
T (; ) is strictly increasing in each argument. But we already know that there
is no equilibrium where given the decision function T (; ) each juror reports
his observation truthfully, a contradiction. Since invertible strategies allow
people to infer the actual observation from the report, the non-existence
of equilibrium with invertible strategies demonstrates incentives to garble
private information in committee decision making.
Our result that manipulation arising from con icting interests leads to
information garbling is related to Crawford and Sobel's (1982) work on cheap
talk games. However, our model studies the problem of strategic information
aggregation instead of signaling, and talk in our model is not exactly cheap.
We assume the committee decision rule is xed, and any report submitted
by members is fed mechanically into the rule to yield a decision. As a result
of this feature, it is not an equilibrium of the game for a committee member
to ignore other people's reports and dismiss them simply as cheap talk. To
be sure, in our model there are always many \uninformative" equilibria: for
example, in the case of unilateral conviction in a two-person jury, both jurors
voting for conviction regardless of their private information is an equilibrium.
However, these are not the counterpart of the uninformative equilibrium in
cheap talk games, because in voting to convict jurors disregard their prior
information as well as all the evidence.

3. Voting as Equilibrium Garbling
We study the form of information garbling that maps continuous cardinal
data into intervals or ordinal ranks. These \partition equilibria" of the
{ 10 {

information-reporting game restrict information in a natural way that prevents full revelation of private evidence and sustains pure strategies.5 For the
most part, we focus on the two-partition equilibrium, where each individual's
report takes on only two possible values. This is equivalent to voting.
Suppose that the committee decision rule is to convict if and only if
S (ra ; rb )  0, where S () is strictly increasing in its arguments. If r1j is
the maximum admissible report and r0j is the minimum admissible report
for each juror j (j = a; b), we must have S (r1a ; r1b )  0 and S (r0a; r0b ) < 0.
We want to construct an equilibrium where r1a and r0a are the only two
reports for A and r1b and r0b are the only two reports for B. Suppose that
S (r1a ; r0b )  0. Then, we must have S (r0a ; r1b )  0. Otherwise, the committee
decision would depend on A's evidence only: regardless of juror B's report,
conviction ensues if A submits report r1a (because S (r1a; r0b )  0 and S (r1a ; )
is increasing), and acquittal ensues if A reports r0a (because S (r0a ; r1b ) < 0
and S (r0a; ) is increasing). The case of S (r1a; r0b )  0 and S (r0a ; r1b )  0 may
be called \unilateral conviction," because either juror submitting the bigger
report r1j ensures conviction, and submitting the smaller report r0j defers the
decision to the other juror. If S (r1a ; r0b ) < 0, the opposite happens. For the
committee decision to depend on A's evidence, we must have S (r0a ; r1b ) < 0.
This is the case of \unanimous conviction," because submitting a bigger
report e ectively defers the decision to the other juror while submitting the
smaller report ensures acquittal.
5 Mixed strategies also prevent full revelation of private information. However, adding

independent noises to observed signals cannot be an equilibrium strategy in general, because it is equivalent to a truthful reporting strategy for the combined \evidence" of signal
plus noise.

{ 11 {

Fix any decision function S (ra ; rb ). There exists an equilibrium of the information-reporting game where juror A reports r0a if ya is
below some threshold and r1a otherwise, and juror B reports r0b if yb is below
some threshold and r1b otherwise.
(i) For the case of unilateral conviction, the thresholds ta and tb satisfy
fga (ta ) Fgb(tb ) a
fia (ta ) Fib(tb ) = k ;
(3:1)
fgb (tb ) Fga(ta ) b
fib (tb ) Fia(ta ) = k :
(ii) For the case of unanimous conviction, the thresholds ta and tb satisfy
fga (ta ) 1 , Fgb(tb ) a
fia (ta ) 1 , Fib(tb ) = k ;
(3:2)
fgb (tb ) 1 , Fga(ta ) b
fib (tb ) 1 , Fia(ta ) = k :
Proof.
Consider only the rst case; the second case is similar. Based on
the observation Y a = ya , juror A's posterior on the probability that the suspect is guilty is  afga (ya ), and the probability that the suspect is innocent
is (1 , a)fia (ya ), where the normalizing factor  is chosen to make the
probabilities sum to one. By submitting report r1a , juror A ensures conviction. His expected cost (from false conviction) is k1afia (ya ). If he submits
report r0a instead, the verdict depends on juror B's report. From A's point
of view, the suspect will be wrongly convicted with probability 1 , Fib(tb ),
and wrongly acquitted with probability Fgb(tb ). Juror A's total expected loss
from the two types of errors is then k1afia (ya )[1 , Fib(tb )]+ k2afga (ya)Fgb (tb ).
Comparing the costs of the two reports shows that submitting r1a is preferred
to submitting r0a if and only if
fga (ya ) Fgb(tb ) a
(3:3)
fia (ya ) Fib(tb )  k :
Proposition 3.1.

{ 12 {

The monotone likelihood ratio property implies that reporting r1a is better
than reporting r0a for all ya  ta . Furthermore, when juror B is using the
two-partition strategy, no other report gives a strictly lower cost than does
r1a when ya  ta . The argument for juror B is symmetric.
Q.E.D.
The thresholds for the two members depend only on whether conviction is reached unilaterally or unanimously. For any given decision function
S (ra ; rb ), one can generally nd many values of the reports (r0a ; r1a ; r0b ; r1b ) to
support the same equilibrium of threshold reporting strategies.6 Similarly,
for given values of the reports (r0a ; r1a ; r0b ; r1b ), one can generally nd many
functions S (ra; rb ) to support the same equilibrium of threshold reporting
strategies. In the following analysis of the two-partition equilibrium, we
make no reference to the decision function S (ra; rb ), but instead refer to the
smaller report of each member as a vote for acquittal and the bigger report
as a vote for conviction. The two cases of unilateral conviction and unilateral acquittal give similar results. For brevity of the analysis, we focus on
the case of unilateral conviction. Unless otherwise mentioned, the results for
unanimous conviction are parallel. The two cases are compared towards the
end of this paper.
Notice that Proposition 3.1 derives voting as an equilibrium of information garbling under private information; voting is not assumed to be the
committee decision rule. Perhaps an example with an explicit decision function is helpful to illustrate this point. For many distributions where Y a and
Y b have the same conditional distributions, the sample mean is a sucient
6 Given any partition equilibrium, the choice of reports has to be coordinated. The
committee may adopt a particular rule to facilitate the coordination. An example is the
point system used in sports like gure skating or gymnastics.

{ 13 {

statistic for optimal statistical decision when evidence is public information.
The optimal decision rule (2.1) takes the linear form \convict if and only
if ya + yb  ," where  represents \the standard of proof." Now suppose
that evidence is private information and the committee decision function is
S (ra ; rb ) = ra + rb , . To avoid uninteresting indeterminacies that may
arise when jurors submit unbounded reports, we assume that reports are restricted to [0; 1]. Then, a meaningful standard of proof  is positive but not
greater than 2. When 0 <   1, there is unilateral conviction, and when
1 <   2, there is unanimous conviction. Although the space of permissible
reports in the information-reporting game is continuous, the jurors e ectively
report only \convict" or \acquit" in equilibrium. Furthermore, the standard
of proof  can vary continuously in the information-reporting game, but in
equilibrium, the e ective standard of proof can only be requiring at least one
vote for conviction (0 <   1) or requiring two votes (1 <   2).
The equilibrium conditions in the reporting game can be understood
in terms of a \pivotal voter" argument (Feddersen and Pesendorfer, 1997).
Strategic voting requires that each juror cast his vote as if it were pivotal. For
the case of unilateral conviction, juror A's vote is pivotal if and only if juror
B votes for acquittal. The likelihood ratio for the event that Y a = ya and B
votes acquittal is given by the left-hand-side of (3.3). The optimal decision
rule for juror A is to vote for conviction if and only if this likelihood ratio is
greater than or equal to ka. An alternative way to see why pivotal voting is
optimal is to consider how jurors choose the threshold rule before observing
the signal. Anticipating that juror B uses a voting rule with threshold tb ,
juror A chooses his threshold ta to minimize the expected loss

k1a(1 , Fia(ta )Fib(tb )) + k2aFga(ta )Fgb(tb ):
{ 14 {

In the above expression, juror A's choice of threshold ta a ects his expected
loss only when Y b < tb . The rst order condition for an optimal threshold
ta is precisely (3.1).
Information aggregation under strategic voting is analyzed in a series
of papers by Feddersen and Pesendorfer (1996; 1997; 1998). Our model differs from these models of strategic voting in several respects. By using a
richer information structure with continuously distributed private signals,
we are able to study a richer set of information manipulation in committee decision-making. Instead of the mixed-strategy equilibria of Feddersen
and Pesendorfer, we study partition equilibria in the information-reporting
game, which will allow us to study in detail obfuscation, exaggeration, and
abstention as distinctive forms of evidence manipulation. Also, we do not
impose voting as the collective decision rule. We start with an information
aggregation rule that is optimal in the absence of strategic manipulation and
derive voting as a possible equilibrium outcome of information garbling. In
the following analysis of the two-partition equilibrium as an equilibrium of
strategic voting, we go beyond the pivotal voting argument of Feddersen and
Pesendorfer, which is valid regardless of whether or not the preferences of
committee members coincide. We emphasize the role of con icting interests
in committee decision-making, and address how con icts a ect information
manipulation and information sharing and the ex ante welfare of the committee members.

3.1. Uniqueness and stability of equilibrium
Equations (3.1) de ne \reaction functions," and the equilibrium is an intersection of the two curves in the (ta ; tb) plane. For j = a; b, denote
{ 15 {

lj () = fgj ()=fij (), and Lj () = Fgj ()=Fij (). By the monotone likelihood ratio property that lj is an increasing function, Lj () is also increasing. Thus,
the two reaction functions are downward sloping in the (ta; tb ) plane. A

sucient condition for a unique intersection is that one reaction function is
steeper than the other whenever the two intersect.7 This condition is satis ed if lj ()=Lj () is monotone. Uniqueness of equilibrium is necessary for
analysis of equilibrium properties.
If in addition lj ()=Lj () is increasing, then the equilibrium is globally
\stable" in a pseudo-dynamic sense that starting from any initial values the
trajectory of the two thresholds converges to the intersection of the reaction
curves. A sucient condition for stability is that juror A's reaction function
is steeper than that of juror B. Direct calculations verify that this is true
if lj ()=Lj () is increasing. As is the case for many static games, stability in
the pseudo-dynamic sense is required to avoid perverse comparative statics
(Dixit 1986). Figure 1 depicts the reaction functions for the case where Y a
and Y b are normally distributed, which satis es the increasing condition on
lj ()=Lj ().
The case of unanimous conviction is analogous. De ne Lj () = [1 ,
Fgj ()]=[1 , Fij ()]. The monotone likelihood ratio property also implies that
Lj () is an increasing function. Therefore, as in the rst case, the assumption that lj ()=Lj () is increasing is sucient to ensure that equilibrium is
unique and stable. For example, if Y j is normally distributed given guilt or
innocence, both lj =Lj and lj =Lj are monotonically increasing.
7 Existence of an intersection of two functions can be guaranteed under appropriate

assumptions. For example,
if for each j = a; b the support of Y j is compact and the
likelihood ratio function lj is unbounded over the support, then the Brouwer xed-point
theorem can be applied to the equations (3.1) to show that an equilibrium exists.

{ 16 {

Figure 1

Reaction functions in the two-partition equilibrium
A’s reaction curve

tb
B’s reaction curve

ta

3.2. Information manipulation and information sharing
This sub-section presents a few comparative statics results for the information voting game that illustrate the tension between information manipulation and information sharing. With unilateral conviction, equations (3.1)
imply that if Y a and Y b have the same conditional distributions, then ka > kb
implies ta > tb . That is, if juror A is more biased toward acquittal than juror
B, the equilibrium threshold for conviction is higher for juror A than that
for juror B. For the same observation value Y a = Y b = y, juror A votes to
acquit while juror B votes to convict if y 2 (tb ; ta ). Therefore jta , tb j can
be thought of as the \area of disagreement" between the two jurors.
The condition that lj =Lj is increasing implies that dta =dka > 0 and
dtb =dka < 0. Thus, the area of disagreement increases as con ict of interests,
{ 17 {

jka , kbj, increases. As juror A becomes more biased toward acquittal and

his standard for conviction increases, juror B counters by lowering his own
standard, which induces juror A to increase ta further. The increase in the
equilibrium threshold ta can be decomposed into two parts: the increase
due to shift of A's reaction function, and the increase along A's reaction
function due to decrease in B's threshold. See Figure 1. The second part
shows that the area of disagreement in committee decision-making is larger
than that implied by inherent con icts in preferences, due to the strategic
manipulation and counter-manipulation of reporting thresholds. In this sense
con icts tend to exaggerate favorable evidence. When juror A is more biased
toward acquittal than juror B, juror A raises his threshold not only because
of the concern for false conviction, but also to balance juror B's opposite
tendency to convict. Juror A votes to acquit more often than in the absence
of juror B's manipulation.
Although con icts cause manipulation, incentives to exaggerate favorable evidence are balanced in equilibrium by incentives to share information.
Comparing the equilibrium with how each juror would make the decision
based on his own private information shows how jurors share information. If
juror j (j = a; b) makes the decision alone, the optimal decision rule convicts
if and only if own evidence yj exceeds a threshold t^j that satis es:

fgj (t^j ) j
=k :
fij (t^j )

(3:4)

Comparing (3.4) to the equilibrium condition (3.1), since Lj () < 1, t^j is
lower than tj . When juror j observes evidence yj between t^j and tj , he
votes to acquit even though he would have chosen conviction if he were the
only decision-maker. Juror j thus utilizes the information of the other juror
{ 18 {

by casting the decisive vote for conviction less frequently. Note that this is
true independent of juror j 's preferences. Even if juror j is biased toward
conviction, the need to utilize the fellow juror's information still makes him
more \conservative" towards conviction. In the case of unanimous conviction, the decisive vote is acquittal instead of conviction: each juror utilizes
the information of the other juror by voting for acquittal less frequently than
if the decision were made on the basis of own information.
Incentives to share information under con icting interests can also be
examined by considering how voting behavior changes when one juror's signal
becomes more discriminating. To borrow from the concept of statistical
power, we say that a signal is more discriminating than another if it results
in a lower probability of type I error, holding xed the probability of type
II error. Consider a modi cation of the structure of information available to
the jurors. Juror A still observes Y a. Juror B observes Y b with probability
1 , , and observes the true state of guilt or innocence with probability .
An increase in  improves the power of the signal available to juror B. The
event that B votes acquittal has a likelihood ratio Lb , where
(1 , )F b (tb )
Lb =  + (1 , )gF b(tb ) :
i 

The numerator of Lb is the probability of committing a type II error by juror
B, and the denominator is one minus the probability of his committing a type
I error. Since Lb is decreasing in , a higher value of  corresponds to more
discriminating evidence. In Figure 1, an increase in  causes A's reaction
function to shift to the right. The e ect is the same as an increase in A's
bias toward acquittal: ta increases and tb decreases. The interpretation is
straightforward. Voting to convict decides the verdict regardless of the value
{ 19 {

of the other juror's signal. Voting to acquit, on the other hand, defers the
decision to the other juror. When juror B gains access to more discriminating
evidence, juror A takes advantage of the improved information by raising
ta and deferring the decision to juror B. This is achieved by raising the
conviction threshold ta .
The analysis is symmetric for the case of unanimous conviction. Given
the modi ed information structure,
 + (1 , )(1 , Fgb(tb ))
b
L = (1 , )(1 , F b(tb )) :
i 
An increase in  increases Lb , so ta falls and tb rises. Voting to acquit
decides the nal outcome of the case. Juror A avoids submitting a decisive
vote in order to take advantage of the more discriminating evidence from
juror B. He therefore lowers ta and votes for acquittal less often. Even
if juror A is biased toward acquittal, the need to utilize the fellow juror's
superior information still makes him more conservative towards casting the
decisive vote.

3.3. Con icts and welfare
Con icts reduce the ex ante welfare of jurors. There is a close relation
between the extent of divergence in preferences, jka , kbj, and expected losses
in the information voting game. With unilateral conviction, equilibrium
expected loss to juror A is given by
E[C a(Y a; Y b)] = k1a(1 , Fia(ta )Fib(tb )) + k2aFga (ta )Fgb(tb ):
Di erentiating with respect to kb and using the equilibrium condition (3.1)
for juror A,
dE[C a(Y a; Y b)] = [,kaf b (tb )F a(ta ) + kaf b(tb )F a(ta )] dtb :
(3:5)

dkb

1 i  i 

{ 20 {

2 g 

g  dk b

Since dtb=dkb > 0 when lj =Lj is increasing, dE[C a(Y a ; Y b)]=dkb has the
same sign as kb , ka. For example, if kb > ka, a further increase in kb raises
juror A's expected loss in the equilibrium.
Con icts reduce welfare because strategic manipulation becomes more
important. A committee with less cooperation uses information less eciently and welfare in the voting game is lower than in a full information
equilibrium. Equation (3.5) shows that dE[C a(Y a; Y b)]=dkb has the same
sign as kb ,ka, and similarly dE[C b(Y a; Y b)]=dka has the same sign as ka ,kb.
If ka = kb there is no con ict of interest in the jury, and equilibrium threshold choices minimize the expected loss for both jurors. If ka < kb, raising the
equilibrium threshold for juror A and lowering it for juror B will reduce the
expected loss for both jurors, because the rst order gain will outweigh the
second order loss. If we de ne \cooperative decision-making" as choosing
thresholds to minimize a weighted sum of expected loss for the two jurors,
then con icts in preferences generate incentives to deviate from the cooperative decision-making. Starting from the cooperative solution, if juror A is
more concerned with false acquittal than juror B is, A will lower his threshold for conviction, which induces B to raise his threshold in order to balance
A's bias for conviction. In equilibrium, both jurors are made worse o .

3.4. Do-it-yourself, delegation, and taking turns
Since con icting preferences lead to strategic manipulation in voting and welfare loss for both jurors, do the gains from information sharing in a committee
will be sucient to outweigh the losses from strategic voting? In general the
answer is \yes." Even though votes are manipulated, aggregation produces
better outcomes than alternatives that do not aggregate private information
when con icts are not too large.
{ 21 {

Let E[C a(Y a)] denote juror A's unconditional expected loss when he
alone makes the decision based on his own information. Then
E[C a(Y a)] = k1a(1 , Fia(t^a)) + k2aFga(t^a );
where the optimal threshold t^a satis es condition (3.4). Consider the di erence D1a = E[C a(Y a; Y b)] , E[C a(Y a)] as a function of kb. We showed above
that dE[C a(Y a; Y b)]=dkb < 0 for kb < ka and dE[C a(Y a; Y b)]=dkb > 0 for
kb > ka. Since E[C a(Y a)] is independent of kb, the di erence D1a decreases
for kb < ka and then increases for kb > ka, reaching a minimum at kb = ka.
In the limiting case when kb approaches in nity, juror B always votes acquittal and lets juror A make the decision. Therefore, D1a = 0. At the other
limit, when kb approaches zero, juror B ensures conviction by himself. Juror
A's expected loss is then simply k1a, and the di erence D1a is given by

k1aFia(t^a) , k2aFga(t^a ):
By the de nition of t^a, we have k1afia (ya ) > k2afga(ya ) for all ya < ^ta. Integrating over the range ya  ^ta then establishes that D1a > 0. Figure 2 shows
D1a as a function of kb. From A's point of view, do-it-yourself decision-making
is preferred to jury decision-making only if kb is suciently smaller than ka.
Note that D1a is negative at kb = ka. With no con ict of preferences, jury
decision-making dominates do-it-yourself decision-making because information is better.
Let E[C b(Y a)] denote juror B's unconditional expected loss when juror A alone makes the decision based on his private information. Clearly, if
Y a and Y b have identical conditional distributions, E[C b(Y b)]  E[C b(Y a)].
That is, each juror always prefers deciding by himself to letting the other juror make the decision. Let D2b (kb) be the di erence between the expected loss
{ 22 {

Figure 2

Welfare comparison: do-it-yourself versus committee

0

ka
a

D1

kb

to juror B under jury decision-making and his expected loss if he delegates
the decision to A. Then, for all ka,

D2b = D1b + E[C b(Y b)] , E[C b(Y a)]  D1b :
From Figure 2 (interchanging the roles for A and B), a necessary (but not
sucient) condition for D2b to be positive is that ka < kb.
The above analysis implies that mutually agreed delegation cannot occur. For juror B to prefer delegating to A, D2b must be positive. For juror
A to accept the delegation, D1a must be positive. A necessary condition
for the former is that ka < kb, and a necessary condition for the latter is
kb < ka. These two conditions are incompatible. The intuition of this result
is clear from its derivation. For the delegation of decision-making to A to be
{ 23 {

agreeable to both jurors, the bene ts of using B's information in committee
decision-making must be small to both A and B. Since conviction can be
ensured unilaterally, the bene ts are small to B only if A is more biased
toward conviction, and the bene ts are small to A only if B is more biased
toward conviction. Thus, if delegating decision-making to A is acceptable to
A, it will not be so to B.8
We can also show that it is never a Pareto improvement for the two
jurors to dissolve the committee and make decisions by taking turns. Let
D3a = (D1a + D2a )=2 be the di erence in juror A's expected loss from jury
decision-making and his expected loss from taking turns. Since kb < ka is a
necessary condition both for D1a  0 and for D2a  0, it is also a necessary
condition for D3a  0. On the other hand, for juror B to prefer taking turns
to jury decision-making (i.e., D3b  0), a necessary condition is kb > ka. It
follows that at least one party will object to dissolving the committee and
making decisions by taking turns instead.9
Welfare comparisons between jury decision-making and delegation or
taking turns, do not change if conviction is reached unanimously instead of
unilaterally. With unanimous conviction, the decisive vote is acquittal. For
the delegation of decision-making from to B to be agreeable to both jurors,
8 Side payments can result in mutually agreed delegation. If A cares about both false

conviction and false acquittal suciently more than B , there will exist side payments from
A to B that the delegation of decision-making to A is acceptable to both. Unfortunately,
side payments involve inter-personal comparisons of expected loss, which are not meaningful in our model. Individual juror's behavior is not changed as long as the ratio of type
I cost to type II cost is the same, but comparisons of expected loss depend on the level of
the two costs.
9 The conclusion that it is never Pareto optimal to make decisions by taking turns may

not hold when individual members must bear the cost of gathering their own information.
The reason is that information is a public good in committee decision-making, and is
under-provided due to the free-rider problem. For implications of the free-rider problem
to committee decision-making, see Li (1999).

{ 24 {

the bene ts of using A's information in committee decision-making must be
small to both A and B. Since acquittal can be ensured unilaterally, the benets are small to A only if B is more biased toward acquittal, but the bene ts
are small to B only if A is more biased toward acquittal. Delegation or taking turns can never Pareto dominate jury decision-making because the gains
from information sharing will outweigh the loss from strategic information
manipulation for at least one juror.

3.5. Sequential voting
The preceding analysis of equilibrium assumes that individuals submit votes
without knowing what votes others have cast. In many settings individuals
in a committee express their positions one by one, so that people know the
votes of those who voted before them. How does sequential voting di er from
simultaneous voting?
Consider the strategy for the juror B. Suppose that juror A votes rst
and adopts a two-partition strategy: convict if and only if ya  ta. With
unilateral conviction, if A votes for conviction, there is no decision for B to
make. If A votes for acquittal, then B's vote will be decisive. In this case,
B knows that Y b = yb and ya < ta. If he votes to convict, his expected loss
from false conviction is k1bfib (yb)Fia (ta), where  is a normalizing factor. If
he votes to acquit, his expected loss from false acquittal is k2bfgb(yb )Fga(ta ).
Juror B therefore votes to convict if and only if yb  tb, where tb satis es

fgb (tb) Fga(ta ) b
fib (tb) Fia(ta ) = k :
This condition is exactly the in equation (3.1). Now consider A's problem.
If A votes to convict, the case is decided regardless of juror B's vote. If A
{ 25 {

votes to acquit, he expects juror B to adopt a two-partition strategy with
the threshold determined by the above equation. But the decision problem
A faces as a rst-mover is exactly the same as the problem he faces when
the two members vote simultaneously. Thus, the sequential voting game has
the same as simultaneous voting.
There are two reasons sequential voting is equivalent to simultaneous
voting in this particular setting. First, the pivotal voting argument is equally
valid in both situations: the threshold of the second juror does not depend
on whether he knows how the rst juror has voted. Second, the rst mover
is unable to commit to a decision rule. Unlike, say, in an oligopoly game
where the strategy is directly observable in a sequential model, the strategy
in the strategic voting game is not observable even when the reports are
sequentially submitted. Strategies in this game take the form of reporting
some number if and only if the private signal exceeds a certain threshold.
While the threshold value can be made public through various devices, the
value of the signal is not public by assumption. As a result, any attempt to
commit to a certain strategy is not veri able. Because of this inability to
commit, juror A cannot manipulate juror B's decision rule, even though B's
threshold depends on A's threshold through equation (3.1).
To see the latter point, suppose A could commit to a decision rule before
he observes his signal. Then, his optimal threshold ta would minimize the
unconditional expected cost, E[C a(Y a ; Y b)]. At ta equal to ta , the equilibrium value without commitment, the derivative of expected loss with respect
to ta is

dE[C a(Y a; Y b)] = [,kaF a(ta)f b (tb ) + kaF a(ta )f b (tb )] dtb ;
1 i  i 
2 g  g  dta
dta
{ 26 {

(3:6)

where the function tb(ta) is de ned according to the reaction function of B.
Since dtb=dta < 0 and the term in brackets in (3.6) has the same sign as
kb , ka, dE[C a(Y a; Y b)]=dta has the same sign as ka , kb at ta = ta . Thus,
unless ka = kb, A always has incentives to manipulate his threshold in order
to in uence the second juror's threshold, if A could commit to a decision
rule. In particular, if ka > kb, juror A has incentives to lower his equilibrium
threshold for conviction. By doing so, he raises the equilibrium threshold for
juror B.
The above analysis implies that both jurors are better o when juror
A can commit to a threshold than when he is unable to commit.10 It was
shown above that manipulation of thresholds by the two jurors under simultaneous voting leads to ineciency loss for both of them relative to what can
achieved through a commitment to jointly chosen thresholds. In particular,
manipulation implies that the di erence between the equilibrium thresholds
is greater than what is implied by the di erence in the preferences of the two
jurors. The same sub-optimal outcome results under sequential voting when
the rst voter cannot commit to a threshold. But if that juror were able
to commit, he would no longer face the incentive to respond to the other's
threshold after observing his private signal. This improves juror B's welfare
as well as juror A's. More precisely, suppose ka > kb, so that juror A is more
biased than juror B toward acquittal. Juror A would lower his conviction
threshold, making B better o . Juror B would raise his own threshold in
response, which makes A better o .
10 As in oligopoly models, commitment of the rst-mover to a threshold decision rule

can be dicult because it is time-inconsistent. However, credible commitment may be
achieved by delegating decision-makingthrough clear procedures and rules. Our result here
is consistent with the observation that a bene cial side of bureaucratic decision-making
procedures is reduction in strategic manipulations of information in the committee.

{ 27 {

4. Abstention
So far abstention has not been allowed in voting. This assumption may
appear innocuous. In the case of unilateral conviction, for example, allowing
jurors to abstain from voting after observing their evidence will not change
behavior because abstention is equivalent to voting for acquittal. However,
if abstention is allowed, jurors take the abstention of others into account
and equilibrium thresholds change. In this model abstention improves the
quality of decision-making.
We need to specify what happens when both jurors decide to abstain.
The simplest way is to specify a \default decision" when both abstain. If
the default is acquittal, abstaining is still equivalent to voting for acquittal
and therefore has no e ect on the equilibrium. But suppose the default is
conviction. Then a vote to acquit by A results in conviction only if B votes
to convict, while abstention by A results in conviction when B either votes
to convict or abstains. Since abstention is more likely to result in conviction
than a vote for acquittal, we expect equilibrium strategies to involve two
thresholds, tj1 < tj2 , such that a juror strategy is

8
>
< \convict";
j
j
R (y ) = > \abstain";
: \acquit";

if yj  tj2
if tj2 > yj  tj1
if yj < tj1.
Using similar reasoning as in the proof of Proposition 3.1, we can establish that the thresholds for juror A satisfy:
fga (ta1 ) Fgb(tb2 ) , Fgb(tb1) a
fia (ta1 ) Fib(tb2 ) , Fib(tb1) = k ;
(4:1)
fga (ta2 ) Fgb(tb1) a
fia (ta2 ) Fib(tb1) = k ;
{ 28 {

and a symmetric pair of equations holds for juror B. The term (Fgb (tb2) ,
Fgb(tb1 ))=(Fib (tb2) , Fib(tb1 )) in the rst equation of (4.1) is the likelihood that
B abstains. In that case, A can guarantee acquittal only if he votes to
acquit. The term Fgb(tb1 )=Fib(tb1) in the second equation is the likelihood that
B votes to acquit. In that case, A can guarantee acquittal if he abstains. The
monotone likelihood ratio condition implies that (Fgj (tj2) , Fgj (tj1 ))=(Fij (tj2 ) ,
Fij (tj1 )) > fgj (tj1)=fij (tj1 ) and Fgj (tj1 )=Fij (tj1 ) < fgj (tj1)=fij (tj1 ). Then, if tb2 > tb1,
(4.1) implies that ta2 > ta1 , and vice versa. Thus, the thresholds (ta1 ; ta2 ; tb1; tb2 )
de ned by (4.1) form a Nash equilibrium.
Comparing the thresholds in the equilibrium with abstention with the
equilibrium thresholds without abstention shows that allowing abstention
makes committee members more \careful" in casting their votes. If the
evidence is not very strong either way, a juror chooses to abstain. Standards
of evidence for voting to convict or to acquit are raised so that the probability
of voting either way is reduced for both members.
Proposition 4.1.

then tj2 > tj > tj1.

If lj ()=Lj () is monotonically increasing for each j = a; b,

. See the appendix.

Q.E.D.

Proof

Allowing abstention is formally identical to allowing each committee
member to submit three reports instead of two.11 With no con ict of preferences, truthful revelation of private evidence is an equilibrium. Abstention
11 In the case of unilateral conviction, the two reports rj and rj for each juror j
0
1

satisfy the property that S (r1a ; r0b )  0, S (r0a ; r1b )  0, and S (r0a ; r0b ) < 0. Find a report
ra 2 (r0a ; r1a ) for juror A such that S (ra ;r0b ) < 0. Since S (ra ; r1b ) > S (r0a ;r1b )  0, we can
nd a report rb 2 (r0b ; r1b ) for juror B such that S (ra ; rb )  0 and S (r0a ; rb ) < 0. The three
reports r0j < rj < r1j for each juror j , together with the decision function S (ra ; rb ), then
implement the voting rule with conviction as the default decision when both abstain.

{ 29 {

cannot improve the quality of committee decision, because valuable evidence
is thrown away. However, when preferences con ict and abstention is not
allowed, members are forced to take more extreme positions in voting. This
is shown in Proposition 4.1. Allowing abstention improves the expected welfare of committee members by reducing harmful strategic manipulations in
the committee. Moreover, abstention allows each juror to adopt a reporting strategy involving three partitions instead of two. Finer partitioning of
information improves the welfare of the committee.
To illustrate how the option to abstain improves welfare of the committee, we consider a Cournot tatonnement process that begins with the twopartition equilibrium without abstention and converges towards the threepartition equilibrium with abstention. Note that any two-partition strategy
can be viewed as a three-partition strategy by adding an additional threshold
for each juror appropriately. For j = a; b, let yj and yj be the lower and the
upper bound of the support Y j . If z1a = ya and z2a = ta are juror A's two
thresholds, and z1b = tb and z2b = y b are B's two thresholds, the voting outcome is the same as the two-partition equilibrium de ned by (3.1). In each
iteration of the Cournot tatonnement, the new thresholds are chosen as best
responses to the previous thresholds. This process converges monotonically
to the three-partition equilibrium. See Figure 3. Furthermore, expected cost
for each juror falls in each iteration.
Expected loss under the three-partition equilibrium is
lower than expected loss under the two-partition equilibrium for each committee member.
Proposition 4.2.

. See the appendix.

Q.E.D.

Proof

{ 30 {

Figure 3

Cournot tatonnement: from two-partition to three-partition equilibrium
za1

•a
y_

za2
|

ta1

|

•_a

|

ta
*

t2a

y

zb1

•b
y_

|

zb2
|

|

t1b tb

t2b

*

•_b
y

Juror A is relatively biased toward conviction and B toward acquittal.
The proof of Proposition 4.2 shows that the reduction in the expected loss is
due to two e ects of abstention. One e ect arises from the common interests
in the committee to use whatever information available: allowing abstention
provides a ner partition of information. The other e ect is the increase in
A's threshold of conviction and the corresponding decrease in B's threshold
of acquittal. Juror A becomes more reluctant to unilaterally convict and
juror B lowers the threshold of voting for acquittal. This strategic e ect
arises from the con icting interests in the committee. It disappears when
ka = kb. Thus, the option to abstain has the additional bene t of softening
the positions that committees members are forced to take when abstention
is disallowed.

5. Finer Partitions
If the option to abstain increases the e ective number of partitions in the
information-reporting game from two to three, are there other equilibria that
{ 31 {

support ner partitioning of information? The answer is yes, but di erences
in preferences limit how ne the partitions can be.
Fix any number N  1 and a committee decision rule \convict if and
only if S (ra ; rb )  0" with a strictly increasing function S . We construct an
equilibrium where each juror j (j = a; b) uses a (N + 1)-partition strategy,
with reports r0j < r1j < : : : < rNj , such that for each n = 0; : : : ; N , rnj is reported if yj 2 [tjn; tjn+1), where tj1; : : : ; tjN are the N thresholds (tj0 = yj and
tjN +1 = yj are de ned as the lower and upper bound of the support of Y j .)
The reports r0j ; : : : ; rNj satisfy the property (and a symmetric one by interchanging the roles of a and b) that for each n = 0; 1; : : : ; N , S (rNa ,n; rnb )  0
and S (rNa ,n,1; rnb ) < 0. This is a \pivotal" condition for the reports. Unlike the equilibrium with two-partition strategies, each juror can convey the
strength of his evidence by choosing di erent reports. A report rnb by juror B results in conviction only when juror A chooses a report at least as
large as rNa ,n. We consider the case of unilateral conviction by assuming
S (rNa ; r0b )  0 and S (r0a; rNb )  0: submitting a report rNj ensures conviction
regardless of the report of the other juror.
Existence of the reports that satisfy the above property can be shown
by induction, similar to how Section 4 showed that abstention can be implemented by adding another report for each committee member. Moreover, if
juror A adopts the above reporting strategy with the N +1 reports r0a ; : : : ; rNa ,
juror B has no incentives to use reports other than r0b ; : : : ; rNb . For example, any report rb 2 (rnb ; rnb +1) such that S (rNa ,n,1; rb ) < 0 is the same as
rnb (because both result in conviction if and only if ra  rNa ,n), and any
rb 2 (rnb ; rnb +1) such that S (rNa ,n,1; rb )  0 is the same as rnb +1. As in the
two-partition case, many sets of reports satisfy the pivotal conditions for an
(N + 1)-partition equilibrium, but they all lead to the same equilibrium.
{ 32 {

For illustration, suppose each juror submits a score of 1 to 10, and the
verdict is conviction if the total score is at least 7. Then submitting any
score of 7 or above will ensure conviction unilaterally and is strategically
equivalent. Each juror has therefore 7 strategically distinct reports. A report of, say, 4 leads to conviction if and only if the other juror submits a
report at least as large as 3. This decision rule induces a 7-partition equilibrium. If the committee convicts whenever the total score is at least 15,
then submitting any score of 4 or below will ensure acquittal unilaterally.
This induces another 7-partition equilibrium corresponding to the case of
unanimous conviction.
Deriving conditions for the (N +1)-partition equilibrium is a straightforward extension of the proof of Proposition 3.1. A pivotal voting argument is
also available. By construction, for each n = 1; : : : ; N , a choice between rna,1
and rna for juror A is pivotal only if juror B reports rNb ,n: if juror A reports
rna,1 there is acquittal, and if he reports rna there is conviction. Juror A therefore makes the choice between the two reports conditional on his evidence
Y a = ya and on juror B's report rb = rNb ,n (that is, yb 2 [tbN ,n; tbN ,n+1)).
The expected loss to juror A from choosing Ran is

k1afia (ya )(Fib (tbN ,n+1) , Fib(tbN ,n));
and from choosing rna,1 is

k2afga (ya )(Fgb (tbN ,n+1) , Fgb(tbN ,n));
where  is a probability normalization factor under Bayesian updating. The
term Fkb(tbN ,n+1) , Fkb(tbN ,n) (k = i; g) is the probability that B's evidence
{ 33 {

lies in the interval that allows A to be pivotal. Thus, reporting rna instead of
rna,1 is optimal if and only if ya  tan where the threshold tan satis es

fga (tan ) Fgb(tbN ,n+1) , Fgb(tbN ,n) a
fia (tan ) Fib(tbN ,n+1) , Fib(tbN ,n) = k :

(5:1)

From the monotone likelihood ratio property, we can establish that [Fgj (u) ,
Fgj (v)]=[Fij (u) , Fij (v)] is increasing in both u and v for all u > v.12 Since the
above argument holds for n = 1; : : : ; N , the thresholds de ned by equations
(5.1) satisfy ta1 < : : : < taN . Thus, the pivotal voting argument proves that if
juror B uses a reporting strategy with thresholds tb1 < : : : < tbN , the strategy
de ned by (5.1) is optimal for juror A.
To conclude, the thresholds for an equilibrium with a (N + 1)-partition
strategies are described by the N equations in (5.1), plus a symmetric set
of N equations for juror B. The conditions (3.1) for the two-partition equilibrium and conditions (4.1) for the three-partition equilibrium are special
cases of (5.1). If jurors have identical preferences, the partitions get ner
and ner as N increases. The solution converges to that implied by the
Neyman-Pearson lemma, and full information revelation occurs. However,
con icts from di erences in preferences place an upper bound on how ne
the partitions can be in equilibrium.13
12 The derivative of this ratio with respect to u has the same sign as fgj (u)[F j (u) ,
i

Fij (v)] , fij (u)[Fgj (u) , Fgj (v)]. By the monotone likelihood ratio property, fgj (u)fij (y) 
fij (u)fgj (y) for all y  u. Integrating over y from v to u gives fgj (u)[Fij (u) , Fij (v)] 
fij (u)[Fgj (u) , Fgj (v)]. Monotonicity in v can be proved in a similar manner.
13 For any given N , the equations (5.1) de ne a Nash equilibrium. Existence of the
equilibrium for an arbitrary N can be guaranteed in the same way as in the two-partition
case. This existence result does not contradict the result in the following proposition that
the number of partitions is bounded on any strict subset of the support of evidence. For
a larger N , more of the corresponding equilibrium thresholds are squeezed into the two
ends of the support.

{ 34 {

j ; y j ] in the
If ka 6= kb, then for any interval [ymin
max
support of Y j there is an  > 0, such that for any equilibrium thresholds
j ; y j ], tj , tj > .
tjn; tjn,1 2 [ymin
max n n,1
Proposition 5.1.

. The monotone likelihood ratio property implies that, for all u > v,

Proof

lj (u) > (Fgj (u) , Fgj (v))=(Fij (u) , Fij (v)) > lj (v);
where lj () = fgj () = fij (). From this result and from the equilibrium
conditions for tan,1 and for tbN +1,n, we have

la(tan,1 )lb(tbN +1,n) < ka;
lb(tbN +1,n)la(tan) > kb:

(5:2)

Adding these inequalities:

lb(tbN +1,n)la0( )(tan , tan,1) > kb , ka;
where  is between tan and tan,1. Similar manipulations using the equations
for tan and for tbN +1,n yield

lb(tbN +1,n)la0( )(tan , tan,1) > ka , kb:
Therefore

a b
tan , tan,1 > lb(tbjk , k)laj 0 ( ) :
N +1,n

If tan , tan,1  , then since  can be arbitrarily small and since lb() and la0()
are both bounded over any xed interval, the above inequality contradicts
ka 6= kb.
Q.E.D.
{ 35 {

Figure 4

)

Con icts and bound on neness of partitions

t bN+1-n

tb
la lb = kb
la lb = ka
t an-1

(

t an

ta

Figure 4 illustrates the argument of Proposition 5.1 for the case of kb >
ka. The monotone likelihood ratio property imposes bounds on the relevant
thresholds as represented by the two inequalities (5.2). Since kb > ka, the
curve lalb = kb is to the right of lalb = ka in Figure 4. For any xed threshold
tan,1 of juror A, the corresponding threshold tbN +1,n of B is bounded from
above through the rst inequality of (5.2). Once tbN +1,n is bounded from
above, the corresponding threshold tan of A is bounded from below through
the second inequality of (5.2). Thus, the distance between tan,1 and tan is
bounded from below. Proposition 5.1 implies that the number of partitions
a , y a )= on the
in an equilibrium strategy of juror A is at most (ymax
min
a
a
interval [ymin ; ymax]. Figure 4 makes explicit that the upper bound on the
neness of equilibrium partitions for a given interval depends negatively on
{ 36 {

the di erence in preferences, jka , kbj. If the two jurors have a greater
di erence in preferences, the two curves in Figure 4 are further apart, and
the lower bound on the distance between adjacent thresholds for each juror
becomes larger. Great con icts within the committee make ne partitions
impossible.14

6. Decision Rules and Decision-making
In a two-partition equilibrium, there are essentially just two decision rules
for a committee of two members, unilateral conviction and unanimous conviction. It might seem that requiring two votes for conviction instead of one
is a more \stringent" standard of proof. But this is only true when jurors
cast their votes without regard to the voting rule. Since each juror cares
only about the nal verdict rather than his own vote, he votes to convict less
cautiously when unanimity is required, knowing that the other juror may
have information that will lead to a vote against conviction. On the other
hand, if one vote is sucient for a guilty verdict, each juror is more cautious
in casting a vote to convict, knowing that such a vote would have a decisive
e ect regardless of the other juror's information. More precisely, the monotone likelihood ratio property implies that for each j = a; b, Lj ()  1 and
Lj ()  1. It then follows from Proposition 3.1 that tj  tj . Thus, both jurors set a lower standard of conviction when the decision rule is changed from
unilateral conviction to unanimous conviction.15 This aspect of comparison
14 Crawford and Sobel (1982) establish a similar result in the context of an information

reporting game with one sender and one receiver.

15 This comparison of decision of decision rules complements the works of Sah and

Stiglitz (1986; 1988), who consider committees without the strategic manipulations that
arise from con icting interests.

{ 37 {

Figure 5

Con icts and personal preference over decision rules
b

b

*

**

C /C

_ _
b
b
C /C
*

**

1.04
1
0.38

1.36

a

a

*

**

C /C

_ _
a
a
C /C
*

**

d

of decision rules illustrates the common interests in sharing information in
committee decision-making.
The extent of con icts in the committee a ects members' preference over
decision rules. When the two jurors have identical interests, they agree on
which decision rule should be used in committee decision-making. By continuity, small di erences in preference do not generate disagreement about
the ex ante choice of decision rule. However, as con icts increase in the
committee, strategic manipulations of information amplify the di erences
in personal preference over decision rules. For a numerical example, let
Fi  N (0; 1) and Fg  N (1; 1) be the common distribution functions, conditional on innocence and on guilt. Then, if the common preference k exceeds
1 so that both jurors are relatively biased toward acquittal, unanimous con{ 38 {

viction is preferred to unilateral conviction. Now, consider how an individual
juror's preference over the decision rule changes in the following comparative statics exercise. Let k1a = k , d, k1b = k + d, and k2a = k2b = 1. As d
increases from 0 to k, ka decreases and kb increases. To examine the role of
equilibrium manipulations of information, de ne a \cooperative" threshold
t under unilateral conviction that satis es l(t )L (t ) = k. By construction,
t minimizes the equally-weighted sum of expected cost to the two jurors under unilateral conviction, regardless of the extent of con icts d. Similarly,
de ne t under unanimous conviction that satis es l(t )L (t ) = k. Figure 5 illustrates how each juror j 's preference over plurality changes with d,
by plotting the ratio of his expected cost under unilateral conviction to the
cost under unanimous conviction. With \cooperative" thresholds, juror B's
preference for unanimous conviction becomes stronger as he becomes more
b increases with d). Juror A initially
biased toward acquittal (i.e., Cb=C
a , but switches his preference to
shares B's preference, as shown by Ca=C
unilateral conviction as he becomes more concerned with false acquittal. In
the numerical example shown (where k = 2), this happens around d = 1:36.
In contrast, equilibrium manipulations of information arising from increasing
con icts between A and B in the non-cooperative game imply a larger di erence in personal preference over decision rule. Figure 5 also plots the ratio of
each juror j 's equilibrium expected cost Cj under unilateral conviction to the
j under unanimous conviction. As with cooperative decision-making,
cost C
b and Ca=C
a becomes greater as d increases,
the di erence between Cb=C
but the divergence goes much faster. Juror A switches his preferred decision
rule from unanimous conviction to unilateral conviction around d = 0:38,
but would prefer unanimous conviction if standards were set cooperatively.
{ 39 {

7. Conclusion
Committee members' incentives to manipulate private information to tilt
decisions toward their personally preferred outcome imply that information
cannot be eciently aggregated by committees. Perhaps this is the basis
for the old joke: \Ques. How do committees make decisions? Ans. Badly."
Nonetheless, committees are used to make many business and other decisions.
We have illuminated some of the reasons for their continued use and survival.
True, self interest and strategic considerations make information pooling
in committees imperfect, but that is relative to some unattainable ideal.
Strategic noise introduced by attempted manipulations of the outcome still
leads to better decisions for all members together than if one of them acted as
\dictator" and made the decision without bene t of other, albeit strategically
manipulated, information. Decisions are better in the sense that not all
members would prefer ex ante to dissolve the committee and randomly select
a \dictator" among them to make less informed decisions.
The reason is that viable committees must share some common goals,
even though individual members might weigh outcomes somewhat di erently.
And members certainly want to gain the statistical advantages of information
sharing and sharpening the signal to noise ratio. What makes the process
work is that the committee rules and procedures are themselves chosen to
temper and control strategic misrepresentations and lter the data in the
best way possible, given self-interested behavior. Procedures are adopted
that coarsen the reporting of information and put a natural limit on feasible
manipulations. They control con ict in an acceptable way. The greater
the di erences of a priori opinion among members, the coarser the rules
must be to control con ict. The quality of committee decisions necessarily
{ 40 {

declines with the degree of con ict. Yet poor as committee decisions might
be when con icts are reasonably large, they still might be better than what
one person could achieve for the combined interests of the group as a whole
from unilateral, and less-informed, decisions.
The two-partition voting mechanism studied in detail here is a very clear
analytical representation of these ideas. In the statistical decision problem
from which it is constructed, all sample information is perfectly aggregated
into a \score." Minimizing the loss function sets a critical score. If the sample
score exceeds the threshold, the object is put into one category, and if it falls
short of the threshold it is put in the other category. Voting in a committee
is a cruder kind of scoring system, but a scoring system nonetheless. Each
person sets his own critical standard endogenously. The object is placed
into one category or another by the committee depending on the proportion
of members whose sample information place it above or below their own
strategically determined personal thresholds.
Some classi cations that would be chosen by a hypothetical perfect aggregation scheme cannot occur in a committee. This ineciency cannot be
eliminated unless there is no con ict. Personal thresholds are chosen to
\undo" the presumed biases and preferences of other members, but not by
enough to completely nullify the information of others. For instance, members defer to those who have more informed sample information|members
who have greater expertise and who are drawing their data out of probability
distributions with greater precision|in the sense that the better informed
members are decisive more often.
While there are few general analytical results on how voting thresholds|
simple majority, super-majority, or unanimity|a ect the quality of committee decisions, the analysis illuminates some of the economic considerations
{ 41 {

involved in these debates. It is interesting that though requiring unanimity for conviction makes each member pivotal for conviction, self-interest
and strategy makes them less cautious in voting to convict because others
are more likely to have information against conviction. On the other hand,
requiring unanimity for acquittal makes voters more cautious in voting for
conviction. These are precisely the reasons why Condorcet's Theorem fails
when strategic considerations play a role in voting (Austin-Smith and Banks,
1996; Feddersen and Pessendorfer, 1998). Strictly speaking in our model,
each issue coming before the committee would have an optimal partition
and an optimal committee cuto score on votes. These could be simulated,
as illustrated in the previous section. We have chosen not to pursue this line
because our model is not suciently well structured for that kind of analysis.
Committee rules are chosen to achieve a certain kind of durability to a broad
variety of issues that come before it. But the nature of preferences, voting
rules, incentives to collect information and even what issues are likely to
come up before the committee (Li, 1999), the presentation of arguments and
rhetoric in committee deliberations (Posner, 1998; Dewatripont and Tirole,
1999), intertemporal vote trading in future deliberations for ongoing committees are all likely to be important for understanding these things. This
model is too crude to incorporate such things.
In conclusion, voting is said to be an inferior allocation mechanism because it does not allow the intensity of one's preferences to be expressed in
the nal tally. And so it is for purely private decisions in which information
and tastes of others are not directly germane. But in decisions where social
gains possibly arise from the pooling information, the intensity of di erences
in preferences leads to discordance among members that causes trouble. Various kinds of voting procedures bound the expression of intensity and discor{ 42 {

dance among voters and lead to better informed decisions. Perhaps this is
the main lesson in this paper.

Appendix
A.1. Proof of Proposition 4.1
Suppose ta  ta2 . Then, using the second equation in (4.1) and the rst
equation in (3.1), we have tb1  tb . From the monotonicity of lj ()=Lj (), we
get
lb(tb1) la(ta )  lb(tb ) la(ta2 ) :
Lb (tb1 ) La (ta ) lb(tb ) La (ta2 )
Cross multiplying and using (3.1) and (4.1) again, we get lb(tb1 )La (ta2 )  kb.
The condition for the threshold tb1 is described by the equation

Fga(ta2 ) , Fga(ta1 ) b
b
b
l (t1 ) F a(ta ) , F a(ta ) = k :
i 2
i 1
Thus, La (ta2 )  [Fga(ta2 ) , Fga(ta1 )]=[Fia(ta2 ) , Fia(ta1 )], which contradicts the

monotone likelihood ratio property.
Suppose ta  ta1 . In the equilibrium without abstention, lb(tb )La (ta ) =
kb. In the equilibrium with abstention, lb(tb2 )La (ta1 ) = kb. These two conditions imply that tb  tb2 . We can then follow the same method as above to
derive a contradiction.
Q.E.D.

A.2. Proof of Proposition 4.2
The proof proceeds in two steps. Step 1 shows that the two-partition equilibrium converges monotonically to the three-partition equilibrium in a Cournot
{ 43 {

tatonnement process. Step 2 shows that expected loss for each juror falls in
each iteration of the tatonnement.
Step 1: The equilibrium conditions for the thresholds of juror A speci ed
in (4.1) can be used to de ne the reaction functions z1a = g1(z1b ) and z2a =
g2(z1b ; z2b ). The reaction functions for juror B can be speci ed analogously.
Note that all the reaction functions are strictly decreasing in their arguments.
If we de ne x = (z1a ; z2a ; ,z1b , z2b ) and let h : IR4 ! IR4 be the reaction
function in the rede ned variables, then h(x) is monotonic increasing in x.
The Cournot tatonnement is speci ed by the process x(t) = h(x(t , 1)). The
initial thresholds are speci ed near the two-partition equilibrium, x(0) =
(y a; ta + ; ,tb ; ,yb), where  > 0 is arbitrarily small. An induction argument
establishes that x(t) increases monotonically. Suppose x(t)  x(t , 1). Then,
because the reaction function h() is monotonic,

x(t + 1) = h(x(t))  h(x(t , 1)) = x(t):
Furthermore, using the conditions for the two-partition equilibrium, it can be
veri ed that x(1) = h(x(0))  x(0), and the induction argument is complete.
A bounded and monotonic sequence converges to a limit point x^. By the
continuity of the payo functions, this point must also be an equilibrium
point, x^ = h(^x). To see this, note that C j (xj (t); x,j (t , 1))  C j (xj ; x,j (t ,
1)) for all xj (j = a; b) because x(t) is the best response to x(t , 1). Since
C j is continuous in xj and x(t) ! x^, we have C j (^xj ; x^,j )  C j (xj ; x^,j ) for
all xj . Therefore x^ is indeed a three-partition equilibrium point.
Step 2: Let the expected loss to juror j be

C (za; zb ; kj ) =kj [1 , Fia(z2a ) + (Fia(z2a ) , Fia(z1a ))(1 , Fib(z1b )) + Fia(z2b ))]
+ [(Fga(z2a ) , Fga (z1a))Fgb (z1b ) + Fga(z1a )Fgb(zgb )]:
{ 44 {

Without loss of generality, assume ka  kb. The change in cost for juror A
between two successive iterations is
C (za(t + 1); zb(t + 1); ka) , C (za(t); zb (t); ka )
=[C (za(t + 1); zb (t + 1); ka) , C (za(t); zb (t + 1); ka)]
+ [C (za(t); zb (t + 1); ka) , C (za(t); zb (t); ka)]

Dza C (za(t + 1); zb (t + 1); ka)(za (t + 1) , za(t))
+ Dzb C (za(t); zb (t + 1); ka)(zb (t + 1) , zb (t));

where Dza C and Dzb are the gradient vectors of C with respect to za and
zb. The inequality above follows from the convexity of the cost function.
Because convergence is monotonic, we have za(t + 2)  za(t + 1). Convexity
of the cost function in za and the fact that za (t + 2) is a best response to
zb(t + 1) then imply

Dza C (za(t + 1); zb (t + 1); ka)  Dza C (za(t + 2); zb(t + 1); ka) = 0:
Furthermore, since Dzb C is decreasing in k, and since ka  kb, we have
Dzb C (za(t); zb (t + 1); ka)  Dzb C (za(t); zb (t + 1); kb) = 0:
Finally, the monotonicity of the convergence process implies that za (t + 1) ,
za(t)  0 and zb(t + 1) , zb(t)  0. Thus the change in cost for juror A is
negative.
For juror B, we follow a di erent decomposition to get
C (za(t + 1); zb(t + 1); kb) , C (za(t); zb (t); kb)
=[C (za(t + 1); zb (t + 1); kb) , C (za(t + 1); zb (t); kb)]
+ [C (za(t + 1); zb (t); kb ) , C (za(t); zb (t); kb)]
Dzb C (za(t + 1); zb (t + 1); kb)(zb (t + 1) , zb (t))
+ Dza C (za(t + 1); zb (t); kb)(za (t + 1) , za(t));
{ 45 {

Because convergence is monotonic, we have zb (t + 2)  zb(t + 1). Convexity
of the cost function in zb and the fact that zb (t + 2) is a best response to
za(t + 1) then imply

Dzb C (za(t + 1); zb (t + 1); ka)  Dza C (za(t + 1); zb (t + 2); ka) = 0:
Furthermore, since Dza C is decreasing in k, and since ka  kb, we have

Dza C (za(t + 1); zb(t); kb )  Dza C (za(t + 1); zb (t); ka ) = 0:
Finally, since za(t + 1) , za (t)  0 and zb(t + 1) , zb (t)  0, the change in
cost for juror B is also negative.
Q.E.D.

References
Austen-Smith, David. \Information Transmission in Debate." American
Journal of Political Science 34 (February 1990): 124{152.
Austen-Smith, David, and Banks, Je rey S. \Information Aggregation, Rationality and the Condorcet Jury Theorem." American Political Science
Review 90 (January 1996): 34{45.
Condorcet, M.J.A.N. de Caritat. An Essay on the Application of Analysis to the Probability of Decisions Rendered by a Plurality of Votes, 1875.
Abridged and translated in Iain McLean and Arnold B. Urken, eds., Classics
of Social Choice. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1995.
Crawford, Vincent P., and Sobel, Joel. \Strategic Information Transmission." Econometrica 50 (November 1982): 1431{1451.
DeGroot, Morris H. Optimal Statistical Decisions. New York: McGraw Hill,
1970.
Dewatripont, Mathias, and Tirole, Jean. \Advocates." Journal of Political
Economy 107 (February 1999): 1{39.
Dixit, Avinash. \Comparative Statics for Oligopoly." International Economic Review 27 (February 1986): 107{122.
{ 46 {

Edwards, A.W.F. Likelihood expanded edition. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University Press, 1992.
Feddersen, Timothy J., and Pesendorfer, Wolfgang. \The Swing Voter's
Curse." American Economic Review 86 (June 1996): 408{424.
Feddersen, Timothy J., and Pesendorfer, Wolfgang. \Voting Behavior and
Information Aggregation in Elections with Private Information." Econometrica 65 (September 1997): 1029{1058.
Feddersen, Timothy J., and Pesendorfer, Wolfgang. \Convicting the Innocent: The Inferiority of Unanimous Jury Verdicts under Strategic Voting."
American Political Science Review 92 (March 1998): 23{35.
Gibbard, A. \Manipulation of Voting Schemes: A General Result." Econometrica 41 (1973): 587{602.
Klevorick, Alvin K., Rothschild, Michael, and Winship, Christopher. \Information Processing and Jury Decisionmaking." Journal of Public Economics
23 (1984): 245{278.
Li, Hao. \A Theory of Conservatism." Unpublished manuscript, University
of Hong Kong, 1999.
Posner, Richard A. \An Economic Approach to the Law of Evidence." Unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago, 1998.
Sah, Raaj Kumar, and Stiglitz, Joseph E. \The Architecture of Economic
Systems: Hierarchies and Polyarchies." American Economic Review 76
(September 1986): 716{727.
Sah, Raaj Kumar, and Stiglitz, Joseph E. \Committees, Hierarchies and
Polyarchies." Economic Journal 98 (June 1988): 451{470.
Satterthwaite, M. \Strategy-Proofness and Arrow's Conditions: Existence
and Corresponding Theorems for Voting Procedures and Social Welfare Functions." Journal of Economic Theory 10 (1975): 187{217.

{ 47 {

