NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PROFITABILITY OF MOMENTUM
STRATEGIES: AN EVALUATION
OF ALTERNATIVE EXPLANATIONS
Narasimhan Jegadeesh
Sheridan Titman

Working Paper 7159
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7 159

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 1999

This paper has benefited from the excellent research assistance of Fei Zou and helpful comments from the
participants of finance workshops at Indiana University and the University of Texas. All opinions expressed
are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 1999 by Narasimhan Jegadeesh and Sheridan Titman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Profitability of Momentum Strategies:
An Evaluation of Alternative Explanations
Narasimhan Jegadeesh and Sheridan Titman
NBER Working Paper No. 7159
June 1999
JELNo. G12

ABSTRACT
This paper evaluates various explanations for the profitability of momentum strategies
documented in Jegadeesh and Titman (1993). The evidence indicates that momentum profits have
continued in the 1990's suggesting that the original results were not a product of data snooping bias.

The paper also examines the predictions of recent behavioral models that propose that momentum

profits are due to delayed overreactions which are eventually reversed. Our evidence provides
support for the behavioral models, but this support should be tempered with caution. Although we
find no evidence of significant return reversals in the 2 to 3 years following the following formation
date, there are significant return reversals 4 to 5 years after the formation date. Our analysis of posthiding period returns sharply rejects a claim in the literature that the observed momentum profits can

be explained completely by the cross-sectional dispersion in expected returns.

Narasimhan Jegadeesh
Department of Finance
College of Commerce and Business
University of Illinois
1206 S. Sixth Street
Champaign, IL 61820-6980
jegadees@uiuc.edu

Sheridan Titman
Department of Finance
University of Texas
Austin, TX 78712-1179
and NBER
titman@mail.utexas.edu

Many portfolio managers and stock analysts subscribe to the view that momentum strategies
yield significant profits. Jegadeesh and Titman (1993) (JT) examine a variety of momentum
strategies and document that strategies that buy stocks with high returns over the previous 3 to 12

months and sell stocks with poor returns over the same time period earn profits of about one
percent per month.' While these results have been well accepted, the source of the profits and the
interpretation of the evidence are widely debated. While some have argued that the results provide
strong evidence of "market inefficiency," others have argued that the returns from these strategies
are either compensation for risk, or alternatively, the product of data mining.
The criticism that observed empirical regularities arise because of data mining is typically the
hardest to address since empirical research in non-experimental settings is limited by data
availability. Fortunately, with the passage of time, we now have eight additional years of data for
out of sample tests. Using the data over the 1990 to 1997 sample period, we find that JT
momentum strategies continue to be profitable and the past winners outperform past losers by
about the same magnitude as in the earlier period. In addition, the January seasonality
documented by JT is also observed in the more recent sample period. This is noteworthy given
that other well-known anomalies such as the small firm effect documented by Banz (1981) and
the superior performance of growth stocks relative to value stocks do not obtain in subsequent
sample periods.2

Given the persistence of this anomaly, it is important to understand its cause. A number of
authors, e.g., Barbens et al (1998), Daniel et al. (1998) and Hong and Stein (1998) present
behavioral models that are based on the idea that momentum profits arise because of inherent
biases in the way that investors interpret information. Others, however, have argued that it is
premature to reject the rational models and suggest that the profitability of momentum strategies
may simply be compensation for risk. Most notably, Conrad and Kaul (1998) (CK) argue that the
profitability of momentum strategies could be entirely due to cross-sectional variations in mean
'Rowenhorst (1998) reports that the momentum profits documented by Jegadeesh and Titman (1993) for the U.S.
market also obtains in the European markets. Grinblatt and Moskowitz (1999) and Grundy and Martin (1999)
examine the industry and factor components of momentum profits. See Haugen (1999) for additional discussion of
the momentum effect.
2
The average of the Fama-French size factor in the sample period 1965 to 1981 (which precedes the publication of
Banz (1981)) is .53% per month with a t-statistic of 2.34. In the 1982 to 1997 sample period the average size factor is
-.09% with a t-statistic of -.37. Similarly, the average Fama-French book-to-market factor in the sample period 1965
to 1989 is .51% per month (t-statistic of 2.61). However, in the 1990 to 1997 period, which is after the sample period
in Fama and French (1993), the average book-to-market factor return is .19% per month (t-statistic of .76) which is
not statistically different from zero.

returns rather than to any predictable time-series variations in stock returns. Specifically,
following Lo and MacKinlay (1990) and others, they note that stocks with high (low)
unconditional expected rates of return in adjacent time periods are expected to have high (low)
realized rates of returns in both periods. Hence, momentum strategies will yield positive average
returns even if the expected returns on stocks are constant over time.

The behavioral models and Conrad and Kaul's argument provide opposite predictions about
the returns of past winners and losers over the period following the portfolio-holding period. The
behavioral models specify that the holding period returns arise because of a delayed overreaction
to information that push the prices of winners (losers) above (below) their long-term values.
These models predict that the returns of losers should exceed the returns of winners subsequent to

the holding period. In contrast, Conrad and Kaul (1998) suggest that the higher returns of
winners in the holding period represent their unconditional expected rates of return and thus
predict that the post-formation returns of the momentum portfolio will be positive on average in
any post-ranking period.

To test the conflicting implications of these theories we examine the long-term returns of

the winner and loser stocks in the momentum portfolio. Specifically, we examine the returns in
each of the 60 months following the formation date. Over the entire sample period of 1965 to
1997 the cumulative return in months 13 to 60 for the JT momentum portfolio is negative. This
finding supports the behavioral models but clearly rejects the Conrad and Kaul hypothesis which
suggests that the winners will continue to outperform the losers outside the momentum strategy
holding period.

Although the negative post-formation returns of the momentum portfolio appear to
support the predictions of the behavioral models, based on our further analysis, we suggest that
this support be interpreted with caution. First, we find no evidence of return reversals in the

second and third year following the formation date. Evidence of return reversals exist only in the
fourth and fifth years following the formation date. In addition, while we find strong evidence of
return reversals in the 1965 to 1981 time period, the evidence of return reversals are substantially

weaker in the 1982 to 1997 time period. This is noteworthy since there is no distinguishable
difference between the magnitude or significance of the momentum profits in two subperiods. the
post-formation returns are very different. They are significantly negative in the 1965 to 1981

period, but are essentially zero in the 1982 to 1997 period. Our evidence also indicates that at

3

least a part of this difference in post-formation returns is due to differences in size and book-tomarket factor realizations in the two subperiods.

The negative post-holding returns of the momentum portfolio is somewhat surprising
given the simulations presented in Conrad and Kaul (1998) that provide strong support for their
argument. To reconcile these conflicting findings we reexamine the Conrad and Kaul simulation
and find a flaw in their experimental design. Our own simulations that correct this flaw indicates
that very little, if any, of the momentum profits are due to the cross-sectional variation in mean
returns.

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section II provides a brief description
of our data and methodology and examines the profitability of momentum strategies in the 1990s.
Section III provides an analysis of the longer horizon returns. Section IV evaluates the
contribution of cross-sectional variation in expected returns to momentum profits and Section V
concludes the paper.

II. Momentum Profits in the 1990s
This section examines whether the profitability of the momentum strategies documented by
JT can be attributed to data mining. The issue here is fairly straightforward. Stock return data are
now widely available and computing power is fairly cheap. Since there are potentially large
payoffs to any viable model that predicts stock returns (in terms of publications andlor money
management revenues) many academics and practitioners have no doubt independently tested a
wide variety of trading strategies. Therefore, it is difficult to assess the significance of individual
studies that find that a particular trading strategy is profitable.

We address the data mining issue in the context of the iT six-month momentum strategy,
which was previously shown to earn abnormal returns of about one percent per month with a tstatistic of 3.07 over the 1965 to 1989 sample period. When this strategy is viewed as a single

experiment, standard statistical theory indicates that the probability of observing a t-statistic at
least as large as 3.07 under the hypothesis of market efficiency is less than 0.11%. Based on this,
JT conclude that the hypothesis of market efficiency can be rejected at even the most conservative
levels of significance. This inference, however, ignores the fact that there were many other tests
independently carried out by other researchers over the same sample period that were perhaps not
profitable and hence not re.ported. The fact that the evidence of momentum profits gained

4

attention can be attributed to the fact that it yielded the highest test statistic among the many tests
that were carried out collectively. Under this interpretation, the test statistic in Jegadeesh and
Titman should be viewed as the highest order statistic across many tests rather than the
conventional test statistic from a single experiment. The distribution of this order statistic of
course is not normal.

To formalize that statistical analysis, suppose that researchers collectively tested n
independent trading strategies during the JT sample period.3 Also, suppose that the momentum

strategy yielded the highest test statistic among these n strategies. The cumulative distribution of
the largest order statistic is F', where F is the cumulative standard normal distribution.4 As stated
earlier, if the JT test is viewed in isolation then n=1 and the probability of observing a 1-statistic

this large is .11%. However, if for example n=100, then the probability that the largest test
statistic is at least 3.07 is about 10%. If n=650, then the p-value based on this test statistic drops
below 50%. So the perception of how strong the JT evidence is in rejecting the efficient market
hypothesis depends on the readers' priors about how many other independent and unreported tests
that failed to reject market efficiency had been carried out.
The advantage of an out-of-sample test is that it significantly reduces the number of strategies
that researchers can potentially search over, greatly reducing n, and thus increasing the

informativeness of the tests. For this reason, we replicate the Jegadeesh and Titman (1993)
strategy, and construct momentum portfolios as follows: We follow JT and include all
NYSE/AMEX stocks and exclude NASDAQ stocks. We also exclude all stocks priced below $5

at the beginning of the holding period. At the end of each month we rank the stocks in the
sample based on their past six-month returns (month —5 to month 0) and then group the stocks

into ten equally weighted portfolios based on these ranks. Each portfolio is held for six months

(month 1 to month 6) following the ranking month. The various periods we consider are
presented in the time line below, which also presents a post-holding period (month 13 to month
The distribution of the highest order statistic will have to be numerically computed if the n trading strategies
examined in this sample period are correlated.
We are assuming here that the degrees of freedom for the t-statistic is sufficiently large so that the t distribution can
be approximated by the standard normal distribution.
Conrad and Kaul (1993) point out that much of the evidence of long horizon mean reversion in DeBondt and Thaler
(1985) is due to the inclusion of low priced stocks. We screen out these low priced stocks to ensure that our results
are not driven by extreme price movements in these low priced stocks The momentum profits are similar with or
without the $5 price screen except in Januarys. The low priced exhibit large return reversals in January and as a result
the momentum strategies earn hirger negative returns in January if these stocks are included. When all calendar
months are considered, momentum profits are about one percent with or without the $5 price screen.

24) that we consider in the next section.

Formation Period

Holding Period

(Month -5 to Month 0) (Month 1 to Month 6 or 12)

Post-Holding Period

(Month 13 to Month 60)

To increase the power of our tests we construct overlapping portfolios. In other words, a
momentum decile portfolio in any particular month holds stocks ranked in that decile in any of
the previous six ranking months. For instance, a December winner portfolio comprises ten percent
of the stocks with the highest returns over the pervious June to November period, the previous
May to October and so on up to the previous January to June Period. Each monthly cohort is
assigned an equal weight in this portfolio.

A. Holding Period Returns
Table 1 presents the monthly returns for the ten momentum portfolios. Portfolio P1 is
comprised of stocks with the best ranking period returns and PlO is comprised of stocks with the

worst ranking period returns. The table reveals a monotonic relation between returns and
momentum ranks over the 1965 to 1989 sample period, confirming the results in JT. The
difference between the P1 and PlO portfolio returns is 1.11% per month, which is reliably
different from zero.6

The table reveals that this return pattern continues in the more recent 1990 to 1997 period. In
this more recent period, past winners outperform past losers by 1.01% per month, which is very
close to the corresponding returns in the original JT sample period. One difference in the nineties
is that the intermediate momentum portfolios do not exhibit the monotonic relation between
decile ranks and returns found by JT. This is likely due to the fact that with only eight years of
data expected returns are measured much less precisely and the tests here do not have the power
to pick up small differences in expected return. The monotonic relation is still observed, however,
when we consider the full 1965 to 1997 sample period.

B. Seasonality
The t-statistic now is 4.61 compared with that of 3.07 reported by Jegadeesh and Titman (1993). The magnitude of
momentum profits here is similar to that in Jegadeesh and Titman (1993) although the variability is now smaller
because of the exclusion of stocks priced below $5.

6

Jegadeesh and Titman (1993) find a striking seasonality in momentum profits. They
document that the winners outperform losers in all months except January but the losers
significantly outperform the winners in January. This seasonality could potentially be a statistical
fluke; January is one of twelve calendar months and it is possible that in any one calendar month

momentum profits are negative. Here again, we can examine the out-of-sample performance of
the strategy in January to examine whether this seasonality is real or whether it was the result of
looking too closely at the data.

Table 2 reports the momentum profits in January and non-January. The results indicate that
the losers outperformed the winners by an impressive 2.92% on average in January in the period

1965-1989. Losers again outperform winners in January in the nineties, but now the return
difference is 1.2 1%. While this difference is not statistically different from zero, it is significantly

smaller than the momentum profits outside January. Also, the momentum profit was positive in

only two of the eight Januarys in the 1990 to 1997 sample period. The momentum strategy earns
about 1.47% outside January in the original sample period compared with that of 1.20% in the
1990 to 1997 sample period.

C. Portfolio characteristics and abnormal returns
This subsection examines the characteristics of the momentum portfolios and the risk adjusted
momentum portfolio returns. Table 3 presents the characteristics of the momentum portfolios.

The winners are on average larger than the losers since by design winners are stocks whose
capitalizations have recently increased and losers are stocks whose capitalizations have recently
declined. The average market capitalization decile rank for winners is 5.25 compared with a
decile rank of 6.59 for losers.8 Both winners and losers tend to be smaller firms than average

because smaller firms have more volatile returns and are thus more likely to be in the extreme
return sorted portfolios.

Table 3 also presents the sensitivities of these portfolios to the three Fama-French factors. The
market factor sensitivity in the Fama-French regression is 1.15 for the winners while it is
marginally higher at 1.21 for the losers. The size factor (Fama-French SMB factor) sensitivity is
.77 for the winners which is also less than the corresponding sensitivity of 1.06 for the losers, The
The average momentum profit is —6.49% in January when stocks priced below $5 are included in the sample, which
corresponds to the finding in Jegadeesh and Titman (1993) which included the lower priced stocks.
8
Size decile rank of 1 is large firms and size decile rank of 10 is small firms.

7

smaller size factor sensitivity for the winners is consistent with our earlier result that the winners
on average tend to be larger firms than the losers. The losers also exhibit greater sensitivity (.24)

to the distress factor (Fama-French HML factor) than do the winners (.05). This is because losers
had recently experienced stock price declines leading to higher book-to-market ratios. The general
picture presented by the results in Table 3 is that the winners are on average exposed to less risk
with respect to the Fama-French factors.

Table 4 reports the alphas of the various momentum portfolios calculated with both the

CAPM and the Fama-French three-factor model. The CAPM alphas of the momentum strategy
are about the same as the raw return difference since both winners and losers have about the same
betas. The Fama-French alpha for the winner minus loser portfolio is 1.29%, which is larger that
the corresponding raw return difference of 1.09%. This difference is due to the larger sensitivity
of the losers to the Fama-French factors, as reported in Table 3•9

III. Post-Holding Period Returns of Momentum Portfolios
As discussed in Jegadeesh and Titman (1993), the observed momentum profits can be
consistent with either underreaction or a delayed overreaction that can be attributed to what

DeLong, Shleifer, Summers and Waldmann (1990) called positive feedback trading. In this
section, we will examine the post-holding period returns of the stocks that comprise the
momentum portfolio in more detail in an attempt to reexamine earlier evidence of delayed

overreaction. Our analysis of the post-holding returns is motivated in part by recent behavioral
papers that present models that include delayed overreaction. As we mentioned earlier, the postholding return evidence also addresses the issues previously raised by Conrad and Kaul (1998).

A. Behavioral Models
The null hypothesis of our post-holding period tests is that the momentum profits arise
because investors underreact to information which is eventually fully incorporated into stock

prices. Barbens, Shleifer and Vishny (1998) discuss how a "conservatism bias" might lead
investors to underreact to information in a way that is consistent with our null hypothesis. The
conservatism bias, identified in experiments by Edwards (1968), suggests that individuals
underweight new information in updating their priors. If investors act in this way, prices will tend
The aiphas in the 1965 to 1989 and 1990 to 1997 subperiods are similar to those reported in Table 4.

8

to slowly adjust to information, but once the information is fully incorporated in prices there is no
further predictability in stock returns. This interpretation suggests that the post-holding period
returns will be zero.

The recent behavioral literature is motivated in part by a body of evidence that suggests that

the post-holding period returns may in fact be negative. For example, Jegadeesh and Titman
(1993) present relatively weak evidence that the post-holding period returns of their momentum
portfolio is negative, and DeBondt and Thaler (1985) provide stronger evidence of longer-term

overreaction. In addition, the earlier mentioned evidence of the predictability of book to market
ratios is consistent with the existence of overreaction.10

To explain the long-term overreaction as well as the shorter-term momentum Barberis, et. al.
present a model that combines conservatism bias with what Tversky and Kahneman (1974) refer

to as a "representative heuristic" which is the tendency of individuals to identify "an uncertain
event, or a sample, by the degree to which it is similar to the parent population." In the context of
stock prices, Barberis et al. argue that the representative heuristic may lead investors to
mistakenly conclude that firms realizing extraordinary earnings growths will continue to
experience extraordinary growth in the future. They argue that although the conservatism bias in
isolation leads to underreaction, however, this behavioral tendency in conjunction with the
representative bias can lead to long horizon negative returns for the momentum portfolios.
Daniel, Hirshleifer and Subramanyam (1998) and Hong and Stein (1998) propose alternative
models that are also consistent with short-term momentum and long-term reversals. Daniel, et. al.

argue that informed traders suffer from a "self-attribution" bias. In their model, investors observe
positive signals about a set of stocks, some of which perform well after the signal is received.
Because of their cognitive biases, the informed traders attribute the performance of ex-post
winners to their stock selection skills and that of the ex-post losers to bad luck. As a result, these
investors become overconfident about their ability to pick winners and thereby overestimate the
precision of their positive signals for these stocks. Based on their increased confidence in their

positive signals, they push up the prices of the winners above their fundamental values. The
delayed overreaction in this model leads to momentum profits that are eventually reversed.
Hong and Stein (1998) follow a different route, which also leads to the prediction of short
horizon momentum and long horizon return reversals. The Hong and Stein model does not
10

See also Lakonishok, Shleifer and Vishny (1994).

9

directly appeal to any behavioral biases on the part of investors but considers two groups of
investors who trade based on different sets of information. The informed investors or the "news
watchers" in their model obtain signals about future cash flows but ignore information in the past
history of prices. The other investors trade based on a limited history of prices and, in addition, do
not observe fundamental information. The information obtained by the informed investors are
transmitted with a delay and hence are only partially incorporated in the prices when first revealed
to the market. This part of the model contributes to underreaction, resulting in momentum profits.

The technical traders extrapolate based on past prices and tend to push prices of past winners
above their fundamental values. Return reversals obtain when prices eventually revert to their

fundamentals. Both groups of investors in this model act rationally in updating their expectations
conditional on their information sets but the return predictability occur due to the fact that each
group uses only partial information in updating its expectation.

B. The Conrad and Kaul (CK) Hypothesis
Conrad and Kaul start with the hypothesis that stock prices follow random walks with drifts,
and the unconditional drifts vary across stocks. The Conrad and Kaul hypothesis proposes that the
differences in unconditional drifts across stocks explain momentum profits. Since any
predictability under the CK hypothesis is due to differences in unconditional drifts across stocks
and not due to the random component of price changes in any particular period, the profits from a
momentum strategy should be the same in any post-ranking period under this hypothesis. In other
words, this hypothesis predicts that the stocks on the long side of the momentum portfolio should
continue to outperform stocks on the short side by the same magnitude in any post-ranking
period.

C. The Post-Holding Period Evidence
Figure 1 summarizes the underreaction, the overreaction and price correction and the CK
hypotheses. While all three hypotheses imply momentum profits in the holding period, the post
holding period performance of the momentum portfolios differ sharply under the three hypotheses
as discussed above.

To test these competing hypotheses we examine the returns of the momentum portfolio

following the initial formation date. The theoretical models do not offer any guidance regarding
the length of the post-holding period over which return reversals due to price corrections are
10

expected to occur. Jegadeesh and Titman (1993) examine momentum portfolio returns up to three

year after portfolio formation with the idea that even if markets are not fully efficient the effect of
any information will likely be impounded in prices within this time frame. Recent studies related
to initial public offerings and seasoned equity offerings, however, find evidence of
underperformance even five years after the events.'1 Therefore we extend the post-holding period
to five years in this study.
Figure 2 presents the cumulative momentum profits over a 60-month post formation period.

Over the 1965 to 1997 sample period, the results reveal a dramatic reversal of returns in the
second through fifth years. Cumulative momentum profit increases monotonically until it reaches
11% at the end of Month 12. From Month 13 to Month 60 the momentum profits are on average
negative. By the end of Month 60 the cumulative momentum profit declines to .79%. In other
words, virtually all of the momentum profits in the first 12 months is reversed over the following
four years.
At this point it appears that the CK hypothesis is untenable. If momentum profits were
entirely due to differences in unconditional risk between the winner and loser portfolios one
would expect the average return of roughly 1% per month observed in the first six months of the

holding period to be observed indefinitely. Under this hypothesis therefore the momentum profit
at the end of Month 60 should be 60%! Clearly, this hypothesis is not supported by the data.

Table 5 presents further details on the momentum portfolio in the first five years after
portfolio formation. The average profit in the first 12 months of the holding period is .93% per
month, the average profit is -.14% per month in the second year and -.10% in the third year.

Momentum profits continue to be negative in the fourth and fifth years after portfolio formation at
-.29% per month and -.39% per month.'2 These results are qualitatively consistent with the
behavioral models, which predict that the momentum profits will eventually reverse.13 The return
reversal, however, appears to take place very gradually and merit further examination.

As Table 2 reports, the loser portfolios have larger sensitivities to the Fama and French size
and book-to-market factors. The negative returns observed in the second and third years after
portfolio formation may therefore represent compensation for factor risks. Furthermore, the
See Loughran and Ritter (1995) and Spiess and Affleck-Graves (1995) among others.
Momentum profits are negative in four of the five years from Year 6 thorough Year 10 but they are not reliably
different from zero.
12

11

Fama-French factors exhibit a January seasonal. In our sample period, the Fama-French size
factor has an average return of 2.39% in January compared with .03% outside January, while the
book-to-market factor has an average return of 2.47% in January and .25% outside January. If the
negative returns for the momentum portfolios are due to their exposures to the Fama-French
factors then we would expect that a large portion of these negative returns will also be
concentrated in January.
Table 5 (Panel B) presents the momentum profits in January and outside January over the
post-formation holding periods. The average momentum profit in January is —2.20% in the first
year and —2.5 3% in the second year and becomes less negative, about -.90%, in years 4 and 5.
The January raw returns are always reliably different from zero. The momentum profits outside

January, however are marginally positive in the second and third years but are reliably negative in
the fourth and fifth year.
Panel C of Table S presents the Fama-French three-factor alphas for the momentum

portfolios. The alphas are significantly negative only in years 4 and 5. The aiphas in January are
typically marginally negative and closer to zero than the raw returns. Therefore, at least part of the
mean reversion over the long horizon appears attributable to differences in the factor sensitivities
of the winner and loser portfolios.
To investigate the robustness of long horizon return reversals we examine the performance of
momentum portfolios in two separate time periods, the 1965 to 1980 and 1981 to 1997

subperiods. In addition to being roughly the half-way point, 1981 represents somewhat of a break
point for the Fama and French factor returns. The Fama-French SMB and HML factors have
higher returns in the pre-1981 period (the monthly returns of the HML and SMB factors average
.49% and .53% respectively, see Table SA) than in the post-1981 period (the monthly returns of
the HML and SMB factors average .38% and -.10% respectively).
The momentum strategy is significantly profitable, and quite similar in both subperiods, in the
first 12 months following the formation date. The returns, however, are quite different in the two

subpenods in the subsequent months. In the 1965 to 1981 subpenod, the cumulative momentum
profit declines from 11.28% at the end of Month 12 to 5.49% at the end of Month 36 and then
declines further to —5.8 1% at the end of Month 60. In fact, the momentum profits are negative in

The F-statistic under the hypothesis that annual returns in years 2 through 5 are jointly equal to zero is 6.86, which
indicates strong rejection of the null hypothesis.

12

each event month after Month 12 in this subperiod. In the 1982 to 1997 subpenod the cumulative
profits increase from 10.71%, at the end of month 12, to 11.69% at the end of Month 36 but then
declines to 7.59% at the end of Month 60. The only significant negative returns, in the later
subperiod, is in the fifth year after portfolio formation.

The findings in this section are supportive of behavioral models that suggest that momentum
returns should later be reversed, but this interpretation should be tempered with caution. The first
concern is that a large part of the return reversal takes place in the fourth and fifth year after
portfolio formation while there is much less evidence of return reversals in the second and third
years.'4 In addition, a significant part of the return reversal takes place in the months of January
while the momentum profits in the holding period are entirely a non-January phenomenon.
Finally, although the phenomenon of momentum profits is robust both in sign and magnitude
across subperiods, evidence of return reversals are much weaker in the second time period.

IV. Cross-Sectional Dispersion in Expected Returns and Momentum Profits
A. Weighted Relative Strength Strategies
The contrast between our conclusions in the last section and the conclusions in Conrad
and Kaul (1998) is particularly striking. Recall, that Conrad and Kaul argue that the magnitude of
the momentum profits could be explained by the cross-sectional variation in expected returns and
does not require time-series variation in expected returns. They reach this conclusion based on
indirect empirical tests and provide further support for their hypothesis with a number of
simulations. This section reconciles the divergence between our findings and the conclusions in
Conrad and Kaul. Specifically, our analysis indicates that their empirical tests overestimate the

contribution of cross-sectional differences in mean returns to momentum profits. Indeed, the
empirical estimates we present here indicate that the contribution of differences in expected
returns to momentum profits is negligible. We also demonstrate how a simple flaw in their
simulations led Conrad and Kaul astray.

14

While the evidence that the information available during the ranking period seems to trickle very slowly into
prices appears quite puzzling, we need to point out that a similar pattern of long horizon returns has been documented
in the case of seasoned equity offerings as well. Specifically, firms that issue seasoned equity perform similar to their
benchmarks in the year followiiig the offerings but underperform their benchmarks significantly in each of the next
four years.

13

We start with the simple decomposition that was examined originally in Lo and

MacKinlay (1990) and used in the Conrad and Kaul (1998) analysis. This decomposition is
derived from a momentum strategy that buys stocks in proportion to their returns over the
previous ranking period. Specifically, under this strategy, which we label the weighted relative
strength strategy (WRSS), each stock is assigned a weight at time t given by:

w=

— rr_i),

where N is the number of stocks in the sample, rj is the return of stock i during the ranking

period t-1 and

rti

is the average return across all stocks in the sample at time t-1. Under this

weighting scheme, the average weight across all stocks is zero but the sum of the weights for the
long or short positions vary month to month depending on past return dispersions and in general

is different from one. Since in our empirical work we focus on six-month momentum strategies
the length of each period can be thought of as six months.
The profit from this strategy, denoted as iii, can be expressed as:

=

—ri-i).

(1)

The difference between the momentum strategy described in the previous sections and the
above strategy is that the WRSS assigns relatively large weights to the extreme winners and losers
and smaller but non-zero weights to stocks that are not in the extreme deciles. In practice,
investment strategies implemented to exploit momentum are likely be closer to our earlier decile
portfolio strategy than to the WRSS, but the latter strategy is more convenient for analytically
examining the different sources of momentum profits.

Table 6 reports the profits to the momentum strategy over the sample period 1965 to 1997.
The average profit is .00379, which is reliably different from zero. The WRSS produces returns
that are highly correlated (about .95) with the momentum strategies with the decile portfolio
strategy examined in the previous section.

To decompose the WRSS profit, the realized return for stock i is expressed as:

r• =t+u11,

(2)

14

where p is the unconditional expected return of stock I and u1, is the unexpected return at time t.
The momentum profits in (1) can now be decomposed into components based on expected and

unexpected components of returns as follows:

= + —iN
cov(u1 ,u11),
is the cross-sectional variance of expected returns. This expression indicates that any

where

variation in expected returns will contribute positively to momentum profits. To see the intuition,

note that the momentum strategies sort stocks based on realized returns. If a large part of realized
returns is due to expected returns then past winners will tend to be stocks with higher than
average expected returns and past losers will tend be stocks with lower than average expected

returns. Given this, past winners tend to be stocks with high expected returns which will on
average continue to earn higher than average returns in the future and the reverse will be true for
the losers.

Most previous research emphasized the importance of the second term in the
decomposition, the serial correlation term. However, Conrad and Kaul (1998) argue that most of
the momentum returns can be explained by the first term in the decomposition, the cross-sectional

variance in expected returns (cr). In other words, they claim that the momentum profits can be
explained without resorting to behavioral stories about investors under or over-reacting to
information.

To estimate a , Conrad and Kaul use the average realized return of each stock as their
measure of the stock's expected return. Formally, this estimator of expected returns is,
(3)
j t=1

where T1 is the number of observations available for stock i. Table 6 reports the cross-sectional

variance of j which is over 134% of the WRSS profits. This point estimate suggests that
perhaps the entire momentum profit is attributable to cross-sectional differences in expected
returns.

The variance of sample mean returns, however, considerably overestimates the dispersion in

true expected returns. To see this, let

15

where represents estimation error. Since ü, is an unbiased estimator of expected returns,
E(E1) = 0. However, since

=

+ a, the variance of the estimated expected returns

overestimates the cross-sectional variance of true expected returns.'5 The magnitude of this
overestimation is exacerbated by the fact that, following Conrad and Kaul, we have used all
stocks in the sample period for the calculation of expected returns, regardless of the length of their
return history. In fact, some of the stocks in our sample have return series that are less than seven
months long and hence their expected return estimates based on estimator (3) are notoriously
imprecise.

To evaluate the extent to which the measurement error in sample mean could potentially bias
the estimates of dispersion in true expected returns, Figure 3 plots the distribution of sample mean
returns. Estimated expected returns are negative for nearly 20 percent of the stocks in the sample.
For some stocks the sample mean returns are even less than —80%, and on the positive side, some

stocks had experienced average returns in excess of 100%. It is unlikely that these sample average

returns capture the stocks' true ex-ante expected returns. These measurement errors, therefore,
bias upwards the CK estimate of the extent to which cross-sectional differences in returns
contribute to momentum profits.

B. Direct Tests of Risk Hypothesis
Up to this point we have followed the Conrad and Kaul approach to examine whether crosssectional differences in expected returns can potentially explain the momentum profits. This
approach, at best, is indirect and fraught with difficulties since it is hard to obtain precise
estimates of expected returns. Fortunately, more direct alternatives are available to examine this

hypothesis. For example, as we earlier showed, Table 4 presents momentum profits that were
adjusted for risk with the CAPM (one factor model) and the Fama-French three factor models.

These methods, however, can be criticized because there is no guarantee that they account for all
risk factors. However, there is no need to use a specific asset pricing model to obtain unbiased
estimates of expected returns if we are willing to impose the assumption made by Conrad and
15

Conrad and Kaul use overlapping six month returns to estimate the expected returns for each stocks and argue that
since they "use overlapping holding period returns at monthly frequency" the impact of measurement errors is
substantially reduced. However, mean return depend on the length of the sample period and the beginning and end of
period stock prices and the frequency with which prices are sampled does not alter the estimates or the precision of
the estimates (see Merton (1980)).

16

Kaul that expected returns are constant over time. In this case, we can use sample average
returns, as described in (3), as an unbiased estimate of expected returns. As we will see below, our
application here only requires that the expected return estimator be unbiased and unlike the CK
approach we do not require that the variance of sample mean returns is an unbiased estimator of
the variance of true expected returns.

We compute sample average returns for each firm over three different sample periods. The
first measure is the ex-arite sample means computed over the pre-ranking period. Specifically, the
ex-ante sample mean for the ranking period ending in month t:
(1) =

(t —6— Tipre + 1)

where Tipre is the first date on or after January 1963 for which returns data for firm i can be

obtained from the CRSP data base. The ex-ante sample period excludes the ranking period since
by construction the returns are low for losers and high for winners in this period.
The advantage of using the ex-ante ranking period returns is that this estimate is available to
the investor at the time of portfolio formation. However, since losers experienced drops in their
equity values and winners experienced gains, it is likely that their financial leverage changed
during the ranking period and hence resulted in changes in their risk exposures. Since ex-ante
means do not account for the effect of the changes in risk, our second measure obtains an estimate
of expected returns using sample means in the post-holding periods. Specifically, for each stock
we compute the post-holding period sample mean as follows for ranking periods ending in month

(2) =
where

—

(t + 13) +1)

is the last month for which return data for firm i is available. Since we are trying to

explain the returns in the holding period, we exclude the 12-month period following the ranking
period to calculate these averages.'6
Our final estimate of expected returns is computed over both pre-ranking and post-holding
periods. Specifically,

The sample period ends December 1996 when we use the estimator

17

(2).

(Tpoct (t+13)+1)+(t6pre

+1)[

Using these estimators, we compute the abnormal returns rj (k) for each stock during the

holding period as:

,

(k) =

—

(k), k = 1,2,3.

Table 6 presents the abnormal momentum profits. The average abnormal return after adjusting
for pre-ranking period mean returns is 1.30% per month. The momentum profits are now
marginally larger than the raw profits reported in Table 1. The average abnormal returns after
adjusting for post-holding period mean returns is 1.08% per month and after adjusting for the
combined sample period mean return is 1.28% per month.'7 The results here indicate that the
contribution of cross-sectional variation in mean returns to momentum profits is marginal at best.

C. The Simulation Puzzle

One puzzle that still remains is the simulation evidence presented by Conrad and Kaul, which

leads them to conclude that the "main determinant of the profits of return-based trading strategies
is the cross-sectional variation in mean returns." The CK simulation results are indeed in direct
conflict to the empirical evidence provided in this paper. In this section we describe the CK
simulation procedure and point out a bias in their procedure which is responsible for the findings
they generate.
The Conrad and Kaul bootstrap experiment works as follows: They first scramble the monthly

returns for each stock by randomly drawing a return for each month, with replacement, from the

observed distribution of the stock's returns. This scrambling process should eliminate any serial
correlation in the return series. Based on these scrambled returns, the profits of the momentum
strategy are calculated for 500 replications. Table 8 reports the simulated momentum profits
generated from this procedure along with the actual profits of the strategy for comparison.

17

Note that the profits after adjusting for combined period mean returns in not the average of the momentum profits
after adjusting for pre-ranking period and post-holding period mean returns since different stocks enter the winner
and loser portfolios at different points in time.

18

Consistent with the results reported by Conrad and Kaul, the simulated profits are similar to the
profits observed with the actual data.'8
Because they generate the same momentum returns from the scrambled return series, the
Conrad and Kaul simulations suggest that the momentum profits arise because of the cross-

sectional dispersion rather than their time-series pattern. However, there is a critical flaw in the
design of this experiment. By drawing returns, with replacement, a bias is introduced into the
simulation that arises because the same observation for any stock can be drawn in both ranking
and holding periods. This bias can be easily illustrated with a simple example where one stock
realizes a particular high return in one month (say one thousand percent). In any particular month
that this return is drawn, because of its extreme return, the stock will fall in the winner portfolio.
If this particular observation is drawn in an adjacent 6 month period, which is not unlikely given
the length of the return time series, the simulation will spuriously show high returns in the holding

period. This small sample bias is formally derived in the Appendix.
To overcome this source of bias we repeat the same bootstrap experiment, but this time
without replacement. As we show in the Appendix, by sampling without replacement we avoid
the small sample bias that arises in samples drawn with replacement. With this simulation the
average momentum profit is .00002, which is .53% of the profits observed in the actual date (see
Table 8). The simulation profit is also not reliably different from zero, suggesting that the positive
returns generated in the previous simulation was generated because the samples were drawn with
replacement. These simulations indicate that only a very small portion of the momentum returns
are generated from the cross-sectional variation in expected returns.'9

18 The t-statistics, however, are much larger with the simulations since scrambling the return data for each stock
individually destroys the cross-sectional correlation in stock returns and hence the profits to the simulated strategy
has a much smaller variance.
19 Conrad and Kaul also carry out two other simulation experiments to further augment their claims. In these
simulations they set the "expected" returns for each stock equal to their sample average returns, the distribution of
which is given in Figure 3. As can be seen from this figure, some stocks earn average returns of less that -80% while
other stocks earn average returns in excess of 100%. There is clearly substantially more cross-sectional variation in
these average returns than one would expect to find in expected returns. Hence, estimates of the components of
momentum returns that use average returns as proxies for expected returns substantially overestimate the component
of profits that are due to the cross-sectional variation in expected returns and underestimate the component due to
serial correlation.

19

V. Conclusions
This paper evaluates various explanations for the momentum profits documented previously
in Jegadeesh and Titman (1993). We first document that the momentum profits in the eight years

subsequent to the Jegadeesh and Titman (1993) sample are remarkably similar to the profits found
in the earlier time period. This evidence provides some assurance that the momentum profits are
not entirely due to data snooping biases.

To learn more about the source of momentum profits, we examined the returns of the
momentum portfolios in the post-holding period. By examining the post-holding period
performance, we are able to address issues that were raised recently by Conrad and Kaul (1998),

Barberis et. al. (1998), Daniel et. al. (1998) and Hong and Stein (1998). Conrad and Kaul argue
that there is no discernable time-series variation in returns and that momentum returns arise

because of cross-sectional variation in returns. This argument implies that the post-holding
period returns of the momentum portfolio should be significantly positive. In contrast, the later
three papers present behavioral models that suggest that the post-holding period returns of the
momentum portfolio should be negative.

Our evidence suggests that the abnormal performance of the momentum portfolio in the 13 to
60 months following the formation month is negative. This evidence supports the behavioral
models, which argue that momentum profits are generated by delayed overreaction. We believe,

however, that this evidence should be viewed with some caution. We are somewhat troubled by
the fact that there is no evidence of a return reversal until 4 years after the formation date. In
addition, we only observe a partial and only marginally significant return reversal in the later time
period. However, the momentum profits in the two time periods are essentially equal.
Although the behavioral models are difficult to evaluate, our evidence is clearly inconsistent
with the Conrad and Kaul (1998) hypothesis that momentum profits arise because of crosssectional differences in expected returns rather than time-series predictability. Since we reach
very different conclusions after examining essentially the same data as Conrad and Kaul (1998),

we have carefully examined their procedures to better understand why our conclusions are so

different. We were particularly concerned about their results indicating that momentum profits
can be generated on simulated data that is created by randomly scrambling the sequence of each

stock's returns. Since this scrambling process should eliminate the serial correlation that exists in

20

actual returns data, the positive momentum profits they generated from these simulated returns is
somewhat surprising.

Our analysis indicates that the simulated momentum profits generated in the Conrad and Kaul

study arise because their experimental design has a small sample bias. Their procedure samples
from each stock's realized return with replacement, which allows extreme observations to be

drawn in two adjacent 6 month periods biasing momentum profits upwards. When we redo their
simulations by drawing samples without replacement, the momentum profits observed in their

simulations disappear. What this means is that the momentum profits observed in the actual data
is generated because of the time-series properties of stock returns, not because of the crosssectional variation in returns.

21

References
Banz, R., 1981, "The relation between return and market value of common stocks," Journal of
Financial Economics 9, 3-18.

Barbens, N., A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny, 1998, "A model of investor sentiment," Journal of
Financial Economics 49(3), 307-343.
Chan, L.K., N. Jegadeesh and J. Lakonishok, 1996, "Momentum Strategies," Journal of Finance
51, 1681-1713.

Conrad, J., and G. Kaul, 1993, "Long-term overreaction or biases in computed returns?"
Journal of Finance 48, 39-63.
Conrad, J., and G. Kaul, 1998, "An anatomy of trading strategies," Review of Financial Studies
11,489-519.
Daniel, K., D. Hirshleifer, and A. Subrahmanyam, 1998, "Investor Psychology and security
market under-and overreactions," Journal of Finance 53, 1839-1886.
Daniel, K. D. and S. Titman, 1997, "Evidence on the characteristics of cross-sectional variation in
stock returns," Journal of Finance 52, 1-33.

DeBondt, W.F.M and R. H. Thaler, 1985, "Does the stock market overreact?" Journal of
Finance 40, 793-805.
DeLong, J.B., A. Shleifer, L.H. Summers, Waldmann, R.J., 1990, "Positive feedback investment
strategies and destabilizing rational speculation, Journal of Finance 45, 379-395.

Edwards, W., 1962, "Conservatism in human information processing," In: Kleimutz, B. (ed.),
Representation of Human Judgement, John Wiley and Sons, New York, 17-52
Fama, E., and K. French, 1993, "Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds,"
Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3-56.

Fama, E., and K. French, 1996, "Multifactor explanations of asset pricing anomalies," Journal of
Financial Economics 51, 5 5-84.
Grinblatt, M. and T. Moskowitz, 1999, "Does industry explain momentum," Journal of Finance
(forthcoming).
Grundy, B. D. and S. J. Martin, 1998, "Understanding the nature of risks and the sources of
rewards to momentum investing," working paper, Wharton School, U. Penn
Haugen, R. A., 1999, The New Finance, Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ.

22

Hong, H., and J. Stein, 1998, "A unified theory of underreaction, momentum trading and
overreaction in asset markets," Working paper, MIT Sloan School of Management.

Keim, D. B., 1983, "Size-related anomalies and stock return seasonality: Further empirical
evidence," Journal of Financial Economics 12, 13-32.
Jegadeesh, N., and S. Titman, 1993, "Returns to buying winners and selling losers: Implications
for stock market efficiency," Journal of Finance 48, 65-9 1.
Lakonishok, J., A. Shleifer, and R. W. Vishny, 1994, Contrarian investment, extrapolation and
risk, Journal of Finance 49, 154 1-78.
Lo, A., and A. C. MacKinlay, 1990, "When are contrarian profits due to stock marketoverreaction?," Review of Financial Studies 3, 175-208.
Loughran, T., and J. R. Ritter, 1995, The new issues puzzle, Journal of

Finance

50, 23-5 1.

Merton, R. C., 1980, "On estimating the expected return on the market: An exploratory
investigation," Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 7, 323-361.
Tversky, A. and D. Kahneman, 1974, "Judgement under uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases,"
Science 185, 1124-1131.
Rowenhorst,

K.G., 1998, "International momentum strategies," Journal of

Finance 53,

267-284.

Spiess, D. Katherine, and John Affleck-Graves, 1995, Underperformance in long-run stock
returns following seasoned equity offerings, Journal of Financial Economics 38, 243-267.

23

Table 1

Momentum Portfolio Returns
P1 (Past Winners)
P2
P3

1.70

P4

1.50
1.40
1.32

P5

1.31

P6

1.25
1.22
1.16
1.07

P7
P8

P9
PlO (Past Losers)

1965-1997

1990-1997

1965-89

0.59

1.55
1.25
1.18
1.17
1.13
1.11

1.67
1.44
1.35
1.29
1.27
1.22

1.19

1.21

1.11
1.13

1.15
1.08

0.54

0.58

P1-Plo

1.11

1.01

1.09

t-statistic

4.61

4.10

5.65

Note: This table reports the monthly returns for momentum portfolios formed with stocks traded on the NYSE/AMEX.
All stocks priced less than $5 at the beginning of the holding period are excluded from the sample. The momentum
deciles are formed based on 6-month lagged returns and held for six months. P1 is the equal-weighted portfolio of ten
percent of the stocks with the highest six-month lagged returns, P2 is the equal-weighted portfolio of the ten percent of the
stocks with the next highest returns and so on.

24

Table 2
Momentum portfolio Returns in January and outside January

1965-1989

1990-1997

P1

P10

P1-PlO

t-statistic

Jan

4.68

7.60

-2.92

-2.45

Feb-Dec
All

1.43
1.70

-0.04
0.59

1.47
1.11

6.48
4.61

Percent
Positive
28.00
70.91
67.33

Jan

2.08

3.29

Feb-Dec

1.50
1.55

0.30
0.54
6.56
0.04
0.58

-1.21
1.20

All
1965-1997

Jan
Feb-Dec
All

4.05
1.45
1.67

1.01

-2.51
1.41

1.09

-1.28

25.00

4.94
4.10

71.59

-2.68
7.73
5.65

27.27
71.07

67.71

1

67.42

Note: This table reports the monthly retums for momentum portfolios formed with stocks traded on the NYSE/AMEX. All stocks priced less than

$5 at the beginning of the holding period are excluded from the sample. The momentum deciles are formed based on 6-month lagged returns and
held for six months, P1 is the equal-weighted portfolio of ten percent of the stocks with the highest six-month lagged retums (past winners) and
PlO is the equal-weighted portfolio of the ten percent of the stocks with the lowest returns.

25

Table 3

Portfolio Characteristics

Average size decile rank

P1

P2
P3

P4
P5

P6
P7

P8
P9
P10
P1-PlO

5.25
4.33
4.17
4.17
4.06
4.25
4.56
4.68
4.96
6.59
-1.34

FF factor sensitivities
Market

SMB

1.15
1.08

0.77
0.57
0.51
0.49
0.52
0.54
0.61
0.67
0.80
1.06
-0.29

1.04
1.02
1.00
1.01

1.02
1.03

1.07
1.21

-0.06

HML
0.05
0.18
0.25
0.27
0.29
0.30
0.31

0.30
0.28
0.24
-0.19

Note: This table reports the characteristics of momentum portfolios formed with stocks traded on the NYSE/AMEX. All stocks priced less than $5
at the beginning of the holding period are excluded from the sample. The momentum deciles are formed based on 6-month lagged returns. P1 is the
equal-weighted portfolio of ten percent of the stocks with the highest six-month lagged returns, P2 is the equal-weighted portfolio of the ten
percent of the stocks with the next highest returns and soon. Average size decile rank is the average rank of the market capitalization of equity of
the stocks in each portfolio at the beginning of the holding period. FF factor sensitivities are the slope coefficients in the Fama-French three-factor
model time-series regressions. "Market'' is the market factor, "SMB'' is the size factor and "HML'' is the book-to-market factor. The sample
period is January 1965 to December 1997.

26

Table 4
CAPM and Fama-French Aiphas
FF Alpha
0.30
0.12
0.04
-0.02
-0.05
-0.11
-0.14
-0.23
-0.35
-0.99

CAPM Alpha
P1

P2
P3

P4
P5

P6
P7

P8
P9
P10
P1-Plo
t-statistic

0.54
0.37
0.31
0.26
0.25
0.19
0.18
0.11
0.01
-0.57
1.11

1.29

4.59

7.78

Note: This table reports the characteristics of momentum portfolios formed with stocks traded on the NYSE/AMEX. All
stocks priced less than $5 at the beginning of the holding period are excluded from the sample. The momentum deciles are
formed based on 6-month lagged returns. P1 is the equal-weighted portfolio of ten percent of the stocks with the highest
six-month lagged returns, P2 is the equal-weighted portfolio of the ten percent of the stocks with the next highest returns
and so on. This table reports the intercepts from the market model regression (CAPM Alpha) and Fama-French threefactor model regression. time-series regression (FF Alpha). The sample period is January 1965 to December 1997.

27

Table 5
Seasonality in Longer Horizons Momentum Profits and Fama and French

Factors
Panel A. Average Factors
Fama-French Factors
Calendar
HML
SMB
Months
Market
2.47
2.39
1.97
January
(4.52)
(3.73)
(2.13)
.25
.03
.36
Feb-Dec
(1.96)
(.19)
(1.59)
.43
.22
.49
All
(3.37)
(1.54)
(2.22)
Panel A. Raw Returns
Momentum Portfolio Returns (P1-Plo)
Calendar
Months 25 to Months 37 to
Months 13 to
Months
Months ito
48
36
24
12
-.90
-1.63
-2.53
-2.20
January
(-2.50)
(-3.68)
(-4.50)
(-3.11)
-.24
.04
.08
1.21
Feb-Dec
(-2.56)
(.39)
(.03)
(8.48)
-.29
-.10
-.14
.93
All
(-2.51)
(-1.11)
(—1.34)
(6.12)

Months 49 to

60
-.91

(-2.13)
-.34
(-3.43)
-.39
(-3.10)

Panel C. Fama-French three factor aiphas

Calendar
Months
January

Feb-Dec
All

Months 1 to 12
-.68
(-.74)
1.23
(8.53)
1.09

(7.16)

Momentum Portfolio Alphas (P1-Plo)
Months 13 to 24 Months 25 to 36 Months 37 to 48
-.85
-.25
-.54
(-1.64)
(-.47)
(-.91)
-.20
.10
.14
(-2.49)
(1.18)
(1.69)
-.22
.07
.07
(-2.67)
(.79)
(.76)

Months 49 to 60
-.25
(-.39)

-.32
(-3.65)
-.31

(-3.56)

Note: Panel A presents average Fama-French factors, Panel B presents monthly momentum profits one, two, three,
four and five years after formation of momentum portfolios. See Table 1 for a description of portfolio construction.
Panel A also presents the average monthly returns on the three Fama and French risk factors. 'Market" is the market
factor, "SMB" is the size factor and FHvIL" is the book-to-market factor. The sample period is January 1965 to
December 1997.

Panel C presents the intercepts from the Fama-French three factor regressions fitted over all months in the sample period
and separately within and outside January. The t-statistics are reported in parentheses.

28

Table 5 A
Longer Horizons Momentum Profits and Fama and French Factors —
Subperiod Results
A. Fama-French factors

Market
1965-198!

.15
(.48)

1982-1997

.84
(2.81)

HML
.49
(2.61)
.38
(2.13)

SMB
.53

(2.34)
-.10
(-.57)

B. Momentum portfolio raw returns

Months ito 12

Months 13 to 24
-.32
.94
1965-1981
(-1.94)
(3.78)
.05
.92
1982-1997
(.46)
(5.43)
C. Momentum portfolio Fama-French three factor alphas
-.01
1.21
1965-1981
(-.06)
(4.91)
.16
1.01
1982-1997
(1.40)
(5.67)

Holding_Period
Months 25 to 36

Months 37 to 48

-.21
(1.51)

-.44
(-3.46)

Months 49 to 60
-.56
(-4.09)

.01

-.14
(-1.32)

-.21
(-1.80)

-.29
(-2.32)

-.38
(2.87)
-.29

(.05)
.03
(.25)
.13
(1.11)

-.11
(-1.08)

(2.43)

Note: Panel A also presents the average monthly returns on the three Fama and French risk factors. Market" is the
market factor, "SMB" is the size factor and HIML" is the book-to-market factor. Panel B presents the average

monthly momentum profits or the P1-Plo portfolio one, two, and three years after formation of momentum
portfolios. See Table 1 for a description of portfolio construction. Panel C presents the intercepts from the FamaFrench three factor regressions fitted within each subperiod. The t-statistics are reported in parentheses.

29

Table 6
Weighted Relative Strength Strategy (WRSS) Profits (1965-1997)
Variance of
Sample mean returns
.00509

WRSS Profit
Average
Fraction of WRSS
profits

.00379
(3.45)

--

1.34

Note: The WRSS is a zero net investment strategy where each stock in the portfolio is assigned a weight equal
proportional to the difference between its lagged six-month returns and cross-sectional mean returns. The momentum
profit for month t (n) is computed as:

IT1 =-

r1(r11 —r1i).

where N is the number of stocks in the cross-section, r,1 is the return of stock i in six-month period t to t+5 and

the return in the six-month period t-1 to t-6. Is the average return across all stocks in the sample.
Autocorrelation consistent t-statistic is presented in parenthesis. Cross-sectional variance of mean returns is the
variance of sample average six-month returns. In the last column, variance of cross-sectional mean returns is
computed excluding the five percent of stocks with the largest and smallest sample mean returns excluded.

30

is

Table 7
Momentum Profits Adjusted for Sample Average Returns
Calendar months

All

January
Non-January

Sample Periods for Mean Return Estimationd
Pre- Ranking and PostPost-Holding Period
Pre-Ranking Period
Holding Periods
1.28
1.08
1.30
(6.65)
(5.34)
(6.75)
-2.32
-2.47
-2.4
(-2.57)
(-2.60)
(-2.61)
1.61
1.40
1.64
(8.78)
(7.23)
(8.97)

Note: This table presents the expected returns adjusted difference between monthly returns of extreme winner and
loser portfolios classified based on lagged six-month returns. Each portfolio is held for six months. The column titled
• 'Pre-Ranking Period" computes expected returns for each stock as the sample average returns in the period from
first month when returns data are available for a particular firm to the month prior to the ranking period. The column
titled "Post-Ranking Period" computes expected returns for each stock as the sample average returns in the period
from 13 months after the holding period to the last month when returns data are available for a particular firm. The
last column computes expected returns for each stock as the sample average returns in the pre-ranking and postholding periods.
a

The sample period is 1965 to 1997. The sample period for the column titled post-ranking period ends in December
1996.

31

Table 8

Weighted Relative Strength Strategy (WRSS) Profits and Cross-Sectional
Dispersion in Mean Returns : Simulation Evidence
t-statistics

Percentage of
Momentum
Profits in Actual
Data

0.00380

3.45

--

0.00410

7.35
0.05

.53

WRSS Profits

Actual data (1965-1997)
Simulation—with replacement
Simulation — without replacement

0.00002

107.89

Note: The WRSS is a zero net investment strategy where each stock in the portfolio is assigned a weight equal
proportional to the difference between its lagged six-month returns and cross-sectional mean returns. See Table 6 for
further details. Autocorrelation consistent t-statistic is presented for profits based on actual returns data. The
simulation with replacement computes the WRSS profits based on 500 simulations where in each simulation the time
series of returns for each stock is scrambled with replacement. The last column reports simulated WRSS profits when
returns are scrambled without replacement.

32

Figure 1: Long Horizon Momentum Profits Under Different Hypothesis

Event Time

—CK hypothesis

Underreaction

33

— — — Overreaction and Price Correction

Figut 2: cumulative Momentum Profits
Figure 1: Long Horizon Momentum Profits Under Different Hypothesis

-8

Event Month

1965to19971965to1981

34

19to1997

Figure 3: Distribution of annual mean returns for all NYSE and AMEX stocks
in the 1965-1997 period.
Sample average return distribution (% per year)
0.6
0.5

0.4
I-

0.3

I

0.2

—

0.1

0

—
<-0.8

-0.8
0.6

LII

I

I

0 0--0.2 0.2--0.4 0.4--0.6 0.6--0.8 0.8-- 1.0
0.4

>1.0

0.2

Percentage of firn

1.01

10.62% I

0.75%

1.82%

4.18% 110.24%149.09%I 23.54%

35

1.92%

1.06%

>1.0
1.18%

Appendix
This appendix shows the bias in simulated momentum profits when the simulation is carried out
with replacement. It also shows that when the simulation is carried out without replacement there

is no bias in simulated momentum profits. Let

t =1 Tbe the time-series realization of

returns for a stock I, which under the null hypothesis are serially uncorrelated. Without loss of
generality assume that the unconditional expected return is zero for all stocks in the sample.
Consider a simulation experiment that draws returns with replacement and constructs a
momentum strategy. Consider a momentum strategy that forms portfolios based on t-1 returns,

and buys winners and sells losers which are held in period t. In this experiment, let rjbe the
randomly drawn return for stock i in the ranking period. When returns are drawn with
replacement, let Erep

( I ') be the expected value of returns for this stock in the holding period

t, conditional on the return observed in the ranking period. When returns are drawn at random
with replacement the probability of drawing any return observation from the time series is
Therefore, the conditional expectation of returns drawn during the holding period is:
Erep

(i

=

iT

E(i

=

1

1

+—

T

E(i1

=

1

The last equality follows since under the null hypothesis returns are serially uncorrelated

and therefore the conditional expectation of returns is zero for j

t — 1.

Momentum portfolios are formed based on ranked t-1 returns. By construction losers have
low

and winners have high

Therefore, conditional on the ranking period returns, the

expected value of returns drawn (with replacement) in the holding period will be high for past
winners and low for past losers. This is true even though by assumption all stocks have the same
unconditional expected returns and all returns are serially uncorrelated. So the simulated
momentum profits will be positively biased when the simulation is carried out with replacement.
How large is this bias? This depends on the length of the return time series. In the limit as T —
this bias will disappear. However, in our sample, the length of return history is less than 5 years

for a large fraction of the stocks. For these stocks there are only 10 independent six-month return
observations. Clearly, the assumption that T approaches infinity is untenable, and in fact not
necessary.

-

36

If one performs simulation without replacement there is no bias. It can easily be shown,
that when returns are drawn without replacement, the conditional expectation of next period's
return is:
Eno rep (i

I

)=

1

E(r1

=0.

37

