1.      Introduction

        An important component of Robert Lipsey's research has involved the study of direct foreign

investment and often the relationship between investment and trade. From our point of view, this

research is of major importance, and our first task in our paper is to explain why.

        The field of international trade developed in the "modern" era as largely a study of trade in

goods. Mundell (1957) wrote an important article in which he noted that trade in goods and factors

were substitutes, perhaps suggesting that there is little point in expanding our theory to include trade

in factors: the same equilibrium in terms of commodity prices, factor prices, and welfare can be

achieved by trading either goods or factors. Only much later was it noted that Mundell showed this

in the context of an extremely special case, namely a two-by-two Heckscher-Ohlin model with zero

trade costs in both goods and factors. Positive analyses showed a wide variety of circumstances in

which trade in goods and factors are complements (Markusen 1983, Wong 1986, Markusen and

Svensson 1985, Ethier and Svensson 1986, and Neary 1995). Normative analyses showed that the

effects of policy often depend crucially on what is traded (Brecher and Alejandro 1977, Bhagwati and

Brecher 1980, Dick 1993).

        Although it had many antecedents (e.g., Kemp 1969, Melvin 1969, Linder 1961), an

industrial-organization (IO) approach to trade was developed in the 1980's. This incorporated

elements of imperfect competition, increasing returns to scale and product differentiation into general-

equilibrium trade models. Yet this new theory, however welcome, was largely disjoint from the study

of multinational enterprises. Firms in the trade-IO literature are typically single-plant production units

with all firm activities in a single location. This is rather odd insofar as most of the firms which fit

the general facts and paradigms of the IO approach to trade are indeed multinationals with production


                                                    1
                                                   2

plants in several countries. Research on multinationals was certainly produced, but it was often (at

best) partial equilibrium in nature and focused on individual firms rather than on explaining the pattern

of direct investment in relation to country and industry characteristics.

        Robert Lipsey is a distinctive individual in that he apparently ignored this allocation of trade,

national firms, and general equilibrium to trade theory and multinational firms to the international

business studies. Bob wrote a number of important articles in which he related the pattern of direct

investment by multinational firms to national characteristics and to trade flows. This work presented

researchers with a comprehensive and challenging set of "stylized facts" to explain. His research

helped make it clear that multinationals had to be integrated into both trade theory and the empirical

analysis of trade and investment flows.

        The work by Lipsey which most clearly relates to this paper includes the following. Two early

papers with Merle Yahr Weiss examined determinants of foreign production and exports (Lipsey and

Weiss, 1981, 1984). During the same period Lipsey developed a long co-authorship with Irving

Kravis, looking at the determinants of the competitiveness of multinational firms and how these firms

affect other variables of interest, such as domestic employment (Kravis and Lipsey, 1982, 1988, 1992,

and Lipsey and Kravis, 1987). Single-authored papers on determinants of inward and outward

investment and the internationalization of production include Lipsey (1988. 1989, 1993, 1995). A

series of other papers was the result of collaboration with Magnus Blomstrom, in some cases with

other co-authors (Blomstrom and Lipsey, 1989, 1993, Blomstrom, Kravis, and Lipsey, 1988,

Blomstrom, Lipsey, and Kulchycky, 1998, Blomstrom, Lipsey, and Ohlsson, 1990, and Lipsey,

Blomstrom and Ramstetter, 1995). This body of work provides a tremendous volume of empirical

evidence on direct investment and trade, that needs to be reconciled with formal theory.
                                                  3

       A few attempts to develop a formal general-equilibrium theory of multinationals firms

developed during the early 1980's. Helpman (1984) had a model in which production involved two

activities, one capital intensive and one labor intensive, which could be geographically separated.

Markusen (1984) took a rather different approach, assuming the existence of firm-level (as opposed

to plant-level) scale economies arising from the joint-input nature of knowledge capital across

geographically separated production facilities. Helpman's model captured the notion of vertically-

integrated firms, but allowed no investments to take place between very similar countries, which is

clearly counter to empirical fact. Markusen's model captured the notion of horizontally-integrated

firms that undertake the same activity in multiple countries, but excluded any motive for vertical

specialization. Theoretical refinements of these ideas can be found in Helpman (1985), Horstmann

and Markusen (1987, 1992), Brainard (1993a), Markusen (1997), Markusen and Venables (1998),

and a survey is found in Markusen (1995).

       During the same period in which some of this formal theory was developing, a large body of

empirical work developed relating direct investment to country and industry characteristics, much of

this by Robert Lipsey alone or with various co-authors as just noted. It quickly became clear that the

overwhelming proportion of direct investment occurs among the similar, high-income developed

countries, not between dissimilar countries. "North-north" investment dominates "north-south"

investment even after correcting for income levels and other determinants. At a superficial level,

horizontal, multi-plant models fit the data better than vertical-specialization models, which do not

predict direct investment among similar countries.

       Formal econometric reconciliation or testing of the theories with the evidence was slow in

coming. Two important papers by Brainard (1993b, 1996) confirmed the casual observation that
                                                   4

similarity rather than differences between countries in terms of size and relative endowments is closely

related to the level of direct investment relative to trade. These papers provide additional support

to the "horizontal" view that firm-level scale economies rather than factor-intensity differences

between activities provides the more important explanation of direct investment. Yet subsequent to

1987, the year of her data sample, a boom in direct investment to developing countries emerged. This

suggested that perhaps it was unmeasured investment barriers that accounted for the low levels of

direct investment to these countries. Carr, Markusen, and Maskus (1998) estimate a model that

integrates both horizontal and vertical motives for direct investment on 1986-94 panel data and find

support for that integrated approach. Complementary work by Ekholm (1995, 1997, 1998a,b)

supports the findings of Brainard and Carr, Markusen, and Maskus, and adds convincing evidence

about the importance of intra-firm trade in knowledge-intensive headquarters services. Of relevance

to the present study, recent empirical work that focusses on the relationships between direct

investment and trade flows (particularly intra-firm), such as whether or not trade and investment are

in some sense complements or substitutes, includes papers by Blonigen (1997, 1998), Swenson

(1998), and Smith (1998).

       The objective of this paper is to extend this inquiry by decomposing foreign affiliate

production data into sales to the host-country market and export sales. We first develop and extend

existing theory from Markusen (1987) and Carr, Markusen and Maskus (1998) (henceforth CMM)

to generate separate predictions as to how local sales versus export sales should be related to parent-

country and host-country characteristics. This approach will attempt to get at the horizontal versus

vertical distinction that is not explicitly considered in CMM. These theoretical predictions are then

taken to the data.
                                                  5

       Results fit well with the theoretical hypotheses. Local sales of foreign affiliates are strongly

dependent on market size and trade costs into the host country. Skilled-labor abundance between

the parent and host country is only weakly related to local affiliate sales in both economic and

statistical terms. Export sales are weakly related to market size and to host-country trade costs.

They are strongly related to the skilled-labor-endowment differences of the parent and host countries,

and strongly related to an interaction term between skill differences and country size: exports by

affiliates are particularly important when the parent is both skilled-labor abundant and small (e.g.,

Sweden, The Netherlands, Switzerland). Both local sales and export sales are strongly negatively

related to a host-country investment barrier (cost) index.

       The ratio of exports to local sales is positively related to the relative skilled-labor abundance

of the parent, and negatively related to market size, the host-country investment cost index, and the

host-country trade-cost index. The findings on trade and investment costs may be due to a

substitution phenomenon. If the investment is undertaken to serve the local market, firms will bear

the trade and investment costs. If the investment is made to serve the market in the parent or third

countries, high local trade and investment costs will induce the firm to look elsewhere.
                                                   6

2.      The Knowledge-Capital Model

        In this section, we outline what we refer to as the "knowledge-capital model" of the

multinational enterprise. A formal algebraic development is presented in Markusen (1997), and many

of its testable implications are analyzed in CMM (1998).

        Assume a two-good, two-factor, two-country world. Refer to the factors as skilled (S) and

unskilled (L) labor. Good Y is produced with constant returns to scale by a competitive industry and

is unskilled-labor intensive. The countries are referred to as h (home) and f (foreign).

        Good X is produced with increasing returns by imperfectly competitive, Cournot firms.

Production of X requires a firm-level fixed cost, "headquarters' services", such as R&D, management,

finance, accounting, marketing and so forth. An X firm may then have one or two plants, and a plant

and headquarters may be geographically separated. Headquarters' services are a joint input across

plants, creating firm-level scale economies, also referred to in the literature as multi-plant economies

of scale. The idea is that headquarters' services are often knowledge-based and can be provided to

additional production facilities at low or zero marginal cost (e.g., blueprints). We also assume plant-

level fixed costs (scale economies).

        Assumptions about the factor intensities of fixed costs are crucial to the story. We assume

that headquarters' services use skilled labor exclusively. Plant level fixed costs are a combination of

skilled and unskilled labor. Final production occurs with constant costs and requires only unskilled

labor. Transport costs between markets use unskilled labor. Finally, we assume that plant

production, including both fixed costs and marginal costs, is more skilled-labor intensive than Y

production, the composite of the rest of the economy. This is not particularly important to any of the

results in this paper, but is important in generating certain results concerning the factor-price effects
                                                    7

of investment liberalization (Markusen, 1997). In summary then, the ranking of activities from most

skilled-labor intensive to least skilled-labor intensive is as follows:

        [headquarters only] > [integrated X] > [plant only] > [Y]

        This completes the description of the model, and allows us to specify more precisely what is

meant by the knowledge-capital approach. There are three defining assumptions.

        (A)     Transportability or fragmentation: the services of knowledge-based assets may be

                fragmented from production and are easily supplied to geographically separate

                production facilities.

        (B)     Skilled-labor intensity: knowledge-based assets are skilled-labor intensive relative to

                final production.

        (C)     Jointness: the services of knowledge-based assets are (at least partially) joint

                ("public") inputs into geographically separate production facilities.

        The first two properties gives rise to "vertical" multinationals that locate their single plant and

headquarters in different countries depending on factor prices and market sizes. The third property

gives rise to "horizontal" multinationals that have plants producing the final goods in multiple

countries.

        More formally, several types of firms may be active in equilibrium in a free-entry Cournot

equilibrium for the model we have just outlined. "National firms" refer to single-plant firms with their

headquarters and plant in the same country. "Horizontal multinationals" refer to two-plant firms with

their headquarters in one country or the other. "Vertical multinationals" refer to single-plant firms

with their headquarters and plant in different countries.

        Here we just outline the results that emerge from this model with respect to what types of
                                                  8

firms are active in equilibrium as a function of country characteristics, such as differences in size,

relative endowments, and the level of trade costs and total world demand. The interested reader is

referred to Markusen (1997) for a fuller development.

        Horizontal multinationals tend to arise when the two countries are similar in size, similar in

relative endowments, total demand is high, and trade costs are moderate to high. In order to

understand the importance of similarity in size, it is perhaps easiest to note that single-plant firms

(national or vertical) have an inherent advantage when the countries are of very different size: put a

single plant in the large country, avoiding costly capacity in the small market. Growth in total

demand will induce shifts (in some regions of parameter space) from single-plant production, serving

the other market by high-marginal-cost exports, to high-fixed-cost branch-plant production.

        Vertical multinationals are favored over national firms and horizontal multinationals when the

countries have very different relative endowments and especially when the skilled-labor-abundant

country is also small. Differences in factor prices encourage fragmentation of activities, with the

headquarters in the skilled-labor-abundant country and differences in size encourage placing the plant

in the large country. These two motives reinforce one another when the skilled-labor-abundant

country is also small.

        These results are interesting, but not very useful to take to the data. We do not have good

data on the types of firms existing and these pure types are greatly blurred in reality in any case.

However, the model can be used to generate results on the sales of affiliates of country i firms in

country j. This "reduced form" gives us direct predictions on observable data, fully endogenizing the

types of firms active, trade flows, and so forth, without requiring us to identify those items in the

data.
                                                     9

        Figures 1-4 present results from simulations using the model from Markusen (1997) and

CMM (1998). These diagrams are world Edgeworth boxes, with unskilled labor on the "x" axis and

skilled labor on the "y" axis. The origin for country i is at the southwest (SW) corner and the origin

for country j is at the northeast (NE) corner. For points on the SW-NE diagonal, the countries have

the same relative endowments but differ in size. Note for reference later that movements within these

Edgeworth boxes are "compensated" experiments, in that total world factor endowments are constant

(and therefore world GDP is approximately constant). These diagrams are most useful for developing

intuition about two-way data in which we observe production and sales by affiliates of country i firms

in country j and vice versa. Thus in any pair (i to j and j to i) of observations total GDP and factor

endowments are held constant.

        Affiliate sales are graphed on the vertical axis of Figure 1. Affiliate sales appear as a saddle,

with an inverted u-shaped curve along the SW-NE diagonal.                  As noted earlier, horizontal

multinationals dominate production when the countries are identical, while national firms located in

the larger country dominate when the countries are very different in size. In the center of the box,

exactly half of world production is affiliate sales, while the other half is the output of the horizontal

multinationals' domestic plants.

        The highest level of affiliate sales occurs in the NW and SE areas of the Edgeworth box in

Figure 1, where one country is both small and skilled-labor abundant.1 In this case, most firms are

vertical multinationals headquartered in the small, skilled-labor-abundant country, and so most plants

are located in the larger, skilled-labor-scarce country. Output of these plants is classified as "affiliate

production" of course, so most (in the limit all) world X production is affiliate sales.

        Figures 2, 3, and 4 show simulation results for affiliate sales in just one direction: affiliates of
                                                  10

country i firms producing in country j. Figure 2 shows the local sales in country j of affiliates of

country i firms. There is again an inverted u-shaped relationship along the SW-NE diagonal. But the

highest levels occur when country i is both small and skilled-labor abundant for the reasons just noted.

        Figure 3 shows the export sales of affiliates back to the parent country i. This diagram is a

"mountain", reaching a maximum when country i is small and skilled-labor abundant, but not too

small and not too skilled-labor scarce. The not-too-small requirement is obvious, because little

output is exported back to a very small country. The not-too-skilled-labor-abundant requirement is

less obvious, and it has to do with the assumption that some host-country skilled labor is required in

plant-level fixed costs. As country j becomes too skilled-labor scarce, production there becomes very

expensive and national firms in country j substitute for vertical firms headquartered in i and producing

in j.

        There are clear differences between Figures 2 and 3. Most notably, only local sales occur if

the countries are very similar, or if country i is very small and very skilled-labor abundant. Yet there

are some similarities that make it difficult to propose sharply different hypotheses regarding how these

two classes of affiliate sales should be related to country characteristics.

        Figure 4 clarifies this ambiguity a bit by displaying the ratio of affiliate exports back to the

parent to local affiliate sales in the host country. This graph suggest that this ratio is most closely

related to the skilled-labor abundance of the parent in relation to the host country. Relative size

differences play some role, but the ratio clearly is not higher when the parent country i is both small

and skilled-labor abundant.2

        These simulation results suggest a number of independent variables that should be used to

explain the three dependent variables: local sales by affiliates of country i firms in country j (Figure
                                                    11

2), export sales by the same affiliates (Figure 3), and the ratio of these two variables (Figure 4). Refer

to these variables as RSALESL, RSALESE, and RATIOEL (R for "real" in the first two). We now

list the right-hand-side variables, adding a discussion of the hypothesized signs and magnitudes using

Figures 1-4 and other more obvious intuition. Again, note that these hypotheses are most appropriate

to two-way "compensated" observations as noted earlier. We shall return to this point below.

        SUMGDP denotes the sum of two countries' real GDPs. This should have a positive

coefficient in explaining RSALESL and RSALESE. However, the effect should be stronger on

RSALESL. The reason is that growth will, at various points in parameter space, lead to a switch

from high marginal-cost single-plant firms to high-fixed-cost multi-plant firms, increasing local sales

more than in proportion to growth in incomes. Accordingly, we hypothesize that RATIOEL should

be negatively related to SUMGDP.

        GDPDIFF is the difference between the two countries' real GDP levels and GDPDIFSQ is the

squared difference. GDPDIFSQ should be negatively related to all three dependent variables, as

suggested by Figures 2-4. Moving along various loci parallel to the SW-NE diagonal, all three

dependent variables are higher near the center than at the extremes, although the maximum point is

generally not exactly where the two countries are the same size.

        SKDIFF denotes the relative skilled-labor abundance of the parent country relative to the

host; formally, it is the share of the labor force that is skilled in country i (parent or source) minus the

same share in country j (host). SKDIFF should be positively related to both RSALESL and

RSALESE. However, it is likely to have a stronger impact on RSALESE than on RSALESL from

eye-balling Figures 2 and 3. Relative endowments and factor-price differences are the primary

determinants of export sales, whereas local sales are influenced heavily by country sizes as well.
                                                  12

Accordingly, we hypothesize that SKDIFF will have a positive sign in the RATIOEL regression as

suggested by Figure 4.

       INVJ denotes an index of investment barriers (costs) into country j, the host country. Higher

numbers indicate higher investment costs. This is hypothesized to be negatively related to both

RSALESL and RSALESE. However, investments to serve the local market may be less sensitive to

these costs than are investments to serve export markets because alternative locations may be selected

for the latter, thus we hypothesize that the magnitude of the coefficient in the RSALESL equation

should be less than that in the RSALESE equation, and therefore that the sign on INVJ should be

negative in the RATIOEL equation as well.

       TCJ denotes an index of trade barriers (costs, not including distance or freight) into country

j. Higher numbers indicate higher barriers or costs. Such barriers should encourage investments to

serve the local market, so the hypothesized sign is positive in the RSALESL equation. The effect

should be noticeably less in the RSALESE equation and may be negative, insofar as trade costs raise

the costs of imported intermediate inputs. The sign of the coefficient in the RATIOEL equation

should thus be negative.

       TCI is a similar measure of trade barriers back into the parent country. This has little effect

on production for local sales in country j, but is expected to have a negative effect on production for

export, insofar as much of that may be going back to the home country. This variable should thus

have a negative sign in the RATIOEL equation.

       SKDIFF*GDPDIFF is an interactive term. Referring to Figures 2-3, the effect of an increase

in SKDIFF should be larger when the parent is smaller (GDPDIFF < 0), and the effect of an increase

in GDPI (parent GDP) should be smaller when the parent country i is skilled-labor abundant (SKDIFF
                                                  13

> 0). Both effects imply that the sign of the coefficient on the interactive term should be negative in

the RSALESL and RSALESE regressions. Figure 4 however does not suggest a very sharp

hypothesis as to whether it should be positive or negative in the RATIOEL equation. Therefore, we

are agnostic about the sign in the RATIOEL equation.

       DIST will denote a distance measure between pairs of counties. Theory does not offer us

much of a prediction about distance. It may lead to a substitution to producing abroad instead of

exporting to a distant country. However, distance raises the transactions costs of investments as well

as those of exports. It is possible that distance might affect production for export more negatively

than production for local sale (which might actually be encouraged), but we are generally agnostic

insofar as we do not understand the transactions costs of investing at a long distance.

       In addition to examining these hypotheses on two-way data (inward and outward affiliate sales

data for the US), we examine them on US outward data only. The advantage of the latter is that it

breaks down affiliate export sales into sales back to the parent country and sales to third countries.

Sales back to the US parent may be closely identified with vertical investments such as foreign

assembly plants. We should note, however, that the intuition generated by figures 1-4 may not always

be appropriate, insofar as these diagrams are "compensated" experiments holding the two-country

total factor endowment constant. Thus an increase in SKDIFF is an increase in the US skilled-labor

abundance and a fall in the host-country skilled-labor abundance in the simulations. For the US

outward data, an increase in SKDIFF is a fall in the host-country skilled-labor abundance holding the

US endowment constant. Similar comments apply to GDPDIFF and in the outward regressions we

will use GDPJ since it is only the latter variable that changes.

       A problematic issue with the outward-only data arises from the fact that the US (the parent)
                                                  14

is always far bigger than the host, although not always skilled-labor abundant relative to the host.

This restricts observations to an area in the NE section of the Edgeworth boxes in Figures 2-4, which

is a considerable difficulty given the non-linearity and non-monotonicity of the theoretical predictions

over the parameter space of the Edgeworth box. For example, note that increases in SKDIFF could

lead to a fall in outward US investment in this region (foreign plants are replaced by US national firms

serving the host by exports). Thus we should expect some differences in the US-outward-only results

versus the two-way results due to the fact that they are somewhat different experiments and because

we are constrained to a sub-region of parameter space in the outward-only data. Further comment

is postponed until we view the results.
                                                 15

4. Data Sources and Variable Construction

        The data form a panel of cross-country observations over the period 1986-94. We take real

sales volume of non-bank manufacturing affiliates in each country to indicate production activity. The

U.S. Department of Commerce provides annual data on sales of foreign affiliates of American parent

firms and on sales of U.S. affiliates of foreign parent firms. Thus, for each year the United States

serves as both the headquarters country for its firms producing abroad and the affiliate country for

foreign firms producing there. There are 36 countries in addition to the United States for which we

have at least one year of complete data. Annual sales values abroad are converted into millions of

1990 U.S. dollars using an exchange-rate adjusted local wholesale price index, with exchange rates

and price indexes taken from the International Financial Statistics of the International Monetary

Fund.

        As noted above, the "inward" data (U.S. affiliates of foreign parents) only list total exports

of the affiliates to all countries. The "outward" data (foreign affiliates of U.S. parents) break down

exports of those affiliates into exports back to the United States and exports to third countries. The

latter series is particularly valuable, but constrains the analysis to a sub-area of the Edgeworth box

in which the parent country (United States) is always very large relative to the host as noted above.

The inward-outward (two-way) data are thus in some ways much for examining the theory, but suffer

from a clear third-country problem, whereas the theory is developed in a two-country context. Thus,

we examine two cases, each of which has a drawback: the inward-outward data using total affiliate

export sales to all countries and outward-only data in which exports can be distinguished between

exports back to the parent and exports to third countries.

        Real gross domestic product is measured in billions of 1990 U.S. dollars for each country.
                                                  16

For this purpose, annual real GDP figures in local currencies were converted into dollars using the

market exchange rate. These data are also from the IFS.

       Skilled labor abundance is defined as the sum of occupational categories 0/1 (professional,

technical, and kindred workers) and 2 (administrative workers) in employment in each country,

divided by total employment. These figures are compiled from annual surveys reported in the

Yearbook of Labor Statistics published by the International Labor Organization. In cases where some

annual figures were missing, the skilled-labor ratios were taken to equal the period averages for each

country. The variable SKDIFF is then simply the difference between the relative skill endowment of

the parent country and that of the affiliate country.

       The cost of investing in the affiliate country is a simple average of several indexes of

impediments to investment throughout the period, reported in the World Competitiveness Report of

the World Economic Forum. The indexes include restrictions on ability to acquire control in a

domestic company, limitations on the ability to employ foreign skilled labor, restraints on negotiating

joint ventures, strict controls on hiring and firing practices, market dominance by a small number of

enterprises, an absence of fair administration of justice, difficulties in acquiring local bank credit,

restrictions on access to local and foreign capital markets, and inadequate protection of intellectual

property. These indexes are computed on a scale from 0 to 100, with a higher number indicating

higher investment costs.

       A trade cost index is taken from the same source and is defined as a measure of national

protectionism, or efforts to prevent importation of competitive products. It also runs from 0 to 100,

with 100 being the highest trade costs. All of these indexes are based on extensive surveys of

multinational enterprises.
                                                 17

       We also incorporate a measure of distance, which is simply the number of kilometers of each

country's capital city from Washington, DC. It is unclear whether this variable captures trade costs

or investment costs, since both should rise with distance.
                                                  18

4.     Results

       Tables 1-3 show results for regression equations on the full inward-outward data set. Table

1 gives results for dependent variable RSALESL (local sales in country j of affiliates of country i

firms). Signs are as predicted for direct effects although the two variables involving SKDIFF are not

statistically significant. Country size, investment costs, and trade costs into the host country market

have strong explanatory power. Trade costs back into the parent country (TCI) have little

explanatory power and theory does not hypothesize that it should.

       Table 2 gives results for dependent variable RSALESE (export sales to all countries by

affiliates of country i firms in country j). Signs are as hypothesized except for TCI, which should be

negative, at least for exports going back to the home countries (these cannot be broken out in the

data as noted above). The two terms involving SKDIFF are both larger in magnitude (economic

significance) than in the RSALESL regression, and highly statistically significant. The magnitude of

the SUMGDP coefficient on the other hand is much smaller in the RSALESE regression. These

results suggest that market size is a more important determinant of production for local sales while

differences in relative endowments is a more important determinant of production for export.

       These comparisons can be misleading, however, due to differences in the size of the dependent

variables (local sales are larger than export sales in most observations). Table 3 therefore uses the

ratio of export sales to local sales. Results confirm that market size is more important for local sales

(coefficient on SUMGDP is negative) and that skill differences are more important for export sales

(coefficient on SKDIFF is positive), thus the proportion of export sales increases as host country j

becomes more unskilled-labor abundant (skilled-labor scarce).

       The coefficients on the INVCJ and TCJ variables in the ratio equation of Tables 3 are
                                                   19

negative. This conforms to our intuition about substitutability. Production for local sale, by

definition, cannot move to a third country, and thus local sales may be relatively insensitive to these

costs. Production for export sale may be more sensitive to investment and trade costs because the

firm can choose an alternative location to serve a broader market, as suggested by the negative signs

in the ratio equation. TCI is positive in this regression which is consistent with results in Tables 1 and

2. This outcome is not consistent with our intuition but note that the significance level is low. Higher

parent country trade costs should discourage foreign production for export back to the parent, but

should not affect production for local sale.

        Tables 4-8 present results on the US-outward-only sample, allowing a breakdown of

production for export sale into sales back to the United States (RSALESUS in Table 5) and sales to

third countries (RSALESF in Table 6). The most dramatic change in these results relative to Tables

1-3 is the reversal in the signs of SKDIFF and GDPDIFF*SKDIFF. This suggests that US outward

investment is attracted to more skilled-labor abundant countries both for local production and

production for export with strong statistical significance. The latter result is particularly at odds with

the two-way results.

        There are two possible explanation, other than just concluding that inward and outward

investments follow different models. First, there is the "compensated" versus "uncompensated" issue

that we mentioned earlier. In the US-outward-only data, an increase in SKDIFF holds US skilled-

labor-abundance constant, effectively lowering "world" skilled-labor abundance. This is a somewhat

different experiment than that in the two-way data, which includes both such uncompensated

observations across different countries, and also a great many "compensated" observation pairs

comparing i-to-j and j-to-i affiliate production. The response of affiliate production to an increase
                                                    20

in host-country skilled-labor abundance (decrease in SKDIFF) should be more positive or less

negative than if this change is accompanied by a fall in the parent country skilled-labor abundance and

that is what the results are telling us.

        The second possible explanation relates to the fact that the parent country (the United States)

is always much larger than the host in the US-outward data. How this might affect the results is

shown most clearly in Figure 2. When country i is quite large relative to country j, a (compensated)

increase in SKDIFF may produce a fall in RSALESL: heading toward the north edge of the box, we

go over the "hump" and RSALESL start to fall. What is happening in the theory model is that host

country j is becoming sufficiently skilled-labor scarce that branch plants there are closed and

production is concentrated in national firms headquartered in country i. This implies a negative sign

on SKDIFF which is the result we are getting in Tables 4-6. This finding is in fact consistent with

results in Zhang and Markusen (1999), which show that the smallest, poorest (skilled-labor scarce)

countries receive a far smaller share of world direct investment than their share of income. The result

and associated theory also points out the importance of knowing which part of the box is being

examined and of adding more investing countries as is done in the two-way sample.

        Table 7 shows results for the ratio of affiliate export sales back to the United States to affiliate

sales to the local market, and Table 8 shows results for the ratio of affiliate sales to third markets to

affiliate sales to the local market. Results on market size confirm those in Table 3, that a larger

market shifts a proportion of sales from exports to local sales. The findings also confirm the results

on INVCJ and TCJ (TCI was dropped because country i is always the United States). The results

on SKDIFF and GDPDIFF*SKDIFF are reversed; however, these point estimates have extremely low

statistical significance in Table 7, while the positive sign on SKDIFF in Table 3 is highly significant.
                                                  21

Both coefficients are statistically significant in Table 8. Thus the results suggest that US outward

investment is not attracted to low-skilled countries, even investment for production for export back

to the United States (Table 5).

       Results on market size and relative endowments must be interpreted carefully, however, since

GDP appears in three terms and relative endowments in two terms. Let us write the first four terms

of the regression equations as:

(1)      $1 SUMGPD % $2 GDPDIFSQ % $3 SKDIFF % $4 GDPDIFF(SKDIFF



The derivatives of this equation with respect to host-country variables GDPJ and SKLJ are then as

follows (an increase in GDPJ is a negative change in GDPDIFF, and an increase in SKLJ is a negative

change in SKDIFF).

          M RSALES
(2)                ' $1 & 2 $2 GDPDIFF & $4 SKDIFF
           MGDPJ




          M RSALES
(3)                ' & $3 & $4 GDPDIFF
            M SKLJ




       Table 9 computes values of these derivatives at the mean values of SKDIFF and GDPDIFF

for the two samples. Table 9 gives the absolute change in sales by country i affiliates in j in response

to a growth in country j's income and to an increase in country j's skilled-labor abundance (decrease

in its unskilled-labor abundance). Effects of increases in country j's investment and trade-cost indices

are also listed. The top panel gives results for the inward-outward estimation while the lower panel
                                                    22

gives estimates for the US outward estimation only. Below the level estimates, an elasticity figure

is computed. We do not compute elasticities with respect to INVCJ and TCJ, since these are

"qualitative" indices.

        According to results in the top panel of Table 9, local sales are elastic with respect to host-

country income with an elasticity of , = 1.6. Export sales are less elastic, at , = 1.1. Local sales are

very insensitive to the skilled-labor ratio in the host country, while export sales have an elasticity with

respect to the skilled-labor ratio of , = -.7. Production for export sales is attracted to less skilled-

labor abundant (more skilled-labor scarce) countries. Comparing local sales versus export sales, the

former respond more to income and export sales respond more to skilled-labor scarcity as suggested

by the regression results discussed earlier.

        The pattern for the US-outward-only data (lower panel of Table 9) is qualitatively similar to

the top panel but quantitatively different. Production for local sale has an elasticity with respect to

local market size of about 1.0, while the elasticities of exports back to the US and to third countries

are 0.2 and 1.0, respectively. A weighted average of these two elasticities (,w) yields a figure of

0.68. Thus the elasticity of exports with respect to host-country size is less than that for local sales

by an amount similar to the two-way estimates. The elasticity of local sales with respect to the host-

country skilled-labor ratio is about 0.6, while the average of the two export elasticities is 0.06.

Production for export back to the US or to third countries is insensitive to the host-country skilled-

labor ratio, at least at the mean of GDPDIFF. Again, the pattern is qualitatively similar to that for

the two-way estimate in that the export elasticity with respect to local skilled labor is smaller than that

for local sales (i.e., less positive or more negative).

        Overall, the results in Table 9, taking into account interactive effects, clearly confirm that
                                                    23

production for local sales is more sensitive to local market size than is production for export.

Production for local sales has an elasticity with respect to the host-country skilled-labor ratio that is

larger than the elasticity for production for export. Production shifts relatively in favor of local sales

when the host is more skilled-labor abundant and relatively in favor of exports when the host is

skilled-labor scarce.

        There is an interesting quantitative difference between the two-way and US-outward estimates

of the elasticities with respect to the host-country skilled-labor ratio (subject again to the caveats that

these are point estimates, evaluated at the mean of GDPDIFF in each sample, and the means differ

in the two samples). While production for export is attracted by host-country unskilled-labor

abundance in the two-way sample, there is virtually no effect in the US-outward sample. We might

infer from this that production by US affiliates for export, including that back to the United States,

is not primarily attracted to low-skilled countries, contrary to a popular impression of multinationals

exporting jobs to low-wage countries. While this may occur in arm's-length outsourcing (e.g.,

subcontracting), our results suggest that it is not primarily multinationals that are responsible for such

a phenomenon if it indeed exists. As we noted above, this is consistent with the theoretical

assumption that branch-plant production is skilled-labor intensive relative to the rest of the host

economy. Past a certain level of skilled-labor scarcity in the host economy, inward direct investment

begins to fall as that country becomes increasingly skilled-labor scarce (Zhang and Markusen, 1999).
                                                   24

5.      Summary and Conclusions

        Robert Lipsey's work over many years has given us a rich empirical literature that relates the

behavior of multinational firms to industry and country characteristics. Theoretical work that

endogenizes multinational firms into general-equilibrium trade models has developed somewhat more

recently, and offers predictions about the relationship between affiliate production and parent-country

and host-country characteristics. In particular, the knowledge-capital approach to the multinational

enterprise identifies motives for both horizontal and vertical multinational activity and predicts how

affiliate activity should be related to variables such as country sizes and relative-endowment

differences.

        This paper draws implications from the theory as to how production for local sales versus

production for export sales relates to country characteristics and then subjects these hypotheses to

empirical estimation. Results fit well with the theory in terms of economic and statistical significance.

Local (host-country) market size is more important for production for local sales than for production

for export sales. Host-country skilled-labor scarcity is important for export production relative to

production for local sales. Investment and trade cost barriers in the host country affect production

for export more negatively than production for local sales.

        Some quantitative difference was found in the two-way (inward and outward) sample versus

the US-outward only sample with respect to host-country skilled labor abundance or scarcity. In the

US-outward only sample, host-country skilled-labor scarcity (unskilled-labor abundance) had little

effect on US affiliate production for export sale, whether back to the United States or to third

countries. This suggests that US outward investment is not primarily drawn to unskilled-labor-

abundant countries, contrary to a common fear that "outsourcing" by multinationals is resulting in a
                                                  25

loss of US unskilled jobs. (Firms could of course be outsourcing to unaffiliated sub-contractors.)

In the two-way sample, production for exports is drawn to unskilled-labor-abundant countries.

However, the results are qualitatively similar in the two samples insofar as unskilled-labor-abundance

in the host is relatively more important for export sales.
                                                26

                                         REFERENCES

Bhagwati, Jagdish N. and Richard A. Brecher (1980), "National Welfare in an Open Economy in the
     presence of Foreign-Owned Factors of Production", Journal of International Economics 10,
     103-15.

Blomstrom, Magnus, Irving B. Kravis, and Robert E. Lipsey (1988), "Multinational Firms and
      Manufacturing Exports from Developing Countries", NBER working paper 2493.

Blomstrom, Magnus and Robert E. Lipsey (1989), "The Export Performance of US and Swedish
      Multinationals", Review of Income and Wealth 35, 245-64.

__________ (1993), "The Competitiveness of Countries and Their Multinational Firms", in Eden,
      Lorraine and Evan H. Potter (editors), Multinationals in the Global Political Economy, New
      York: St. Martin's Press, 129-41.

Blomstrom, Magnus, Robert E. Lipsey, and Ksenia Kulchycky (1998), "US and Swedish Direct
      Investment and Exports", in Baldwin, Robert E. (editor), Trade Policy Issues and Empirical
      Analysis, Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press, 259-97.

Blomstrom, Magnus Robert E. Lipsey, and Lennart Ohlsson (1990), "What do Rich Countries Trade
      with One Another? R&D and the Composition of US and Swedish Trade", Banca Nazionale
      del Lavoro - Quarterly Review 173, 215-35.

Blonigen, Bruce (1997), "Firm-Specific Assets and the Link Between Exchange Rates and Foreign
       Direct Investment", American Economic Review 87, 447-466.

__________ (1998), "In Search of Substitution between Foreign Production and Exports", University
      of Oregon working paper.

Brainard, S. Lael (1993a), "A Simple Theory of Multinational Corporations and Trade with a Trade-
       off between Proximity and Concentration", NBER Working Paper No. 4269.

__________ (1993b), "An Empirical Assessment of the Factor Proportions Explanation of
      Multinationals Sales", NBER Working Paper No. 4580.

__________ (1996), "An Empirical Assessment of the Proximity-Concentration Tradeoff between
      Multinational Sales and Trade", American Economic Review 87, 520-544.

Brecher, Richard A. and Carlos F. Diaz-Alejandro (1977), "Tariffs, Foreign Capital and Immiserizing
       Growth", Journal of International Economics 7, 317-322.

Carr, David, James R. Markusen and Keith Maskus (1998), "Estimating the Knowledge-Capital
                                               27

       Model of the Multinational Enterprise", NBER working paper 6773.

Dick, Andrew R. (1993), "Strategic Trade Policy and Welfare: The Empirical Consequences of
       Foreign Ownership", Journal of International Economics 35, 227-249.

Ekholm, Karolina (1995), Multinational Production and Trade in Technological Knowledge, Lund
      Economic Studies, number 58.

__________ (1997), "Factor Endowments and the Pattern of Affiliate Production by Multinational
      Enterprises", CREDIT working paper no. 97/19, University of Nottingham.

__________ (1998a), "Headquarter Services and Revealed Factor Abundance", Review of
      International Economics 6, 545-553.

__________ (1998b), "Proximity Advantages, Scale Economies, and the Location of Production",
      in Braunerhjelm, Pontus and Karolina Ekholm (editors), The Geography of Multinational
      Firms. Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 59-76.

Ethier, Wilfred and Lars E.O. Svensson (1986), "Theorems of International Trade with Factor
        Mobility", Journal of International Economics 20, 21-42.

Helpman, Elhanan, (1984) "A Simple Theory of Trade with Multinational Corporations", Journal of
      Political Economy, 92, 451-471.

__________ (1985)"Multinational Corporations and Trade Structure", Review of Economic Studies
      52, 443-458.

Horstmann, Ignatius J. and James R. Markusen (1987), "Strategic Investments and the Development
      of Multinationals," International Economic Review 28, 109-121.

__________ (1992), "Endogenous Market Structures in International Trade," Journal of International
      Economics 32, 109-129.

Kemp, Murray C. (1969), The Pure Theory of International Trade and Investment, New York:
      Prentice Hall.

Kravis, Irving B. and Robert E. Lipsey (1982), "The Location of Overseas Production and
       Production for Export by US Multinational Firms", Journal of International Economics 12,
       210-23.

__________ (1988), "The Effect of Multinational Firm's Foreign Operations on Their Domestic
      Employment", NBER working paper 2760.
                                               28

__________ (1992), "Sources of Competitiveness of the United States and of its Multinational
      Firms", Review of Economics and Statistics 74, 193-201.

Linder, Staffan Burenstam (1961), An Essay on Trade and Transformation, Uppsala: Almqvist and
       Wiksells.

Lipsey, Robert E. (1988), "Changing Patterns of International Investment in and by the United
       States", in Martin Feldstein (editor), The United States and the World Economy, Chicago and
       London: University of Chicago Press, 475-545.

__________ (1989), "The Internationalization of Production", NBER working paper 2923.

__________ (1993), "Foreign Direct Investment in the United States: Changes over Three Decades",
      in Froot, Kenneth A. (editor), Foreign Direct Investment, Chicago and London: University
      of Chicago Press, 113-70.

__________ (1995), "Outward Direct Investment and the US Economy", in Feldstein, Martin, James
      R. Hines, and Glenn Hubbard (editors), The Effects of Taxation on Multinational
      Corporations, Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press, 7-33.

Lipsey, Robert E., Magnus Blomstrom and Eric Ramstetter (1995), "Internationalized Production
       in World Output", NBER working paper 5385.

Lipsey, Robert E. and Irving B. Kravis (1987), The Competitiveness and Comparative Advantage of
        US Multinationals 1957-1984", Banca Nazionale del Lavoro - Quarterly Review 161, 147-65.

\Lipsey, Robert E. and Merle Yahr Weiss (1981), "Foreign Production and Exports in Manufacturing
         Industries", Review of Economics and Statistics 63, 210-23.

__________ (1984), "Foreign Production and Exports of Individual Firms", Review of Economics
      and Statistics 66, 304-308.

Markusen, James R. (1983), "Factor Movements and Commodity Trade as Complements," Journal
      of International Economics 13, 341-356.

__________ (1984), "Multinationals, Multi-Plant Economies, and the Gains from Trade", Journal of
      International Economics 16, 205-226.

__________ (1995), "The Boundaries of Multinational Firms and the Theory of International Trade",
      Journal of Economic Perspectives 9, 169-189.

__________ (1997), "Trade versus Investment Liberalization", NBER working paper 6231.
                                               29

Markusen, James R. and Lars E.O. Svensson (1985), "Trade in Goods and Factors with International
      Differences in Technology," International Economic Review 26, 175-192.

Markusen, James R. and Anthony J. Venables (1998), "Multinational Firms and the New Trade
      Theory", Journal of International Economics 46, 183-203.

Melvin, James R. (1969), "Increasing Returns to Scale as a Determinant of Trade", Canadian Journal
       of Economics 3, 389-402.

Mundell, Robert (1957), "International Trade and Factor Mobility", American Economic Review 47,
      321-335.

Neary, J. Peter (1995), "Factor Mobility and International Trade", Canadian Journal of Economics
       28, S4-S23.

Smith, Pamela J. (1998), "Patent Rights and Bilateral Exchange: A Cross-Country Analysis of US
       Exports, FDI, and Licensing", University of Minnesota working paper.

Swenson, Debra (1998), "The Tradeoff between Trade and Foreign Investment", University of
      California, Davis, working paper.

Wong, Kar-Yui (1986), "Are International Trade and Factor Mobility Substitutes?", Journal of
      International Economics 20, 25-44.

Zhang, Kevin Honglin and James R. Markusen (1999), "Vertical Multinationals and Host-Country
       Characteristics", Journal of Development Economics, forthcoming.
                                                    30

                                              ENDNOTES


         1. The locus of point in which countries i and j have equal incomes is much steeper than

the NE-SE diagonal of the Edgeworth boxes in Figures 1-4. It runs between columns 8 ("north"

edge) and column 12 ("south" edge). So, for example, country i is smaller than j to the left of this

locus.




         2. Recall that country i is smaller than country j at all points left of a line running from

approximately column 8 on the north side of the box to column 12 on the south side.
Table 1: Results for Panel estimation, inward and outward data


Dependent variable:      RSALESL (weighted least squares)
Total observations               381
R-Squared                      0.728
Adjusted R-Squared             0.722


Variable                    Parameter         Sign as      T for HO:      Prob > |T|
                              Estimate     Predicted?      Parm = 0

SUMGDP                         10.2937            Yes             9.108      0.0001
GDPDIFSQ                       -0.0009            Yes            -7.163      0.0001
SKDIFF                           10531            Yes             0.877      0.3813
GDPDIFF*SKDIFF                 -2.6932            Yes            -1.114      0.2658

INVCJ                        -633.3970            Yes            -7.119      0.0001
TCJ                           366.5574            Yes             6.142      0.0001
TCI                           -22.0996              ?            -0.195      0.8451

DIST                           -1.5326              ?            -9.293      0.0001
INTERCEPT                       469.22                            0.046      0.9631


Table 2: Results for Panel estimation, inward and outward data

Dependent variable:      RSALESE (weighted least squares)
Total observations               381
R-Squared                      0.486
Adjusted R-Squared             0.473


Variable                    Parameter         Sign as      T for HO:      Prob > |T|
                              Estimate     Predicted?      Parm = 0

SUMGDP                          2.9274            Yes             3.971      0.0001
GDPDIFSQ                       -0.0003            Yes            -3.504      0.0005
SKDIFF                           42961            Yes             5.523      0.0001
GDPDIFF*SKDIFF                 -6.9520            Yes            -4.434      0.0001

INVCJ                        -277.2284            Yes            -4.758      0.0001
TCJ                            52.1164              ?             1.332      0.1836
TCI                            65.6274            NO              0.892      0.3729

DIST                           -0.6398              ?            -5.927      0.0001
INTERCEPT                      7501.94                            1.127      0.2604
Table 3: Results for Panel estimation, inward and outward data


Dependent variable:      RATIOEL (weighted least squares)
Total observations               371
R-Squared                      0.335
Adjusted R-Squared             0.319


Variable                    Parameter         Sign as       T for HO:     Prob > |T|
                              Estimate     Predicted?       Parm = 0

SUMGDP                       -0.000671            Yes            -4.327      0.0001
GDPDIFSQ                     -1.92E-08            Yes            -1.209      0.2273
SKDIFF                        3.175373            Yes             3.121      0.0019
GDPDIFF*SKDIFF               -0.000043              ?            -0.173      0.8630

INVCJ                        -0.043374            Yes            -3.491      0.0005
TCJ                          -0.010975            Yes            -1.261      0.2082
TCI                           0.014789             No             1.094      0.2749

DIST                          0.000055              ?            2.446       0.0149
INTERCEPT                     6.100586                           4.222       0.0001
Table 4: Results for Panel estimation, US outward only


Dependent variable:      RSALESL (weighted least squares)
Total observations               274
R-Squared                      0.773
Adjusted R-Squared             0.766


Variable                    Parameter         Sign as    T for HO:    Prob > |T|
                              Estimate     Predicted?    Parm = 0

GDPJ                           20.8423            Yes        10.362      0.0001
GDPDIFSQ                        -0.0018           Yes        -8.120      0.0001
SKDIFF                         -948636              ?       -11.980      0.0001
GDPDIFF*SKDIFF                174.5818              ?        11.905      0.0001

INVCJ                        -517.8056            Yes        -6.546      0.0001
TCJ                           314.8092            Yes         5.943      0.0001

DIST                           -1.2044              ?        -7.810      0.0001
INTERCEPT                     73798.00                        9.863      0.0001


Table 5: Results for Panel estimation, US outward only

Dependent variable:      RSALESUS (weighted least squares)
Total observations               244
R-Squared                      0.358
Adjusted R-Squared             0.336


Variable                    Parameter         Sign as    T for HO:    Prob > |T|
                              Estimate     Predicted?    Parm = 0

GDPJ                             2.1956           Yes         1.445      0.1499
GDPDIFSQ                        -0.0002           Yes        -1.332      0.1843
SKDIFF                         -177143            NO         -3.049      0.0026
GDPDIFF*SKDIFF                 33.4368              ?         3.088      0.0023

INVCJ                        -346.6351            Yes        -5.722      0.0001
TCJ                           207.5793            NO          5.141      0.0001

DIST                           -0.7968              ?        -6.635      0.0001
INTERCEPT                        20469                        3.616      0.0004
Table 6: Results for Panel estimation, US outward only


Dependent variable:      RSALESF (weighted least squares)
Total observations               259
R-Squared                      0.598
Adjusted R-Squared             0.585


Variable                    Parameter         Sign as    T for HO:   Prob > |T|
                              Estimate     Predicted?    Parm = 0

GDPJ                             6.8947           Yes        5.690      0.0001
GDPDIFSQ                        -0.0006           Yes       -4.615      0.0001
SKDIFF                         -237383             No       -4.803      0.0001
GDPDIFF*SKDIFF                 44.7907              ?        4.860      0.0001

INVCJ                        -211.3208            Yes       -4.541      0.0001
TCJ                            -8.6449            Yes       -0.279      0.7805

DIST                           -8.6449              ?       -3.001      0.0030
INTERCEPT                     29941.00                       6.715      0.0001
Table 7: Results for Panel estimation, US outward only

Dependent variable:      RATIOUSL (weighted least squares)
Total observations               231
R-Squared                      0.413
Adjusted R-Squared             0.392


Variable                    Parameter         Sign as       T for HO:   Prob > |T|
                              Estimate     Predicted?       Parm = 0

GDPJ                         -0.000693            Yes         -3.708       0.0003
GDPDIFSQ                     -4.12E-08            Yes         -2.134       0.0340
SKDIFF                        2.364984            Yes          0.391       0.6963
GDPDIFF*SKDIFF               -0.000186              ?         -0.165       0.8689

INVCJ                        -0.019319            Yes         -2.831       0.0051
TCJ                          -0.004806            Yes         -0.959       0.3387

DIST                          0.000087              ?          6.225       0.0001
INTERCEPT                     1.947083                         2.925       0.0038


Table 8: Results for Panel estimation, US outward only

Dependent variable:      RATIOFL (weighted least squares)
Total observations               236
R-Squared                      0.343
Adjusted R-Squared             0.320


Variable                    Parameter         Sign as       T for HO:   Prob > |T|
                              Estimate     Predicted?       Parm = 0

GDPJ                        -0.001291             Yes         -3.881       0.0001
GDPDIFSQ                     -2.36E-08            Yes         -0.683       0.4953
SKDIFF                      29.904477             Yes          2.630       0.0091
GDPDIFF*SKDIFF              -0.005218               ?         -2.467       0.0144

INVCJ                        -0.045391            Yes         -3.517       0.0005
TCJ                          -0.003751            Yes         -0.403       0.6876

DIST                         -0.000026              ?         -0.841       0.4014
INTERCEPT                     3.913419                         3.330       0.0010
         Table 9: Effects of Host-Country Size and Skilled-Labor Abundance on Foreign Affiliate
         Production for Local Sale and Export (derviatives evaluated at the mean of independent variables)


                                   $1 billon                 One percentage               One point       One point
                                   increase in               point increase in            increase in     increase in
Effect on:                         country j's GDP           SKLJ*                        INVCJ           TCJ

Local sales of country i
affiiates in country j              $16.7 million             - $12.1 million             - $633.4 mill    $366.6 mill
(inward and outward data)             = 1.558 **                = -0.017

Export sales of country i
affiliates in j to all countries    $4.7 million             - $189.0 million             - $277.2 mill    $52.1 mill
(inward and outward data)             = 1.118                   = -0.681

Local sales of US
affiliates in country j             $22.7 million             $280.5 million              - $517.8 mill    $314.8 mill
(US outward data only)                = 1.044                  = 0.599

Export sales of US
affliliates in j to the US          $1.3 million               $8.3 million               - $346.6 mill    $207.6 mill
(US outward data only)                = 0.213                   = 0.064
                                                     w =                         w =
Export sales of US                                   0.681                        0.062
affliliates in j to other          $9.0 million              $12.0 million                - 211.3 mill     - $8.6 mill
(US outward data only)                = 0.989                  = 0.061

* By a one-percentage-point increase in SKLJ we mean, for example, an increase from
          15% to 16%, not an increase from 15% to 15.15%
**  denotes elasticity
                              Figure 1: World Affiliate Sales



                                                                                         Affiliate Sales


                                                                                                   1000
                                                                                                   900
                                                                                                   800
                                                                                                   700
                                                                                                   600
                                                                                                   500
                                                                                                   400
                                                                                                   300
                                                                                                   200
                                                                                                   100
  19




                                                                                                   0
       16
            13




                                                                                   16   17 18 19
                 10




                                                                    11 12 13 14 15
                      7




                                                                 10
                                                       6   7 8 9
                          4




                                               4   5
World Endowment of                     2   3
                                   1
                               1




                                                           World Endowment of Unskilled Labor
   Skilled Labor




                          Origin for Country i
               Figure 2: Local Sales of Affiliates of Country i firms in Country j




Affiliate Sales


   1000
     900
     800
     700
     600
     500
                                                                                                           19
      400
                                                                                                         17
      300                                                                                               15
      200                                                                                             13
                                                                                                    11
      100
                                                                                                9
           0
                                                                                            7
                1   2                                                                               World Endowment of
                        3   4                                                           5
                                5   6   7   8                                                          Skilled Labor
                                                9
                                             10 11                                  3
                                                      12 13
                                                            14 15               1
                                                                  16 17
                        World Endowment of Unskilled Labor              18 19

Origin for
country i
              Figure 3: Export Sales of Affiliates of Country i Firms in Country j




Affiliate Sales


   250


    200


    150

                                                                                                         19
     100
                                                                                                       17
                                                                                                      15
      50                                                                                            13
                                                                                                   11
                                                                                               9
          0
                                                                                           7
               1   2                                                                   5
                       3   4   5   6                                                           World Endowment of
                                       7   8                                       3
                                          9 10
                                                 11 12                                            Skilled Labor
                                                        13 14                  1
                                                              15 16
                       World Endowment of Unskilled labor           17 18
                                                                          19


  Origin for
  Country i
             Figure 4: Ratio of Export Sales to Local Sales, Affiliates of Country i Firms in
                                               Country j




  Ratio
 0.35

  0.3

  0.25

   0.2

  0.15                                                                                                            19
                                                                                                                17
    0.1                                                                                                        15
                                                                                                             13
   0.05                                                                                                    11
                                                                                                       9
         0
                                                                                                   7
              1   2                                                                                    World Endowment of
                      3   4                                                                    5
                              5   6                                                                       Skilled Labor
                                       7   8   9 10 11                                     3
                                                         12 13
                                                                 14 15                 1
                                                                         16 17
                                                                               18 19
                                      World Endowment of Unskilled Labor
Origin for
Country i
