NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE ANATOMY OF HEALTH INSURANCE

David M. Cutler
Richard J. Zeckhauser

Working Paper 7176
http://www.nber.org/paperS/W7 176

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 1999

This paper was prepared for the Handbook of Health Economics. We are grateful to Dan Altman for
research assistance, to Jon Gruber, Tom McGuire, and Joe Newhouse for helpful comments, and to the
National Institutes on Aging for research support. All opinions expressed are those of the authors and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

1999 by David M. Cutler and Richard J. Zeckhauser. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
notice, is given to the source.

The Anatomy of Health Insurance
David M. Cutler and Richard J. Zeckhauser
NBER Working Paper No. 7176
June 1999

JELNo. Ii

ABSTRACT

This article describes the anatomy of health insurance. It begins by consideringthe optimal
design of health insurance policies. Such policies must make tradeoffs appropriately between risk
sharing on the one hand and agency problems such as moral hazard (the incentive of people to seek
more care when they are insured) and supplier-induced demand (the incentive of physicians to
provide more care when they are well reimbursed) on the other. Optimal coinsurance arrangements
make patients pay for care up to the point where the marginal gains from less risk sharing are just
offset by the marginal benefits from less wasteful care being provided. Empirical evidence shows
that both moral hazard and demand-inducement are quantitatively important. Coinsurance based on
expenditure is a crude control mechanism. Moreover, it places no direct incentives on physicians,
who are responsible for most expenditure decisions. To place such incentives on physicians is the
goal of supply-side cost containment measures, such as utilization review and capitation. This goal
motivates the surge in managed care in the United States, whichunites the functions of insurance
and provision, and allows for active management of the care that is delivered.
The analysis then turns to the operation of health insurance markets. Economists generally
favor choice in health insurance for the same reasons they favor choice in other markets: choice
allows people to opt for the plan that is best for them and encourages plans to provide services
efficiently. But choice in health insurance is a mixed blessing because of adverse selection -- the
tendency of the sick to choose more generous insurance than the healthy. When sick and healthy
enroll in different plans, plans disproportionately composed of poor risks have to charge more than
they would if they insured an average mix of people. The resulting high premiums create two
adverse effects: they discourage those who are healthier but would prefer generous care from
enrolling in those plans (because the premiums are so high), and they encourage plans to adopt
measures that deter the sick from enrolling (to reduce their overall costs). The welfare losses from
adverse selection are large in practice. Added to them are further losses from having premiums vary
with observable health status. Because insurance is contracted for annually, people are denied a
the
valuable form of intertemporal insurance -- the right to buy health coverage at average rates in
future should they get sick today. As the ability to predict future health status increases, the lack
of intertemporal insurance will become more problematic.

The article concludes by relating health insurance to the central goal of medical care

insurance
promote health in the most cost-efficient manner. Resolving this question is the central policy
concern in health economics.

expenditures -- better health. Studies to date are not clear on which approaches to health

David M. Cutler
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
dcutler@fas.harvard.edu

Richard J. Zeckhauser
Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
richard_zeckhauser@harvard.edu

Insurance plays a central role in the health care arena. More than 80 percent of health care

expenditures in the United States are paid for by insurance, either public or private, with an even
greater percentage supported in most other developed nations. Insurance thus provides the money

that motivates and supports the health care system.

This paper describes the anatomy of health insurance. At the micro level, it details why
individuals seek insurance, and the challenges in structuring insurance policies. At the macro level,

it explains the role of health insurance in the medical care sector. The medical care triad (figure 1)

depicts that sector in a fundamental fashion. Insurers mediate between individuals and their
providers. Oftentimes, the flow of funds is more roundabout: governments or employers nominally

pay insurers, but these costs are then passed on to individuals, via increased taxes or lower wages.
The insurer intermediary must design a policy to pay for (and possibly provide) care. This

is a treacherous task. Designing a health insurance policy is not nearly so challenging
technologically as, say, designing a personal computer system, but it must still overcome some

distinct and substantial economic obstacles. The most important of these obstacles are agency
problems. Insurers cannot get relevant parties to do what efficiency requires. Thus, people with
generous insurance spend more on medical care than people with less generous insurance (moral

hazard), and providers paid on a fee-for-service (piece-rate) basis may provide more care due to
supplier-induced demand than they would if they were not paid pertask. In a situation where agency

relationships are imperfect, insurance is necessarily second-best. Insurers must trade off the benefits
from more generous insurance — primarily the reduction in risk it affords — against

the costs of more

Throughout the paper, to facilitate exposition, we mostly refer to patients or insureds as
individuals, although most health insurance is purchased onbehalf of families.

generous insurance — moral hazard or supplier-induced demand. Throughout this chapter. we

highlight central lessons about health insurance, which are then collected in Table 10. This clash
between risk sharing and incentives is Lesson 1 about health insurance.
Agency problems in health care can be alleviated in two ways. The demand-side approach
discourages excessive utilization by making people pay something when they consume medical care.

Demand-side rationing is epitomized in the traditional indemnity insurance plan, which prevailed

in the United States for a half century. The supply-side approach discourages utilization by
monitoring providers carefully, penalizing them if they are profligate, and giving them financial

incentives to provide only essential care. Increasingly, supply-side limitations are fostered by
integrating insurance and provision. Some HMOs, for example, are both insurers and providers of
care. Integration of the insurance and provision functions is unique to medical care, and results from

the fundamental difficulties withjust demand-side rationing. The integration of health insurance and

provision of medical services is Lesson 2 about health insurance. Sections III through V of the
chapter lay out the issues involved in demand- and supply-side rationing.
We then move from these micro relationships to the broader arena of the market for health

insurance. People have preferences for different types of health insurance, and those preferences
should be accommodated to the extent possible. In addition, competition in health insurance can
encourage production efficiency, driving down overall costs. But competition in health insurance

produces results unlike competition in other markets, for a fundamental reason: the costs of
providing insurance, as opposed to say computers or food, depend on the characteristics of the buyer.

People with a poor medical history will benefit more from and cost more to insure than those with

a healthy past. Thus, the sick will sort themselves into more generous plans than will the healthy.
2

This process, called adverse selection, can substantially limit the benefits of health plan choice.
Individuals will have incentives to choose less generous policies over more generous ones (to pool
with the healthy instead of the sick) and insurers will have incentives to reduce the generosity of their

benefits (to attract the healthy instead of the sick). Lesson 3 describes the consequences of
competition when buyer identity affects costs. Section VI discusses adverse selection and
approaches to deal with it.
The natural tendency of insurers to charge the sick greater premiums than thehealthy presents

a further challenge to health insurance: lack of coverage against the long-term risk of becoming sick
and having higher expected costs in the future. Using the thought experiment of individuals making
choices behind the veil of ignorance, they would choose to insure their risk of becoming sicker than
average, a multi-year risk,just as individuals in any year wish to insure their medical costs that year.

Markets for multi-year insurance do not exist, however, for understandable reasons, and in practice

individuals are left without this insurance. The kernel of the problem is that information on risk
levels becomes available before insurance contracts can be drawn. Lesson 4 is that early information

dries up insurance markets. Long-term insurance is taken up in Section VII of the chapter.
However effectively health insurance controls costs or spreads risks, the focus of most of this

chapter, its key goal is to promote health. In Section VIII we examine the relationship between
health insurance and health. Variations in insurance generosity have relatively little impact on health

among those with insurance. This finding is consistent with the idea that insurance generally
restricts care offering relatively low value. But the time frame over which these issues has been

examined is not large. We know less about the long-run effect of different health insurance
arrangements on health than we should. We mark the centrality of health as opposed merely to
3

financial transfers and the lack of clear evidence on the relative benefits of different systems as
Lesson 5 about health insurance.
At the outset, it is important to take account of the distinctive role health insurance plays in

society. Economists traditionally measure value by willingness to pay, and the value of health
insurance, or its byproduct medical care, is calibrated in dollar terms, the same as apples or television

sets. In much of the world, however, particularly outside the United States, medical care and
medical insurance are treated differently. Medical care is often viewed as a right, for which market-

based allocation is not appropriate. For some, the right is absolute; markets should play no role in

the allocation of medical services. More moderate positions assign government a special
responsibility for medical care, which leads to a government insurance system or set of subsidies.
Rights-oriented sentiments show up even in the United States. The United States subsidizes medical

insurance directly for poor people and old people, and indirectly for the working-age population

(through the exclusion of health insurance from individual taxable income). While some such
subsidies may bejustified on externality grounds (when people get medical care, they are less likely
to spread infectious diseases to others), merit good arguments, or fiscal externality arguments (when

people are healthier. they earn more, pay more in taxes, and receive less in public benefits), we
suspect that a right to medical care is the more basic motive.
But the rationale for subsidizing health insurance, as opposed to medical care, is less clear.
The government could promote consumption of medical care through direct delivery of services or
by subsidizing inputs, without intervening in the medical insurance market. We thus focus primarily

on the economic analysis of health insurance, leaving aside normative views about access to basic
medical services [CITE OTHER CHAPTERS]. We come back to the access issuein the last section.
4

In this essay, we follow common parlance by [primarilyj using the terms health care and

health insurance, although the terms medical care and medical care insurance might be better
descriptors. Health status cannot be insured. The costs of medical care can be, and are, albeit often
bearing the label health insurance.
We begin in the first section by discussing the provision of health insurance around the world

and in the second with a review of the principles of insurance. We then examine the micro and
macro issues in health insurance.

I.

Health Insurance Structures in Developed Nations

Health insurance is common to all developed countries, but the mechanism for obtaining
insurance differs from country to country. Inmost countries, health insurance is universal;everyone
is entitled to coverage and is required to purchase it.2 In some nations, such as Canada, the financing

is through taxation; people pay an income or payroll tax, and the proceeds are used by the
government to purchase or provide health insurance. In other nations, the financing is through
private insurance; individuals or their employers contribute to health insurance companies. which
then provide insurance for the population. While the payment for any individual may differ in these
two systems (a tax financed system generally imposes relatively more on the rich), the implications

for the provision of health insurance are generally slight. Governments in both systems are
intimately involved in determining what services are covered, the cost sharing that patients face, and

2 In some countries, such as Germany, temporary workers do not receive health insurance,
but they comprise a small part of the population. All citizens are entitled to insurance.
5

the restrictions imposed on providers.

The specifics of health insurance structures differ significantly across developed nations.

Countries like England and Italy finance health insurance through general taxation and (at least
historically) provide services publicly.3 Countries such as Canada and Germany finance insurance
publicly but contract for services through private providers.

I. 1 Health Insurance in the United States
Describing the detailed structures for health insurance in different nations would take an

entire volume. We focus our attention primarily on the United States. The United States is
distinctive among OECD countries because health insurance is not universal.4 Table 1 shows the
sources of health insurance in the United States. About one-quarter of the United States population

is insured through the public sector. The primary public programs are Medicare, which mostly
insures the elderly, along with the disabled and people with kidney failure; and Medicaid, which

insures younger women and children, the elderly (for services not covered by Medicare such as
nursing home care), and the blind and disabled. Other public programs, primarily for veterans and
dependents of active duty military personnel. insure another 1 percent of the population.

Another 60 percent of the population has private health insurance. Most of this insurance
is provided by employers; less than 10 percent of the population purchases insurance privately. The

Countries like the U.K. have moved to more of a decentralized provision system in recent

years. Hospitals have been set up as private trusts, for example, and physicians are no longer
salaried.
Health insurance coverage is not required in Switzerland but it is subsidized so heavily that

essentially everyone purchases it.

6

predominance of employer-provided insurance results from the favorable tax treatment of that
method of payment. Compensation to employees in the form of wages and salaries is taxed

through

Federal and state income taxes, and through the Federal Social Security tax. Compensation paid
health insurance, in contrast, goes untaxed. Since marginal tax rates range from 15 to 40

as

percent for

most employees,5 the subsidy to employer-provided insurance, as opposed to individually-purchased

insurance, is substantial. The subsidy to employer-provided

health insurance generally does not

extend, however, to out-of-pocket payments made by employees. As a result, there are incentives
to have generous insurance, paid for by employers, with few individual copayments. We return to
the effects of this subsidy structure below.
The remaining 15 percent of the United States population is uninsured. The implications of

being uninsured are a subject of vigorous debate (Weissman and Epstein, 1994). Some of the
uninsured (perhaps 4 percent) are eligible for public insurance (particularly Medicaid) but have
chosen not to take up that insurance. Presumably, if these people become sick they will enroll in
Medicaid.6 Others will receive "uncompensated" care if they become sick—they will get emergency
care if they need it, but they will not pay for it, The costs ofuncompensated care then get shifted to
people with insurance, for whom payments made exceed the cost of servicesprovided. In this sense,

the United States has a form of universal insurance coverage for catastrophic care, although the
patchwork nature of that coverage is undoubtedly suboptimal. It also limitsprimary and preventive

care for those without health insurance.

Income tax rates can range as high as 40 percent, but the income level at which these rates
are reached are past the cap on earnings subject to the payroll tax.
6

Since it is difficult to deny treatment, providers have
a strong interest to enroll eligible

people in Medicaid, so that they can receive some payment for them.
7

The last colunm of Table 1 shows the share oftotal payments that each

group makes. As in

any insurance policy, people may use more or less of the service than they pay for. This is
particularly true for the uninsured, whose out-of-pocket payments are much lower than the cost of

services they receive. The table reports the share of total payments made by each

group; the share

of services that is used by each group will be somewhat different. Because people insured

the public sector are older and sicker than

through

people insured privately, and because some of the costs

of the uninsured are passed on to the public sector, the public sector accounts for much

more of

medical spending than its demographic share of insurance coverage. Close to half of medical
spending in the United States is paid for publicly. While this amount is extremely high relative to
most goods and services in society, it is low by international standards for medical care. In OECD
nations, governments generally pay for 75 to 90 percent of medical care.

Whether run publicly or privately, health insurance encounters fundamental problems that

any insurer must face. Adverse selection, though diminished for government since some of its
programs are so heavily subsidized that the vast majority choose to participate, stillexists, and moral

hazard affects governments no less than private insurers. Thus,when we discuss the optimal design
of health insurance policies, we do not distinguish betweenpublic or private insurers. We return to

public versus private insurance issues in the conclusion.

II.

The Principles of Insurance

In this section and the next three, we discuss the optimal design of health insurance policies.

Our perspective is that of an insurer -- public or private -8

wanting to optimally insure its enrollees

against the costs of treating adverse health outcomes.

The value of health insurance is rooted in the unpredictability of medical spending. While
individuals know something about their need for medical services, the exact amount they will spend

on medical care is to a significant degree uncertain. Medical spending is extremely variable. Table
2 shows the distribution of medical spending in the United States in 1987 (Berk and Monheit, 1992).

The top 1 percent of medical care users consume an average of nearly $50,000 each in a year (in
1987 dollars), and account for 30 percent of medical spending. The top 10 percent of users account

for nearly three-quarters of total medical spending. The shorter the time period, of course, the
greater is the percentage disparity in medical spending among individuals. But even looking over

several years, the skewness of medical spending is substantial (Roos et al., 1989; Eichner,
McClellan, and Wise, 1998). In such a situation, insurance can significantly spread risks.

Risk averse individuals will want to guard against the potential of requiring a substantial
amount of medical care. One way to do this is to wait, borrow money for treatment should they get

sick, and then repay the money when well. But borrowing when debilitated is difficult, since the
individual may not live long enough or be healthy enough to repay the loan. The borrowing process,

moreover, may also take more time than the sick individual has available. A reasonable alternative

might be for individuals to save money when they are healthy to pay for medical care should they

get sick. But some sicknesses are significantly more expensive than others. The substantial
expenses of very severe illness make saving prior to illness impractical as a protective measure. All

of us would have to significantly curtail consumption to save up for expenses that would be borne
by only a few. The natural solution is to insure against the possibility of medical illness by pooling

risks with others in the population. Annual consumption would be reduced only by the premium,
9

the average cost of care.

Risks to health have always been with us, but health insurance is a relatively new
phenomenon, only becoming economically significant in the postwar era. Fire and life insurance
were well developed by the end of the 19th century, and marine insurance was already being written

in the 12th century. There was little role for health insurance in earlier eras, however, since
expensive medical treatments could accomplish little for health. Insurers also feared they could not
control individual use of medical services if the services were insured. Once effective hospital care

-- an extremely expensive commodity -- became
possible, significant health insurance became
desirable and inevitable.

II.]

Insurance with JIxed spending

The simplest insurance situation is one where sickness entails a fixed cost and insurance is
priced at its actuarial cost. Imagine a situation where initially identical individuals are either healthy

or sick in a period of one year. There is one disease. People are healthy with probability l-p, in
which case they require no medical care. People get sick with probability p. Let d = 0 or d =

1

indicate whether absent medical care the person is healthy or sick. Treatment of aperson who is
sick requires medical spending of m. The after-expenditure health of a sick person is h = H[d, m].
To simplify exposition, we assume that medical spending restores a person to perfect health, so that

H[1,m] = H[0,0].
Before proceeding, we alert the reader to our use of mathematics. We use mathematics to
derive statements precisely. We also endeavor to explain all of our results intuitively. Thus, readers

who wish to skip the mathematical portions of the chapter can still follow the central arguments.

10

Individuals receive utility, u, which depends on their consumption, x, and their aftertreatment health, h. Thus we have u = U(x,h). Assume, for simplicity, that people have exogenous
income endowments, y; and that they can neither borrow or lend. Thus, an individual's consumption
is what is left over after paying medical expenditures, or if insured, his insurance premium, rc. Thus,

for uninsured people, x y when healthy and x = y-m when sick. For insured people, x = y-rt
whether healthy or sick. We use the subscripts I and N to indicate whether the individual is insured

or not insured.

Let U(x) U(x,H[O,O]); i.e., it is the reduced form utility function for consumption given
perfect health. In the absence of insurance, an individual's expected utility is given by:

(1)

VN

(l-p) U(y, H{O,O]) + pU(y-m, H[l,m]),

= (l-p) U(y) + p U(y-m),
where the second equality follows from the assumption that medical care restores the person to
perfect health.7 We assume that U has the standard property that utility is increasing in consumption

albeit at a declining rate: U'>O and U"<O. We further assume that medical expenditures are
worthwhile even if the individual is not insured.
Suppose the individual purchases insurance against the risk of being sick. For an insurance

company to break even, the fair insurance premium would have to be it = pm. The insurance
company collects the premium each year and pays out m when the individual is sick. If an individual

chooses this policy, his utility would always be:

(2)

V1=U(y-it)

Assuming that medical expenditure is worthwhile, this analysis actually requires a less
stringent condition. The same equation would apply if restored health imposed a fixed utility cost,
k, relative to initial perfect health, so that U(c,H[O,O]) = U(c,H[l,m]) + k for all c.
11

Using a Taylor series expansion of equation (l),8 we can approximate that equation as:

(3)

VN

U(y-it) + U' (U"/2U') Tt(m-lt)

Therefore,

Value of Insurance =

(4)

(V - VN) / U,

(1/2) (-U"/U') t(m-iI)

The left hand side of equation (4) is the difference in utility from being uninsured relative to being

insured, scaled by marginal utility to give a dollar value for removing risk. The right hand side is

the benefit of risk removal. Here, (-U"/U') is the coefficient of absolute risk aversion; it is the
degree to which uncertainty about marginal utility makes a person worse off. Because U"<O and

U'>O, this term is positive. The term lt(m-1t) represents the extent to which after-medical
expenditure income varies because the person does not have insurance. It too is positive. The
product of terms on the right hand side of equation (4), therefore, is necessarily positive, implying
that fair insurance is preferred to being uninsured. The dollar value of riskspreading increases with

risk aversion and with the variability of medical spending.
The intuition supporting this result is that risk averse individuals would like to smooth the
marginal utility of income — to transfer income from states of the world where their marginal utility

is low to states of the world when their marginal utility is high. In the absence of insurance, a
person's marginal utility of income when healthy is U'(y) and when sick is U'(y-m). Since marginal
utility falls as income increases, marginal utility is lower when healthy than when sick. Transferring

income from healthy states to sick states until marginal utility is equalized maximizes total utility,
8

The Taylor series is taken about the level of income net of insurance premiums. From

equation (1), VN
(l-p) [U(y-i) - U'it + V2 U"t2] + p [U(y-7c) + U'(m-Tc) + V2 U"(m-it)2}.
Collectingterms, this simplifiesto VN U(y-it) - U'{(l-p)t -p(m-ir)} + V2 U"{(l-p)it2 +p(m-it)2}.
The term (l-p)ir - p(m-it) is zero. The term (l-p)it2 + p(m-ic)2 can be expanded as (l-p)it2 + pm2 2pmit + p7E2. Since pm = it, this simplifies to pm2 - it2 =
12

assuming fair insurance. Health insurance carries out this transfer, charging premiums up front and
reimbursing expenditures later.9

There is a diagrammatic way to make the same point; it is shown in Figure 2. We think of
the two states of the world — being sick and being healthy — as

if they were two goods. Individuals

would like more consumption in each state. In the absence ofany probability of being sick, people
would be able to consume y in each state. Because of

required medical spending, however, people

can only consume y-m when sick. This is shown as point E in the figure.
The fair odds insurance line is the individual's implicit budget constraint. It is drawn for the

case where p=.2. The slope of the line is -lip, or 5•! The indifference curve for consumption is
also steeply sloped, recognizing that the sick state is unlikely to arise. Thus, people are not willing

The situation is more complex when medical spending fails torestore the person to perfect
health, and the marginal utility of income is affected by health status. Suppose that when sick a
person still needs medical spending of m, but that his after-expenditure health remains below what
it would be had he never got sick; i.e., that H[l,m] <H[O,OJ. Expected utility for people without
insurance is given by VN (l-p) U(y, H[O,OJ) + pU(y-m, H[l,m]), and the marginal utilities of
income are U, (y, H{O,O]) when healthy and U, (y-m, H[1,m]) when sick, where the subscripts
indicate partial derivatives. Because the marginal utility of income may be affected by health and
health varies across sickness states, it is not clear how much insurance the person will want. If
people attach little value to money when sick — for example, if there are few pleasurable activities
they can engage in — they may not want any health insurance at all. Alternatively, if the value of
money when sick is particularly high, say because aides are needed to carry out the activities of daily
life, people may want more than full insurance against medical expenditures.
This example highlights the difference between medical care insurance and what, ifwe used
a strict interpretation, would be labeled health insurance. Health insurance transfers money across
people -- generally from the healthy to the sick. The money can be used to purchase medical services
the individual otherwise could not afford, or to allow the individual to purchasemore of other goods
and services after medical care has been paid for. But health insurance cannot guarantee that an
individual's health will be unaffected by outside factors. Insuring one's health is technologically
infeasible.
10

A fair insurance policy that charges $1 each year and pays an amount k when sick is
defined by: pk + 1 = 0. Thus, k = -I/p.

13

to give up much consumption when healthy to get consumption when sick. A person can trade
consumption when sick for consumption when healthy, at a rate given by the insurance premium.
People will choose to purchase some insurance. If insurance is priced actuarially fairly, individuals
will choose to be fully insured — they will have the same consumption when sick as when

healthy.

This optimum is shown as point E' in the figure. People are better off at E' than they are at E; they
have moved to a higher indifference curve.
In our simplified world, the optimal insurance policy is an indemnity policy — it pays a fixed

amount of money for a particular condition when the individual is sick. The amount paid equals the

cost of the appropriate treatment for the person's disease; if there is more than one disease, the
payments vary. Since each disease requires a fixed amount of care -- there is no more nor less that
a person can consume -- there are no wasted resources in the policy; the indemnity insurance plan
is efficient. Beyond its efficiency properties, the indemnity policy is the simplest health insurance

policy. In effect, it operates as a contingent claims market; people get paid specified amount
depending on which contingency occurs (Zeckhauser, 1970).

Health insurance started off as a quasi-indemnity policy — in most cases paying a fixed

amount per day in the hospital. The first Blue Cross policies, for example, were developed just

before and during the Great Depression. These policies, run by hospitals, guaranteed a certain
number of hospital days per year (for example, 21 days) for an annual premium (for example, $5 to

$10 in the early 1930s). After World War II, life insurance companies entered the health insurance
market, driven by the profits of Blue Cross policies and the expanding demand for health insurance
resulting from its favorable tax treatment. These nascent health insurers offered indemnity policies

as well, limiting their potential losses by fixing the maximum amount they would pay per hospital

14

day.

III.

Moral Hazard and Principal-Agent Problems

Health insurance must address several problems beyond risk spreading. We now turn to
some of these challenges.

III.]

Moral hazard

Moral hazard refers to the likely malfeasance of an individual making purchases that are
partly or fuiiy paid for by others (Arrow, 1965; Pauly, 1968, 1974; Zeckhauser, 1970; Spence and
Zeckhauser, 1971; Kotowitz, 1987). ll He will overspend; i.e., he will use more services than he
would were he paying for the medical care himself. Since insurance is an arrangement where others
pay for the lion's share of one's losses, it creates a moral hazard to use additionalmedical resources.

The designation moral hazard, a disquieting term, frequently connotes some moral failure of

individuals, but this is not meant to be so. Indeed, Kenneth Arrow (1985) employs the less
judgmental and more informative term "hidden action" for moral hazard.

Moral hazard is a concern because it conflicts with risk-spreading goals. Insurance is
valuable because it allows people to transfer income from when they need it less to when they need

" The theory of moral hazard, if not the words, goes back at least to Adam Smith: "The
directors of such companies, however, being the managers rather of other peoples' money than of
their own, it cannot well be expected, that they should watch over it with the same anxious vigilance
with which the partners in a private copartnery frequently watch over their own... Negligence and
profusion, therefore, must always prevail, more or less, in the management ofthe affairs of such a
company" (Smith, 1776, p. 700).
15

it more. But this transfer is not perfect because people increase their consumption of medical care
when it is subsidized. This creates an inherent second

best problem in designing insurance policies:

insurers must trade off the benefits from spreading more risk against the cost of increased moral
hazard. We formalize this Lesson 1 about health insurance:

Lesson 1: Risk Spreading versus Incentives. Health insurance involves a fundamental
tradeoff between risk spreading and appropriate incentives. Increasing the generosity of
insurance spreads risk more broadly but also leads to increased losses because individuals
choose more care (moral hazard) and providers supply more care (J)rincipal-agent problems).

Moral hazard, or hidden action, emerges in one form in the risks that individuals choose to

take. People may take worse care of themselves when they have insurance than if they do not. If

their actions were readily observed, the insurance company would merely not pay off were they
reckless or negligent. But individual actions are difficult to observe; they are hidden. The extent
of moral hazard in terms of actions that affect health may not be large for health insurance in most

instances, since the uncompensated loss of health itself is so consequential.2 Thus, it would be

surprising if people smoked because they knew health insurance would cover the costs of lung
cancer.

Hidden action also arises because individuals may get treatments they would not pay for
themselves. Though the action itself (seeking medical care) is not hidden, the motivation behind it
12

This does not mean that people will not smoke or faithfully take their medications. But

there is no moral hazard if their actions would be the same if they had no health insurance, i.e., if
these health-harming behaviors are inelastic with respect to cost sharing.
16

is.'3

Optimal insurance plans would pay for treatment only if the individual would have chosen

the same treatment had he borne the full bill. The thought experiment here is whether the person
would pay for the medical expenditure in expectation, before he knew his condition. For example,
suppose that a person has income of $25,000, and faces a 1 percent probability he will have a serious

illness. If he could commit in advance, he would agree to receive $50,000 of medical care when sick

in exchange for a $500 premium. If fully insured, however, the individual will choose to consume
$60,000 of care. The moral hazard in this example is $10,000— the additional spending beyond the

optimal amount of care he would contract for in advance of being sick.

In the terminology of demand theory, moral hazard is the substitution effect of people
spending more on medical care when its price is low, not the income effect of people spending more

on medical care because of insurance, by efficiently transferring resources from the healthy state to

the sick state, makes them richer when sicker (de Meza, 1983). In the example considered, say the
individual would have spent half his income, $12,500, on medical care in the absence of insurance.

Insurance thus raises medical spending by $47,500, but only a fraction of this increase is due to
moral hazard.
If some fixed m were the known optimal medical expenditure for any sick person, insurance

plans need experience no moral hazard. They could simply pay m in medical expenditures to or for

those who are sick. Moral hazard arises because medical needs are not fully monitorable, and
different people with the same condition have different optimal expenditures, at least as best the
3

hazard also results from patients making less effort to search for low-cost providers.

For example, when patients pay but one-fifth of the cost of their drugs, they will have weak
incentives to switch to generic brands or stray beyond the local pharmacy.

17

insurance company can determine. Suppose that the optimal medical expenditure for treating a
particular condition is rn, which varies across people, indexed by i. The insurance company requires

the individual to pay a coinsurance amount c(m) for medical care received. The rest of the care, m-

c(m), is paid by the insurer. In effect, the insurer takes the individual's medical expenditure to be

a signal of his true medical needs the coinsurance payment creates the necessary costs to have
signaling operate.

Two polar extremes for the form of c(m) are commonly found. The first is the indemnity
policy discussed above: the insurer pays a fixed amount, call it m*, and the individual pays c(m) =
m - m*. The second is full insurance: the insurer pays the full costs of medical care, regardless of

its cost, and the individual pays nothing (i.e., c(m) =0). The full insurance policy removes all risk
from the insured, but engenders greater moral hazard.
To understand the optimal insurance policy, consider a case where an indemnity policy is not
optimal. Suppose that rather than being healthy or sick, the individual has a range of potential illness

seventies, s, with s distributed with density function f(s). Health is given as before by hH[s,m].
The patient's s will determine the optimal treatment. The insurer cannot observe s, however. Thus,
making a fixed indemnity payment to anyone sick is not optimal. The ex ante utility function for the

insured consumer is:

(7)

V1 =

J

U(y-t-c(m(s)), H[s,m(s)]) f(s) ds

where rn(s) tells how much medical care an individual with condition s chooses to receive.
We consider first the optimal policy -- the amount of medical services the person would like

to contract for if he could write a perfect state-contingent contract and thereby eliminate moral
hazard. A perfect contract is one that pays an indemnity amount conditional on s, financing the
18

payments by a uniform premium. This optimal amount m*(s) is the value of m that yields the
maximum feasible utility:
(8)

Maxm(S) f U(y-pm, H[s,m]) f(s) ds.

The solution to this problem sets

(9)

HmUH =

E[U],

where the subscripts denote partial derivatives and x =y-pm. The left-hand side represents the gain
in utility from spending another dollar on medical care; it is the product of the effect of medical care

on health and the effect of health on utility. The right hand side is a weighted average expectation
of the marginal utility of consumption in different illness states, namely:

(10) E[U] = f U(y-pm, H[s,m]) f(s) ds.
Equation (9) says that with the optimal first-best policy, the expected marginal utility gained from
an additional dollar of medical care in each state of the world equals the utility cost of that dollar)4

Now consider the situation severity of illness is not monitorable, hence the optimal policy

cannot be implemented. At the time the consumer is seeking medical care, he alone knows his
severity. We assume the consumer treats the insurance premium as fixed —nothing he does will raise

or lower his insurance premium that year. Further, we assume for now that individuals are not
penalized in future years for additional medical spending this year, because expected future changes

in costs are spread equally over everyone in the group. The cost to the consumer of another dollar

14

This assumes that these functions are well behaved, hence that local optima are global

optima. Some medical expenditures may offer increasing returns over a relevant range. For
example, it may cost $200,000 to do a heart transplant, with $100,000 accomplishing much less than
half as much. Efficiency then requires the insurance program spend at least to the minimum average
cost of benefits point, or not at all.

of medical expenditure will be c'(m).'5 The sick consumer will therefore choose medical care
utilization to maximize utility when sick. Thus, he will choose ma(s) as the m which maximizes
utility given knowledge of 5:
(11)

Maxm(S) U(Y-it-c(m), H[s,m}) for each s.
The solution to this problem will depend on the specific s the individual has realized, and is

given by the first order condition:

(12) HmUh = c'(m) U,

for each s

The left-hand side once again represents the gain in utility from spending another dollar on medical

care. The right-hand side is the utility cost to the individual from spending that dollar; it is the
product of the out-of-pocket cost of medical care and the utility loss from losing that dollar for
consumption.

Comparing equations (9) and (12) shows the loss due to moral hazard. When c'(m)<l,
people will overconsume medical care when sick and thus pay more in health insurance than is
optimal. 16

The structure of the insurance plan may present the insured with a range of decreasing
marginal cost. Say a plan has a deductible of $600 with a copayment of 20% beyond that point, a
common structure. The insured can receive $600 of benefits for $600, but $1200 of benefits for
$720. Say the individual solves, and finds a $400 expenditure is locally optimal. He must also look
globally to the optimal expenditure beyond $600, which may be superior. Recognizing that using up
a deductible gets one to a range of lower costs, gives the insured an interesting dynamic optimization
program where there are two benefits from spending below the deductible: (1) the health care itself,
and (2) the increased potential for getting to the low-cost range (Keeler, Newhouse, and Phelps,
1977).
16

This can be derived by taking expectations of both sides of equation (12) and comparing

to equation (9).

20

III. l.A Evidence on the Price Elasticity of Medical Care Demand

How does an individual's demand for medical care respond to his required out-of-pocket
expenses? Economists used to differ on this question. Table 3 details estimates of the elasticity of
demand for medical care.'7 A substantial literature in the 1970s estimated the elasticity of demand
for medical care using cross-sectional data, or cross-sectional time series data. Pre-eminent among

these papers are Feldstein (1971), Phelps and Newhouse (1972), Rosett and Huang (1973), and
Newhouse and Phelps (1976). Feldstein (1971) was the first statistically robust estimate of price
elasticities using time-series micro data, in this case on hospitals. Feldstein identified the effect of
coinsurance rates on demand using state-variation in insurance coverage and generosity, estimating

a demand elasticity of about -0.5. The subsequent papers use patient-level data and more
sophisticated study designs. The elasticities that emerged from these papers ranged from as low as

-.14 (Phelps andNewhouse, 1972) to as high as -1.5 (Rosett and Huang, 1973). The implication of
this range of elasticity estimates was that moral hazard was likely a significant force.
This estimation literature suffered from two major difficulties, however. First, the generosity

of health insurance at either the state or the individual level might be endogenous. Generous
insurance might boost utilization of medical services, as posited; or alternately, areas where people

desire or need more medical care may also be areas where people demand more health insurance.

One cannot separate these two effects statistically without an instrument for the rate of insurance
coverage in an area, but such instruments were not easy to find. Second,the studies typically failed

to distinguish average and marginal coinsurance rates. Usually for data reasons, most of these

Zweifel and Manning (this volume) discuss the elasticity of demand for medical care in
more detail.
17

21

studies related medical spending to the average coinsurance rate in an area. But theory predicts that

medical spending should relate to the marginal coinsurance rate. Because insurance policies are
non-linear, average and marginal prices may differ substantially.18 As a result of these problems, as

late as the 1970s many critics still believed that medical care was determined by "needs" and no

other economic factors, i.e. that demand was totally inelastic, although others believed that the
demand elasticity was substantial -- perhaps -0.5 or more.

To address these problems, the United States government funded a social insurance
experiment, designed to estimate the demand elasticity for medical care. The Rand Health Insurance

Experiment (Newhouse et al., 1993; Zweifel and Manning, 1998) randomized nearly 6,000 people
in 6 areas to different insurance plans over an 3- to 5-year period in the early 1 970s. The insurance

plans varied in contractual levels of cost sharing. Elasticity estimates were formed by comparing
utilization in the different plans. The Rand Experiment found an overall medical care price elasticity

of about -0.2. This elasticity is statistically significantly different from zero, but noticeably smaller
than the prior literature suggested. Sound methodology, supported by generous funding, carried the
day. The demand elasticities in the Rand Experiment have become the standard in the literature, and

essentially all economists accept that traditional health insurance leads to moderate moral hazard in
demand. The Rand estimates are also commonly used by actuaries in the design of actual insurance

policies.

III. 1.B Coinsurance in Practice

8 Of course, if individuals are appropriately forward looking, it is the expected marginal
coinsurance rate at the end of the year that should affect behavior, rather than the ostensible marginal
coinsurance rate at the time services are used.

22

The indemnity policy, which characterized health insurance at its inception, became
outdated over time. With increased medical technology, the range of optimal spending within a
given condition became great. Indemnity policies left individuals bearing too much risk. As a result,

insurance structures moved from indemnity payments to a service benefit policy -- a policy that

covers all medical expenses, with some cost sharing. Service benefit policies grew steadily in
importance in the post-war period, reaching their height in the early 1980s.
Service benefit policies use three cost-sharing features, sometimes in concert: the deductible,

the coinsurance rate, and the stop loss amount. Figure 3 and Table 4 show how these cost sharing

features operate. The deductible is the amount that an individual must pay before the insurance
company pays anything. The deductible is usually set annually; the typical deductible in 1991 was
about $200 for an individual and $500 for a family. Consumers pay the full price for care consumed

under the deductible. The coinsurance rate is the percentage of the total bill above the deductible
that a patient pays. Nearly all indemnity plans had a coinsurance rate of2O percent. The coinsurance

is paid until the patient reaches the stop loss -- the maximum out-of-pocket payment by the person
in a year. A typical stop loss in an indemnity policy was about $1,000 to $1,500 in a year.

In addition to these features, many policies impose further cost sharing through caps on
various types of expenditures. For example, policies may permit 8 mental health visits per year, or

have a $1 million lifetime limit on overall medical expenditures. Such provisions discourage use.

and may deter high cost users from selecting the insurance plan, and providers from turning
expensive cases into subsidized meal tickets. Table 4 details the frequencies with which various
policy features were found in insurance policies in 1991.

Somewhat misleadingly, the service benefit policy is frequently called an 'indemnity

23

insurance plan" by economists, with the system that developed to provide this policy termed the
"indemnity insurance system". In fact, true indemnity health insurance policies (a fixed payment per

disease) had existed but were largely replaced by the service benefit policy. For consistency with

other literature, we follow this nomenclature despite its inaccuracies. This nomenclature is
particularly unfortunate since recently insurance has been moving back towards the indemnity model,

frequently with the risk of above-average spending being placed on the provider rather than the
patient. We discuss regimes of provider responsibility in Section IV.

III]. C Optimal Insurance Given Moral Hazard
Knowledge of the utility function and the parameter values that determine medical spending
elasticities can be combined to design the optimal insurance policy -- the actuarially fair policy that

maximizes expected utility subject to the constraint that individuals will act in a self-interested
fashion, i.e., that moral hazard will operate. Such a policy is inherently second-best; in calibrating
its level of generosity, it balances the utility benefits of greater risk-sharing across people against the

moral hazard costs incurred. The insurer's challenge is to define the function of risk sharing by
insureds, the c(m) function, that maximizes expected utility.
To analyze the optimal policy, we assume patients differ in the severity of their illness.19 The

insurer will seek to find the c*(m) function that produces the maximum possible expected utility
with:

(13) E{U*J =

MaxC(,fl)

S

U(Y_1t_c*(m), H[s,m#]) f(s)ds,

19

Moral hazard arises, let us remember, because individuals differ in unmonitorable ways.
Thus it could be on income, on health status, or on some aspect of preferences.

24

where m# is defined as the solution to equation (12). Because insurers cannot tell an individual's
health state, the insurance policy cannot differentiate payments on the basis of illness severity.
An additional constraint operates on the insurance company: premiums must cover expected

costs. Thus.
(14)

it = 5 {m#(s) - c(m(s))]f(s)ds.

The optimal insurance policy can be formally written as a problem in dynamic optimization
(Blomqvist, 1 997)•20 Alas, this is a complicated problem, whose algebra is not particularly revealing.

The analytic solution balances two factors. The first is the reduced overconsumption from making
people pay more out of pocket for medical care. If the coinsurance rate is increased in some range,
people in that range pay more for medical care, as do people at all higher levels of spending (because

their coinsurance rates have been increased). This increases boosts the efficiency of provision.
Countering this, however, is a loss in risk spreading benefits. As people are made to pay more out

of pocket, they are exposed to more risk, and this reduces their welfare. The optimal coinsurance
rate balances these two incentives.

A small literature has simulated optimal insurance policies using this framework. Table 5
shows the results of these simulations. Table 5 shows a wide range of disparities in optimal

insurance policies. Some of the studies find that simulated insurance policies are substantially less

generous than actual indemnity policies of the past 20 years (Feldstein and Friedman. 1977;
Blomqvist, 1997), while other studies find that they are about the same (Buchanan et al., 1991;

20

The problem is formally analogous to the optimal tax problem in public finance when

ability is unobservable (Mirrlees, 1971; Diamond, 1998).

25

Newhouse et al., 1993: Manning and Marquis, 1996).21 The difference between these various
estimates has not been fully reconciled, although one suspects that differing degrees of risk aversion

and moral hazard are important. One suspects that real world policies will be more generous than

optimal policies because of the tax distortions favoring more generous insurance: payments to
insurance which are then made to providers are not taxed as income to employees, while wage and

salary payments, which might be used to pay for medical care out-of-pocket, are. Indeed, other

research shows that the benefits that employer health insurance policies offer are sensitive to
employee tax rates (Pauly, 1986).
A second importance difference between real world and optimal policies is that the former
almost invariably have a constant coinsurance rate, i.e., linear structures, whereas the latter donot.

The optimal policy can be substantially superior. Blomqvist (1997), for example, finds that
coinsurance rates should range from over 25 percent at low levels of spending to 5 percent at high

levels of spending. There is likely a tradeoff between optimality and simplicity. Optimal policies

can be very complicated, while real world situations are characterized by relatively simplistic
structures.
If services or diseases differ in the degree of moral hazard they entail, the optimal insurance

policy will differ by service or disease as well. Suppose, for example, there is a fixed number of
diseases that a person can have and that moral hazard varies by disease. The insurance company can

observe the disease of the person (e.g., cancer or appendicitis) but not the severity of illness within

the disease. Then, the optimal insurance policy will have different cost sharing by disease

21

The implication of the Blomqvist estimates for health insurance cost sharing depend on

whether income losses are compensated or not.

26

(Zeckhauser, 1970). Coinsurance formulas could just as easily depend on service (e.g., outpatient
psychiatry) or locale of medical care (e.g., hospital care).22 In practice, elasticity estimates do differ

across services. The Rand Health Insurance Experience found higher demand elasticity for
outpatient care than for inpatient care, and within outpatient care a greater demand elasticity for
mental health care. Most health insurance policies, including Medicare, draw distinctions between

services in their coinsurance schedules. Thus, Medicare has a separate hospital deductible, and
private insurance plans frequently cover a fixed number of psychiatric visits.
Moral hazard is a significant concern in insurance policies but it is not one that necessarily
argues for government intervention. Government insurance policies, after all, may engender just as
much moral hazard as private insurance policies. There is a rationale for government to be involved

in goods subject to moral hazard only if the government is better able to monitor or punish moral
hazard than the private sector. This is not obviously the case in medical care.

111.2

Patients, Doctors, and Insurers as Principals and Agents

Thus far, we have implicitly assumed that patients choose the amount of medical care they

want, knowing their illness, the range of possible treatments, and the prices of the treatments to
them. But few patients are so well informed. In most cases of serious expenditure, it is the doctors

who make the resource-spending decision, with patients and insurers bearing the costs; patients

usually do not know the charge until the bill comes. Patients, physicians. and insurers arein a

22 This is analogous to the Ramsey rule of optimal taxation. The Ramsey rule states that
optimal taxes on a set of commodities should be inversely related to the elasticity of demand for each
commodity — in minimizing inefficiency, inelastic factors should be taxed more. The statement here
is the equivalent but for subsidies instead of taxes.

27

principal-agent relationship: the patient (principal) expects the doctor (agent) to act in his best
interest when he is sick. Similarly, the insurer would like the doctor to act in its interests. Ofcourse,
patients also bear the insurance costs for seeking care, so that ex ante the patient's incentives and the

insurer's incentives line up. But once the patient becomes sick and requires care, the parties'
incentives diverge.
This three-player agency problem creates substantial problems for health insurance. To the
extent that medical treatments are decided upon jointly by physicians and patients, the supply side
of the health insurance policy (the rules about paying physicians) will matter along with the demand-

side of the insurance policy (the rules about cost sharing for patients).

With the traditional service-benefit insurance policy, doctors and patients frequently have
relatively congruent interests, which may differ from those of the insurer. Patients who face but a
fraction of the costs they incur will desire excessive treatments. Service-benefit insurers usually pay

more to physicians who provide more medical services. The result is that patients and physicians

want essentially all care that improves health, respectively ignoring and welcoming resource
expenditures. The view that physicians should do only what is best for the patient is codified in the

Hippocratic Oath -- providers should promote the best medical outcomes for their patients.
Hippocrates said nothing about providing care the patient or society would have deemed ex ante to
be wasteful.
Plato anticipated the application of agency theory to the health care arena by a goodly margin.

He wrote that, "No physician, insofar as he is a physician, considers his own good in what he
prescribes, but the good of his patient; for the true physician is also a ruler having the human body

28

as a subject, and is not a mere moneymaker." (The Republic, Book 1, 342-D).23 With thepassage
of 2,000+ years, fidelity to principals has slipped a bit, and new participants -- insurers, government,

employers, and provider organizations -- have strode into the arena. But the principles are very much

the same.

A more sinister view of the principal-agent problem contends that physicians manipulate
patients into receiving more services than they would want, so that physicians can increase their
income. This has been termed supplier-induced demand in the literature. An enormous amount of
work in health economics have been devoted to the question of whether and to whatextent suppliers

induce demand. The empirical evidence on this issue is discussed by [CITE OTHERCHAPTER].

Lesson 1 notes the tradeoff between risk spreading and appropriate incentives applies on both the
demand- and supply-sides of the market.
Increasingly, the arrows of responsibility among the players -- who is agent, who principal

-- now point in all directions. For example, doctors now have responsibilities to other providers and

insurers, not just to patients. Such added doctor responsibilities, primarily to hold down
expenditures, ultimately enhance patient welfare, at least on an expected value basis, if not when
the patient is sick. Insurers, acting for their customers as a whole, want to limit spending to only that

care that is necessary; i.e., the care patients would select given a lump-sum transfer that depends on

their condition and making them pay all costs at the margin. With patients, physicians and insurers

pulling in different directions, a conflict over what care will be provided frequently results.

23

One might instead heed the warning of George Bernard Shaw nearly a century ago: "That

any sane nation, having observed that you could provide for the supply of bread by giving bakers a
pecuniary interest in baking for you, should go on to give a surgeon a pecuniary interest in cutting off
your leg, is enough to make one despair of political humanity." (Shaw, 1911)

29

111.3

Transactions costs

Processing claims costs money, the more claims processed the more it costs. National
estimates of medical expenditure suggest that 15 percent of insurance premiums are devoted to
administrative expense.4 Someone must read the bill, approve the spending, and pay the claim.
Insurance companies seek to control these costs, and policies are designed accordingly.25
A major part of claims processing costs -- monitoring, transferring money, and the like -- are

invariant to the size of the claim. Size-invariant costs are a greater percentage burden for small bills

than for larger bills. This suggests limiting health insurance to larger claims and having individuals

pay directly smaller expenses (Arrow, 1963). This insight gives further justification to the
widespread use of deductibles and coinsurance for small bills, and for the fact that historically
insurance developed first for inpatient doctor and hospital charges, where bills are the largest.

IV.

Relationships Between Insurers and Providers

The medical care system is a network, with patients, monies and information flowing from

one party to another. The information flow to insurers, however, is not so rich that they can

24 This includes the expenses of paying bills as well as marketing. Divisions between these
sources of administrative expense are not very precise.
25 Of course, individuals must also bear some costs in paying bills on their own, so it is not

self evident which method of payment. individually or through insurance, is cheaper. But most
people implicitly assume that insurers have additional transactions costs for paying bills beyond what

individuals face. Thus, there is likely to be a net transactions cost to purchasing insurance. There
are also transactions costs associated with selling the policy, but they do not vary with the magnitude
of claims.

30

guarantee that only cost-effective care will be provided. Their monitoring difficulties provide the
motivation for cost-sharing in insurance policies. But cost sharing has limited value: Patients do not

make the most costly decisions, the Hippocratic Oath does not extend to conserving society's
resources, and risk spreading considerations severely limit what charges can be imposed.

Return now to figure 1, the Medical Care Triad. Working solely on the left side of the
triangle, the demand side, these arguments suggest that passive insurers are unlikely to be able to
limit utilization appropriately. Recognizing this, insurers also work the right side of the triangle -the supply side. Increasingly, insurers attempt to provide incentives for providers to limit spending.

The incentives may be imposed at arm's length, as Medicare does with its DRG system: treat a
simple heart attack, and a hospital gets paid a flat amount, roughly $5,000. Or the insurer may form

a contracting alliance with providers, as it does say with network HMOs. At the extreme, insurers

and providers merge into a single entity. Uniting disparate organizations in this way enhances
monitoring possibilities and better aligns incentives, but it also creates the potential for diseconomies

of scope, e.g., requiring another layer of management when care is delivered.
The sweeping nature of insurer-provider interactions is indicated by figure 4 (see also Glied,
-1998). In 1980, over 90 percent of the privately insured-- i.e., employer- or self-paid population

in the United States was covered by "unmanaged" indemnity insurance. By 1996, that share had
shrunk to a mere 3 percent.
Table 6 provides a taxonomy of different insurance-provider arrangements. The most limited

arrangement is a "managed" indemnity insurance policy. It bundles a traditional indemnity policy

with limited utilization review, for example requiring that non-emergency hospital admissions be
precertified. At the most intrusive, insurers can seek to monitor care on a retail basis through tissue

31

review committees, or on a statistical, wholesale basis by monitoring a physician or hospital'soverall

utilization. Such reviews can be used to refuse or reduce payment. Suchintrusiveness by insurers

may be unhelpful and, coming after-the-fact, may be ineffectual. It certainly is not welcome to
physicians. As Figure 4 shows, managed indemnity insurance, though non-existent in 1980, claimed

a 41 percent share by 1992, but has fallen to 22 percent today.
Preferred Provider Organizations (PPOs), a second type of managed care, form anetwork of

providers, including physicians, hospitals, pharmaceutical purveyors,

and others, and control costs

by securing discounts from them. The quid pro quo for the discounted fee is that insureds are steered

to in-network providers. Out-of-network providers may getreduced coverage or no coverage at all.

More typically, the patient's coinsurance or copayment rates are merely set lower for in-network
providers. In 1991, for example, the typical PPO had anin-network coinsurance rate of 10 percent

and an out-of-network coinsurance rate of 20 percent. PPOs usually impose pre-authorization
requirements as well, though they are rarely especially strict. As Figure 4 shows, PPO enrollment,

zero in 1980, now makes up about one-quarter of the privately insured population.

Full integration creates the strongest link between insurance and provision. In the United
States, these merged entities are called health maintenance organizations (HMOs). They sell their

services directly to employers or individuals on an annual fee basis, and then they deliver care.
There are three major types of HMOs. Within a group/staffHMO -- the most common form, with
Kaiser being the best known example -- physicians are paid a salary and work exclusively

for the

HMO. The HMO may have hospitals on contract, or may run its own.

HMOs employ a range of mechanisms to limit utilization. They reflect the traditional
economic instruments of regulation, incentives, and selection of types. HMOs frequently regulate

32

physicians' practices, for example limiting the referrals they can make or the tests they canorder.
But the efficiency benefits of HMOs arise much more from aligning the incentives of provider and

insurer, rather than through direct regulation. Some group/staff HMO physicians are salaried; as a
result, they have a weaker incentive to provide marginal care than their fee-for-service counterparts.

Moreover, HMOs monitor the services that physicians provide. They may reward parsimonious
resource use directly with compensation, though more likely with perks or subsequent promotion.
Extravagant users are kicked out of the network. Finally, since physicians differ substantiallyin their
treatment philosophies, HMOs can select physicians whose natural inclination is towardconservative

treatment.
Given the ability of HMOs to limit utilization on the supply-side, price-related demand-side

limitations can be less severe. Cost-sharing to enrollees is generally quite low -- typically about $5

to $10 per provider visit, although other forms of demand-side limitation survive (for example,
patients may have to get approval from their internist before seeing a specialist).
Independent Practice Associations (IPAs), or Network Model HMOs, represent a morerecent

innovation in managed care.26 These plans neither employ their own physicians nor run their own

hospitals. Instead, they contract with providers in the community. By limiting the size of the
network, the plans secure lower costs from willing providers. In addition, these plans employ
stringent review procedures. For example, patients may need approval to receive particular tests.
Finally, IPAs often provide financial incentives to limit the care that they provide. For example,
some plans pay physicians on a "capitated" basis. The physician receives a fixed payment per patient

per year. Out of this capitated stipend, the physician must pay for all necessary medical services,
26 Some IPAs are older, but thet form gained popularity only recently.

33

possibly including hospital services and prescription drugs. The physician's incentives for cost
control become even more significant when all expenditures come out of his own pocket.
In many HMOs, patients can go outside of the network and still receive some reimbursement.

This is termed a Point of Service [POS] option. But reimbursement out-of-network is not as
generous as reimbursement within. Use of non-network services, for example, frequently requires
a deductible followed by a 10 to 40 percent coinsurance payment.
As Figure 4 shows, HMO enrollment of all forms (including POS enrollment) has increased

from 8 percent of the population in 1980 (then predominantly group/staff model enrollment) to
nearly half of the privately insured population today.

This vertical integration in managed care, with insurers and providers linked or united, is
virtually unheard of in insurance of other types. Auto insurance, for example, is an indemnity policy.

People choose what coverage they will have, what deductibles will be in force, etc. When there is
a crash, the insured and the adjuster get together, perhaps at the repair shop, to negotiate the cost of

the repair. The insured or the repair shop, entities having no particular relationship to the insurer,
are paid that amount, less any deductibles, which are the responsibility of the insured. After major
crashes, cost-ineffective repairs are avoided by declaring the car a total loss, giving the wreck to the

insurance company and reimbursing the owner.
But such a contingent claims system could not work with health care. The claims are more
frequent and uncertainties much greater, making costs much harder and more expensive to estimate.

"Scrapping" a human body is rarely an inexpensive or palatable proposition. The burgeoning links

between insurers and providers in health care, we believe, are a response to the a priori difficulty
of writing contingent claims contracts in the medical sector.

34

Vertical integration is also important because it can elicit price discounts. Managed care
partly represents a price club. In exchange for an up-front fee, the patient gets to purchase goods at

a significant discount. The discounts are secured through bulk purchase bargaining, or by directly
hiring the sellers. In exchange for lower prices, patients precommit to receive care from a limited
set of providers, or to pay harshly for the privilege of going elsewhere.
Finally, vertical integration is important because it fundamentally transforms the principal-

agent conflicts in the medical system. Physicians no longer look out for the interests of just their
patients, or perhaps their patients' interests and their own. Now, physicians must watch out for the

insurer as well. And patients must be more attuned to the incentives their physician is under. We
note the integration of insurance and provision as the second lesson of health insurance:

Lesson 2: Integration oflnsurance and Provision. With medical care, unlike other insurance

markets, insurers are often directly involved in the provision of the good in addition to
insuring its cost. The integration of insurance and provision, intended to align incentives,

has increased over time. Managed care, where the fimctions are united, is an extreme
version. Under it, doctors have dual loyalties, to the insurer as well as to the patient.

IV.] Equilibrium Treatment Decisions in Managed Care
One can understand the impacts of managed care using a framework similar in spirit to what

we described for patient cost sharing, only the physician's choices are targeted. A typical physician

payment, for example, is
(15)

Payment = R + r Cost.

35

Here, R is the prospective amount and r is the retrospective amount. A fully capitated system sets

r=O and R>O, while a fully retrospective system sets R=O and r 1. Thus, the capitated system
focuses solely on incentives; the retrospective system removes all risk from the doctor.
Changing to a capitated system might affect treatment decisions in several ways. One effect

is to raise the physician's "shadow price" for providing treatment -- physicians might require a
greater expected health benefit before providing care under managed care than under traditional
indemnity insurance (Frank, Glazer, and McGuire, 1997; Keeler, Carter, and Newhouse, 1998).
This effect is particularly strong when the physician is capitated, and thus bears the marginal cost
for providing additional care.

In addition, managed care might hannonize treatment decisions across patients. Protocols

in managed care, for example, encourage or require physicians to treat patients with the same
condition similarly.
In both of these circumstances, the physician's views about optimal treatment may differ from

the patient's. Doctors may want to limit care while patients may want more. This divergence is
particularly likely if patients pay little at the margin for medical care, as they do in many managed

care plans (at least for in network services). The conflict of incentives between physicians and
patients in managed care contrasts with the situation in traditional indemnity insurance, where the
incentives of patients and physicians are generally aligned (although both differ from the incentives
of insurers).

Figure 5 shows a potential conflict; at the prices each faces, the patient demands much more

36

care (QD) than the physician wants to provide (Q). Which level of care will ultimately be
provided? Knowing how treatment decisions will be made in such an environment is difficult, as
economic analysis of rationed goods in general does not reach uniform conclusions. The situation
is particularly severe in the medical care market because patients do not pay substantial amounts at

the margin for medical care; thus, willingness to pay is not an accurate way of gauging individual

value of services. There are several possible outcomes. One possibility is that the short-side
principle applies, which predicts that the equilibrium quantity will be the lesser of demand and

supply. This is shown as the thickened line in figure 5 and corresponds to a situation where
treatment decisions in managed care are made predominantly by physicians. The short-side principle

underlies much of the work on managed care (see, e.g., Baumgardner, 1991; Ramsey and Pauly,
1997; Pauly and Ramsey, 1998).

But the short-side principle assumes patient wishes play no role when demand exceeds
supply. Treatment decisions may come out of a "bargaining" process that balances the wishes of
physicians and patients (Ellis and McGuire, 1990). One can interpret this bargaining either as an

explicit process between the parties, or as the physician balancing his own self-interest (or the
insurer's profits) with the best interests of the patient.
The actual level of service delivered is likely to vary with the particular medical situation.
Patients with chronic conditions may know a great deal about their treatment options; the outcome

may thus be close to the patient's demand. In emergency situations, the opposite may be true. The
effectiveness of managed care in limiting medical spending may thus differ across settings.

27

have drawn the physician's supply curve as upward sloping. This needn't be. It could

be vertical or backward bending. Our point would carry through, nevertheless.
37

IV 2 Evidence on Supply-side Payment and Medical Treatment

A substantial literature examines the role of supply-side payment systems in influencing

medical treatments. A change from retrospective, or cost-based reimbursement, to prospective
reimbursement is typically analyzed.

Table 7 presents studies on this topic. It documents the impact of prospective payment on
five aspects of hospital care: the number of admissions and transfers; average length of stay or other
inputs; hospital profits; and quality of care. Prospective payment might increase or decrease hospital

admissions. On the one hand, sick people might be less likely to be admitted to a hospital under
prospective payment, since reimbursement for these individuals falls short of expected cost. On the

other hand, hospitals might be more eager to admit healthy patients, for whom reimbursement

exceeds costs. As table 7 shows, admissions generally declined with the implementation of
prospective payment.

While one might worry about whether care for the sick is excessively rationed in such a
system, the literature on whether patients are being "dumped"under prospective payment (e.g., sent

to public hospitals) is not particularly clear. A loose consensus is that there is some dumping of
patients under PPS, but the magnitude is not particularly great (Morrisey,Sloan, and Valvona, 1988;

Newhouse, 1989; Newhouse, 1992).
Studies examining the effect of prospective payment on average lengths of hospital stayand

other inputs find nearly uniformly that average hospital stays fell with the reimbursement change.

This is what theory predicts: hospitals no longer paid for each additional service will cut back on
marginal care, which is expensive relative to health benefits. The effect of prospective payment on

hospitals stays is uniformly strong and impressive; many studies find reductions of 20 to 25 percent

38

over a period of 5 years or less. These studies provide among the clearest evidence that supply-side

reimbursement changes do affect medical treatments.
Despite the reduction in average lengths of hospital stay, a number of studies find that profit

margins fell under prospective payment. This reduction in profits came largely from a reduction in
revenues. As the reduction in length of stay indicates, costs fell with the introduction of prospective
payment.
In addition to examining the effect of prospective payment on quality, the literature has also

examined how managed care as a whole affects medical spending. Studies of this quetion are
summarized elsewhere, including in this volume (Miller and Luft, 1997; Congressional Budget
Office, 1992; Glied, 1998); we discuss it only cursorily here.

Virtually all studies find that managed care insurance reduces medical spending in
comparison to traditional indemnity insurance. The consensus estimate would be that patientsunder
managed care spend about 10 percent less than patients in indemnity plans, adjusted for differences

in the underlying health of the two groups. The effect is somewhat greater for inpatient hospital
spending, but is offset by some additional outpatient utilization in managed care insurance. Overall,

therefore, incentives on the physician side clearly have an effect on overall utilization.

V.

Optimal Mix of Demand and Supply-Side Controls

Given the availability of both demand and supply-side controls, which should be employed?

A first pass suggests that supply-side limitations are preferable, since providers are relatively less
risk averse than are patients. In practice, however, plans with both types of limitations are sold,and

39

indeed most plans available have a mix of demand- and supply-side cost containment features (for

example, capitation with high cost sharing on out-of-network use, or indenmity insurance with
utilization review).28

Both demand- and supply-side controls may be desirable in the presence of the other. First,

patients and providers may control different features of the medical interaction. For example, the
Rand Health Insurance Experiment found that patient cost sharing had a substantially greater impact

on the probability that a patient uses services than on the level of services provided conditional on
use (Newhouse et al., 1993). One can interpret this as saying that cost sharing affects insureds, but

not their physicians. The evidence cited above shows that managed care can limit the level of
services provided, however. An insurer or provider facing this situation might then want to combine

demand- and supply-side cost sharing, the former to limit the initiation of visits and the latter to
control the intensity of treatment provided within visits (Ma and McGuire, 1997).

Combining demand- and supply-side controls can also promote flexibility in types of
treatment. Consider the situation in Figure 6 (Baumgardner, 1991; Ramsey and Pauly, 1997; Pauly
and Ramsey, 1998). There are two types of patients: those who are moderately ill (denoted M), and
those who are more seriously ill (denoted S).29 Moderately ill patients demand less medical care at

any price than severely ill patients. We assume the insurer cannot distinguish the two groups,
however; thus, cost sharing or quantity restrictions must apply equally to the two.

28 The coexisting prevalence of both types of plans may be transitional, since managed care
is still relatively new. But managed care plans have increasingly been incorporating more consumer
choice and cost sharing (for example, in out-of-network use). This suggests the combination is not
just transitional.
29

that this may apply conditional on a diagnosis. For example, the conditions could be
severe and moderate heart attacks.

40

Given a price of medical care P, the optimal amounts of medical care to receive are QM and

Q respectively for the moderately and severely ill. With a coinsurance policy that requires the
patient to pay c for each unit of care, the equilibrium will be medical care levels of Q'M and Q.
Because of moral hazard, medical care demand will be too high. Insurers might alternately adopt

a fixed quantity constraint, for example Q for each patient.3° At Q, the right amount of medical care
is provided in total, but not for each patient; the moderately ill patient will receive too much medical

care, while the severely ill patient will not receive enough. Thus, neither demand- nor supply-side
cost containment by itself yields an optimal allocation.
Combining demand- and supply-side cost containment can improve the situation, however.

For example, starting from Q, raising coinsurance will discourage utilization by the moderately ill

person before the severely ill person (because the marginal value of care is much lower for the
former). If the coinsurance rate necessary to deter low value utilization is small, the risk spreading

loss from such coinsurance will be small, and the net welfare consequences of deterrence will be
positive. The ability to limit demand by the moderately ill person, in turn, allows an increase in (,
since this constraint applies only to the severely ill person. Indeed, if demand for the moderately ill

person is fully constrained by the cost sharing, Q could be increased to the optimal level of care for

the severely ill person. More generally, coinsurance and constrains can be combined to enable

rationing in more than one dimension whether there is heterogeneity of optimal treatment. A
combination of the two systems may be superior to using either system alone.

A third rationale for combining demand- and supply-side controls is to limit selection
behavior by providers. Providers paid on a capitated basis will have incentives to attract healthy

30 We assume that managed care features this type of restriction.

41

patients and "dump" sick ones, since the provider's payment is the same with the two patients but

the costs are much greater in treating the sick patient. Incorporating patient cost sharing into the
insurance policy can relax the supply-side constraints and thus limit the incentives to dump patients

(Ellis, 1998). We return to this type of adverse selection in the next section.

Theoretical results to date generally suggest a combination of demand- and supply-side

controls may offer significant advantages. Moreover, with so many differing incentives in the
medical care system, optimal reimbursement schemes undoubtedly differ across specialties (for

example, in response to moral hazard propensities) and groups of providers (for example, if the
ability to bear risk differs with group size), which increases the potential for working both sides of
the market. The way demand- and supply-side systems interact with each other, however, is not well

understood; neither is the tradeoff between a fine-tuned system and a system that is simple and

comprehensible. Real world structures suggest simplicity has its virtues. It is noteworthy, for
example, that virtually all coinsurance operates at a flat rate between the deductible and any stop loss
amount.31

VI.

Markets for Health Insurance: Plan Choice and Adverse Selection

To this point, we have talked of the design of a single health insurance plan. Most private
insurance in the United States is offered on a menu basis, however, with different insureds selecting

31 Simplicity and transparency may be a handicap. Conceivably insureds and doctors, not
understanding what they will be respectively charged or paid for something, may behave more
reasonably. For example, a low but complex coinsurance rate might be the best way to discourage
utilization. It imposes less financial risk than, say, a higher flat rate, but might be just as effective
in controlling use.

42

different plans. Health insurance choice is a natural way to meet differing individual preferences.
Some people will prefer managed care insurance, which limits utilization but costs less, while others

will opt for a more open-ended indemnity-style policy. Within indemnity insurance policies, some
will be willing to bear more financial risk than others. Having these preferences reflected in market

outcomes is beneficial.
In addition, health insurance choice is important to promote efficiency. Customers shopping

for the lowest prices drive costs to their lowest level. Moreover, product characteristics will be
shifted and new produetsintroduced to meet consumer demands. These benefits of competition for
health insurance are analogous to the benefits competition yields in other markets.

But health insurance is fundamentally different from other markets in ways that create
harmful side effects from competition. The key problem is that with health insurance, unlike other
services or commodities, the identity of the buyer can dramatically affect costs. Insuring a 60 year

old costs 3 times as much as insuring a 30 year old, and among 30 year olds, some will have far
higher costs than others. Who one pools with in health insurance dramatically affects what one has
to pay.

Generally, the sick are drawn to more generous plans than the healthy. Those expecting to
use more services will, all else equal, want more generous policies than those expecting to use fewer

services. If plans could charge individuals their expected cost for enrolling in each plan, the market

would efficiently sort people. Such charges are generally not imposed, however, since it is widely

believed that it is not fair to make people pay a lot more just because they are sick. Knowing the
individual-specific prices may also not be technically feasible.

When plans can only charge average prices, generous plans will disproportionately attract
43

sicker people, and more moderate plans will disproportionately attract healthier ones. This
phenomenon is termed adverse selection (Akerlof, 1970; Arrow, 1985). As a result of adverse
selection, generous plans will have to charge premiums above moderate plans not only because they

offer more benefits but also because they attract a worse mix of enrollees. These premium
differentials, if passed on to insureds, will tilt unfairly against generous plans.32

Adverse selection into more generous plans leads to two fundamental difficulties. First,
people will choose to be in less generous plans, so that they can avoid paying for the higher costs of

very sick people. Second, plans will have incentives to distort their offerings to attract the healthy

and repel the sick. Since no plan would like to enroll the sickest people, all plans will find it
profitable to distort their benefits. Indeed, even innovations that improve quality of health care may

be unattractive to plans even if they come without additional cost, if they attract the wrong people.

The distortion in plan provisions resulting from adverse selection is variously termed plan
manipulation, skimping (Ellis, 1998), or stinting (Newhouse, 1997).

The consequences of these undesired side effects of competition are felt in market
equilibrium. The equilibrium with adverse selection may be inefficient; it may not even exist. We
express this as the third lessons of health insurance:

Lesson 3: Competition When Consumer Identity Matters. When consumer identity affects

costs, competition is a mixed blessing. Allowing individuals to choose among competing
health insurance plans can allocate people to appropriate plans and provide incentives for
32

This would happen, for example, if employers make a fixed dollar contribution to the

premiums of each plan offered to their employees. The converse is also true; if employers heavily
subsidize the difference between plan costs, employees will choose the generous plan too often.

44

efficient provision. But it can also bring with it adverse selection -- the tendency of the sick
to differentially choose the most generous plans. Adverse selection induces people to enroll
in less generous plans, so they can be in a healthier pool, and gives plans incentives to distort

their offerings to be less generous on care for the sick.

Many models of adverse selection have been developed. We start with simple models and
then present more advanced models.

VI. I Equilibrium with Adverse Selection - The Basics
To understand the patterns in adverse selection, we start with the simplest possible situation

(Rothschild and Stiglitz, 1976; Wilson, 1980). Assume there are two individuals, one HIGH risk

and one LOW risk, and two plans, a generous plan and a moderate plan. Table 8 gives the
hypothetical benefits and costs for the generous and moderate plans. We suppose that the generous
and moderate plans are what HIGH and LOW respectively would design for themselves, assuming
that each had to pay his own costs.33 Note that HIGH costs more in either plan and both people use

more services in the generous plan than in the moderate plan.
Equilibrium. Efficiency requires people to be in the generous plan if the additional benefits
of that plan to them are greater than the additional costs they incur. In this case HIGH should be in
the generous plan, and LOW should be in the moderate plan, since the additional value to HIGH of
the generous plan ($13) is greater than its additional cost ($12),while the converse is true for LOW

(a benefit of $1 compared to an additional cost of $3). The efficient outcome thus separates the

This assumption of respective optimality facilitates exposition, but is not required.

45

insureds.

Were separation to happen, the premiums would be $16 for the generous plan (the cost of

HIGH) and $1 for the moderate plan (the cost of LOW). At these prices, however, HIGH would
select the moderate plan; the $15 savings are greater than the $13 loss. Of course, once HIGH joins
the moderate plan costs escalate, but they are still only $2.50 (the average of 4 and 1). HIGH's cost

savings by enrolling in the moderate plan ($13.50) are still greater than his loss in benefits ($13).
LOW will also prefer the moderate plan.

The market equilibrium will thus have both individuals in the moderate plan. a pooling
equilibrium. This is not efficient, however. The reason this inefficiency arises is that individuals

do not pay their own costs in each plan, but rather the average cost of the plan. Hence, HIGH
mimics LOW so that he can share his costs with LOW.

There are a variety of ways to struggle back towards efficiency. Two logical candidates,
assigning people to plans or charging people on the basis of expected cost, are undesirable because

they respectively override free choice or sacrifice risk spreading.34 Two additional possibilities
would be to cross subsidize the generous plan by the moderate plan (Cave, 1985), or to distort the
plan offerings (Rothschild and Stiglitz, 1976).
Cross Subsidy. Suppose the moderate plan is taxed an additional $1.25 per capita, which is
used to offset the premium of the generous plan. In the separating equilibrium, the premiums in the

two plans will be $14.75 and $2.25, and HIGH will now prefer the generous to the moderate plan.

Both insureds are better off with the subsidy than without. HIGH clearly prefers a subsidy to no

Partial measures are possible. For example, many employers "carve out" mental health
benefits from all plans and provide those services using one insurer. Adverse selection is one
rationale for this (Frank et al., 1998).

46

subsidy. LOW also prefers the subsidy. because he pays only a $1.25 subsidy, compared to an
additional $1.50 premium if he pooled with HIGH in the moderate plan.
Plan manipulation. A second mechanism to induce a separating equilibrium is to replace the

moderate plan with something stingier. \Vhen faced with a stingier plan, HIGH might choose the
generous plan over pooling with LOW. Making the moderate plan stingier is distasteful to LOW,
but the cost to HIGH is substantially greater. This disparity in costs is what allows "hurting" the plan

to produce separation.
Consider a plan called basic, also detailed in table 8, which gives both HIGH and LOW 70

percent of the benefits and costs they would receive from the moderate plan. Thus, LOW would

receive benefits of $3.50 at a cost of $0.70 were he in the basic plan and HIGH would receive
benefits of$14, incurring a cost of $2.80. If basic and generous were the two plans offered, LOW
would select the basic plan. If HIGH selects the basic plan as well, his premium, i.e., average cost,
would be $1.75. H&d prefer the generous plan, which offers an additional $19 in benefits, but would

cost only $14.25 more. LOW prefers the basic plan to pooling with HIGH in the moderate plan.
Plan manipulation sacrifices efficiency, since LOW generates more net benefits in the moderate plan.

In practice, plan manipulation can take many forms. Aerobics programs, for example, will

attract the vigorous healthy while spinal cord injury or high tech cancer care facilities pull in the
costly sick. There are generally more opportunities to trim a high cost-attracting service than to add
aerobics equivalents.35 Thus, we expect plans to be ungenerous with services for conditions that will

predictably have high costs.

However, the Harvard University Group Health Plan -- an option for Harvard faculty -offers a $50 weliness payment, which can be used say for sneakers, as an attractor.
47

Market competition will lead to the manipulated equilibrium. Assume that the moderate and

generous plans were the only offerings. All participants would pool in moderate. Introducing the
basic plan would then attract LOW, HIGH would go off to generous, and the moderate plan would
be abandoned.36

In practice, plan manipulation and cross-subsidy of premiums can be combined to promote

separation. The market equilibrium will have two plans. One will be the optimal plan for HIGH,
given whatever subsidy he is receiving. The other plan, which will enroll LOW, will be the plan as

close as possible to moderate whose combination of subsidy and manipulation just makes HIGH
prefer his optimal plan.
We show this graphically in Figure 7(a), assuming there is a continuous choice of plans.37
We array the plans in Figure 7(a) from least to most generous —in this case variability among plans

is due to differences in the percent of expenses covered. The figure shows the expected utility of
LOW (the upper two lines) and HIGH (the lower two lines) at each possible level of generosity, and

for both the pooling and separating equilibria. LOW does better than HIGH, since he have a lesser
chance of incurring the cost of sickness. HIGH is better off pooling than separating for it allows him

to shed costs; the opposite is true for LOW. For both LOW and HIGH, their optimal separating
equilibrium offers less than full insurance. This might be because of moral hazard or administrative

36

efficiency costs of separation produced through plan manipulation may be small. That
is because the moderate plan was designed for LOW. Assuming smoothness, the costs of moving
away from the optimal plan are initially trivial. But the costs to HIGH, who is already far from his
optimum, may be great. This disparity allows cheap distortion to produce target efficiency (Nichols
and Zeckahuser, 1982).

The classic diagrammatic presentation of plan manipulation (dating from Rothschild and
Stiglitz) uses indifference curves. We present this in the Appendix.

48

costs; without these factors each in isolation would want the most generous policy. We show HIGH

as wanting full insurance in the pooled equilibrium; in our example. the benefits from the subsidy
in that plan are greater than the moral hazard or administrative cost loss. In the least generous plan
(no insurance), both HIGH and LOW are indifferent between pooling and separating equilibria. In

the most generous plan (full insurance) the two pay the same price and get the same utility in the
pooling equilibrium.

Consider the situation if HIGH and LOW are initially at A, the full insurance pooling
equilibrium. An insurer that offered a plan with generosity G1 would attract LOW, since LOW

prefers G1 to A. HIGH would then move to G1, because E is preferred to C, the separating
equilibrium if only HIGH is in the generous plan. As the pooled policy becomes less generous, its

attractiveness to HIGH falls. Policy G, makes HIGH just indifferent between pooling with LOW
and the separating equilibrium at C. The stable equilibrium will thus have two policies: LOW will

be at point L with policy G2 and HIGH will be at point C.
With slight chnages in the curves, however, the situation at G, may not be stable either.
Consider the situation in Figure 7(b), drawn for the case where the risk difference between HIGH

and LOW is less than in 7(a). Here LOW's preferred pooling equilibrium is superior to his best
sustainable separating plan, SL. Thus, the separating equilibrium at G2 will be broken by the pooling

equilibrium at G1. But the converse is also true; the pooling equilibrium at G1 is broken by a plan
say at G3, with a price just low enough to attract LOW at F, whereas HIGH would prefer to stick with

the premium and coverage at E. Once LOW went to F, however, the premium at E would have to
rise, and HIGH would chase LOW to G3. Thus, there is no stable equilibrium in Figure 7(b).

The model underlying Figure 7 assumes a frictionless world, where individuals shuttle

49

costlessly between plans and there are no costs involved in establishing new plans. If such costs play
a role, they may enable otherwise breakable equilibria to survive. For example, if establishing a plan

entails high fixed costs, but individuals' transit costs remain low, p becomes stable, since breaking

p with G3 is costly but yields only temporary profits. Interestingly, greater transit costs for
individuals may promote instability, since a temporary period for attracting individuals toan unstable

equilibrium may last longer, and therefore be more attractive despite the fixed costs of establishing

a plan. Even in this simple model, the ultimate outcome of markets with adverse selection is
uncertain.

Vi 2 Equilibria with Multiple Individuals in a Risk Group
The simple model of adverse selection had a single HIGH and LOW risk. The lumpiness of

movement implied by this specification is an important limitation of the model. With multiple
individuals of a given risk type, there can also be a third class of equilibria, a "hybrid" equilibrium,

to join the pooling and separating equilibria. We now show this equilibrium.
Imagine that there are now many HIGHs and LOWs, with similar tastes for insurance within

each group.38 Our example uses the parameter values from Table 8, with the $33 benefit for HIGH

under the generous plan changed to $34. Suppose we start in the separating equilibrium, with
HIGHs in the generous plan and LOWs in the basic plan. The expected utility in this equilibrium
is shown by the points A and B in Figure 8. Recall that the LOWs all prefer the moderate plan to
the basic plan. Imagine that they all enroll in that plan. Now suppose that instead of all the HIGHs

38 A more general formulation would allow individuals within a cost class to differ on such
factors as risk aversion, or in tastes for plans. Then the division of HIGHs between the moderate and
generous plans would reflect the individuals' preferences.

50

choosing the moderate plan, only a share of them choose it. Figure 8 traces expected utility for

HIGHs and LOWs as a greater share of the HIGHs choose the moderate plan. Once H* of the
HIGHs have enrolled in the moderate plan -- the number is 50 percent for our parameters -- HIGHs

will be indifferent between the two plans. No additional movement of HIGHs will occur.
The LOWs in the moderate plan are worse off pooling with some of the HIGHs than they
would be if they had the moderate plan to themselves. But that does not indicate whether the LOWs

prefer to separate themselves in basic. Indeed, in Figure 8, expected utility for the LOWs with a
share B of HIGHs in the moderate plan (point D) is greater than expected utility in the basic plan
(point C). The equilibrium with all of the LOWs39 and a share H* of the HIGHs in the moderate plan
— what

we term the "hybrid equilibrium" — is stable.
The hybrid equilibrium need not be stable, however, If the HIGHs are sufficiently costly, the

LOWs will prefer the separating equilibrium to the hybrid equilibrium (point C will be above point

D) and thus the two groups would separate competely.

VI.3 Continuous Risk Groups

Our two risk types model suggests that at least some high risks will enroll in their most
preferred plan while low risks may be distorted into less generous plans. In situations with more
than two risk groups, however, this situation may be reversed; the low risks may be in their preferred

plans but the high risks may not. We show this using a model developed by Feldman and Dowd

LOWs will never end up split between the basic and moderate plan. Say the basic and
moderate plans were equally attractive with a fraction of the LOWs in the moderate plan. As more
LOWs moved to the moderate plan it would become more attractive. Hence, the equilibrium would
tip all the LOWs into the moderate plan.

51

(1991), Cutler and Reber (1998), and Cutler and Zeckhauser (1998). The model assumes there are
two pre-established plan types.

Suppose there is a continuous distribution of risks in the population, denoted by s. For
simplicity, we normalize s to be the person's expected spending in the generous policy. There are
two plans, one generous and one moderate. The value of more generous insurance to an individual
is V(s), where V'>O (the sick value generous policies more than the healthy). Figure 9 shows V(s).
At any additional cost for choosing the more generous policy, people will strictly divide into plans.

If s'' is the sickness level of the person indifferent between the two policies, people with s>s will
choose the generous policy, whereas people with s<s* will choose the moderate policy. Average
sickness in the generous policy is SG = E[sls>s*], and average sickness in the moderate policy, is SM

= E[sIs<s*].
Plan premiums, in turn, depend on who enrolls. We assume people in the moderate policy
cost a fraction a (a<1) of what they would cost in the generous policy.40 In a competitive insurance

market, premiums will equal costs: G = s, and M = a SM. The premium difference between the two
plans is therefore:

(15) P(s) =

- 'M = (1-a) M + [G - SM]

The first term in the final expression is the cost savings the moderate plan offers to its average
enrollee. The second term is the difference in the average sickness level in the two plans; it is the
consequence of adverse selection.

As marginal people move from the generous to the moderate plan, the average sickness in

40 The literature reviewed above suggests that az.9 for an HMO relative to an indenmity
policy.

52

each of the plans will rise. Depending on the distribution of s, the price difference between plan may

widen or narrow. Because medical spending in practice is significantly right-skewed (Table 2), it
is natural to conjecture that the premium in the generous plan will rise by more than the premium

in the moderate plan. Figure 9 reflects this expectation as an upward sloping P(s) curve.

The guideline for efficiency is that the price differential must be appropriate for the
individual at the margin in choosing between plans. All other people would be appropriate sorted,
with sicker people choosing the generous plan and healthier people choosing the moderate plan.4'
The price for the marginal individual is given by:

,

(16)

prnarg() = (1-a)

where

is the person for whom equation (16) holds. We show this schedule in Figure 9 as lying

below the P(s) line.

optimally delineates people in the moderate and generous plans.

Comparing equations (15) and (16) shows that only by coincidence will the equilibrium be

efficient. Suppose that the efficient allocation prevailed. From equation (15), the price difference

between the two policies will differ from this amount for two reasons. The first term in equation
(15) is generally below the efficient differential; it represents the savings from the moderate plan for

the average person in the moderate plan, not the marginal person in the plan, for whom the savings
would be greater. Working in the opposite direction, adverse selection (the second term in equation

(15)) will raise the premium in the generous plan relative to the premium in the moderate plan.
Depending on the distribution of medical expenditures, the market differential could thus be above

or below the efficient level. The right skewness of medical spending suggests that the adverse

'' If preferences as well as sickness level affect the value of the generous plan, then each
individual must may his personal cost differential, P1(s) = (1 -a) s

53

selection effect will tend to predominate. This is the situation shown in Figure 9 (by virtue of the

fact that the iSP(s) line is above the Pm(s) line). The premium differential for the generous plan
will then be above the efficient differential, and too few people will enroll in the generous plan.

Because of adverse selection, small deviations in price can drive large differences in
allocations, and indeed, the generous plan may fail to survive. Starting from ,suppose the generous
plan is priced too high. Marginal enrollees will depart, driving prices up still further, inducing new

departures, and so on. The final equilibrium may be quite far from the efficient point. Indeed,
Figure 9 also shows the possibility that the entire generous plan is depopulated. If APt(s)described

the cost differential, then V(s) would not intersect that line and the equilibrium would have no
enrollment in the generous plan.42 The disappearance of generous plans as a result of dynamic
processes of adverse selection is termed a "death spiral". In such a situation, high risks end up in
less generous plans than is optimal, while low risks get their preferred policy.

VI. 4 Evidence on the Importance of Biased Enrollment

A substantial literature has examined adverse selection in insurance markets. Table 9

42

Whether a death spiral actually occurs will depend on the distribution of risk levels, and

the strength of the risk-preference interaction. The fatter the upper tail, the stronger the interaction,
the more threatening is the possibility of a spiral. A numerical example illustrates this possibility.
Suppose that the highest cost person has expected spending of $50,000 and that average costs of the
whole population in the moderate policy (with or without this person, if he comprises a small part
of the total risk) is $3,000. Suppose further that the high cost person values the generous policy at
$20,000 more than the moderate policy, and that he spends only $5,000 less in the moderate policy
than with the generous policy (for example, a 10 percent savings if the plans are an indemnity policy
and an HMO). Efficiency demands that he should be in the generous policy; theadditional value of
that policy ($20,000) is greater than the additional cost he imposes there ($5,000). If the high cost

person were the only person in the generous policy, however, the cost of that policy would be
$47,000 more than the cost of the moderate policy, which would lead him to opt for the moderate
policy.

54

summarizes this literature, breaking selection into three categories: traditional insurance versus
managed care; overall levels of insurance coverage; and high versus low option coverage.
Most empirical work on adverse selection involves data from employers who allow choices
of different health insurance plans of varying generosity; a minority of studies look at the Medicare

market, where choices are also given. Within these contexts, adverse selection can be quantified in

a variety of fashions. Some authors report the difference in premiums or claims generated by
adverse selection after controlling for other relevant factors (for example, Price and Mays, 1985;

Brown et a!., 1993). Other papers examine the likelihood of enrollment in a generous plan
conditional on expected health status (for example, Cutler and Reber, 1998). A third group measure

the predominance of known risk factors among enrollees of more generous health plans compared
to those in less generous plans (for example, Ellis, 1989).
Regardless of the exact measurement strategy, however, the data nearly uniformly suggest
that adverse selection is quantitatively large. Adverse selection is present in the choice between fee-

for-service and managed care plans (8 out of 12 studies, with 2 findings of favorable selection and
3 studies ambiguous), in the choice between being insured and being uninsured (3 out of 4 studies,

with 1 ambiguous finding), and in the choice between high-option and low-option plans within a
given type (14 out of 14 studies).
Figure 10 shows a particularly salient example of adverse selection, taken from experience

at Harvard University.43 The Harvard experience is nice because adverse selection was driven by
a policy change, and thus one can view the beginning of adverse selection and its subsequent effects.

In the early l990s, Harvard University offered its employees two types of health insurance plans: a

'

See Cutler and Reber (1998) and Cutler and Zeckhauser (1998).

55

generous PPO and a number of HMOs. The University paid about 90 percent of each plan's
premium; thus, the employee cost of the PPO, shown in Figure 10(a), was a relatively modest $500

per year. To trim costs, Harvard in 1995 moved to a more competitive health insurance system.
Under the new system, the University pegged its contribution at a fixed percentage of the lowest cost

plan. Employees paid the entire amount above this for the plan of their choice. The hope was that
competition among plans would drive down premiums and thus save the University money.

When the new system was introduced, the cost of the PPO rose, and PPO enrollment fell.

As Figure 10(a) shows, about 1/4 of PPO enrollees left the PPO between 1994 and 1995. These
enrollees were disproportionately the younger and healthier employees in the PPO, however. As a
result of the biased disenroilment, the PPO lost money in 1995; in 1996, it had to raise its premium

by nearly $1,000. This led to a further decline in PPO enrollment; over half the remaining PPO
enrollees left the plan after 1996. Again, these employees were disproportionately younger and
healthier than those that remained in the PPO. Thus, the PPO premium lost money again in 1997
and would have had to increase premiums substantially in 1998, just to prevent losses. In fact, the
required premium increase would have been too large for the insurer and Harvard tobear. The PPO

was disbanded before that year. Adverse selection thus produced a death spiral, and did so very
quickly. The disappearance of the PPO is a welfare loss to employees who would have chosen it at
their individual-specific cost. Cutler and Reber estimate the size of the welfare loss at 2 to 4 percent

of baseline premiums.
The importance of adverse selection has had direct impacts on policy. For example, Brown
et al. (1993) found that Medicare enrollees who enroll in a managed care plan would have spent 10
percent below average if they had been in the traditional system. Since Medicare paid only 5 percent

56

less to managed care companies for enrolling these people, Medicare lost money as HMO enrollment

increased. In 1997, Federal legislation reduced payments to HMOs by an additional 5 percent, to
avoid these continuing losses.

VI.5 Evidence on the Importance of Plan Manipulation

There are substantially fewer empirical studies on plan manipulation than on adverse
selection. Plans, of course, differ greatly in their generosity. But it is difficult to know, and plans

do not want to reveal, the extent to which the observed variation in plan benefits reflects
manipulation by the plans to attract healthy risks as opposed to the self-interested choice of insurance

arrangements among people already enrolled in the plans. Adverse selection aside, plans with sicker

enrollees probably should be more generous.

Though evidence on plan structures is ambiguous, the marketing of managed care plans
shows clear efforts to promote favorable selection. Maibach et al. (1998) document the marketing
practices managed care plans use to attract healthy Medicare enrollees, including television ads that
show seniors engaged in physical and social activities and marketing seminars held in buildings that

were not wheelchair accessible. Whether such practices extend to the types of benefits these plans
offer is unknown.

VI. 6 The Tradeoff Between Competition and Selection

In weighting the consequences of competition, losses from adverse selection must be
balanced against the gains, if any, from lower premiums that competition induces. The Harvard
University study discussed above (Cutler and Reber, 1998) shows such a tradeoff. As Figure 10(b)

57

demonstrates, premiums for the HMOs fell by over $1,000 when the University moved to flat-rate

pricing. The savings to Harvard from these lower premiums was estimated at 5 to 8 percent of
baseline health spending. This cost savings is greater than the 2 to 4 percent loss from adverse
selection noted above. Thus. the net effect of competition in the Harvard circumstance appears to
be beneficial, although the adverse selection losses were quite large.

With few exceptions (Wholey et al., 1995; Feldman and Dowd, 1993; Baker and Corts,
1995), few studies have examined how competition affects health insurance premiums. It is often
difficult to gather data on premiums, since most insurers charge different groups different amounts.

In addition, premiums need to be adjusted for differences in the quality of benefits, but the many
dimensions of quality are very difficult to control for. Thus, the tradeoff between cost savings and
adverse selection in other situations is generally unknown.

VI. 7 Risk Adjustment
The fundamental question about health insurance design is how to achieve the benefits of
competition while containing the costs of adverse selection. A natural solution is suggested by the

model above. Suppose that individuals were not charged the full difference in premiums between
plans, but that instead the employer or government entirely running the insurance system offset some

of the difference. For example, if the generous plan has above average risks in the amount E[sIs>s*]

E[s], the government would give the plan a per capita subsidy equal to this amount. The subsidy

would be financed by a tax on the moderate plan, which has below average risks, bythe amount

58

E{ss<s*]E[s. The contribution from the plans would just match,44 so there would be no net cost
to the government.
In a competitive market, plans that receive subsidies (or are forced to pay taxes) would pass

these subsidies on to consumers. Therefore, the premium for the generous plan would fall to G =

s0 subsidyG
(1 -a) SM.

E[s], and the premium for the moderate plan would rise to M a SM + taxM E[s] -

The adjusted premium difference between the plans, which individuals would face, would

thus be

l7/ iP=P -P
G M=
k

iM

This quantity is the savings for the average person in the moderate plan. It is closely related to the

optimal price difference in equation (16), which is the savings for the marginal person in the
moderate plan. Plan choices made on the basis of the price difference in equation (17), though not

optimal, are likely to be more efficient than plan choices made on the basis of unadjusted price
differences.
This form of differential payment is termed "risk adjustment" (Ellis and VandeVen, 1998).
Risk adjustment must be carried out by some entity that can require individuals to insure orconvince

them to do so through subsidies. Otherwise, low cost individuals would choose not to participate.
One possibility would be for the government to impose risk adjustment, whoever is the payer. But

employers providing subsidized health insurance can do the job just as well. Employers have an
incentive to risk adjust since it promotes efficiency and thus lowers the overall cost of providing

'

This is because (E[sls>s*] + E[sls<s*]) I 2 = E[s].

59

health coverage.45

Empirically, risk adjustment can be carried out in four ways. Plans can pay or receive
payments based on: (1) demographic variables (for example, more for taking on older people); (2)

medical conditions (for example, more for people with diabetes); (3) past medical expenditures,
which help predict future expenditures; or (4) actual experience in a year (for example, $50,000 extra

for each organ transplant patient). The first three approaches attempt to predict experience; the last

is after-the-fact reinsurance.

The tradeoffs between these different forms of risk adjustment is related to the ability of
health plans to manipulate the risk adjustment system. Information about diagnosis, past claims, and

actual use increase the ability to measure differential enrollment, but are susceptible to distortion by

the plans. For example, plans may code borderline people as having diabetes if risk adjustment is
done on the basis of the number of diabetics. Plans might creatively assign costs to high cost cases,

when such cases are largely reimbursed. Even if risk adjustment is done on a prospective basis,
plans have an incentive to exaggerate current sickness and expenditure levels,since the vast majority

of insureds stick with their plans from year to year. A final, at least theoretical, concern about risk

adjustment is that it may diminish plans' incentives to maintain their enrollees' health. Keeping

people healthy disqualifies the plan from receiving additional risk adjustment payments, thus
reducing the value of the health investment.
Because so few employers or governments have used formal risk adjustment systems, the

" Some employers have made second best efforts to implement risk adjustment,at times

inadvertently. The heavy subsidy of premiums -- many employers pay 85 percent or more -- in effect
covers 85 percent of cost differentials due to varying mixes of insureds. Alas, heavy subsidies also
significantly diminish the incentives of insureds to shop around, hence of health plans to hold down
their costs.

60

relative advantages and drawbacks of different risk adjustment methodologies are unknown. New

efforts may provide some of this information, however, In January 1999, in a major initiative, the
Federal government announced its intention to employ risk adjustment on the basis of past diagnoses

to pay HMOs that enroll individuals in Medicare. Evaluating the impact of this system is a major
research priority.

VII.

Person-Specific Pricing, Contract Length, and Premium Uncertainty

Adverse selection is a problem of asymmetric information -- individuals know their likely

medical care utilization but insurers either do not, or are not allowed to use this information.
Increasingly, however, information is becoming equalized. Insurers question individuals or monitor

their past utilization to forecast their future costs. Equipped with such knowledge, insurers may
know more about expected costs for the groups they are insuring than the members of the groups do

themselves.
Insurers can use this information to set premiums. While such "experience rating" is rare at

the individual level, it is common at the group level. Most private health insurance in the United
States is at least partly experience rated. The bigger the group purchasing insurance, the more likely

is experience rating. Hence, older and sicker groups are charged more per capita for the same
coverage.

But experience rating creates its own set of problems, particularly when carried out at the
individual level. When people face premiums that depend on their sickness, they are denied a form

of insurance -- the ability to obtain the same insurance premiums as their peers at the same price.

61

The welfare loss can be significant.
Consider. for example. a situation where individuals are insuring themselves, diabetes is the

only disease, and both people and plans know who is diabetic. Plans would offer full insurance to
everyone but would charge diabetics more than non-diabetics; after all, no one who is not diabetic

would be willing to pay extra to insure the diabetics. Given the distribution of diabetics and nondiabetics, the higher premiums charged to diabetics create a distributional issue. Diabetics pay more,

and non-diabetics pay less relative to level premiums.

But from an ex ante perspective, before anyone knows who will contract diabetes, the
distributional issue represents an efficiency loss. Suppose that before an individual knew if she
would be diabetic or not -- potentially before birth — she was offered insurance against the risk that

she would become diabetic and thus face higher insurance premiums in the future. Full insurance

would guarantee that if she developed diabetes, the policy would give her sufficient income each
year to cover the higher diabetes premium she would then face. The benefitswould be financed by
payments from non-diabetics. Individuals would be willing to purchase this insurance were it sold
at fair odds; they get a reduction in financial risk at no expected cost.
In real-world markets, however, such insurance against falling into a worse risk class is not

offered. Some of the insurance would have to be purchased before birth. People obviously cannot
do this, and even their parents might be unable to buy it for them, if there is a genetic predisposition

towards disease. Other insurance could wait until mid-life for the unpredictable infirmities of old

age. The key is to contract for insurance before therisk is resolved. While long-term anticipatory

insurance is possible, health insurance in actual markets is rarely sold for over one year. People
consequently lose welfare ex ante; there is an insurance policy they want but cannot obtain.

62

This loss at first may seem counterintuitive: everyone has full information and everyone gets

full insurance every year. Where is the source of the loss? The welfare loss derives from a missing

market for insurance against one's risk type. Risk averse individuals would like to insure against

the possibility of being discovered to be high risk. There is no market where they can do so,
however. Given that a market is missing, there is no guarantee that efficient pricing on the basis of
known information as opposed to level pricing (as if ignorant) will enhance welfare. This illustrates
the theory of the second best. The market failure might also be thought of as a recontracting failure.

We recontract for health insurance annually despite the fact that we learn about expected future
health costs during the year. Such periodic recontracting breaks the contractual arrangements that
would characterize optimal insurance.
This problem has variously been termed the problem of renewable insurance or the problem
of intertemporal insurance (Pauly, Kunreuther, and Hirth, 1995; Cochrane, 1995; Cutler, 1996; and

Zeckhauser, 1974). It is likely to grow in importance in health insurance markets as our ability to
predict medical spending rises, as it will, for example, through advances in genetic screening. We
note this as the fourth lesson of health insurance:

Lesson 4: Information and Long-term Insurance: More information about individual risk
levels allows for more efficient pricing of risk, but portends a welfare loss from incomplete

insurance contracts.

Might markets develop to deal with this problem? Some possibilities suggest themselves.
People might purchase insurance for their lifetime rather than annually. If insurance choices were
63

made early enough (or high-cost people were compensated when insurance choices were made),

people would not suffer from knowledge gained over time. Long-term purchases, such as those
associated with whole life insurance, are made in this fashion. Individuals buy level premium life

insurance when they are young and healthy; they will wish to retain it, even if relatively healthy,
when they grow old and annual risks escalate.

In theory, health insurance could be sold for the long term on a level premium basis. In
practice, matters will be more complex. Much health insurance is now bundled with the provision

of care. If an individual left a geographic region, he might have to change provider, and no new
provider/insurer would want to take him own at his old level rate. Portability is but one problem.
Once individuals purchase lifetime medical insurance, why should an insurer strive for efficiency
when people are stuck in his plan? This problem is exacerbated since the insurer must agree to pay

for or provide a changing level of services. Health insurance policies optimally change from year
to year, as medical teclmology improves and knowledge about optimal treatments expands. Finally,

with future medical costs so unpredictable, insurers cannot take on the risk, which would apply to
all policies, that costs will escalate beyond expectation. With life insurance, by contrast, portability,

changing service mix, and varying costs are not problems.

A second approach to long-term health insurance would be to develop policies offering
insurance against learning one is high cost (Cochrane, 1995). Imagine that people purchase two
insurance policies in a year; one to cover their medical costs that year, and a second to cover any

increase in premiums they may face in the future. The second policy -- the "premium insurance"
policy might look like a standard health insurance policy: people pay in money and if they learn they

are likely to have high costs in the future they receive money back. Full premium insurance would

64

give people an amount of money equivalent to the discounted expected increase in their future
medical spending they learn about during the year.46 Why don't' we observe premium insurance?

Several factors have been identified. Moral hazard (i)eople with premium insurance would take
insufficient care of their health) and adverse selection (people expecting declines in health would
more likely take up the insurance) are possibilities.

The aggregate risk phenomenon provides still a third explanation (Cutler, 1996). Full
premium insurance would have to insure a person against the risk that the medical policy that a
representative individual will need in the future will cost more then than it is forecast to cost today.

But future medical costs are not known. For example, a half century ago, the cost of treating
cardiovascular disease treatment was minimal with little prospect for rapid increase. Bypass surgery,

angioplasty, and the like unexpectedly increased the cost of treating cardiovascular disease.
Diversifying such a risk of significant cost increases for a common ailment is not possible. It is what

is termed an aggregate as opposed to an idiosyncratic risk, where the latter apply to individuals one

at a time. Insurers generally eschew aggregate risks. By contrast, insurers accept risks readily when

they can lean comfortably on the Law of Large Numbers to spread them, as they can with
idiosyncratic risks. They generally refuse to write insurance for risks that are unpredictable or
nondiversifiable since they could bankrupt the company. Cost increases associated with future
medical care suffer both disqualifications.
The result is that even though improved insurer information may reduce adverse selection
overtime, problems in insurance markets may grow. If people are increasingly charged on the basis
46

is related to the solution in Pauly, Kunreuther, and Hirth (1995). They propose paying
a large premium in the first year. which is used to finance additional care for those who become sick
in later years.

65

of their individual risk characteristics, the efficiency losses could be severe.

Does employer-based insurance, where individuals choose from a menu of options, help?
Under such plans, there is a range of potential costs individuals can face for choosing more generous

insurance. At one extreme such plans are fully subsidized; people pay the same amount for each
plan. At the other extreme there is no subsidy; people pay the expected cost in each plan on a group
of individual basis. A system of risk adjustment lies in between; people pay the average cost of more

generous plans assuming the mix of insureds is constant across plans.
We have stressed the efficiency aspects of risk-adjusted premiums, but such a system may

not spread risks to a sufficient extent. Even in the perfect risk-adjusted equilibrium, the sick will

pay more than the healthy, since they will be more attracted to the generous plan. People would

presumably like to insure some of even this efficient price difference. There is, in terms of our
earlier discussion, a tradeoff between moral hazard and risk sharing. Risk spreading considerations
suggest that people should pay nothing additional for selecting more generous plans, assuming risk

level was the driving factor in their choice. Efficiency dictates that they should pay the expected
additional cost they incur by choosing more generous care. The optimal differential lies between the

two extremes, at the point where the marginal costs in terms of misallocation of people across plans

exactly offsets the marginal benefits of increased risk sharing. Of course, price setting to this level
of refinement may not be possible.

VIII. Insurance and Health Outcomes

Our empirical analysis to this point has focused on the impact of health insurance on medical

66

spending. Ultimately, people care about health insurance because they are concerned about their
health. A central research issue is therefore how alternate insurance arrangements affect health.
Much policy rhetoric expounds on the effects of not having insurance on health. Evidence

on this issue shows that the effect of being without insurance can be large. See Weissman and
Epstein, 1994, for a review. For our purposes, however, we are interested in how variations among
the set of insurance plans affects health. One might expect an attenuated version of the same finding

-- that people carrying less generous insurance, either indemnity insurance with high cost sharing or

managed care insurance, would suffer worse health outcomes than people with more generous
insurance. This might be particularly expected since medical treatment differs across insurance
categories.
But several factors work in the other direction. Some of the additional care provided under

more generous insurance may be iatrogenic (harmful to the patient), conceivably provided by
physicians to increase their income. Perhaps more important, managed care policies may improve
outcomes. One feature of managed care is that it standardizes the care that is received by classes of
patients. These standards, if based on sound science and carefully crafted to patient characteristics.

may be superior to what physicians conclude on their own. In addition, managed care usually
involves less cost sharing for primary care, preventive services, and prescription drugs than does
indemnity insurance. Greater use of these services may improve health outcomes.

Evidence on the effect of different insurance arrangements on health outcomes generally
suggests very little difference in health produced across plans. The clearest findings on the impact
of differing levels of demand-side cost sharing emerge from the Rand Health Insurance Experiment

(Newhouse et al., 1993). The Rand study measured a broad array of health indicators. For most
67

people, outcomes did not differ across plans. This is true even though spending differed across plans

by up to one-third. Insurance did have a small effect of the health of the sick poor: Poor people
achieved better outcomes in more generous plans with blood pressure control, vision correction, and

filling decayed teeth. Of course. the Health Insurance Experiment lasted for only a few years, which

may have tilted the test against more generous plans. Increased primary and preventive care, even
if strongly beneficial, may not be so important in such a short period of time.
Many studies have examined the impact of supply-side cost sharing on medical outcomes.
Such studies must adjust for differing population mixes across plans, which is a difficult challenge.
Important evidence comes from the implementation of prospective payment for hospital admissions
covered by Medicare. At the time of the change, the critics of the new prospective payment warned
that patients would be discharged from hospitals "quicker and sicker". Several papers examined this

question, as shown in Table 7. The most detailed studies are the papers grouped under Kahn et al.

(1991), which examined patient medical reviews before and after prospective payment was
implemented to measure changes in health. That research found no increase in adverse outcomes
for the average patient after prospective reimbursement, although they did find that with prospective

payment more patients were discharged from the hospital in an unstable condition. The lack of
significant adverse effect on quality of care was also found by DesHarnais, Chesney, and Fleming
(1988).
Some papers have found evidence of adverse outcomes resulting from prospective payment.

Fitzgerald et al. (1987, 1988) found that patients admitted to a hospital in the midwest with a hip
fracture were discharged sooner after prospective payment but were more likely to be in a nursing
home 6 months and 1 year after the hip fracture. In response, many other researchers have examined

68

this question, finding that length of stay for hip fracture patients fell but there was no effect on
nursing home residence, functional status. or mortality after 1 year (Gerety et al., 1989; Palmer et
al., 1989; Roy, Griffin, and Baugh, 1990).

Two studies have looked at the impact not of the prospective payment system, but of the
revenue changes stemming from prospective payment (Cutler, 1995; and Staiger and Gaumer, 1997).

These studies compared patients admitted to hospitals that lost revenue with patients admitted to
hospitals that gained revenue. The former patients experience a compression of mortality into the

period just after the hospital admission in comparison to the latter; some classes of patients that
formerly survived several months after being hospitalized did not live as long after revenues fell.

The effect diminished over the succeeding year, however. For patients who survived a year or
longer, there was no increase in mortality.47 The authors conclude that price changes have a small

adverse effect on the very sick, but little effect on others.

A second set of evidence examines the effect of managed care on health. Miller and Luft

(1997) summarize 35 studies comparing medical outcomes in managed care and indemnity
insurance. They find no clear difference; some studies find that managed care does worse, while an

equally large number find it does better. Many find no difference in outcomes.48
One is tempted to conclude from these findings that managed care is superior to traditional

insurance -- it saves money without substantial adverse effects. Such a conclusion is premature,
however, until long-term evidence on the effect of managed care has been obtained. We note the

'

After a phase-in period, hospital payments in total were not substantially affected by
prospective payment, so these results are consistent with the Kahn et al. (1991) fmding of no change
in health for the average patient.
See also Cutler, McClellan and Newhouse (1998).

69

focus on health and lack of conclusive results as the fifih lesson of health insurance.

Lesson 5: Health Insurance and Health. The primary purpose of health insurance and

delivery is to improve health. Unfortunately, conclusive results are not in on which
insurance and provision arrangements do this most effectively.

IX.

Conclusions and Implications

Health insurance has a complex anatomy. The lens of economics brings many of its critical
features — incentives, risk spreading and asymmetric information — into strong relief. The

understanding thus gained, however helpful, does not solve all of the problems. Indeed, the primary

message of this chapter is that health insurance design is a challenging exercise in the second best.

On each of a variety of dimensions, goals must be traded off against each another, since first
principles are in conflict.
Our lessons about health insurance, highlighted in Table 10, are instructive in this respect.

We start with a single insurer. Lesson 1 stresses the tradeoff between efficient risk spreading and

excessive utilization. Optimal risk sharing puts all the burden on the risk-neutral insurer, but this

induces moral hazard (excess consumption of services) and possibly supplier-induced demand
(excessive provision). Lesson 2 finds that integration of insurance and provision of services, which

is absent in other insurance contexts, may be desirable to align producer and insurer incentives in
the delivery of medical care.

70

Lessons 3 and 4 highlight second-best problems in the health insurance marketplace. Lesson

3 shows that competitive markets, the traditional lodestar of economics, may have undesirable side

effects in health insurance. Most important, competition induces adverse selection, hence the
misallocation of people to plans and the incentive for insurers to trim their offerings to deter the sick.

In theory at least, risk-adjustment methods, which are just now being tried in practice, can counter
these phenomena. Lesson 4 alerts us, however, that even if we slay the dragons of adverse selection

and plan manipulation, a fierce risk remains. Since insurance is written on an annual basis,
individuals are denied crucial protection against becoming sick and having their premiums escalate

substantially in the future.

Lesson 5 reminds us that the ultimate goal of health insurance does not involve the usual
economic concepts of prices, incentives and costs. Rather, the central objective of health insurance

is to maintain and enhance our health. The payoff question, therefore, is what can we get for
alternative levels of expenditure? The contribution of economics is to enable us to sketch the
production function.
Health insurance is a service in society, like a hair cut or tennis lesson. Why then does health

insurance cause so many more problems than the other two? Both the insurance aspect, and its area

of application, health, produce problems. In any insurance situation, moral hazard and adverse
selection plague outcomes. In the case of health insurance, the problems are magnified, since health-

promoting and care-seeking actions are difficult to monitor, and it is widely believed to be unfair to

charge people more if they contract diseases that are not their fault. Moreover, the payoff from
health insurance, unlike say life insurance, is quite variable, and subject to human choice made after

the contract is written. In addition, for justifiable reasons, health care is written on an annual basis,

71

though today's chance outcomes often have cost implications that stretch for decades. Finally, health

has a privileged position above other goods and services. For a range of philosophical and moral
reasons, societies care deeply that out citizens receive health care, even if that is not what they would

buy were we to give them the money.

These fundamental issues surrounding the equitable and efficient provision of health
insurance make government involvement inevitable, and in many contexts desirable. The range of

government involvement in health care and health insurance is enormous. At one end, many
governments provide medical care directly; they raise money through taxes, hire doctors and run
public hospitals. Less extreme are countries where the government is the sole insurer, but provision

of services remains private. More market-oriented systems such as the United States have most of

the population in private insurance and most of the provision of medical care done by private
providers. Even there, though, government plays a sizeable role, refereeing the playing field and
insuring those who the market would leave behind. Thus, the Federal government insures people

through Medicare and Medicaid, provides tax subsidies to private insurance, defines permissible
structures for supplementary Medicare insurance, and requires insurers to cover people who recently

lost or changed jobs. Moreover, many states mandate that particular benefits be part of any health
insurance plan.
Discussions of medical care reform in the United States and elsewhere often lead to extreme

positions. Advocates at one end believe that the problems with markets in health care are so severe

that government control, at least of expenditures, is necessary. The Canadian system — taxsupported, privately provided, but publicly regulated — is held up as an exemplar. The claimed
merits are that one insurer eliminates adverse selection, tight supply restrictions manage costs, and

72

tax financing enables everyone to be insured. Of course, in such a system competition between
insurers plays no role in promoting efficiency.

At the other extreme are free-market advocates, who believe that market institutions, if

guided correctly, would produce a superior outcome. The government should stay out of the
insurance business, but implement a risk adjustment system, directly or at arm's length, so that
people face efficient prices. Moreover, the government should remove the tax subsidy favoring

employer provision of insurance, which would lead to trimmed plan generosity and more cost
sharing by employees. Where necessary, the government should give high cost individuals riskrelated subsidies that enable them to buy health insurance in the marketplace.

The fundamental difference between the public and private approaches to medical care
reform are indicative of the enormous problems in medical care markets and the central role that
health plays in our utility. Can risk adjustment work well enough to deter plan manipulation and
cream skimming? Without subsidies, would employers provide insurance? If they stopped doing
so, how many more people would be uninsured, and how much would their health suffer? These are

questions at the heart of health insurance reform.

And beyond the question about organizing the health insurance system, there remain
questions of how plans should interact with providers. Should providers be paid by capitation or by

fee-for-service, or might there be a happy medium? Will providers respond to a payment schedule

by either skimping on patients or driving up costs? Only experience in the future, coupled with a
delicately balanced wisdom, will enable us to answer these questions.
Economics does not offer robust conclusions about the virtues and liabilities of markets in

second-best situations. Hence, it is not surprising that the debate on who should provide health
73

insurance and how it best should be structured rages on, even among economists. Ultimately, of
course, many of the issues cannot be answered on the basis of first principles, much less the dogma

that is too often brought to the debate. They require empirical investigations.
An impressive array of data has been brought to bear one-to-one on central issues in health
insurance, but the grand synthesis needed for effective prescription awaits us. Which medical system

around the world is best, and what would make it even better? Might the best system for Germany

or Japan differ significantly from that for the United States? To understand the attractiveness of
alternative health insurance structures. not unlike much of medical care itself, many consequences

must be weighed, and many side effects considered. This chapter provided an anatomy to help
organize those investigations.

74

References
Akerlof, George, "The Market for 'Lemons': Qualitative Uncertainty and the Market Mechanism",
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1970, 74: 488-500.

Altman, Daniel, David M. Cutler and Richard J. Zeckhauser, "Adverse selection and adverse
retention," American Economic Review, Vol. 88, No. 2 (May, 1998), pp. 122-26.

Arrow, Kenneth, "Uncertainty and the Welfare Economics of Medical Care", American Economic
Review, 1963, 53(5), 941-973.
Arrow, Kenneth, Aspects of the Theory of Risk Bearing, Helsinki: Yrjo Jahnssonin Saatio, 1965.

Arrow, Kenneth, "The Economics of Agency", in John Pratt and Richard Zeckhauser, eds.,
Principals andAgents: The Structure ofBusiness, Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business School
Press, 1985, 37-5 1.

Baker, Laurence C, and Kenneth S. Corts, "The Effects of HMOs on Conventional Insurance
Premiums: Theoiy and Evidence", NBER Working Paper No. 5356, November 1995.
Baumgardner, James, "The Interaction between Forms of Insurance Contract and Types of Technical
Change in Medical Care", Rand Journal of Economics, Vol. 22 (1), Spring 1991, 36-53.

Beck, R. G., "The effects of co-payment on the poor," Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 9, No. 1
(Winter 1974), pp. 129-142.

Berk, Marc L., and Alan C. Monheit, "The Concentration of Health Expenditures: An Update",
Health Affairs, Winter 1992, 145-149.
Bhattacharya, Jayanta, William B. Vogt, Aki Yoshikawa and Toshitaka Nakahara, "The utilization

of outpatient medical services in Japan," Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 31, No. 2
(Spring 1996), pp. 450-76.

Bice, Thomas W., "Risk vulnerability and enrollment in a prepaid group practice," Medical Care,
Vol. 13, No. 8 (August 1975), pp. 698-703.
Blomqvist, Ake G., "Optimal non-linear health insurance," Journal of Health Economics, Vol. 16,
No. 3 (June 1997), pp. 303-21.

Brown, Randall S., et al., The Medicare Risk Program for HMOs -- Final Summary Report on
Findings from the Evaluation, Final Reprot under HCFA Contract Number 500-88-0006,
(Princeton, NJ: Mathematica Policy Research, Inc., 1993).

Buchanan, Joan L.. Emmett B. Keeler. John E. Roiph and Martin R. Holmer, "Simulating health
expenditures under alternative insurance plans," Management Science, Vol. 37, No. 9
(September 1991), PP. 1067-89.

Buchmueller, Thomas C. and Paul J. Feldstein. "The effect of price on switching among health
plans," Journal of Health Economics, Vol. 16, No. 2 (April 1997), pp. 231-47.

Cardon, James and Igal Hendel, "Asymmetric information in health care and health insurance
markets: Evidence from the National Medical Expenditure Survey," mimeo (July 8, 1996).
Carroll, Norman V. and W. Gary Erwin, "Patient shifting as a response to Medicare prospective
payment," Medical Care, Vol. 25. No. 12 (December 1987), pp. 1161-67.

Cave, Jonathan, "Subsidy Equilibrium and Multiple-Option Insurance Markets", in Richard
Scheffler and Louis F. Rossiter. eds., Advances in Health Economics and Health Services
Research. Volume 6. Biased Selection in Health Care Markets. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press,
1985, 27-45.
Cherkin, Daniel C., Louis Grothaus and Edward H. Wagner, "The effect of office visit copayments
on utilization in a health maintenance organization," Medical Care, Vol. 27, No. 7 (July
1989), pp. 669-79.

Cochrane, John, "Time Consistent Health Insurance", Journal of Political Economy, 103(3), June
1995, 445-73.

Colle, Ann D. and Michael Grossman, "Determinants of pediatric care utilization," Journal of
Human Resources, Vol. 13 (Supp. 1978), pp. 115-53.
Conrad, Douglas A.. David Grembowski and Peter Milgrom. "Adverse selection within dental
insurance markets," Advances in Health Economics and Health Services Research, Vol. 6,
Richard M. Scheffler and Louis F. Rossiter, eds. (Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, 1985), pp. 17190.

Congressional Budget Office, The Effects of Managed Care on Use and Costs of Health Services",
mimeo, June 1992.

Cutler, David M., Estimating the Effect of Reimbursement Policy on Medical Outcomes, doctoral
dissertation. Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1991.
________________ "The

incidence of adverse medical outcomes under prospective payment,"
Econometrica. Vol. 63, No. 1 (January 1995), pp. 29-50.

______________ "Why Don't Markets Insure Long-Term Risk", mimeo, 1996.

Cutler, David M. and Sarah J. Reber, Paying for health insurance: The tradeoff between
competition and adverse selection" Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 113, No. 2 (May
1998), PP. 433-66.
Cutler, David M. and Richard J. Zeckhauser, "Adverse selection in health insurance," Frontiers in
Health Policy Research, Vol. 1, Alan Garber, ed. (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1998).

Cutler, David M., Mark McClellan, and Joseph P. Newhouse, "What Does Managed Care Do?",
mimeo, 1998.
Davis, Karen and Louise B. Russell, "The substitution of hospital outpatient care for inpatient care,"
Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 54, No. 2 (May 1972), pp. 109-120.

De Meza, David, "Health Insurance and the Demand for Medical Care", Journal of Health
Economics, Vol. 2 (1), March 1983, 47-54.

Deshamais, Susan I., James Chesney and Steven Fleming, "Trends and regional variations in
hospital utilization and quality during the first two years of the prospective payment system,"
Inquiry, Vol. 25 (Fall 1988), pp. 374-82.

Desharnais, Susan I., Roger Wroblewski and Dale Schumacher, "How the Medicare prospective
payment system affects psychiatric patients treated in short-term general hospitals," Inquiry,
Vol. 27 (Winter 1990). pp. 3 82-88.

Diamond, Peter, "Optimal Income Taxation: An Example with a U-Shaped Pattern of Optimal
Marginal Tax Rates", ;merican Economic Review, 88 (1), March 1998, p 83-95.
Dowd, Bryan and Roger Feldman, 'Biased selection in twin cities health plans," Advances in Health

Economics and Health Services Research, Vol. 6, Richard M. Scheffler and Louis F.
Rossiter, eds. (Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, 1985), pp. 253-7 1.
Eggers, Paul W., "Risk differential between Medicare beneficiaries enrolled and not enrolled in an
HMO," Health Care Financing Review, Vol. 1 (1980), pp. 91-99.
Eichner, Matthew J., "Incentives, price expectations and medical expenditures: an analysis of claims
under employer-provided health insurance," mimeo (July 30, 1998).

Eichner, Matthew J., Mark McClellan, and David Wise, "Insurance or Self-Insurance?: Variation,
Persistence, and Individual Health Accounts", in David Wise, ed., Inquiries in the Economics
ofAging, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1998.

Ellis, Randall P., 'The effect of prior-year health expenditures on health coverage pian choice,"
Advances in Health Economics and Health Services Research, Vol. 6, Richard M. Scheffler
and Louis F. Rossiter, eds. (Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, 1985), pp 127-47.

"Employee choice of health insurance." Review ofEconomics and Statistics, Vol.
71, No. 2 (May 1989). pp. 215-23.
_______________ "Creaming, Skimping and Dumping: Provider Competition on the Intensive and
Extensive Margins", Journal of Health Economics, Vol. 17 (5), October 1998, p 537-55.

Ellis, Randall P. and Andrew Van de Ven, "NEED FINAL TITLE" this volume.

Ellis, Randall P. and Thomas G. McGuire, "Hospital response to prospective payment: Moral
hazard, selection, and practice-style effects," Journal of Health Economics, Vol. 15 (1996),
pp. 257-77.

Eze, Pius and Barbara Wolfe. "Is dumping socially inefficient? An analysis of the effect of
Medicare's prospective payment system on the utilization of Veterans Affairs inpatient
services," Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 52 (1993), pp. 329-44.
Farley, Pamela J. and Alan C. Monheit. "Selectivity in the demand for health insurance and health
care," Advances in Health Economics and Health Services Research, Vol. 6, Richard M.
Scheffler and Louis F. Rossiter, eds. (Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, 1985), pp. 231-52.

Feder, Judith, Jack Hadley and Stephen Zuckerman, "How did Medicare's prospective payment
system affect hospitals?" New England Journal of Medicine, Vol. 317, No. 14 (October 1,
1987), pp. 867-73.
Feldman, Roger, Michael Finch, Bryan Dowd and Steven Cassou, "The demand for employmentbased health insurance plans," Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 24, No. 1 (Winter 1989),
pp. 117-42.

Feldman, Roger and Dowd, Bryan, "Must Adverse Selection Cause Premium Spirals", Journal of
Health Economics. 10 (October 1991), 350-357.
Feldman, Roger and Bryan Dowd, "The Effectiveness of Managed Competition in Reducing the
Costs of Health Insurance", in Robert B. Helms, ed., Health policy reform: Competition and
controls, Washington. D.C.: AEI Press, 1993, p 176-217.

Feldstein, Paul J., "General report," Report of the Commission on the Cost of Medical Care
(Chicago: American Medical Association, 1964), part 1.
Feldstein, Martin S., "The rising price of physicians' services," Review of Economics and Statistics,
Vol. 52, No.2 (May 1970), pp. 121-33.
________________ "Hospital cost inflation: A study of nonprofit price dynamics," American

Economic Review, Vol. 60 (1971), pp. 853-72.

Feldstein, Martin S. and Bernard Friedman, "Tax Subsidies, the Rational Demand for Insurance and
the Health Care Crisis," Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 7. No. 2 (April 1977), PP. 15578.

Fisher, Charles R., "Hospital and Medicare financial performance under PPS, 1985-90," Health
Care Financing Review, Vol. 14. No. 1 (Fall 1992), pp. 171-83.
Fitzgerald, John F., Patricia S. Moore and Robert S. Dittus, "The care of elderly patients with hip
fracture: Changes since implementation of the prospective payment system," New England
Journal of Medicine. Vol. 319, No. 21 (November 24, 1988), P. 1392-97.

Folland, Sherman and Robert Kleiman, "The effect of prospective payment under DRGs on the
market value of hospitals," Quarterly Review of Economics and Business, Vol. 30, No. 2
(Summer 1990), pp. 50-68.

Frank, Richard G. and Judith R. Lave, "The effect of benefit design on the length of stay of
Medicaid psychiatric patients," Journal of Human Resources, Vol.21, No. 3 (Summer 1986),

pp. 321-37.
________________

"A comparison of hospital responses to reimbursement policies for Medicaid

psychiatric patients," RAND Journal of Economics, Vol. 20, No. 4 (Winter 1989), pp. 588600.
Frank, Richard G., and Thomas McGuire, "Economic Functions of Carve-Outs", American Journal
of Managed Care, 4(SP), 1998, SP31-SP39.

Fuchs, Victor R. and Marcia J. Kramer, "Determinants of expenditures for physicians' services in
the United States, 1948-68," National Bureau of Economic Research Occasional Paper
Series, No. 117 (1972).

Gaumer, Gary L., Eugene L. Poggio, Craig G. Coelen, Cary S. Sennett and Robert J. Schmitz,
"Effects of state prospective reimbursement programs on hospital mortality," Medical Care,
Vol. 27, No. 7 (July 1989), pp. 724-36.
Gerety, M. B., V. Soderholm-Difatte and C. H. Winograd, "Impact of prospective payment and
discharge location on the outcome of hip fracture," Journal of General Internal Medicine,
Vol. 4, No. 5 (September-October 1989), pp. 388-91.
Glied, Sherry, "Managed Care", this volume.

Goldman, Fred and Michael Grossman, "The demand for pediatric care: An hedonic approach,"
Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 86, No. 2 (April 1978), pp. 259-80.

Griffith, Mary Jane, Nicholas Baloff and Edward L. Spitznagel, "Utilization patterns of health
maintenance organization disenrollees," Medical Care. Vol. 22, No. 9 (September 1984), pp.
827-34.

Guterman, Stuart and Allen Dobson, Impact of the Medicare prospective payment system for
hospitals," Health Care Financing Review, Vol. 7, No. 3 (Spring 1986), pp. 97-114.
Guterman, Stuart, Stuart H. Altman and Donald A. Young, "Hospitals' financial performance in the
first five years of PPS," Health Affairs, Vol.9, No. I (Spring 1990), pp. 125-134.

Hadley, Jack, Stephen Zuckerman and Judith Feder, "Profits and fiscal pressure in the prospective
payment system: Their impacts on hospitals," Inquiry, Vol. 26 (Fall 1989), pp. 354-65.
Hodgkin, Dominic and Thomas G. McGuire, "Payment levels and hospital response to prospective
payment," Journal of Health Economics, Vol. 13 (1994), pp. 1-29.

Jackson-Beeck, Marilyn and John H. Kleinman, "Evidence for self-selection among health
maintenance organization enrollees," Journal ofthe american MedicalAssociation, Vol. 250,
No. 20 (November 25. 1983), pp. 2826-29.

Juba, David A., Judith R. Lave and Jonathan Shaddy, "An analsyis of the choice of health benefits
plans," Inquiry, Vol. 17 (Spring 1980), pp. 62-71.

Kahn, Katherine L. et al. (series), "The effects of the DRG-based prospective payment system on

quality of care for hospitalized Medicare patients," Journal of the American Medical
Association, Vol. 264, No. 15 (October 17, 1990), pp. 1953-1994 (eight articles).
Kotowitz, Yehuda, "Moral Hazard", in the New Paigrave Dictionary of Economics, 1987.

Langwell, Katherine M. and James P. Hadley, "Evaluation of the Medicare competition
demonstrations," Health Care Financing Review, Vol. 11, No. 2 (Winter 1989), pp. 65-80.

Lave, Judith R., Richard G. Frank, Carl Taube, Howard Goldman and Agnes Rupp, "The early
effects of Medicare's prospective payment system on psychiatry," Inquiry, Vol. 25 (Fall
1988), pp. 354-63.
Long, Stephen H., Russell F. Settle and Charles W. Wrightson, "Employee premiums, availability
of alternative plans, and HMO disenrollment," Medical Care, Vol. 26, No. 10 (October
1988), pp. 927-3 8.
Luft, Harold S., Joan B. Trauner and Susan C. Maerki, "Adverse selection in a large, multiple-option

health benefits program: A case study of the California Public Employees' Retirement
System," Advances in Health Economics and Health Services Research, Vol. 6, Richard M.
Scheffler and Louis F. Rossiter, eds. (Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, 1985), pp. 197-229.

Ma, Ching-to Albert. and Thomas McGuire, "Optimal Health Insurance and Provider Payment",
American Economic Review, Vol. 87 (4), September, 1997, pp. 685-704.

Maibach, Ed., Katharine Dusenbury. Pamel Zupp, et al., "Marketing HMOs to Medicare
Beneficiaries: An Analysis of Four Medicare Markets", Menlo Park, CA: Kaiser Family
Foundation, 1998.
Manning, Willard G. and M. Susan Marquis, "Health insurance: The tradeoff between risk pooling
and moral hazard," Journal of Health Economics, Vol. 15, No. 5 (October 1996),pp. 609-39.

Marquis, M. Susan, Adverse selection with a multiple choice among health insurance plans: A
simulation analysis," Journal of Health Economics, Vol. 11, No. 2 (August 1992), pp. 12951.

Marquis, M. Susan and Charles E. Phelps, "Price elasticity and adverse selection in the demand for
supplemental health insurance.' Economic Inquiry, Vol. 25, No. 2 (April 1987), pp. 299-313.

McAvinchey, Ian D. and Andreas Yannopoulos, "Elasticity estimates from a dynamic model of
interrelated demands for private and public acute health care," Journal of Health Economics,
Vol. 12 (July 1993), pp. 171-86.
McGuire, Thomas G., "Price and membership in a prepaid group medical practice," Medical Care,
Vol. 19, No. 2 (February 1981), pp. 172-83.
Menke, Tern, "Impacts ofPPS on Medicare Part B expenditures and utilization for hospital episodes
of care," Inquiry, Vol. 27 (Summer 1990), pp. 114-26.

Merrill, Jeffrey, Catherine Jackson and James Reuter, "Factors that affect the HMO enrollment
decision: A tale of two cities," Inquiry, Vol. 22 (Winter 1985), pp. 388-95.

Miller, Robert H. and Harold S. Luft. Does Managed Care Lead to Better or Worse Quality of
Care?", Health Affairs. 16(5), September/October 1997, pp. 7-25.
Morrisey, Michael A., Frank A. Sloan and Joseph Valvona, "Medicare prospective payment and
posthospital transfers to subacute care," Medical Care, Vol. 26, No. 7 (July 1988), pp. 68598.

Newhouse, Joseph P., "Do unprofitable patients face access problems?" Health Care Financing
Review, Vol. 11, No. 2 (Winter 1989), pp. 33-42.
Newhouse, Joseph P., "Reimbursing Health Plans and Health Providers: Efficiency in Production
Versus Selection,' Journal ofEconomic Literature, XXXIV (September 1996), 1236-1263.
Newhouse, Joseph P. and the Insurance Experiment Group, Free for All? Lessons from the RAND
Health Insurance Experiment (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1993).

Newhouse, Joseph P. and Daniel J. Byrne, 'Did Medicare's prospective payment system cause
length of stay to fall?" Journal of Health Economics, Vol. 7(1988), pp. 413-16.

Newhouse, Joseph P. and Charles E. Phelps, "Price and income elasticities for medical care
services," The Economics of Health and Medical Care, ch. 9 (New York: John Wiley &
Sons, 1974), pp. 140-61.
_______________ 'New estimates of price and income elasticities of medical care services," The
Role of Health Insurance in the Health Services Sector, ch. 7 (New York: National Bureau
of Economic Research. 1976), pp. 261-313.

Nichols, Albert, and Richard Zeckhauser, "Targeting Transfers through Restrictions on Recipients"
American Economic Review, 72 (2), May 1982, p 3 72-77.

Palmer, R. M., R. M. Saywell. Jr.. I. W. Zollinger, B. K. Erner, A. D. LaBov, D. A. Freund, J. E.
Garber, G. W. Misamore and F. B. Throop, "The impact of the prospective payment system
on the treatment of hip fractures in the elderly,"Archives of Internal Medicine, Vol. 149, No.
10 (October 1989), pp. 2237-41.
Pauly, Mark, "The Economics of Moral Hazard: Comment", American Economic Review, 1968, 58:
53 1-53 6.

Pauly, Mark, "Overinsurance and Public Provision of Insurance: The Roles of Moral Hazard and
Adverse Selection", Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1974, 88: 44-54.

Pauly, Mark, "Taxation, Health Insurance and Market Failure", Journal of Economic Literature,
1986, 24 (6): 629-675.
Pauly, Mark, and Scott Ramsey. Would You Like Suspenders to Go With that Belt? An Analysis
of Optimal Combinations of Cost Sharing and Managed Care", mimeo, 1998.

Pauly, Mark, Howard Kunreuther, and Richard Hirth, "Guaranteed Renewability in Insurance",
Journal of Risk & Uncertainly. Vol. 10 (2), March 1995, pp. 143-56.
Phelps, Charles E., "The demand for health insurance: A theoretical and empirical investigation,"
RAND Research Paper Series, No. R-1054-OEO (July 1973).
Phelps, Charles E. and Joseph P. Newhouse, "Effect of coinsurance: A multivariate analysis," Social
Security Bulletin (June 1972), pp. 20-28.

on coinsurance on demand for physician services," RAND Research
Paper Series, No. R-976-OEO (June 1972).

_________________ "Effects

_______________ "Coinsurance, the price of time, and the demand for medical services," Review

of Economics and Statisiics, Vol. 56, No. 3 (August 1974), pp. 334-42.

Plato, The Republic.

Price, James R. and James \V. Mays, "Biased selection in the Federal Employees Health Benefits
Program," Inquiry. Vol. 22 (Spring 1985), pp. 67-77.
Ramsey, Scott D. and Mark Pauly, "Structural Incentives and Adoption of Medical Technologies in
HMO and Fee-for-Service Health Insurance Plans", Inquiry, 34 (3), Fall 1997, p 228-36.

Ray, W. A., M. R. Griffin and D. K. Baugh, "Mortality following hip fracture before and after
implementation of the prospective payment system," Archives of Internal Medicine, Vol.
150, No. 10 (October 1990), pp. 2 109-14.

Rodgers, Jack and Karen E. Smith, "Is there biased selection in Medicare HMOs?" Health Policy
Economics Group Report (Washington, DC: Price Waterhouse LLP, May 16, 1996).
Roos, NP, E. Shapiro, and R. Tate, "Does a small minority of elderly account for a majority of health
care expenditures? A sixteen-year perspective" Milbank Quarterly, 1989 67(3-4):347-69.

Rosenthal, Gerald, "Price elasticity of demand for short-term general hospital services," Empirical
Studies in Health Economics, Herbert E. Klarman, ed., (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins
Press, 1970), pp. 101-117.
Rosett, Richard N. and Lien-fu Huang, "The effect of health insurance on the demand for medical
care," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 81 (MarchlApril 1973), pp. 28 1-305.

Rothschild, Michael, and Joseph E. Stiglitz. "Equilibrium in Competitive Insurance Markets: An
Essay on the Economics of Imperfect Information", Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1976,
90: 629-650.

Russell, Louise B. and Carrie Lynn Manning, "The effect of prospective payment on Medicare
expenditures," Nei England Jo urnal of Medicine, Vol. 320, No. 7 (1989), pp. 439-44.
Sager, Mark A., Douglas V. Easterling, David A Kindig and Odin W. Anderson, "Changes in the
location of death after passage of Medicare's prospective payment system," New England
Journal of Medicine, Vol. 320, No. 7 (1989), pp. 433-39.
Scitovsky, Anne A. and Nelda McCall, "Coinsurance and the demand for physician services: Four
years later," Social Security Bulletin (May 1977), pp. 19-27.

Scitovsky, Anne A., Nelda McCall and Lee Benham, "Factors affecting the choice between two
prepaid plans." \Iedical Care. Vol. 16, No. 8 (August 1978), pp. 660-675.
Scitovsky, Anne A. and Nelda M. Snyder, "Effect of coinsurance on use of physician services,"
Social Security Bulletin (June 1972), pp. 3-19.

Shaw, George Bernard. The Dociois Dilemma, 1911.
Sheingold, Steven H.. The first three years of PPS: Impact on Medicare costs," Health Affairs, Vol.
8, No. 3 (Fall 1989), p. 191-204.

Sheingold, Steven H. and Thomas Buchberger, "Implications of Medicare's prospective payment
system for the provision of uncompensated hospital care," Inquiry, Vol. 23 (Winter 1986),
pp. 371-81.
Sloan, Frank A., Michael A. Morrisev and Joseph Valvona, "Medicare prospective payment and the
use of medical technologies in hospitals," Medical Care, Vol. 26, No, 9 (September 1988),
pp. 837-50.

Smith, Adam, The Wealth of Nations, 1776.

Spence, Michael, and Richard Zeckhauser. "Insurance, Information, and Individual Action",
American Economic Revew, Papers and Proceedings, 1971, 61(2): 380-387.
Staiger, Douglas and Gary L. Gaumer, "Price regulation and patient mortality in hospitals," mimeo
(August 1995).

van de Ven, Wyn, and P. M. M. and Rene C. J. A. van Vliet, "Consumer surplus and adverse
selection in competitive health insurance markets: An empirical study," Journal of Health
Economics, Vol. 14, No. 2 (June 1995), pp. 149-69.
Welch, W. Pete, "Restructuring the Federal Employees Health Benefits Program: The private sector
option," Inquiry, Vol. 26 (Fall 1989), pp. 321-34.

Weissman, Joel, and Arnold Epstein, Falling Through the Safety Net: Insurance and Access to
Medical Care. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1994.
Wholey, Douglas, Roger Feldman, and Jon B. Christianson, "The Effect of Market Structure on
HMO Premiums", Journal of Health Economics, 14 (1), May 1995, pp. 8 1-105.
Wilike, Richard J, William S. Custer, James W. Moser and Robert A. Musacchio, "Collaborative
production and resource allocation: The consequences of prospective payment for hospital
care," Quarterly Review of Economics and Business, Vol. 31, No. 1 (Spring 1991), pp. 2847.

Wilson, Charles, "The Nature of Equilibrium in Markets with Adverse Selection", The Bell Journal
of Economics. 11(1), Spring 1980. pp. 108-30.

Wrightson, William. James Genuardi and Sharman Stephens, "Demographic and utilization
characteristics of HMO disenrollees," GHAA Journal (Summer 1987), pp. 23-42.

Zeckhauser, Richard, "Medical Insurance: A Case Study of the Tradeoff Between Risk Spreading
and Appropriate Incentives", Journal of Economic Theory, 1970, 2: 10-26.

Zeckhauser, Richard, "Risk Spreading and Distribution," in Harold M. Hochman and George E.
Peterson, eds., Redistribution Through Public Choice, New York: Columbia University
Press, 1974, 206-28.
Zweifel, Peter, and Willard G. Manning, "Consumer Incentives in Health Care", this volume.

</ref_section>

Appendix
This appendix shows the classic treatment of equilibrium with adverse selection and two
individuals, from Rothschild and Stiglitz (1976).
For simplicity, assume that spending when sick, m, is the same for HIGH and LOW, i.e. *
there is no moral hazard. HIGH is more likely to be sick. Figure A( 1) shows the indifference curves
for these two people. LOW's indifference curve is stepper than HIGH's, since LOW is not willing
to give up as much money when healthy to get a dollar when sick. With no moral hazard, both LOW
and HIGH would optimally want full insurance, if charged their fair price for it. Points A and B
represent their respective efficient levels of insurance when purchased at fair actuarial rates.
Figure A(2) shows the potential pooling equilibrium. The fair odds line that is shown is the
average premium for the two together. At point C, both LOW and HIGH purchase full insurance
at this price. But this equilibrium cannot prevail. If an insurer entered the market offering policy
D, which has incomplete coverage but a lower premium, he would attract LOW but not HIGH.
LOW prefers the policy because he gets the cost savings from not pooling with HIGH, which more
than makes up for his loss of full insurance. This is parallel to what happens with the introduction
of the basic plan in our numerical analysis, which breaks the pooling equilibrium at moderate.

Figure A(3) shows the equilibrium with plan manipulation. HIGH receives full insurance
(point A). To separate himself out and thereby reduce his payments, LOW insures incompletely, at
point G. Ppoint G makes HIGH just indifferent between staying in the full insurance plan and
enrolling in the less generous, but less expensive, policy. Though optimality requires that both
groups insure fully, only HIGH does so.
Figure A(4) shows how the separating equilibrium may be broken. We show two fair odds
line for the average of HIGH and LOW -- one where costs for the two are far apart and one where
they are closer together (for simplicity, we show only one indifference curve for HIGH). In the case
where HIGH and low have very different costs, the pooled fair odds line will not attract LOW; they
do not want to pay the additional amount for more generous coverage because doing so necessitate
pooling with HIGH. If the costs are closer together, in contrast, the average fair odds line for the two
as a whole will be close to the fair odds line for LOW. Relative to points A and G, there may be a
point such as H that will be preferred by LOW to the separating equilibrium. It will also be preferred

by HIGH, who benefits from pooling with the healthier group in the population. It will thus
undermine the separating equilibrium. With no stable pooling equilibrium and no stable separating
equilibrium, the market will not reach an equilibrium.

Table 1: Sources of Health Insurance Coverage for the United States Population
Share of total
population

Share of total
payments

Elderly; disabled; end-stage
renal disease

13%

22%

Medicaid

Elderly; blind and disabled;
poor women and children

10

15

Other*

Military personnel and their
dependents

1

8

Source

Public
Medicare

Private
Employer sponsored
Nongroup

Uninsured
*

Groups insured

Workers and dependents

56

Families

6

16

53

2

Other public spending includes non-insurance costs such as public hospitals, the Veterans

Administration, etc.
Source: Authors' calculations based on data from Department of Health and Human Services,
National Health Accounts (medical spending), and from Employee Benefit Research Institute
(insurance coverage). ____________________________
--_____________

Table 2: Distribution of Medical Spending,
1987

Share of Distribution

Cumulative
Share of
Spending

lop 1 percent

30%

Top 5 percent

58

lop 10 percent

72

Top 50 percent

98

Total population

100

Source: Berk and Monheit (1992).

time-series regression

univariate estimates
for short-term care
categories

aggregated physician
service data
68 of 218 general,
short-term hospitals
all hospitals,
aggregated by state

aggregated hospital
outpatient care;
48 states' not-forprofit hospitals

BLS survey; NCHS
1963-64 survey;
physician interviews
1962 sample of New
England hospitals
AHA survey of
hospitals, 1958-1967,
NCI-IS 1963-64
survey
1970 guide issue of
"Hospitals"

1966 Internal
Revenue Service
tabulations

Feldstein, M.S. (1970)

Rosenthal (1970)

Feldstein, M.S. (1971)

Davis and Russell (1972)

Fuchs and Kramer (1972)

Phelps and Newhouse(1972) Palo Alto Group
Health Plan, 1966-68

-0.10 to -0.36

TSLS: IV's are
number of medical
schools, ratio of
premiums to benefits,
and union members
per 100 population
natural experiment:
introduction of
coinsurance

physician services,
aggregated into 33
states

physician and
outpatient ancillary
services

-0.118 Tobit
(physician
visits)

0.l4* OLS,

-0.32

bed days

-0.49 for total

0.19 to -0.70

1.67
(physician
services)

(physician
visits)

-0.19

Elasticity

Total Price

cross-sectional
estimates

time-series regression

cross-section
estimates of
physician visits

general care

Feldstein, P.J. (1964)

1953, 1958 Health
Information
Foundation and
NORC surveys

Paper

Estimation Method

[)ata

Restrictions

Table 3: Estimates of the Elasticity of Demand for Medical Care

-0.63 for visits
to hospital

Visits Price
Elasticity

Quality Price
Elasticity

verified data from

Phelps (1973)

coinsurance

services

1963 CHAS survey

Newhouse and Phelps (1974)

1963 CHAS survey

1971 NORC!CHAS
health survey

pediatric care

estimates

cross-sectional

insignificant)

(TSLS estimates

cross-sectional OLS

Colic and Grossman (1978)

employeds and
non-employeds

arc elasticities across
coinsurance ranges

natural experiment:
coinsurance increases

in previous work)

(larger sample than

prescriptions

care, and

general care, dental

cross-sectional OLS
(TSLS estimates
insignificant)

natural experiment;
introduction of
copayments

cross-sectional Tobit
estimates

Scitovsky and McCall (1977) Palo Alto Group
physician, outpatient
Health Plan, 1968-72 ancillary services

Newhouse and Phelps (1976)

Phelps and Newhouse(1974) insurance plans in
US, Canada, and UK

physicians' services

random sample of
poor population of
Saskatchewan

Beck (1974)

employeds' hospital
stays within coverage

hospitalization and
physicians' services

1960 Survey of
Consumer
Expenditure

estimates

cross-sectional Tobit

introductionof

hospitalization and
physicians' services

natural experiment:

Estimation Method

physicianand
outpatientancillary

Restrictions

Rosett and Huang (1973)

(University of
Chicago) survey

CHAS

Palo Alto Group
Health Plan, 1966-68

Scitovsky and Snyder (1972)

1963

Data

Paper

Table 3 (continued)

-0.039

(physician
visits)

(ancillary)
-0.11

0.29*

2.56*

-0.24
(hospital),
-0.42
(physician)

-0.10

of stay)

-0.10 (length

0.065*

-0.35 to -1.5

zero

-0.06
(physician
visits)

(physician
visits)

(ancillary)
not
significantly
differentfrom

0.l4*

Visits Price
Elasticity

0.060*

Elasticity

Total Price

Quality Price
Elasticity

employees aged 25 to

1990-92 insurance
claims from
employees and

Eichner (1998)

SUMMARY

-0.32

one- and two-stage
Tobit regressions of
out-of-pocket costs

non-Medicare HMO
patients

Group Health
Cooperativeof Puget
Sound

Cherkin et al. (1989)

dependentsof a
Fortune 500 firm

0.035* (all

natural experiment:
introduction of
copayments

outpatient visits

55

Cox proportional
hazards model

experiment

randomized

-0.20

visits), 0.15*
to 0.075*
(preventive)

-0.22

-0.17 to -0.31
(hospital),
-0.17 to -0.22
(outpatient)

1990 Japanese
Ministryof Health
and Welfare survey

general care

Bhattacharya et al. (1996)

-1.2

RAND Health
Insurance
Experiment

intertemporal model

Newhouse et al. (1993)

dynamic

acute hospital care

waiting lists from
UK's National Health
Service

McAvinchey and
Yannopoulos (1993)

hedonic model

pediatric care

Total Price
Elasticity

1965-66
Mmdl in-Densen
longitudinal study

Estimation Method

Restrictions

Goldman and Grossman
(1978)

Paper

Data

Table 3 (continued)

-0.088
(compensated
-0.085)

-0.060

-0.05 to -0.15

(compensated
-0.032)

Quality Price
Elasticity

Visits Price
Elasticity

Table 4: Risk-Sharing Features of Indemnity Insurance
Policies, 1991
Characteristic

Average!
Percent

Deductible
Individual

$205

Family

$475

Coinsurance rate
<20 percent

13%

20 percent

78%

>20 percent

4

Stop Loss

$500

21%

$501-$1,000

30%

S1,001-$2,000

32%

>$2,000

17%

Maximum Lifetime Benefit - Individual

$250,000

9%

$250,001-$999.999

6%

$1,000,000

85%

Source: HIAA Employer Survey, 1991.
Remaining responses are "rate varies" and "other".

Table 5: Estimates of the Optimal Insurance Policy

Author

Optimal Policy

Feldstein and Friedman (1977)
van de Ven and van Praag (1981)
Buchanan, Keeler, et al. (1991)
Newhouse et al. (1993)*

$200 to $300 deductible;
25 percent cost sharing;
$1,000 stop loss (assumed)

Marquis and Holmer (1996)
Manning and Marquis (1996)

25 percent coinsurance;
>$25,000 stop loss

Blomqvist (1997)**

Cost sharing declines from 27% at
roughly $1,000 of spending to 5%
above roughly $30,000

* Amounts are in 1983 dollars.
** Amounts are based on the Rand Health Insurance Experiment data.

Table 6: Key Characteristics of Insurance Policies
Managed Care
IPA/Network
HMO

Group/Staff
HMO

Almost all
(Network)

Network

Network

Patient

Patient

Gatekeeper
(in network)

Gatekeeper
(in network)

Fee-for-service

Discounted
FFS

Capitation

Salary

Moderate

Low in
network;
High out of
network

Low in
network;
High out of
network

Low in network;
High/all out of
network

Pay bills

Pay bills;
Form network

Pay bills;
Form network;

Provide care

Dimension

Indemnity
Insurance

Qualified Providers

Almost all

Choice of Providers

Payment of Providers

Cost Sharing

Roles of insurer

PPO

Monitor
utilization

Limits on utilization

Demand-side

Supply-side
(price)

Supply-side
(price, quantity)

Supply-side
(price, quantity)

1981

Frank and Lave
(1986)

NIMH

1981 PPS cost

Sheingold and
Buchberger
(1986)

(1987)

1982 and 1984 AHA
surveys

Feder, Hadley,
and Zuckerman

facilities

1982-85 patient
records from
non-random sample
of 10 Georgia
long-term care

Carroll and
Erwin (1987)

reports

HCFA in-house
statistics

Guterman and
Dobson (1986)

discharge data and
Al-IA surveys

Data

Paper

LOS dropped 13%
from 1981-84 vs.
4% in previousfour
years combined

comparison of
means and other
descriptivestatistics

means

comparison

comparison
means

of

of

provision of free
care by hospitals
under PPS rules

simulation of

LOS for psychiatric
patents fell 0.3 days
more in states with
PPS in Medicaid

Length of Stay /
Other inputs

hospitalsunder
TEFRA

compared to no
change for

hospitalsunder
PPS rose 2.9%,

total margins for

Profits

of Prospective Payment on:

OLS regression

Methods

Admissions /
Transfers

Effects

Table 7: Prospective Payment and Medical Treatments

of Care

patients dying within 30
days of entering
long-term care facility
dropped from 14.7% to
8.3% under PPS

each 1% decrease in
financial margin leads to
0.3-0.5% less free care
provision

Quality

Morrisey,
Sloan and
Valvona
(1988)

Goldman, and
Rupp (1988)

Lave, Frank,
Taube,

Dittus (1988)

Moore, and

1980, 1983-85
sample of 501
CFHA hospitals

1984 Medicare
PATBILL file,
1984 NIMH
psychiatric
discharges, HCFA,
Al-IA, CHPS
multinomial logit
and OLS for
post-hospital care
selection

comparison of
means

probability of
transfer
increases
significantly
after PPS

12.6;

LOS dropped
from 21.9 to

Fitzgerald.

of

comparisons
means

Elderly patients
admitted for new hip
fracture at large,
mid-western
community hospital,

DesHamais,
Chesney, and
Fleming (1988)

Discharges
dropped 3%
from 1980-85

1980-85 Professional
Activities Study of
CPHA hospitals

Fitzgerald et al.
(1987)

Admissions /
Transfers

of

comparison
means

patientswith hip
fracturesadmitted to
a municipal hospital
from 1981-85

Author(s)

Methods

Data

Effects

LOS decreased in
almost all major
DRGs after
advent of PPS

LOS for
psychiatric
patients at PPS
hospitals fell 23%
under PPS;
charges fell 20%
under PPS

percent discharged to
nursing home rose from
38 to 60; percent in
nursing home at one year
rose from 9 to 33 percent

effect on quality of care

rio significant adverse

from 1980-85

LOS dropped 20%

of Care

percent in nursing home
at six months after
discharge rose from 13
percent to 39 percent

Quality

LOS fell from 16.6
to 10.3 days

Profits

of Prospective Payment on:

Length of Stay /
Other inputs

Table 7 (continued)

1981, 1984-85

Newhouse and
Byrne (1988)

poorer discharge
ambulation; no effect
on nursing home
residence at 1 year

comparison of
means

comparison of
means

1974-83 AHA
surveys and
standardized
mortality rates

of
with
patients
hip

Gaumer,
Poggio,
Coelen,
Sennett, and
Schmitz (1989)

Gerety et al.
(1989)

fracture before and
after prospective
payment

Chart review

mortality rates 1% to
2% higher than
predicted for urgent
care patients in PPS
states

hazard model

days

LOS fell by 1.4

LOS fell 17%
with per case
payment for
psychiatric
patients

states than nonPPS states from
1980-83

1981-84 National
Hospital Discharge
Survey

Quality

Frank and
Lave (1989)

ICU/CCU days
rose less in PPS

comparison of
means

Profits

1980, 1983-85
sample of 501
CFHA hospitals

LOS rose at longterm hospitals
(not on PPS)
relative to shortterm hospitals (on
PPS)

comparison of
means

Methods

Length of Stay /
Other Inputs

Effects of Prospective Payment on:

Sloan,
Morrisey, and
Valvona
(1988)

20% sample of
Medicare claims
from non-waiver
states

Data

Author(s)

Admissions /
Transfers

Table 7 (continued)

1983-84 5%
random sample of
PPS hospital bills

patients with hip

Newhouse
(1989)

Palmer et al.
(1989)

198 1-85
age-specific
national mortality

Sager,
Easterling,
Kindig, and
Anderson
(1989)

data

annual reports of
trustees of federal
Hospital Insurance
Trust Fund

Russell and
Manning
(1989)

suburban,
teachinghospital
from 1981-87

fracturesadmitted
to a private,

1983-85 AHA
surveys

Hadley,
Zuckerman,
and Feder
(1989)

of

--

comparison of
means

PPS

cost projections
before and after

comparison

means; OLS
regression

of

comparison of
means

Data

Author(s)

comparison

Methods

/

days

LOS fell from
17.0 to 12.9

unprofitable
DRGs move to
city! county
hospitals

1/4 of cases in

Admissions
Transfers
LOS fell by
10.3% under PPS

projections

comparedto

Medicare costs
for 1990
reduced by $18
billion

Profits

deaths in nursing
homes rose by 2.6% in
PPS states; no change
in non-PPS states

home residence or
ambulation at 6 months

No effect on nursing

Quality of Care

Effects of Prospective Payment on:
Length of Stay /
Other Inputs

Table 7 (continued)

seemingly
unrelated
regressions of
excess returns
comparison of
means

1980-85 stock
market returns

1983-86 AHA and
Healthcare
Financial
Management
Association

surveys

Folland and
Kleiman
(1990)

Guterman,
Altman, and
Young (1990)

_____---

and
Schumacher
(1990)

Wroblewski,

means

comparison of

1980-87
Professional
Activities Study of
CPHA hospitals

Sheingold
(1989)

DesHarnais,

comparison of
means

1983-87 Medicare

Author(s)

Cost Reports

Methods

Data

/

psychiatric
patients fell
under PPS

admissionsof

Discharges
dropped 6% in
1983 and 1984

Admissions
Transfers

fastest falling
PPS margins

highest but

hospitals have

teaching

management
firms after PPS

no significant
excess returns
to hospital

PPS margins
fell from
14.7% to 7.9%
between 1983
and 1985

Profits

Quality of Care

Effects of Prospective Paym ent on:
Length of Stay /
Other Inputs

Table 7 (continued)

Medicare enrollees
with hip fracture in
Michigan

1984, 1988
MassachuseUs
inpatient data

Ray, Griffin,
and Baugh
(1990)

Cutler (1991)

OLS regression

OLS regression

1983-86 Medicare
Parts A and B

Menke (1990)

claims data

patients were
1%to 1.6%

comparison of
means

1981-82 and
1985-86 Medicare
records from 297
for patients with
six conditions

Kahn et al.
(1990) [series
of articles
using the same
data in a
single-volume
series]
sicker at
admission

Transfers

Methods

Author(s)

Data

Admissions/

LOS and inpatient
procedures fell
under PPS

LOS fell by 4.4
days

LOS for stroke
patients fell by 2.4
days

/
Profits

Mortality at
unchanged

1

year was

no significant effects
on quality:
- patients admitted
from home, not
discharged home fell
4%;
- likelihood of
instability at dis-charge
rose 22%;
- patients receiving
poor care fell 13%;
in-hospital mortality
fell 3%;
- 30-day mortality rose
1.6%

Quality of Care

Effects of Prospective Payment on:
Length of Stay
Other Inputs

Table 7 (continued)

Hodgkin and
McGuire
(1994)

Eze and Wolfe
(1993)

1983-90 ProPAC
Medicare extracts

Files, Medicare
discharge data

Patient Treatment

1982-86 Dept. of
Veterans Affairs

admissions fell

comparison of
means

1983-90

11% from

discharges to
VA hospitals
rose, by
135.6% for
serious cases

ANOVA

1985-90 Medicare comparison of
Cost Reports, AHA means
employee data

comparison of
means

1983-87 AMA
Socioeconomic
Monitoring System
telephone surveys

WilIke, Custer,
Moser and
Musacchio
(1991)

Fisher (1992)

Methods

Data

Author(s)

Admissions /
Transfers

LOS for Medicare
fell and then rose
from 1984-89 to
levels consistent
with other payers

from 1983-87;
doctors' practice
hours per week
rose 2.0 hours per
week

LOS dropped
from 0.6 days

Hospital
margins
projected to
drop from
14.5% to
- 10.2% under
PPS

hospitals with
Medicare
profits dropped
from 84.5% to
40.7% from
1985-1990

Profits

Quality of Care

Effects of Prospective Payment on:
Length of Stay /
Other Inputs

Table 7 (continued)

Cutler (1995)

SUMMARY

Ellis and
McGu ire
(1996)

Staiger and
Gaumer (1995)

1981-88 New

Author(s)

Medicaid Services
psychiatric
discharges

Hampshire

1988-92 New

random sample of
AHA hospital file,
Medicare
MEDPAR
discharge data

1984-8725%

records

Security death

198 1-89 Social

admissions,

England Medicare

Data

of

data

simultaneous
equations
treatment of panel

mortality

model

beta-logistic

hazard models for
readmission and
mortality

Methods

/

fall; Moderate
dumping from
PPS to
non-PPS
hospitals

Admissions

Admissions
Transfers
Profits

LOS falls
Initially higher
Medicare
significantly;
other inputs fall as profit margins
well.
reduced over
time

LOS for
psychiatric
patients fell 25%
under PPS

Length of Stay /

Effects on quality
ambiguous for average
patient, adverse for
marginal patient; lower
in-hospital mortality

reduced payments
compress mortality into
period just after
discharge

compression of
mortality into
immediate postadmission period

Quality of Care

Effects of Prospective Payment on:

Other Inputs

Table 7 (continued)

Table 8: Benefits and Costs for HIGH and LOW Risk Individuals
Generous Plan

Moderate Plan

Basic Plan

Benefits

Costs

Benefits

Costs

Benefits

Costs

HIGH risk

$33

$16

$20

$4

$14.00

$2.80

LOWrisk

6

4

5

3.50

70

Data

Empirical Methods

Kleinman (1983)

Jackson-Beeck and

McGuire (1981)

Juba, Lave, and
Shaddy (1980)

1978-81

11

employeegroups from
Minneapolis-St.Paul Blue
Cross and Blue Shield,

employees' health plan
enrollment statistics
(random sample)

Yale University

health insurance
enrollment and survey,
1976

Carnegie-Mellon
University employees'

1974-76

Group Health Cooperative
(GUC) of Puget Sound's
Medicare Risk Contract,

reimbursements per person are 2.11 times
higher outside GHC

Length of stay 25 percent higher for
non-GHC patients; inpatient

children

fee-for-service patients are older and
more likely to be single or without

expected costs are reduced

poor health and high expected use of
medical services is positively correlated
with enrollment in prepaid plans;

Highlights of Results

HMO joiners averaged 53 percent fewer
inpatient days beforejoiningthan those
who chose to stay in FFS

of costs and

enrollees and
non-enrollees in period
before HMO availability

utilization for HMO

comparison

women are less likely to join the prepaid
health plan than men, but no significant
effect is associated with age

logistic regression of
health plan choice given
some plan is chosen

maximum likelihood logit lower family self-reportedhealth status
estimates of determinants results in significantly less chance of
of plan choice
selecting HMO enrollment

comparison of usage
statistics with control
sample from Medicare 20
Percent (Part A) and 5
Percent (Part B) Research
Discharge Files

StanfordUniversity
least-squares regression
and
of plan choice (note
enrollment
employees'
data
survey
dependent variable is
binary)

Scitovsky, McCall
and Benham (1978)

Eggers (1980)

East

Bice (1975)

tests of means of health
Baltimore public
residents
housing
(random status variables by
Medicaid enrollment
sample)

SelectionBetween Managed Care and IndemnityPlans

Paper

'Fable 9: Evidence on Adverse Selection in Health Insurance

adverse

adverse

adverse

adverse

adverse

favorable

Selection

state employees'

summary of 1992
Mathematica Policy
Research study of
Medicare enrollees
claims and enrollment data
from the Massachusetts
Group Insurance
Commission (GIC)

Rodgers and Smith

Altman, Cutler and

SUMMARY

Zeckhauser(1998)

(1996)

Medicare spending for
enrollees who stayed in
traditionalsystem versus
those who moved into
managed care

of Results

ambiguous

ambiguous

Selection

HMO patients are 5.7 percent costlier

enrollees who switchto managedcare
had 10 percent lowerspendingthan
enrolleeswho stayed in traditional
system.

adverse

adverse

favorable

adverse

non-enrollees' reimbursements are 44
adverse
percent higherthan enrolleesin two years
before capitation; disenrollees have
worse past health

conditions in their family units

HMO joiners are younger,more often
male, less likely to use psychiatric
services, but have more chronic

high usage rates at managed care plan's
initiation eventually fall to lower
steady-state levels

Highlights

adverse selectionaccounts for
age- and sex-adjusted
analysis of costs among
approximately 2 percent ofdifferences
individuals with different between indemnity and HMO plan costs
plan choice histories

measure cost differences
between elderly
customers covered by
standard Medicare FFS
and capitated HMO care

Comparison of spending
in the two years prior to
HMO enrollment

non-enrollees using
two-tailed tests of means;
comparison of enrol lees
and disenrollees using
surveys

of HMO

CapitationDemonstrations enrollees and

comparison

1980-81 Medicare

Brown et al. (1993)

of

tests of means in plan
populations and logit
regression of health plan
choice

Langwell and Hadley

enrollment and utilization
data from Salt Lake City
and Tallahassee

(1989)

Merrill, Jacksonand
Reuter (1985)

nonlinear regression
frequency of visits

physician visits in the

Griffith, Baloff, and
Spitznagel (1984)
Medical Care Group of St.
Louis

Empirical Methods

Data

Paper

Table 9 (continued)

Data
Empirical Methods

1980 random sample of
claims and eligibility data
for dental health insurance
by Pennsylvania Blue
Shield
1982-83 employeehealth
plan enrollment and
expense records of a large
firm

Ellis (1985)

ofHigh-OptionPlan within Type ofPlan

Conrad,
Grembowksi, and
Milgrom (1985)

Selection

SUMMARY

logit estimates
plan choice

of health

2SLS and 3SLS
estimation of demand
models for premiums and
total expenditures

of

National Medical
ExpenditureSurvey

Cardon and Hendel
Tobit-style model
insurance choice

probit estimation for
chance of insuree
disenrolling from each of
three HMOs

enrollment patternsof
subscribers to three
Minneapolis-St. Paul
HMOs

Long, Settle, and
Wrightson (1988)

(1996)

comparison of costs and
disenrollment rates for
insurees

disenrollees from seven
plans offering different
types of managed care

Wrightson,
Genuardi, and
Stephens (1987)

insurance purchases

OLS and 2SLS

estimationof health

1977 National Medical

Care ExpenditureSurvey

ofReenroilmentversus Disenroilment/ Uninsurance

Farley and Monheit
(1985)

Selection

Paper

age and worse previousyears health
expenses are associated with choice of
more generoushealth coverage for the
next year

corresponds to higher valuation of
insurance; experience rating does not
always lower premiums

worse self-perceiveddental health

individuals who are younger, male, or in
"excellent" self-reported health are
significantly less likely to become
insured

likelihood of disenrollment rises
significantly with increases in relative
premium of own plan

disenrollees have lower inpatient costs
and occupy less risky demographic
groups than continuing enrollees

insignificant impact on health insurance
purchases

ambulatorycare expenditures have an

Highlightsof Results

Table 9 (continued)

adverse

adverse

adverse

adverse

adverse

adverse

ambiguous

Selection

claims and enrollment data analysis of different
from a large financial
plans' member
services firm
characteristics and
expenses

survey of employee health
insurance programs at 7

Ellis (1989)

Feldman, Finch,
Dowd and Cassou
(1989)

Welch (1989)
Towers, Perrin, Forster,
and Crosby Inc. study of
Federal Employees Health
Benefits program

Minneapolis firms

adverse

high-option premium is 79 percent higher adverse

than low option

comparison of premiums
between high and low
option Blue Cross plans
for governmentworkers

selection

age varies positively with selection of a
(relatively generous) IPA or FFS
single-coverage health plan

adverse

adverse
employees in high option plan are 1.8
years older, 20.1 percent more likely to
be female, and have 8.6 times the costs of
the default plan.

families in highest expenditure quartile
were 42 percent more likely to obtain
supplementary insurancethan those in
lowest quartile

nested logit for plan

insurance

probit estimation for
take-up of supplementary

(1987)

Rand Health Insurance
Experiment

Marquis and Phelps

high option Blue Cross plan undergoes a
premium spiral with enrollment cut in
half over only three years

adverse

comparison of costs and
premiums across plan
choices

Federal Employees Health

Benefits Program
proprietarydata

Price and Mays
(1985)

patient risk in high option indemnity and adverse
fee-for-service plans increases faster than
risk in managed care

California state employees' comparisonsof risk
enrollment and utilization indices across plans and
data
years

Luft, Trauner and
Maerkis (1985)

adverse

fee-for-service patients are older and
more likely have serious medical
conditions or relatives with such
conditions

(1985)

tests of means of

Selection

Minneapolis-St. Paul firms characteristics of health
plan populations

survey data from 20

Dowd and Feldman

of Results

Highlights

Empirical Methods

Data

Paper

Table 9 (continued)

comparison of plan
choices with age/sex
adjustments under
various group-rating

plan selectionof families
in Rand Health Insurance
Experiment

SUMMARY

claims and enrollment data
from Harvard University
and the Massachusetts
Group Insurance
Commission (GIC)

claims and enrollment data calculation of welfare
from Harvard University
loss and simulation of
long-run effects of
changes in health plan

Cutler and Reber
(1998)

Cutler and
Zeckhauser (1998)

historical analysis of
enrollment changes and
premium increases

University of California
Health Benefits Program
enrollment figures

Buchmueller and
Feldstein (1997)

analysis of different
plans' member
characteristics and
expenses

prices

regression of risk factors
on prediction error of
difference in costs
between members of
high- and low-cost plans.

survey and claims data
from 20,000 families
insured by largest Dutch
insurer, Zilveren Kreis

regimes

Empirical Methods

Data

Van de Ven and Van
Vliet (1995)

Marquis (1992)

Paper

of Results

adverse

adverse

adverse

Selection

adverse

adverse
employeesin GIC's FFS plan spend 28
percent more, are older, and have
significantly more births and heart attacks
than HMO members

adverse selection creates a welfare loss
adverse
to
2
of
baseline
health
equal
percent
spending; price responses in long run are
triple those in short-run

two high-option plans suffered fatal
premium spirals in a six-year period; a
third was transformed from FFS into
POS to preventa spiral

age- and sex-composition of plans
explain 40 percent of error in predicted
cost differential between plans

73 percent more individuals in high risk
quartile choose most generous plan than
those in low risk quartile, even with
age/sex/experience rating

Highlights

Table 9 (continued)

Table 10: Five Central Lessons About Health Insurance
Lesson 1: Risk
Spreading versus
Incentives

Health insurance involves a fundamental tradeoff between risk
spreading and appropriate incentives. Increasing the generosity of
insurance spreads risk more broadly but also leads to increased losses
because individuals choose more care (moral hazard) and providers
supply more care (çrincipal-agent problems).

Lesson 2: Integration Medical care is unlike other insurance markets in that insurers are
of Insurance and
often involved in the provision of the good in addition to insuring its
Provision
cost. The integration of insurance and provision, intended to align
incentives, has increased over time. Managed care, where the
functions are united, is an extreme version. Under it, doctors have
dual loyalties, to the insurer as well as the patient.
Lesson 3:
Competition and
Consumer Identity

When consumer identity affects costs, competition is a mixed
blessing. Allowing individuals to choose among competing health
insurance plans can allocate people to appropriate plans and provide
incentives for efficient provision. But it can also bring with it adverse
selection -- the tendency of the sick to prefer the most generous plans.
Adverse selection induces people to enroll in less generous plan, so
they can be in a healthier pool, and gives plans incentives to distort
their offerings to be less generous on care for the sick.

Lesson 4:

More information about individual risk levels allows for more
efficient pricing of risk, but portends a welfare loss from incomplete
insurance contracts.

Information and
Long-term Insurance

Lesson 5: Health
The primary purpose of health insurance and delivery is to improve
Insurance and Health health. Unfortunately, conclusive results are not in on which
insurance and provision arrangements do this most effectively.

Figure 1: The Medical Care Triad

Solid lines represent money flows; the dashed line represents service
flows.

Figure 2: The Welfare Gains from Health Insurance

Sick

y

insurance line

y

Healthy

Figure 3: Cost Sharing Under Indemnity Insurance
Dollars
payment

Cl)

00
Cl)

0

Individual payment

stop-loss

Dollars

Medical Expenditure

Figure 4: Changes in Health Plan
Enrollments

—

I

100%
90%
80%
70%

o RDS

0

naged FFS
Urnanaged FFS

30%
20%
10%
0%
1980

1992

1996

Year
I nfl, 3W111J1¼ 13

I.J1J1¼# VT ILl I jIll V Ut'.. l,l..l1lji1UJL.I lit 11.11 V Iuttan) 1113W a1I'..l..

Source: Data are from Lewin-VHI.

Figure 5: Conflict in Quantities Desired Between Providers and
Patients
Dollars

Supply

P

C

Q

QD

Quantity of Treatment

Figure 6: Demand and Supply Side Expenditure Controls
Dollars

P

C

QM

QM

-

Q

Q

Q Quantity of Treatment

Figure 7: Reduction in Insurance to Separate High and Low
(a) Stable Separating Equilibrium
Expected
Utility

0%

100%

G2

Generosity of Plan
(Percent of Expenses Covered)

Figure 7: Reduction in Insurance to Separate High and Low
(b) Unstable Separating and Pooling Equilibria
Expected
Utility

G3

Generosity of Plan
(Percent of Expenses Covered)

Figure 8: Hybrid Equilibria with Adverse Selection

$19 00

HIGHS in moderate plan

$18.00

°

LOWs in moderate plan

$400

$2.80

uhI

__L==_
11* (50%)

plan

100%

Share of HiGHs in moderate plan
Note: Dashed lines assume all LOWs choose moderate plan.
The figure uses the values inTable 9, assuming the benefits to
the HIGH risks in the generous plan is $34 instead of $33.

Figure 9: Enrollment Consequences of Adverse Selection

p(s)

A
S

S

$0

$1,000

$2,000

1992

1993

Year

1995

1996

1997

0%

5%

10%

15%

20%

25%

dollars and isfora family policy.

1994

1996
Note: Employee charge SIn
Reber
and
(1998)
Cutler
Source:

2>

a)

ci)

C-)

(0

a)

-5

?!

$3,000

Enrollment
(a) Real PPO Premium and

a)

1992

1993

1995

GHD

Year

.FFO

1994

1996

and are in 1996 dollars
Premiums are fora family policy

$5,000

$5,500

$6,000

$6,500

$7,000

Note:

-

cn

$7,500

$8 .000

(b) Real Premiums

Selection at Harvard UniversitY
Adverse
10:
Figure

1997

Figure A: Adverse Selection and Plan Manipulation

(1) Indifference Curves
Low-risk indifference curve

450

c)
Cl,

4.)

insurance

Cd,

0

Dollars when healthy

(2) Pooling Equilibrium

450

C.)
Cd,

4)

U,

0
High-risk indifference
curve

Dollars when healthy
Dashed lines are indifference curves with no insurance.

(3) Separating Equilibrium
Low-riSk indifference

450

5)

High-risk
indifference curve

0

fair odds

Dollars when healthy

(4) Potential NonEXisteflCe of Separating Equilibrium

Dollars when healthy

