1    Introduction

The purpose of this paper is to discuss some monetary policy issues for the Eurosystem, which
conducts monetary policy in the Euro area from January 1, 1999.1 More precisely, the paper
discusses the choice between in‡ation targeting and monetary targeting as a strategy for the
Eurosystem, the actual strategy the Eurosystem announced in the fall of 1998, the framework
for policy decisions appropriate for achieving the goals of the Eurosystem, the role of exchange
rate management in the EMU, and the accountability and transparency of the Eurosystem.
    Some of the …ndings of the papers are that the choice between in‡ation targeting and
Bundesbank-style “pragmatic” monetary targeting is, in e¤ect, a choice between high and low
transparency. In‡ation targeting and pragmatic monetary targeting, in practice, imply similar
policy decisions, but pragmatic monetary targeting implies that policy decisions are explained
in terms of money-growth developments that are not essential for policy. As a part of its
monetary strategy, the Eurosystem has speci…ed an operational in‡ation target, although in
a somewhat ambiguous way. More importantly, its announced monetary strategy is de…cient,
since it proposes a prominent role for an essentially irrelevant money-growth indicator in analy-
sis and communication, but will keep secret the in‡ation forecast that will, in practice, be the
decisive input in policy decisions. Exchange rate policy is controlled by the Council of …nance
ministers in the EMU; this is a major inconsistency in the Maastricht Treaty and a potential
threat to the independence of the Eurosystem. The European Parliament may play a crucial
role in ensuring the accountability of the Eurosystem; the minimum transparency needed for
e¤ective outside monitoring and evaluation of the Eurosystem’s policy decisions requires pub-
lished in‡ation forecasts and, most likely, published minutes and voting records of the Governing
Council.
    Section 2 discusses the Eurosystem’s choice of monetary strategy, section 3 discusses the
Eurosystem’s announcement of October 13, 1998, section 4 discusses the appropriate targets
and operating procedures for the Eurosystem, section 5 discusses exchange rate policy, and
section 6 discusses the appropriate degree of transparency. Section 7 contains some conclusions.
   1
      The “Eurosystem,” a “user-friendly expression” adopted by its General Council, consists of the European
Central Bank, ECB, and the national central banks, NCBs, of the 11 Member States adopting the euro. Decisions
in the Eurosystem are made by the 17 members of the Governing Council, consisting of the 6 members of the
Executive Board of the ECB and the 11 governors of the NCBs. The European System of Central Banks, ESCB,
also includes the 4 NCBs in the European Union that have not adopted the Euro.
   The relation between ECB and the Eurosystem is somewhat similar to that between the Federal Reserve Board
and the Federal Reserve System (the latter includes the Federal Reserve Banks). Since monetary policy will be
decided by the ESCB’s Governing Council rather than by the ECB’s Executive Board, it is logical to speak of
the monetary policy of the Eurosystem rather than that of the ECB.



                                                     1
    In spite of the length of this paper, several important issues are not covered, for instance,
potential problems with the relatively weak center and the high degree of decentralization in
the Eurosystem, issues of …nancial stability and lending of last resort, …scal interaction, and
international monetary coordination.2


2    The choice of monetary strategy for the Eurosystem: in‡ation
     targeting or monetary targeting?

The choice of monetary strategy for the Eurosystem was previously narrowed down by EMI
[32] to be between in‡ation targeting (practiced by the central banks in New Zealand, Canada,
United Kingdom, Sweden and Australia) and monetary targeting (practiced by the Bundesbank
in Germany), or possibly a combination of these two alternatives.3 Exchange-rate targeting,
interest-rate targeting and nominal-GDP targeting was considered inappropriate (EMI [32],
p. 1):
         “First, an exchange rate objective is not considered appropriate since, for an area
         potentially as large as the euro area, such an approach might be inconsistent with the
         internal goal of price stability. Second, the use of an interest rate as an intermediate
         target is not considered appropriate given di¢culties in identifying the equilibrium
         real interest rate which would be consistent with price stability. Third, employing
         the growth rate of nominal GDP which can be viewed as consistent with price sta-
         bility as an intermediate target would provide a clear nominal framework and would
         have the advantage of not being sensitive to shocks in the income velocity of money.
         However, nominal income would be di¢cult to control by the ESCB, could lead to
         misinterpretation of the ultimate goal of the ESCB, could be subject to substantial
         data revisions and might lead to an indeterminate price/volume division in the short
         run, thus creating uncertainty about the in‡ation performance of the economy. Fur-
         thermore, the fact that nominal income targeting is not used at present in any EU
         Member State makes it inadvisable for the ESCB to adopt this strategy. For these
         reasons, special attention is paid in this report to only two strategies, monetary and
         direct in‡ation targeting.”

    There has been considerable debate about the Eurosystem’s monetary strategy among aca-
demics and central bankers. In‡ation targeting has been promoted by a large majority of acad-
emics as well as by central bankers with experience of in‡ation targeting and previous failures
   2
     These issues are discussed in, for instance, Begg [3], Begg, Giavazzi and Wyplosz [5], Begg, De Grauwe,
Giavazzi, Uhlig and Wyplosz [4], Obstfeld [56] and the report by Blanchard, Gros, Emerson, Mayer, Saint-Paul,
Sinn and Tabellini [42].
   3
     Finland and Spain have announced in‡ation targets while still being members of the ERM, the Exchange Rate
Mechanism of the European Union. Israel has announced in‡ation targets while still maintaining an exchange
rate band. Recently the Czech Republic joined the ranks of in‡ation-targeting countries.
  The National Bank of Switzerland also has a monetary target. The discussion about monetary targeting in the
EMU has almost exclusively focused on Bundesbank-style monetary targeting, though.


                                                      2
of monetary targeting in non-German countries. Monetary targeting has mainly been promoted
by certain German academics and by German central bankers. More recently, central bankers
in Germany and in the Eurosystem have suggested a combination of the two alternatives. On
October 13, 1998, the Eurosystem …nally announced its strategy, indeed with elements of both
alternatives. The Eurosystem’s decision is discussed and scrutinized in section 3. In that section
I will provide de…nitions and some general discussion of the two alternatives, that is, in‡ation
targeting and monetary targeting.
    In discussing monetary policy strategy, I will distinguish two of its elements, the framework
for policy decisions and communication. By the framework for policy decisions, I mean the mon-
etary policy procedures inside the central bank, which, from observations of various indicators,
eventually result in decisions about the central bank’s instruments, that is, decisions intended
to achieve the central bank’s targets; in short, the principles for setting the instruments (which,
in the case of the Eurosystem, will be a repurchase rate).4 By communication, I mean the
central bank’s way of communicating with outsiders (the general public, the …nancial market,
governments, policymakers and policymaking institutions, which, in the case of the Eurosystem,
includes EU institutions and national governments and parliaments). Communication is part of
the implementation of monetary policy, in that it a¤ects the e¢ciency of monetary policy by, for
instance, in‡uencing expectations, predictability and credibility of the policy. Communication
also in‡uences how transparent policy is, which is crucial for the accountability and, arguably,
also for the political legitimacy of the policy.


2.1    In‡ation targeting

In‡ation targeting, as practised by an increasing number of in‡ation-targeting central banks,
has three main characteristics, (1) an explicit quantitative in‡ation target, (2) a framework for
policy decisions, in‡ation-forecast targeting, which uses an internal conditional in‡ation forecast
as an intermediate target variable, and (3) a high degree of transparency and accountability.
Real-world in‡ation targeting is “‡exible” in‡ation targeting rather than “strict”, in the sense
that it allows concerns not only about in‡ation variability around the in‡ation target but also
about real variability in the economy.5 This can be represented by an intertemporal loss function
   4
     Possible alternative terms are “decision process,” “implementation” (in the broad sense of implementation of
the monetary-policy goals rather than in the narrow sense of the implementation of a particular monetary policy
decision) or “operating procedures” (as it is used in Freedman’s [37] paper for the 1996 Jackson Hole conference).
The last term has nevertheless been avoided here, since it is frequently used in the United States in reference to
the choice and the use of an operating target, like non-borrowed reserves or the federal-funds rate.
   5
     See, for instance, Svensson [70] for discussion and references to the literature.


                                                        3
in period t;
                                                          1
                                                          X
                                             Et (1 ¡ ±)          ± ¿ Lt+¿ ;                                      (1)
                                                          ¿ =0
where Et denotes expectations conditional on information available in period t, the discount
factor, ±, ful…lls 0 < ± < 1 and the period loss function is given by

                                          1
                                      Lt = [(¼t ¡ ¼¤ )2 + ¸(yt ¡ ytn )2 ];                                       (2)
                                          2

where ¼t is in‡ation in period t, ¼¤ is the in‡ation target, yt is (log) output, ytn is (log) potential
output, and yt ¡ ytn is the output gap, with ¸ > 0 being the relative weight on output-gap
stabilization. As emphasized in the literature, this translates into a more gradual adjustment of
in‡ation towards the in‡ation target, and an aim at the in‡ation target at a longer horizon than
the shortest possible.6 Furthermore, a loss function as above implies that the conditional in‡a-
tion forecast will become an intermediate target at an appropriate horizon, say about two years
ahead. The framework for policy decisions of the central bank is then to compute conditional
forecasts for in‡ation and, possibly, for the output gap and then set its instrument, normally a
short interest rate, such that the corresponding conditional in‡ation forecast about two years
ahead hits the in‡ation target.7
       It is worth pointing out that under this framework for policy decisions, the instrument will
depend on all the information entering the conditional forecasts, including the current in‡ation
and output gap. In particular, note that the current output gap will also a¤ect the instrument
under hypothetical strict in‡ation targeting, when ¸ = 0 and the output gap does not enter the
loss function — for the simple reason that the current output gap helps predict future in‡ation.
       Communication under in‡ation targeting is mostly direct and to the point. The Reserve
Bank of New Zealand, Bank of England and Sveriges Riksbank publish high-quality In‡ation
Reports with conditional in‡ation forecasts, where they motivate their policy and explain ex
   6
      See Ball [2] and Svensson [68].
   7
      The loss function above does not induce an average in‡ation bias, since the implicit output target is taken
to be the potential output level and therefore consistent with the potential-rate hypothesis (that monetary policy
cannot systematically a¤ect average unemployment/the potential output level). Indeed, motivations for in‡ation
targeting, by governments, parliaments and central banks, put much emphasis on the potential-rate hypothesis,
and it can be argued that the hypothesis constitutes one of the foundations of in‡ation targeting. The high
degree of transparency and accountability in in‡ation targeting may then ensure that any concern about the real
economy is consistent with the natural-rate hypotheses and therefore reduces, or eliminates, any in‡ation bias.
This then translates into an output-gap target in (2) that is equal to zero.
   This highlights a fundamental asymmetry between in‡ation and output in in‡ation targeting. There is both a
level goal and a stability goal for in‡ation, and the level goal (that is, the in‡ation target) is subject to choice.
For output, there is only a stability goal and no level goal. Or, to put it di¤erently, the level goal is not subject
to choice; it is given by the capacity output level. Therefore, I believe it appropriate to label minimizing (2)
as “(‡exible) in‡ation targeting” rather than “in‡ation-and-output-gap targeting,” especially since the label is
already used for the monetary policy regimes in New Zealand, Canada, United Kingdom, Sweden and Australia.



                                                          4
post outcomes. Bank of England and Sveriges Riksbank also publish voting records and non-
attributed minutes from the meeting of their respective Monetary Policy Committee and Execu-
tive Board. This makes in‡ation targeting very transparent, simpli…es external monitoring and
evaluation of the policy, improves incentives for the central banks to perform well, and increases
the accountability of the central banks.
    Thus, under in‡ation targeting, the central bank’s rhetoric is highly consistent with the
actual policy pursued. Given the high degree of transparency, signi…cant discrepancies are not
di¢cult to detect by competent central-bank watchers.8


2.2     Monetary targeting

Whereas the rhetoric and the practice coincide under in‡ation targeting, this is arguably not
always the case under monetary targeting. Therefore, monetary targeting must be de…ned with
some special care. I will specify two kinds of monetary targeting, “strict” money-growth tar-
geting (which is hypothetical and not pursued by any central bank) and “pragmatic” monetary
targeting (which is the policy that was actually pursued by Bundesbank).


2.2.1    Strict money-growth targeting

First, let me de…ne strict money-growth targeting.9 This involves specifying a money-growth
target for a monetary aggregate, say M3. The money-growth target is set so as to be consistent
with an in‡ation target (in the sense of achieving an average in‡ation equal to the in‡ation
target). Strict money-growth targeting can be represented by the period loss function

                                                1
                                            Lt = (¢mt ¡ ¢m¤ )2 ;                                                  (3)
                                                2

where mt denotes the (log) quantity of money in period t, ¢mt ´ mt ¡ mt¡1 denotes money
growth, and ¢m¤ is the money-growth target. Since money growth reacts with some lag to
the interest rate, the framework for policy decisions involves making a conditional forecast for
money growth and setting the interest rate such that the conditional forecast hits the target at
the appropriate horizon.
    8
      During the …rst few years, in‡ation-targeting central banks were arguably less than transparent about the
role of output-gap stabilization. This has, by now, to a large extent been remedied; see, for instance, the discussion
in Svensson [70].
    9
      By “strict” targeting of a variable I mean that no other variable enters the loss function; “‡exible” targeting
allows other variables in the loss function. By “unconditional” targeting, I mean that the target level is …xed for
a substantial period; “conditional” money-growth targeting, discussed in Svensson [68] and [70] and, brie‡y, in
appendix B of the conference version of this paper, allows the target level to be state-contingent and adjusted
with new information.


                                                          5
    In any reasonable model of the transmission mechanism, minimizing the loss function (3)
is not equal to minimizing the loss function (2). This simply re‡ects that money is not an
intermediate variable in the transmission mechanism from the instrument to in‡ation. It is not
the case that the instrument a¤ects in‡ation in the medium term exclusively by …rst a¤ecting
money growth (with a lag), and then by money growth a¤ecting in‡ation.10 As a consequence,
although a money-growth target may result in the desired average in‡ation rate over a su¢ciently
long period, in the medium term there is a con‡ict between stabilizing money-growth and
stabilizing in‡ation. Thus, there is a tradeo¤ between in‡ation variability and money-growth
variability. This is particularly clear if we consider strict in‡ation targeting, that is, with ¸ = 0
in (2). Strict in‡ation targeting minimizes in‡ation variability around the in‡ation target,
which would normally lead to substantial money-growth variability. Money-growth targeting
minimizes money-growth variability around the money-growth target, which can be chosen such
that average in‡ation equals the in‡ation target, but money-growth targeting would normally
lead to considerable in‡ation variability around the in‡ation target. This is illustrated in …gure 1,
where the curve illustrates the e¢cient tradeo¤ between in‡ation variability and money-growth
variability. Strict in‡ation targeting minimizes in‡ation variability at the point SIT, whereas
money-growth targeting minimizes money-growth variability at the point SMT.11
    In terms of the frequently used tradeo¤ between in‡ation variability and output-gap vari-
ability, shown in …gure 2, ‡exible in‡ation targeting would correspond to a compromise between
in‡ation and output-gap variability at the point FIT, whereas strict monetary targeting would
correspond to a point inside the e¢cient tradeo¤, like the point SMT.12 Rudebusch and Svensson
[63] con…rm the empirical relevance of …gure 2.13
  10
     By an intermediate variable in the transmission mechanism I mean a variable such that the instrument
a¤ects a target variable exclusively via …rst a¤ecting the intermediate variable and then the intermediate variable
a¤ecting the target variable. Money is simply not an intermediate variable in this sense. See the simple model of
the transmission mechanism below, and see Svensson [70] for further discussion. Early discussion of these issues
can be found in Friedman [38] and Bryant [14].
  11
     The curve results for a period loss function (2) replaced by Lt = 12 [(1 ¡ !)(¼ t ¡ ¼ ¤ )2 + !(¢mt ¡ ¢m¤ )2 ]
and an intertemporal loss function like (1) below (where ± ! 1), and where ! varies from zero (resulting in point
SIT) to unity (resulting in point SMT).
  12
     The curve results for a period loss function (2) and an intertemporal loss function like (1) (where ± ! 1),
and where ¸ varies from zero (resulting in point SIT) to in…nity [resulting in the minimum output-gap variability
but potentially a nonstationary in‡ation, indicated by point SOT (for “strict output targeting”) potentially being
in…nitely far to the right].
  13
     The general ine¢ciency of any intermediate-targeting strategy, including monetary targeting, was pointed
out by Kareken, Muench and Wallace [49], Friedman [38] and Bryant [14] in early criticism of monetary targeting.




                                                        6
Figure 1: The tradeo¤ between in‡ation and money-growth variability, Var[¼t ] and Var[¢mt ].


                       Var[∆mt]



                                  SIT




                                                                SMT

                                                                               Var[πt]




2.2.2      Pragmatic monetary targeting

Strict money-growth targeting means giving priority to the money-growth target when con‡icts
with the in‡ation target arise. This would lead to high in‡ation variability, as illustrated in
…gure 2 and empirically con…rmed in Rudebusch and Svensson [63]. This is probably the very
reason why Bundesbank is notorious for disregarding its money-growth targets, and hence not
implementing strict money-growth targeting. Instead, Bundesbank engages in what has been
called pragmatic monetary targeting.
       Pragmatic monetary targeting involves having an in‡ation target, over the years called “un-
avoidable in‡ation”, “price norm”, or “medium-term price assumption”. It has been 2 percent
for many years. Since the Bundesbank’s Council’s meeting in December 1996 through 1998, it
has been 1.5–2 percent.14 Starting from this in‡ation target, Bundesbank has then, for each
year, derived a money-growth target for M3 by adding predicted potential-output growth and
subtracting a velocity trend. Bundesbank has then set a target corridor around the monetary
target, for 1998 it was 3 percentage points wide.
       As noted above, the problem is now that in the medium term, there will normally be a
  14
    In Bundesbank [18, p. 21], this interval is referred to as ”[Bundesbank’s] medium-term price assumption,
which is a de…nitive expression of its price stability target.”



                                                     7
   Figure 2: The tradeo¤ between in‡ation and output-gap variability, Var[¼t ] and Var[xt ].


                      Var[xt]




                                  SIT
                                                                SMT



                                      FIT



                                                                   SOT
                                                                                Var[πt]




con‡ict between stabilizing in‡ation around the in‡ation target and stabilizing money-growth
around the monetary target. A number of studies of Bundesbank’s monetary policy, by both
German and non-German academics, have come to the unanimous conclusion that, in this
con‡ict, Bundesbank has given priority to the in‡ation target and has disregarded the monetary
target.15 One piece of evidence is from estimates and interpretations of Bundesbank’s reaction
function. These show no trace of reacting to current or anticipated misses of the money-growth
targets.16 The evidence for this conclusions includes the fact that Bundesbank’s in‡ation record
has been unprecedented, while it has missed its money-growth target about half the time. A
graph from Bundesbank’s Annual Report 1995, [17], is most revealing, see …gure 3. Furthermore,
these misses seem deliberate and are hardly due to imperfect control. Figure 4 shows the German
overnight interest rate (which is highly correlated with the Bundesbank’s repurchase rate) and
the German CPI in‡ation during 1993–1996. There is no sign of dramatic interest-rate changes
in order to bring money in line with the monetary target, whereas in‡ation seems to be under
control. Indeed, according to Issing’s [44, p. 71–72] evaluation of German monetary policy:
  15
     This literature includes Neumann [55], von Hagen [79], Bernanke and Mihov [7], Clarida and Gertler [21],
Clarida, Gali and Gertler [20] (note a crucial typo: the coe¢cient for money supply in Table 1 should be 0.07
instead of 0.7), Laubach and Posen [50], and Bernanke, Laubach, Mishkin and Posen [6].
  16
     Depending on the form of the money-demand function, there are, however, some di¢culties in interpreting
reaction functions consistent with monetary targeting, cf. Svensson [70].



                                                     8
     “Only rarely have money stock overshoots been of a completely involuntary nature;
     mostly rather they constituted deliberate monetary policy decisions.... [M]onetary
     policy was always analyzed with a view to achieve the ultimate aim of safeguarding
     the currency.”


          Figure 3: Growth of German M3 (Chart 12 in Deutsche Bundesbank [17])




   Although Bundesbank’s internal framework for policy decisions is a well-kept secret, it seems
inconceivable that it could have achieved its in‡ation record without a forward-looking medium-
term approach to monetary policy, where conditional in‡ation forecasts are an important ele-
ment. My conclusion is that pragmatic monetary targeting is likely to have a framework for
policy decisions similar to ‡exible in‡ation targeting. I interpret von Hagen [79] and [80] as pre-
viously having come to the same conclusions. Thus, Bundesbank’s policy can be seen as having
the same period loss function as ‡exible in‡ation targeting, (2), rather than that corresponding
to strict money-growth targeting, (3), and would reach a point like FIT in …gure 2.
   The major di¤erence between in‡ation targeting and pragmatic monetary targeting is then

                                                9
                  Figure 4: German overnight rate and CPI in‡ation, 1993–1996



                         10



                  %/yr

                          5
                                                                          o/n rate

                                                                        CPI inflation


                          0
                                 1993          1994          1995          1996




Bundesbank’s communication with outsiders. Bundesbank communication was entirely within
the monetary targeting framework, with frequent ad hoc explanations of the regular misses of the
monetary target. Given that the framework for policy decisions in reality seems to disregard the
monetary targets, the discussion about the misses of the monetary targets was basically irrelevant
for Bundesbank’s monetary policy. Thus, pragmatic monetary targeting can be described as
“in‡ation targeting in disguise”, or “in‡ation targeting in actions, monetary targeting in words.”
The rhetoric was simply inconsistent with the framework for policy decisions.17             18


    What explains this strange state of a¤airs? von Hagen [80] provides a fascinating account
of the rise of Bundesbank’s monetary-targeting framework. His account provides ample evi-
dence that the framework was important and perhaps crucial in the sometimes delicate political
situation of Bundesbank, where its role was mainly to increase and maintain Bundesbank’s
independence and protect it from political interference.19
  17
     In line with the discussion in Lohmann [52], there may have been two very di¤erent audiences for the
Bundesbank’s announcements. One, the experts, was informed and saw through the rhetoric and understood the
true reasons for repeated misses of the monetary targets. The other, the general public, was uninformed and
believed that the monetary-targeting framework was essential.
  18
     Posen [60] has coined the term “monetary masquerade”.
  19
     One easily recalls an argument sometimes presented in favor of the nontranspareny of the Federal Reserve
System; nontransparency is a way of keeping Congress at arms-length and maintain independence.




                                                      10
2.3    Summary

In‡ation targeting and pragmatic monetary targeting appear to be similar with regard to the
loss function and the framework for policy decisions. The di¤erence regards communication and
transparency. Under in‡ation targeting, communication is direct and to the point. The rhetoric
is consistent with the framework for policy decisions. Words match actions, and vice versa.
In‡ation targeting is “in‡ation targeting in the open,” whereas pragmatic monetary targeting is
“in‡ation targeting in disguise.” Under pragmatic monetary targeting, the communication and
discussion is, deliberately, mainly focused on irrelevant misses of the monetary targets and the
ad hoc explanations thereof. In practice, the choice between in‡ation targeting and pragmatic
monetary targeting is a choice between transparency and nontransparency.20                  21   Given this, I
believe the advocacy of monetary targeting for the Eurosystem has been somewhat misguided.22


3     The Eurosystem’s monetary policy strategy

The goals for monetary policy in the EMU are speci…ed in the Maastricht Treaty. According to
its Article 105(1),

      “The primary objective of the ESCB shall be to maintain price stability. Without
      prejudice to the objective of price stability, the ESCB shall support the general
      economic policies in the Community with a view to contributing to the achievement
      of the objectives of the Community as laid down in Article 2...”

According to Article 2, the Community shall have as its task

      “to promote throughout the Community a harmonious and balanced development
      of economic activities, sustainable and non-in‡ationary growth respecting the en-
      vironment, a high degree of convergence of economic performance, a high level of
      employment and of social protection, the raising of the standard of living and qual-
      ity of life, and economic and social cohesion and solidarity among Member States.”

    EMI [32] and the Executive Board of the ECB [33] have previously de…ned price stability
as an in‡ation rate between 0 and 2 percent (per year). This could be interpreted as a target
range for an EMU-wide in‡ation of 0–2 percent, or as a point in‡ation target of 1 percent with
a tolerance interval of §1 percentage point.23
  20
     Thus, I agree with Laubach and Posen [50] in their detailed description of actual Bundesbank policy, but I
disagree with their conclusion that Bundesbank’s pragmatic monetary targeting is, nevertheless, transparent.
  21
     See Schmid [64] for a recent o¢cial Bundesbank view of its monetary targeting.
  22
     In appendix D of the conference version of this paper, I scrutinize the arguments in favor of monetary
targeting that have been put forward by EMU Monitor, a panel of European academics.
  23
     Alternatively, it might be interpreted as implying that a point in‡ation target is not necessarily at the
midpoint but somewhere within the interval 0–2 percent.


                                                      11
   The second sentence in Article 105(1) could arguably be interpreted as including stabilization
of real variables around their natural (potential) levels, that is, ‡exible rather than strict in‡ation
targeting. This could be represented by a Eurosystem period loss function including stabilization
of the output gap, as in (2) with ¸ > 0. As emphasized in the literature and noted above, this
translates into a gradual adjustment of in‡ation towards the in‡ation target, and aims at the
in‡ation target at a longer horizon. Furthermore, a loss function as above implies that the
conditional in‡ation forecast will become an intermediate target at an appropriate horizon, say
2–2.5 years ahead. The task of the Eurosystem would then be to set its instrument, an EMU-
wide short nominal interest rate, such that the corresponding conditional in‡ation forecast 2–2.5
years ahead hits the in‡ation target of 1 percent per year.
   After its meeting on October 13, 1998, the Governing Council of the ECB …nally announced
the main elements of its monetary policy strategy, namely (see [30]):

      “² a quantitative de…nition of the primary objective of the single monetary policy,
      price stability;
       ² a prominent role for money with a reference value for the growth of a monetary
      aggregate; and
      ² a broadly-based assessment of the outlook for future price developments.”


3.1   The de…nition of price stability

With reference to the primary objective for the Eurosystem to maintain price stability, the
Governing Council announced on October 13 that

      “the ESCB’s monetary policy strategy will focus strictly [emphasis added] on this
      objective.”

This might be interpreted as ¸ = 0, a zero weight on output-gap stabilization, corresponding to
strict in‡ation targeting rather than ‡exible.
   Furthermore, the Governing Council adopted the following de…nition of price stability:

      “Price stability shall be de…ned as a year-on-year increase in the Harmonised Index of
      Consumer Prices (HICP) for the euro area [the Monetary Union Index of Consumer
      Prices (MUICP)] of below 2%. Price stability is to be maintained over the medium
      term. The current rate of HICP in‡ation in the euro area [1.2% for August 1998,
      1.0% for September] is in line with this objective.”

   As commentators quickly pointed out, this de…nition of price stability was indeed ambiguous,
since it did not specify a lower bound for in‡ation. About a month later, on November 10, it

                                                  12
appeared that the ambiguity was eliminated, when the ECB president, Willem Duisenberg [26],
clari…ed that “increase” in the de…nition excludes decrease and de‡ation. It would seem to
follow that the lower bound was zero and that the de…nition refers to an in‡ation rate between
0 and 2 percent. This would have been consistent with the previous statements of EMI and
the Executive Board referred to above. The midpoint of the interval would then be close to the
August MUICP in‡ation rate and equal to the September rate, and thus certainly “in line with
this objective.” Thus, the midpoint of 1 percent could have been taken to be the in‡ation target
¼¤ and serve as an anchor for in‡ation expectations.24
    The ambiguity was not completely resolved, though. On November 12, Duisenberg [27]
stated:

      “We did not announce a ‡oor for in‡ation, because we know that the price index
      may include a measurement bias, but we do not know its magnitude.”

To this date (May 1999), no explicit lower bound has been announced.
    A lower bound might be inferred from the reference value for money growth, though. When
the reference value was announced on December 1, [29], it appeared that a point in‡ation target
of 1.5 percent had been used (see further below). If that point in‡ation target is interpreted to
be in the middle of the interval, the lower bound is 1 percent. Hence, it seems to me that the
de…nition could also be interpreted as the interval 1–2 percent, equivalent to an in‡ation target
of 1.5 percent.
    Is an in‡ation target of 1.5 percent appropriate? It happens to coincide with the midpoint
of the target range of 0–3 for New Zealand since 1997 (during the period 1990–1996, the target
range was 0–2 percent). The fact that the in‡ation target exceeds zero can be motivated by
measurement bias, nonnegative nominal interest rates and possible downward nominal price and
wage rigidities. The other in‡ation-targeting countries now have in‡ation targets (or midpoints
of the target range) ranging between 1.5 in New Zealand, 2 percent in Canada, Sweden and
Finland (before joining the EMU), and 2.5 percent in United Kingdom and Australia (the
Reserve Bank of Australia has an in‡ation target in the form of the range 2–3 percent for
average in‡ation over an unspeci…ed business cycle). As noted above, Bundesbank had 1.5–2
percent (which could hence be translated into a point in‡ation target of 1.75 percent); thus, the
  24
     Could the de…nition indicate an in‡ation target ¼¤ just below 2 percent? (“2.5 percent or less,” the ambiguous
in‡ation target for Bank of England announced by the Chancellor of the Exchequer in June 1995, was later
interpreted as just below 2.5 percent; the current unambiguous target of 2.5 percent was announced in May
1997). This can hardly be the case, since such an in‡ation target, if successful, would mean that in‡ation would
exceed 2 percent about 50 percent of the time, due to unavoidable short-term volatility.


                                                        13
Eurosystem seems to be aiming slightly lower than the Bundesbank. Interestingly, 2 percent
is the borderline in Akerlof, Dickens and Perry [1], who study the e¤ects of downward rigidity
of nominal wages, whereas 1 percent is the borderline in Orphanides and Wieland [57], who
examine the consequences of non-negative nominal interest rates. These studies indicate that
in‡ation targets below those borderlines risk reducing average output or increasing average
unemployment.25 Altogether, announcing an explicit in‡ation target (a point target or a range)
may be more important than whether the target (the midpoint of the range) is 1.5, 2 or 2.5
percent.
    The Governing Council also stated:

       “Furthermore, the statement that ‘price stability is to be maintained over the medium
       term’ re‡ects the need for monetary policy to have a forward-looking, medium-term
       orientation. It also acknowledges the existence of short-term volatility in prices which
       cannot be controlled by monetary policy.”

This could be interpreted as targeting in‡ation at a longer horizon than the minimum possible,
which is consistent with ‡exible in‡ation targeting and ¸ > 0. The Eurosystem will probably
target in‡ation at approximately a two-year horizon, as is done by most in‡ation-targeting
central banks do. A quote from the January Monthly Bulletin [31, p. 47] gives additional
support for an interpretation with ¸ > 0, as well as some weight on minimizing interest rate
variability:

       “... a medium-term orientation of monetary policy is important in order to permit a
       gradualist and measured response [to some threats to price stability]. Such a central
       bank response will not introduce unnecessary and possibly self-sustaining uncertainty
       into short-term interest rates or the real economy...”26


3.2    A prominent role for money; a major role for an in‡ation forecast

The Governing Council also announced that the monetary policy strategy would consist of “two
key elements,” later called “the two pillars:”

       “² money will be assigned a prominent role. This role will be signalled by the
       announcement of a quantitative reference value for the growth of a broad monetary
   25
      For reasons explained in Gordon [41], I believe that Akerlof, Dickens and Perry [1] reach a too pessimistic
conclusion. On the other hand, their data is from the United States and Canada, and downward nominal wage
rigidity may be more relevant in Europe. Orphanides’ and Wieland’s [57] conclusions are sensitive to assumptions
about the size of shocks and the average real interest rate, the latter which is taken to be 1 percent for the United
States. If the average real rate is higher in Europe, and the shocks not much larger than in the United States,
nonnegative interest rates may be of less consequence in Europe.
   26
      Note the possible ambiguity: whereas this quote can be interpreted as indicating ¸ > 0, the …rst quote in
the subsection can be interpreted as indicating ¸ = 0.


                                                         14
      aggregate. The reference value will be derived in a manner which is consistent with—
      and will serve to achieve—price stability.
      Deviations of current monetary growth from the reference value would, under normal
      circumstances, signal risks to price stability. The concept of a reference value does
      not imply a commitment to mechanistically correct deviations over the short term.
      The relationship between actual monetary growth and the pre-announced reference
      value will be regularly and thoroughly analysed by the Governing Council of the
      ECB; the result of this analysis and its impact on monetary policy decisions will
      be explained to the public. The precise de…nition of the reference aggregate and
      the speci…c value of the quantitative reference value for monetary growth will be
      announced by the Governing Council of the ECB in December 1998;
      ² in parallel with the analysis of monetary growth in relation to the reference value,
      a broadly-based assessment of the outlook for price developments and the risks to
      price stability in the euro area will play a major role in the ESCB’s strategy. This
      assessment will be made using a wide range of economic and …nancial variables as
      indicators for future price developments.”

   The statement that “[t]he concept reference value does not imply a commitment to mecha-
nistically correct deviations over the short term” must be interpreted as the reference value not
being an intermediate target for money growth. Indeed, the Eurosystem has rejected monetary
targeting, on the grounds that the relationship between money and prices may not be su¢ciently
stable, and that it is not clear that the monetary aggregates with the most stable relationship
is su¢ciently controllable in the short run. As Issing [47] summarizes:

      “In these circumstances, relying on a pure monetary targeting strategy would con-
      stitute an unrealistic, and therefore misguided, commitment.”

Instead, the Eurosystem plans to use money growth as an indicator of “risks to price stability,”
such that “[d]eviations of current money growth from the reference value would, under normal
circumstances, signal risks to price stability.”
   The text clearly emphasizes the role of the relationship between actual monetary growth
and the announced reference value in the communication with the general public. The text is
silent on whether in‡ation forecasts will be published or not; at the press conference, Duisenberg
reportedly stated that in‡ation forecasts will not be published (Financial Times [36]). About a
month later, Duisenberg [26] stated in no uncertain terms that in‡ation forecasts would not be
published. The reasons given were that

      “... publishing an in‡ation forecast would obscure rather than clarify what the Gov-
      erning Council is actually doing. The public would be presented with a single number
      intended to summarise a thorough and comprehensive analysis of a wide range of


                                                   15
         indicator variables. However, such a summary would inevitably be simplistic. More-
         over, because publishing a single in‡ation forecast would be likely to suggest that
         monetary policy reacts mechanistically to this forecast, publication might mislead
         the public and therefore run counter to the principle of clarity.”

       The reasons given are somewhat surprising, since it is common knowledge that the in‡ation-
targeting central banks that publish in‡ation forecasts provide considerable discussion and ex-
planation of the assumptions, data and analyses behind the in‡ation forecasts, including a
discussion of the uncertainties involved. Both Bank of England and Sveriges Riksbank pub-
lish uncertainty bands and fan charts. Reserve Bank of New Zealand provides extensive verbal
discussion of the uncertainty involved. No in‡ation-targeting central bank publishes a single
number and no explanation of assumptions, data and analysis. What they publish are indeed
examples of “a broadly-based assessment of the outlook for price developments and the risks to
price stability.”
       The quantitative reference value for monetary growth was announced on December 1, namely
4.5 percent for M3. This was calculated from an estimated trend growth of real GDP in the
euro area, 2–2.5 percent per year, an assumed trend decline in velocity of 0.5–1 percent per year,
and the de…nition of price stability, “below 2%.” Adding the midpoint of the intervals for GDP
and velocity gives 3 percent. To get to 4.5 percent, “below 2%” must be 1.5 percent. Hence,
the in‡ation target of the Eurosystem seems to be 1.5 percent, and if that is the midpoint of an
interval, that interval must be interpreted as 1–2 percent.
       The prominent role for money seems very problematic. The fact is that the deviation between
monetary growth and any reference value is a very poor indicator of “risks to price stability,”
that is, in‡ationary or de‡ationary pressure. This is the case under normal circumstances, even
absent any velocity shocks, as is shown below. A monetary policy that e¤ectively maintains low
and stable in‡ation must instead rely on in‡ation forecasts. This is easily illustrated in a simple
model of a closed economy.


3.3      The simplest model of the monetary transmission mechanism

The role of in‡ation forecasts and money growth as indicators in a policy aimed at maintaining
low and stable in‡ation is easily shown in a very simple model, which nevertheless matches
some stylized facts.27 Thus, we can use this model to test the soundness of the monetary policy
  27
    This model is a variant of the one used in Svensson [68] and [69], and is further discussed in those papers.
The model is estimated for the United States in Rudebusch and Svensson [62], and estimated and used for the
EMU in Peersman and Smets [58], Gerlach and Smets [40] and Taylor [78].


                                                      16
strategy of the Eurosystem. If its strategy is de…cient in this simple model, it is likely to be even
more de…cient in a more complicated model with more forward-looking elements and, indeed, in
the real world.28
       Consider an aggregate model for the EMU as a whole. Let EMU-wide aggregate demand be
given by the equation

                           xt+1 = ¯ y xt ¡ ¯ r (it ¡ ¼t+1jt ¡ r¹) + ¯ z zt + ´ t+1 ;                     (4)

where aggregate demand is expressed in terms of the EMU-wide output gap, so that xt is the
output gap in year t, given by
                                               xt ´ yt ¡ ytn ;                                           (5)

where yt is EMU-wide (log) output and ytn is the EMU-wide (log) potential output in year t.
The ECB’s instrument, it , is a short nominal interest rate (the repurchase rate), ¼t is MUICP-
in‡ation between year t ¡ 1 and t, zt is an exogenous variable (easily generalized to a vector of
exogenous variables), and ´t+1 is an iid mean-zero shock to the output gap that is not known in
year t. In‡ation expectations ¼t+1jt are given by Et ¼ t+1 , the expectation of ¼t+1 conditional on
information available in year t. The coe¢cients ¯ y and ¯ r are positive, ¯ y < 1, and the constant
r¹ is the average real interest rate, that is, the natural real interest rate.
       Let aggregate supply be given by the equation

                                    ¼t+1 = ¼t + ®x xt + ®z zt + "t+1 ;                                   (6)

where the coe¢cient ®x is positive and "t+1 is an iid mean-zero shock.
       Thus, the central bank can a¤ect the output gap with a one-year lag, and in‡ation with a
two-year lag. In year t, ¼t , yt and ¼t+1jt are predetermined and cannot be a¤ected by monetary
policy.29
       Suppose the demand for a broad EMU-wide monetary aggregate, like M3, is given by a
standard money-demand equation,

                               mt+1 ¡ pt+1 = ·y yt ¡ ·i it + ·z zt + º t+1 ;                             (7)
  28
     The model abstracts from open-economy issues. It agrees with conventional wisdom on the monetary trans-
mission mechanism, in that in‡ation is determined by aggregate demand and aggregate supply, without any
explicit role for money. Money is introduced via a money-demand function and hence, determined by demand.
See Svensson [71] and [70] for further discussion of these points and for extensions to open economies and to
forward-looking behavior.
  29
     The choice of a year as a period allows pedagogical simpli…cations. Rudebusch and Svensson [62] and the
other empirical papers referred to in footnote 27 use a quarterly variant of the model.




                                                      17
where the coe¢cients ·y and ·i are positive and º t+1 is an iid mean-zero shock. Thus real
money demand is supposed to depend on the nominal interest rate, output and the exogenous
variable, with a lag. Some adjustment lag is realistic and consistent with the central bank having
imperfect control over the monetary aggregate. Arguably, a one-year adjustment lag is too long.
Therefore, I will also consider the variant when there is no adjustment lag in money demand.
Note that money demand is, realistically, a function of output rather than of the output gap.
       Finally, suppose that the central bank has an intertemporal loss function in year t given by
(1) with the periodloss function (2). For simplicity, consider the case of strict in‡ation targeting,
¸ = 0, so that the period loss function is

                                                    1
                                                Lt = (¼t ¡ ¼¤ )2 :                                                (8)
                                                    2

It is easy to see that the …rst-order condition for minimizing the intertemporal loss function (1),
subject to (4) and (6), simpli…es to
                                                   ¼t+2jt = ¼¤ ;                                                  (9)

where ¼t+2jt = Et ¼t+2 denotes the two-year-ahead conditional in‡ation forecast, given by

               ¼t+2jt = ¼t+1jt + ®x xt+1jt + ®z zt+1jt

                        = ¼t+1jt + ®x ¯ y xt + ®x ¯ z zt + ®z zt+1jt ¡ ®x ¯ r (it ¡ ¼t+1jt ¡ r¹);               (10)

where I have used (6) and (4).30         31


       Combining (9) and (10) and solving for the instrument level result in the optimal reaction
function under strict in‡ation targeting,

                                   1 + ®x ¯ r                 ¯y   ¯        ®z
                  it = r¹ + ¼¤ +              (¼t+1jt ¡ ¼¤ ) + xt + z zt +       z      :                       (11)
                                     ®x ¯ r                   ¯r   ¯r      ®x ¯ r t+1jt

       Thus, the optimal policy can be described as using the relevant current information about
the state of the economy to construct a conditional two-year-ahead in‡ation forecast, and then
setting the instrument such that the two-year-ahead conditional in‡ation forecast equals the
in‡ation target. Such policy will result in the instrument being a function of the in‡ation
target and the information about the state of the economy that is relevant for constructing the
  30
      In this annual model with a two-year control lag for in‡ation, strict in‡ation targeting corresponds to the
two-year-ahead conditional in‡ation forecast equal to the in‡ation target. In a quarterly model, with a control
lag for in‡ation equal to a few quarters (less than eight), an eight-quarter-ahead conditional in‡ation forecast
equal to the in‡ation target can be interpreted as an approximation of a …rst-order condition for ‡exible in‡ation
targeting, since eight quarters is then longer than the minimum control lag.
  31
     The analysis is easily adapted to the case of ‡exible in‡ation targeting, ¸ > 0. As shown in Svensson [68], the
…rst-order condition (9) is then replaced by ¼ t+2jt ¡ ¼ ¤ = c(¸)(¼ t+1jt ¡ ¼¤ ), where c(¸) is an increasing function
of ¸, with 0 · c(¸) < 1, c(0) = 0 and c(¸) ! 1 for ¸ ! 1.


                                                         18
conditional in‡ation forecast. In this model, the relevant information is the predetermined one-
year-ahead in‡ation forecast, ¼t+1jt , the output gap, xt , and the current and forecasted values
of the exogenous variable, zt and zt+1jt .32 The predetermined one-year-ahead in‡ation forecast
is by (6) constructed from current in‡ation, the current output gap, and the current exogenous
variable, according to
                                          ¼t+1jt = ¼t + ®x xt + ®z zt :                                         (12)

    The conditional two-year-ahead in‡ation forecast in this example corresponds to the “broadly
based assessment of the outlook for future price development” mentioned in the Eurosystem’s
October 13 announcement of the strategy.


3.4    An optimal indicator of “risks to price stability”

What is the best indicator of “risks to price stability,” that is, in‡ationary or de‡ationary
pressure, in this setup?33 The most intuitive indicator is obviously one that signals by how
much the in‡ation target is likely to be missed in case policy is not adjusted. Such an indicator
would also signal in what direction and by how much the instrument should be adjusted to
restore price stability. An obvious candidate is the deviation between an appropriately de…ned
in‡ation forecast and the in‡ation target. For this purpose, de…ne ¦t+2jt (i) as the two-year-
ahead in‡ation forecast conditional upon a given interest rate i and the state of the economy in
year t (that is, ¼t+1jt , xt , zt (or, by (12), ¼t , xt , zt ) and the forecast zt+1jt ), that is,

               ¦t+2jt (i) ´ ¼t+1jt + ®x ¯ y xt + ®x ¯ z zt + ®z zt+1jt ¡ ®x ¯ r (i ¡ ¼t+1jt ¡ r¹):              (13)

Then, call ¦t+2jt (it¡1 ) the two-year-ahead conditional “unchanged-interest-rate” in‡ation fore-
cast, that is, the conditional in‡ation forecast when the interest rate is unchanged from last
year, ¢it ´ it ¡ it¡1 = 0. Finally, de…ne the “in‡ation-forecast” indicator It¼ as the deviation of
the conditional unchanged-interest-rate in‡ation forecast from the in‡ation target,

                                            It¼ ´ ¦t+2jt (it¡1 ) ¡ ¼ ¤ :                                        (14)
   32
      Thus, we see that the reaction function includes the output gap as an argument, since it a¤ects the two-year
conditional in‡ation forecast, even if the output gap does not enter the loss function.
   33
      Note that by indicator, we mean a variable that conveys useful information to the central bank, for instance,
about the required direction of change of the instrument. This meaning of indicators may seem to be di¤erent
from that used in Brunner and Meltzer [12] and [13] (BM): “The indicator problem of monetary policy is the
problem of constructing a scale that is invariant up to a monotone transformation and that provides a logical
foundation for statements comparing the thrust of monetary policy” ([13], p. 2). (Friedman [38] expresses doubts
about the usefulness of the BM indicator.) If interpreted as monetary policy’s impact on the real economy, in
the simple model used here, a BM indicator might be the di¤erence between the short real interest rate and the
natural real interest rate, it ¡ ¼ t+1jt ¡ r¹. However, if the BM indicator is interpreted as indicating the deviation
of a target variable from the target level, the in‡ation-forecast indicator presented below is a BM indicator.


                                                         19
       This is, arguably, a very appropriate indicator of in‡ationary or de‡ationary pressure. It
indicates the extent to which in‡ation two-year-ahead is likely to exceed the in‡ation target
in case monetary policy is “unchanged,” in the sense that the instrument is kept unchanged.
Therefore, it indicates whether the instrument needs to be adjusted in order to minimize the
loss function (8).
       Furthermore, It¼ indicates both the direction and the magnitude of the optimal change in
the instrument. We have

                                                                  @¦t+2jt (it¡1 )
                                ¦t+2jt (it ) ¡ ¦t+2jt (it¡1 ) =                   ¢it :                       (15)
                                                                      @i

Combining this with (9), we get the optimal adjustment of the instrument,

                                                      1                    1 ¼
                                      ¢it =                      I¼
                                                  @¦t+2jt (it¡1 ) t
                                                                      =         I ;                           (16)
                                              ¡                           ®x ¯ r t
                                                       @i

where I have used (13) and (14). Thus, the required change in the instrument is proportional
to the in‡ation-forecast indicator, more precisely the in‡ation-forecast indicator divided by the
negative of the policy-multiplier, ¡ @¦t+2jt (it¡1 )=@i = ®x ¯ r .34
       Using (13), the in‡ation-forecast indicator can be expanded as

               It¼ = ¼t+1jt ¡ ¼¤ + ®x ¯ y xt + ®x ¯ z zt + ®z zt+1jt ¡ ®x ¯ r (it¡1 ¡ ¼ t+1jt ¡ r¹):          (17)

It is a particular way of aggregating the information about the state of the economy, and hence,
a particular linear combination of ¼t+1jt , xt , zt and zt+1jt . Due to (12), it can equivalently be
written as a linear combination of ¼t , xt , zt and zt+1jt ,

        It¼ = ¼t ¡ ¼¤ + ®x (1 + ¯ y )xt + (®z + ®x ¯ z )zt + ®z zt+1jt ¡ ®x ¯ r (it¡1 ¡ ¼t+1jt ¡ r¹):         (18)


3.5      The inadequacy a money-growth indicator

How appropriate is a money-growth indicator of the kind suggested by the Eurosystem? First,
we need to derive a reference value “in a manner which is consistent with... price stability” (let
me leave the question whether the reference value also “will serve to achieve... price stability”
open for a while). By (7), money growth is given by

                            ¢mt+1 = ¼t+1 + ·y ¢yt ¡ ·i ¢it + ·z ¢zt + ¢º t+1 :                                (19)
  34
       The analogue of (16) under Brainard-type [9] parameter uncertainty is easily derived, cf. Svensson [69].




                                                          20
       Let the reference value, ¢m¤ , be the average money-growth consistent with average in‡ation
equal to the in‡ation target.35 Average money growth is given by the unconditional expectation

                 E[¢mt+1 ] = E[¼t+1 + ·y ¢yt ¡ ·i ¢it + ¢º t+1 ] = E[¼t ] + ·y E[¢yt ];                      (20)

where I have used that average in‡ation is bounded and that the unconditional mean of the
exogenous variable is zero, which implies E[¢zt ] = E[¢it ] = 0. Furthermore, consistency with
the in‡ation target requires
                                                  E[¼t ] = ¼¤ :                                              (21)

Then the reference value that is “consistent with price stability” is given by

                                           ¢m¤ ´ ¼¤ + ·y E[¢yt ]:                                            (22)

       Note that this reference value is consistent with the Eurosystem’s derivation. Identify pre-
dicted trend growth in output with average output growth, E[¢yt ].36 By (7), (log) velocity is
given by
                    vt+1 ´ pt+1 + yt+1 ¡ mt+1 = yt+1 ¡ ·y yt + ·i it ¡ ·z zt ¡ º t+1 :                       (23)

Then the velocity trend is

             E[¢vt+1 ] = E[¢yt+1 ¡ ·y ¢yt + ·i ¢it ¡ ·z ¢zt ¡ ¢º t+1 ] = (1 ¡ ·y )E[¢yt ]:                   (24)

Thus, the reference value is

                                 ¼¤ + E[¢yt ] ¡ E[¢vt ] = ¼¤ + ·y E[¢yt ];                                   (25)

which agrees with (22).
       The Eurosystem suggests that “[d]eviations of current monetary growth from the reference
value would, under normal circumstances, signal risks to price stability.” Let us examine whether
this is the case. De…ne the money-growth indicator

                                             Itm ´ ¢mt ¡ ¢m¤ :                                               (26)

By (19) and (22) we get

                 Itm = (¼t ¡ ¼¤ ) + ·y (¢yt¡1 ¡ E[¢yt ]) ¡ ·i ¢it¡1 + ·z ¢zt¡1 + ¢º t :                      (27)
  35
     This is an unconditional reference value, independent of the current state of the economy. Se appendix B of
the conference version of this paper for a discussion of a conditional reference value that can serve as a complex
(and nontransparent) frequently adjusted money-growth target, the ful…llment of which is equivalent to strict
in‡ation targeting.
  36
     That is, I assume that the unconditional and the conditional forecast of the growth of potential output are
             n
equal, Et ¢yt+1  = E[¢ytn ], and use E[¢yt ] = E[¢ytn ].


                                                       21
It is not clear what this money-growth indicator signals. Above all, it is not clear why it would
signal “risks to price stability” or in‡ationary or de‡ationary pressure, except that the …rst term
on the right side of (27) is the current deviation of in‡ation from the in‡ation target. However,
this term is quite trivial and does not need a monetary indicator to be observed. Besides, it only
contains very partial information; it is only one of several components of the optimal in‡ation-
forecast indicator It¼ , cf. (18). The money-growth indicator can be of either sign, independent
of the sign of It¼ or whether It¼ is zero and no change in the instrument is required. Thus, the
money-growth indicator Itm does generally not indicate in which direction the instrument should
be changed. It mainly seems to be a noisy indicator of ¼t ¡ ¼¤ .
    Note that the money-growth indicator would still be inferior, if money had a more direct
role in the transmission mechanism (6) and (4). Assume, for instance, that there is a real-
balance e¤ect on aggregate demand, such that (4) has an additional term ¯ m (mt ¡ pt ) on the
right side. This implies that (log) real balances, mt ¡ pt , is an additional state variable. Then
the optimal reaction function (11), under strict in‡ation targeting, would have the additional
        ¯m
term    ¯ r (mt ¡ pt )   on the right side. Furthermore, the two-year-ahead in‡ation forecast (13) and
the in‡ation-forecast indicators (17) and (18) would have the additional term ®x ¯ m (mt ¡ pt )
on the right side. Real balances become one of the inputs in the in‡ation forecast, but the
money-growth indicator (26) would be equally inappropriate as an indicator of risks to price
stability.


3.5.1     Strict money-growth targeting

If the money-growth indicator were meaningful, targeting money-growth, in the sense of mini-
mizing the deviations of money growth from the reference value (that is, strict money-growth
targeting), should not be an unreasonable policy. The interest rate should then be set so that
the one-year-ahead conditional forecast of the money-growth indicator equals zero,

                                                  m
                                                 It+1jt = 0:                                     (28)

Solving for the corresponding change in the interest rate gives
                                 1                  ·y                ·z    1
                         ¢it =      (¼t+1jt ¡ ¼¤ ) + (¢yt ¡ E[¢yt ]) + ¢zt ¡ º t :               (29)
                                 ·i                 ·i                ·i    ·i
Let us compare this to the optimal interest rate adjustment according to (16) and (17),

                      1                     ¯y   ¯        ®z
             ¢it =          (¼t+1jt ¡ ¼¤ ) + xt + z zt +       z      ¡ (it¡1 ¡ ¼t+1jt ¡ r¹):    (30)
                     ®x ¯ r                 ¯r   ¯r      ®x ¯ r t+1jt

                                                     22
                                                                                           m
       It is clear that these two reaction functions are quite di¤erent, and that setting It+1jt equal
to zero would normally create considerable variability in in‡ation, since (30) minimizes in‡ation
variability. Note that this would be true even if velocity shocks were zero, º t ´ 0. Not only
are the coe¢cients di¤erent, the reaction functions also involve di¤erent variables, above-trend
output growth for monetary targeting (¢yt ¡ E[¢yt ]) and the output gap for strict in‡ation
targeting (xt ). Furthermore, they are of di¤erent forms, in the sense that (29) is a di¤erence
form whereas (30) is basically a level form, see (11). Rudebusch and Svensson [63] con…rm
empirically that (29) is a very ine¢cient reaction function.37
       Thus, as Taylor [76] has observed, money-growth targeting implies a particular reaction
function. However, in contrast to what is indicated by Taylor himself, this reaction function
may be quite di¤erent from the reaction function with which he is associated and promotes; and
even more so when more realistic demand functions are considered, see below.
       A reaction function like (29) may seem attractive for the simple reason that it requires
minimum information, in the sense that only parameters of the money demand function is needed
(although those parameters may not be easily estimated at the onset of EMU). However, this does
not change the fact that this minimum information seems to be the wrong minimum information;
it is simply inadequate to e¢ciently stabilize in‡ation. One aspect is that a lower interest rate
sensitivity of money demand, a lower coe¢cient ·i , would, everything else equal, require larger
interest rate changes. The magnitude of ·i is, of course, related to the controllability of money
demand; Cabrero, Escrivá, Muñoz and Peñalosa [19] show that current estimates of potential
aggregate money-demand functions for the EMU indicate that monetary aggregates would be
considerably less controllable in the EMU than in Germany, even if the parameters were stable,
and hence require larger interest changes to ful…ll a given monetary target.


3.5.2      Other money-demand formulations

Furthermore, this inadequacy of monetary targeting is not due to the assumed adjustment lag
for money demand. In order to stack the cards in favor of the money-growth indicator, assume
that money-growth adjusts without a lag, so that

                              ¢mt = ¼t + ·y ¢yt ¡ ·i ¢it + ·z ¢zt + ¢º t :                                  (31)
  37                                                                                 ¯m
     Furthermore, a real-balance e¤ect on aggregate demand would only add the term   ¯ r (mt   ¡ pt ) on the right
side of (30) and not make (29) more attractive.




                                                    23
The money-growth indicator would then be

                  Itm = (¼t ¡ ¼¤ ) + ·y (¢yt ¡ E[¢yt ]) ¡ ·i ¢it + ·z ¢zt + ¢º t :             (32)

It is now directly a¤ected by the current instrument and can hence not be observed before
the instrument setting. It does not seem more informative about in‡ationary or de‡ationary
pressure.
   Solving for the interest rate change that makes the current money-growth indicator equal to
zero gives
                           1               ·y                ·z    1
                   ¢it =      (¼t ¡ ¼ ¤ ) + (¢yt ¡ E[¢yt ]) + ¢zt + ¢vt :                      (33)
                           ·i              ·i                ·i    ·i
This is similar to (29), except that current in‡ation is substituted for the one-year-ahead in‡ation
forecast and that the velocity term is di¤erent. This reaction function is still inadequate, even
in the absence of velocity shocks.
   Considering a more realistic money-demand function does not make the money-growth indi-
cator or the reaction function corresponding to strict monetary targeting more attractive. This
is demonstrated in appendix C of the conference version of this paper, which considers a typical
empirical quarterly money-growth demand equation for western German M3 estimated by Ger-
lach [39]. Other similar money-demand equations, for instance those estimated and discussed
in Issing and Tödter [48] or Wolters, Teräsvirta and Lütkepohl [81], would give similar results.
Rudebusch and Svensson [63] con…rm the ine¢ciency of money-growth targeting for the United
States and Europe, with empirical money-demand functions.
   A general way of understanding the inadequacy of money-growth indicators and money-
growth targeting is to recall the tradeo¤ between in‡ation variability and money-growth vari-
ability, illustrated in …gure 1. Strict in‡ation targeting minimizes in‡ation variability around
the in‡ation target, which leads to substantial money-growth variability. Strict money-growth
targeting minimizes money-growth variability around the money-growth target, which can be
chosen such that average in‡ation equals the in‡ation target, but money-growth targeting leads
to considerable in‡ation variability around the in‡ation target. This would be the case even if
money-demand shocks were zero, for the simple reason that the reaction function that stabilizes
money growth is manifestedly di¤erent from the reaction function that minimizes in‡ation vari-
ability (or minimizes a weighted average of in‡ation variability and output-gap variability, cf.
…gure 2).



                                                24
3.6    Summary

There are many sensible aspects of the Eurosystem’s October 13 announcement, for instance,
the choice of the MUICP (which does not include interest-rate costs) as the main index, the
focus on the euro area as a whole, the warning about unavoidable and uncontrollable short-
term volatility of prices, the emphasis on the medium term, and the rejection of money-growth
targeting. Still, the announcement and the strategy proposed have a number of conspicuous
de…ciencies.
    First, the statement that the Eurosystem “will focus strictly on [the price stability] objective”
is somewhat at variance with the medium-term emphasis, since the medium-term horizon can be
rationalized by a concern about output-gap variability and, hence, correspond to ‡exible in‡ation
targeting and a loss function like (2). Second, the strategy gives a prominent role to an essentially
useless monetary reference value and monetary indicator, in analysis and communication. Third,
although the strategy assigns a major role to an in‡ation forecast, and this forecast will, in
practice, be crucial for policy decisions, the Eurosystem (for no good reasons; cf. the quote from
Duisenberg [26] above) does not intend to focus communication on this forecast, but instead
intends to keep it secret and therefore completely nontransparent.38
    Thus, as many commentators have noticed, the Eurosystem seems to have opted for a fair
amount of ambiguity, relatively little transparency and considerable discretion. What could be
the explanation for this choice? Potential explanations are a desire to maximize continuity with
the Bundesbank and a general desire to maximize independence and discretion, and a belief that
the latter is best achieved by avoiding transparency and accountability.
    What could motivate a desire for a continuity with Bundesbank? Two possibilities are that
(1) the Eurosystem, thereby, hopes to inherit some credibility from the Bundesbank and (2) the
Eurosystem does not want to disappoint the German public.
    But why would continuity with the Bundesbank be the best way of gaining credibility?
Bundesbank’s credibility seems to depend on its in‡ation record and not on its monetary tar-
geting record. Given the many misses of the monetary targets, it appears that Bundesbank’s
credibility is in spite of the monetary-targeting framework, not thanks to it. It seems that
Bundesbank’s in‡ation record has brought respectability and (in‡ation-)credibility to monetary
targeting rather than the other way around. Monetary targeting, measured as the frequency
  38
     Issing [45] has defended the transparency and accountability of the Eurosystem with reference to the frequence
and volume of information the Eurosystem intends to make public; content, and not frequency and volume, is the
relevant aspect, though.



                                                        25
of hits, may not have been more successful in Germany than in many other countries where
monetary targeting has eventually been o¢cially abandoned. This is certainly consistent with
the conclusion above that Bundesbank, in e¤ect, has pursued in‡ation targeting rather than
monetary targeting.
   If the above argument is correct, alleged monetary targeting need not give the Eurosystem
any credibility per se. Instead, it must maintain any initial credibility, and gain any new cred-
ibility, by showing a good track record for in‡ation. The absence of an initial track record
together with an ambiguous and intellectually weak strategy with irrelevant money-growth ref-
erence values and ad hoc explanations for unavoidable misses is unlikely to enhance credibility
and more likely to diminish it.
   Why would it be important not to disappoint the German public? It seems that the German
public has been led to believe that monetary targeting is an essential part of Bundesbank’s im-
pressive in‡ation record. Furthermore, it appears that the German public’s (still quite reluctant)
acceptance of Germany joining the EMU is, to a large extent, conditional on the understanding
that the Eurosystem will behave very similar to the Bundesbank. Announcing a strategy de-
viating too much from Bundesbank’s o¢cial strategy would then be politically dangerous and
endanger the Eurosystem’s legitimacy with the German public. The Eurosystem might already
have done as much as it dares, by rejecting monetary targeting and even daring to mention the
major role of an in‡ation forecast?
   On the other hand, in the new political situation in Germany, with the new government being
doubtful about Bundesbank and Eurosystem monetary policy, too much loyalty to Bundesbank’s
o¢cial framework may back…re. More transparent and direct communication, together with an
intellectually stronger strategy, might be more e¤ective, as further discussed in sections 5 and 6.
   A desire to maximize independence and discretion by minimizing transparency and account-
ability is probably natural to any bureaucracy. However, this way of maximizing independence
may be quite ine¤ective, since the political legitimacy of the Eurosystem may be weakened from
a perceived lack of transparency and accountability. Furthermore, a lack of transparency makes
it more di¢cult to rebut criticism. Whereas pragmatic monetary targeting may have been very
e¤ective for achieving and maintaining Bundesbank’s independence in the 1970s, see von Hagen
[80], the political situation for the Eurosystem is quite di¤erent and there is no reason why this
should be e¤ective now. As argued in section 6, transparency and accountability may be more
e¤ective for safeguarding the Eurosystem’s independence and maintaining monetary stability in


                                                26
the EMU in the long run.


4     Achieving price stability: Targets and the framework for pol-
      icy decisions

This section tries to specify the most e¢cient way for the Eurosystem of ful…lling its objectives
according to the Maastricht Treaty. The Eurosystem basically needs to translate the objectives
into operational targets, and then …nd the framework for policy decisions that best achieves
those operational targets.


4.1   Specifying the targets

The Eurosystem’s operational de…nition of price stability has been interpreted above as a target
range for the MUICP-in‡ation between 1 and 2 percent, with the interval’s midpoint, ¼¤ = 1.5
percent, as the in‡ation target. Alternatively, the de…nition might be interpreted as a target
range of 0–2 percent, with the midpoint and in‡ation target equal to 1 percent. To ensure
transparency of the de…nition, the Eurosystem would need to remove the ambiguity about the
lower bound and the midpoint. Furthermore, the Eurosystem’s statement about the medium
term would need to be operational. In line with other in‡ation-targeting central banks, the
appropriate horizon for the in‡ation forecast to equal the in‡ation targets may be in the 1.5–2.5
years range, depending upon the nature of the disturbance and the initial deviation from the
target. There will be short-term volatility of in‡ation, part of which the Eurosystem cannot
control due to the unavoidable lags in the e¤ects of monetary policy, part of which it should
not attempt to control, since that would require drastic instrument adjustments likely to cause
undue volatility of economic variables other than in‡ation. This corresponds to ‡exible in‡ation
targeting, and a loss function like (2) with ¸ > 0.
    After a few years, when some experience has been gained and the policy regime can be
evaluated, the Eurosystem may want to reconsider its de…nition of price stability. In particular,
with more experience of in‡ation targeting in the EMU and in in‡ation-targeting countries
outside the EMU (perhaps after 5 or 10 years) the Eurosystem may want to consider price-level
targeting rather than in‡ation targeting. It is often forgotten that in‡ation targeting implies
base drift for the price level and hence a nonstationary price level. To call this price stability is
indeed misleading. True price stability would require a stationary or at least a trend-stationary


                                                 27
price level.39


4.2      The framework for policy decisions: How to set the repurchase rate

With an intertemporal loss function given by (1) and (2), the operational problem of the Eu-
rosystem is formally, …rst, to …nd a feasible set Y t of conditional forecasts of EMU in‡ation,
¼t ´ (¼t ; ¼t+1jt ; ¼ t+2jt ; :::), the EMU output gap, xt ´ (xt ; xt+1jt ; :::) and interest rate paths
it ´ (it ; it+1jt ; :::), and, second, to choose f¼t ; xt ; it g 2 Y t so as to minimize (1) with Lt given
by (2). The …rst element of the instrument path, it , is then the appropriate current instrument
setting. This is equivalent to considering the conditional forecasts ¼t and xt as intermediate
targets.
       For this purpose, the Eurosystem must be able to calculate EMU-wide conditional in‡ation
and output-gap forecasts. The Eurosystem must be able to calculate such forecasts for un-
changed interest rates, for arbitrarily given interest rate paths, and for arbitrary reaction func-
                                                                                      @                    @
tions. It must then also estimate and determine policy multipliers, like             @it ¼ t+T jt   and   @it xt+T jt .

It must determine the essential information input needed in these forecasts, and collect the
appropriate data.
       The Eurosystem must also be able to incorporate both model and extra-model information,
that is, di¤erent kinds of informal information, and to make judgemental adjustments. By its
nature, the in‡ation- and output-gap-forecasting framework actually enforces a certain amount
of discipline on judgemental adjustments. In order to motivate why a particular piece of in-
formation should in‡uence the current instrument setting, a convincing case must be presented
why this piece of information will a¤ect the in‡ation forecast or the output-gap forecast at a
horizon where monetary policy can have some e¤ect. Without such a case, there is no reason
for adjusting the instrument. Thus, “information needs to be …ltered through the forecasts,” in
order to have any e¤ect on the instrument.40
       Several in‡ation-targeting central banks have translated this framework into a condition of
the form
                                                 ¼t+T jt = ¼¤ ;                                                  (34)

where the horizon T is a function of current information. That is, an approximate …rst-order
condition for a minimum of the loss function is that the conditional in‡ation forecast for the
  39
     Svensson [72] and [73] provides some discussion of price-level targeting and references to the literature.
  40
     See Svensson [67] and [70] for further discussion. Svensson [73] discusses distribution forecast target as a
possible extension of mean forecast targeting, in order to incorporate model uncertainty and nonlinearities which
imply that certainty-equivalence no longer holds.


                                                       28
planned instrument path coincides with the in‡ation target for an appropriate horizon, where
the horizon may depend on the state of the economy.41 As discussed above in section 2, this
may allow a crucial role for the in‡ation-forecast indicator

                                           It¼ ´ ¦t+T jt (it¡1 ) ¡ ¼¤ ;                                      (35)

the conditional unchanged-interest-rate in‡ation forecast for this horizon. Desired changes in
the instrument are then indicated by

                                                          1
                                          ¢it =                       I¼:
                                                      @¦t+T jt (it¡1 ) t
                                                                                                             (36)
                                                  ¡       @it


4.3     Aggregated EMU forecasts vs. disaggregated national forecasts

As the October 13 announcement makes clear, the Eurosystem is concerned about the aggregate
HICP for the EMU as a whole, the MUICP. Should the Eurosystem then construct forecasts
directly for EMU-wide aggregates, or should these aggregate forecasts be constructed from dis-
aggregated national forecasts? Directly constructing forecasts for the EMU-wide aggregates
could have the advantage that some national forecast errors might cancel. On the other hand,
if the coe¢cients in the various aggregate supply and aggregate demand equations di¤er su¢-
ciently, forecast precision should be higher with disaggregated forecasts.42 For instance, MUICP
in‡ation ful…lls
                                                      J
                                                      X
                                               ¼t =         ! ¼j j
                                                              t ¼t ;                                         (37)
                                                      j=1

where ¼jt and ! ¼j                                                                   j
                t are HICP in‡ation in country j, j = 1; :::; J, and the weight of ¼ t in MUICP

in‡ation ¼t , respectively.43 Then, the T -period-ahead conditional in‡ation forecast is given by
                                                      X
                                          ¼t+T jt =        !¼j       j
                                                            t+T jt ¼ t+T jt                                  (38)
                                                      j

(where I disregard the conditional variance between ! ¼j        j
                                                      t+T and ¼ t+T ), and the policy multiplier
 @
@it ¼ t+T jt   will be given by
                                                                       j
                           @¼t+T jt    @ X ¼j       j
                                                            X ¼j @¼ t+T jt
                                    =       !     ¼       =   ! t+T jt     ;                                 (39)
                             @it      @it j t+T jt t+T jt   j
                                                                       @it
  41
      For instance, the horizon depends on the initial deviaton of in‡ation from the in‡ation target. See Svensson
[70] for discussion of alternative approximate …rst-order conditions.
  42
      There is considerable evidence of di¤erences in the transmission mechanism in the EMU Member States, for
instance due to di¤erences in the amount or the maturity of indebtedness, see for instance Begg [3], Dornbusch,
Favera and Giavazzi [25] and Ramaswamy and Sloek [61].
  43
      The country weights are computed every year and re‡ect the country’s share of private …nal domestic
consumption expenditure.


                                                          29
                               @ ¼j                                             @ j
(where I disregard the term   @it ! t+T jt ).   Since the policy multipliers   @it ¼ t+T jt   for HICP in‡ation
and other monetary policy responses in the di¤erent countries are likely to be di¤erent, it
seems that it will be necessary to start from national conditional forecasts and use nationally
disaggregated data. This also allows NCB models and accumulated experiences in forecasting
to be taken into account.
   Parallel to this, the Eurosystem would, of course, be wise to experiment with aggregate
models of the EMU transmission mechanism. Interestingly, Gerlach and Smets [40], Peersman
and Smets [58] and Taylor [78] have already estimated and used variants of the Rudebusch and
Svensson model [62] for the EMU area, with reasonable and encouraging results.


4.4   The transmission mechanism with a new common currency

The irrevocably …xed exchange rates, the new common currency and the new monetary policy
regime seem to imply considerable uncertainty about the transmission mechanism of monetary
policy and possibly shifts thereof. One issue is whether price- and wage-setting behavior, their
inertia and their sensitivity to output gaps and unemployment will change. That is, will aggre-
gate supply relations change? Another issue is whether the sensitivity to interest rate changes
of the output gap, unemployment and general real activity to interest rates will change. That
is, will aggregate demand relations change?
   ECB statements, for instance Issing [46], have warned that the formation of expectations
might change in the new circumstances, thereby making old relations unstable. I am not so
convinced; it seems that in‡ation expectations are already rather low and stable in Europe,
and absent major mistakes by the Eurosystem, there is no obvious reason why they should
change signi…cantly. Furthermore, in the absence of realignments of their central parities, the
core countries of the EMU have already e¤ectively had the same monetary policy and similar
in‡ation rates for several years.
   The introduction of the Euro will arguably mainly have consequences in the …nancial sector,
by increasing …nancial integration and …nancial competition, and by speeding up the rate of
…nancial innovation. On the other hand, considerable …nancial integration and innovation have
already taken place in several EU countries, following the liberalization and deregulation of the
…nancial markets. In some countries, there is already a fair amount of experience of monetary
policy under …nancial innovation.
   Given this, the e¤ects on aggregate supply and aggregate demand relations may be less


                                                       30
dramatic and more gradual, and the construction of reasonably reliable conditional forecasts
less di¢cult, than what appears at …rst sight.
       The most dramatic e¤ects will obviously concern the denomination and substitutability of
…nancial assets and monies. Consequently, the demand for the new currency is likely to be both
more unpredictable and potentially more unstable than anything else. It goes without saying
that this means that the information content of monetary aggregates becomes even smaller than
normal in the short and medium run, perhaps even in the long run.
       It may be sobering to recall that the introduction of in‡ation targeting in the United King-
dom, Sweden and Finland occurred under rather dramatic circumstances. The countries went
through dramatic boom-bust experiences, very serious banking and …nancial-sector crises, and
a sudden dramatic shift from a …xed exchange rate to a new monetary policy regime with a
‡oating exchange rate. Furthermore, this occurred in a situation with very low credibility for
monetary policy, with high and unstable in‡ation expectations, much above the announced in-
‡ation targets. At least for Sweden (where I am naturally more informed) the central bank’s
commitment to the …xed exchange rate was so strong that there was no contingency planning.
When the krona was ‡oated in November 1992, the new in‡ation-targeting regime, which was
announced in January 1993, had to be conceived from scratch (although, of course, with the
bene…t of the experiences mainly from New Zealand and Canada). It is not easy to rank dif-
…culties and changes in the transmission mechanism, but it seems to me that the di¢culties
facing the Eurosystem are still not of the same magnitude as the di¢culties that the central
banks of United Kingdom, Sweden and Finland were facing. Since those central banks have,
nevertheless, managed quite well, the odds for the Eurosystem may be quite good, provided it
adopts a similar framework for policy decisions.
       In particular, the Eurosystem seems to start in a situation when credibility is high, in the
sense that in‡ation expectations are low and stable. Low and stable in‡ation expectations are
likely to cause both considerable reversion of in‡ation towards the target and make the impact
of the monetary policy instrument larger, thus making the achievement of the Eurosystem’s
targets correspondingly easier.44
  44
       In order to see this, consider a forward-looking variant of the aggregate supply relation (6),
                                    ¼ t+1 = (1 ¡ ®¼ )¼t+2jt + ®¼ ¼ t + ®x xt + "t+1 :

where 0 < ®¼ < 1. With good credibility, the expectation term, ¼t+2jt , will be close to the in‡ation target, ¼ ¤ .
Consequently, there will be an automatic reversion towards the in‡ation target, which, in itself, makes in‡ation
targeting easier.
  With regard to the e¤ect of the instrument, in more elaborate models of the aggregate demand equation than
(4) (see Svensson [71] for an example and for references to the literature), aggregate demand is a¤ected by a


                                                           31
4.5    The role of monetary aggregates

What is the role of di¤erent monetary aggregates in this framework? A rational role for mone-
tary aggregates simply seems to be one set of indicators among many others, whose usefulness
exclusively depend on their performance in predicting in‡ation. Thus, the issue is simply how
useful current money growth is as an input in a two-year conditional in‡ation forecasts.
    Under normal circumstances, the information content of money growth for in‡ation forecasts
in the short and medium term seems to be quite low. In Estrella and Mishkin [28], money has
essentially no predictive power beyond lags of in‡ation and output in forecasting in‡ation for
the United States and Germany. Examining in‡ation forecasts for the United States, Stock
and Watson [65] also …nd low or no predictive power of money. These empirical …ndings are
consistent with the current conventional wisdom with regard to the transmission mechanism,
where money plays no role in the aggregate supply block determining in‡ation. Only in the long
run does a high correlation between money growth and in‡ation result.
    Under the special circumstances of the introduction of a new common currency, the demand
for money is likely to be quite unpredictable and possibly very unstable, since the main structural
changes are likely to occur in …nancial markets and banking. Then, the information content
of money is, a priori, likely to be even lower than under normal circumstances. Thus, the
uncertainty associated with the introduction of the new currency is an argument in favor of
relying less, rather than more, on monetary aggregates.


4.6    An instrument rule instead of in‡ation targeting?

Could the Eurosystem apply a simple instrument rule, where the instrument is speci…ed as a
simple function of a few observed macrovariables? Frequently discussed instrument rules include
those of Taylor [75] and Henderson and McKibbin [43]. Could the Eurosystem simply implement
those? If it did, it would seem to be the …rst time in monetary history. In practice, no central
bank follows an explicit instrument rule, in the sense of being committed ex ante to a particular
instrument rule.
    Such behavior would correspond to “interest-rate targeting,” in the following sense. Let the
               P1
variable ½t ´        (i
                 ¿ =0 t+¿ jt
                             ¡ ¼ t+¿ jt ¡ r¹) which is approximately proportional to a long real interest rate, rtT ,
according to ½t ¼ T (rtT ¡ r¹), where T is the maturity of the real interest Prate. With high credibility, in‡ation
                                                                                1
expectations ¼t+¿jt are approximately equal to the in‡ation target, so ½t ¼ ¿ =0 (it+¿jt ¡ ¼ ¤ ¡ r¹) and potentially
more strongly a¤ected by expected future short nominal rates than when expectations are more variable.




                                                         32
period-loss function be
                                             1
                                         Lt = (it ¡ i¤t )2 ;                                   (40)
                                             2
where i¤t is a time-varying interest-rate target, a time-varying target-level for the central bank’s
instrument, a short interest rate. For instance, let the interest rate be given by a Taylor rule
with interest smoothing,

                       i¤t ´ ½it¡1 + (1 ¡ ½)[¹
                                             r + ¼¤ + 1:5(¼t ¡ ¼¤ ) + 0:5xt ];                 (41)

where 0 < ½ < 1.
   Clearly, a …rst-order-condition for minimizing (1) with the period loss function (40) is simply

                                              it = i¤t .                                       (42)

   I believe it is obvious that no central bank is committed to a period loss function of this
kind, with a corresponding interest rate target. Every central bank would be likely to resist any
attempt to commit it to such behavior. No central bank reacts in a prescribed mechanical way to
a prescribed information set. Every central bank uses more information than what the frequently
suggested simple rules rely on. As further discussed in Svensson [70] and [73], the role of simple
or complex instrument rules, as opposed to “targeting rules”, is, in practice, never to commit
the banks to the rules. At most, they serve as base-lines, that is, as comparisons and frames
of reference, for the actual policy and its evaluation. Thus, even under normal circumstances,
they are not a substitute for a framework for policy decisions. Under the special circumstances
at the onset of the EMU, it would obviously be a particularly formidable challenge to …x the
parameters of a simple instrument rule, including the average real interest rate.
   Even if central banks are not committed to follow a particular instrument rule, this does
not exclude that central banks’ behavior ex post may be similar to a simple instrument rule.
If current in‡ation and the current output gap are approximate su¢cient statistics for the
state of the economy and together with the instrument constitute the major determinants of
future in‡ation and the output gap, a central bank pursuing ‡exible in‡ation targeting will, in
systematic way, react to current in‡ation and output ( for instance, as in (11) when zt ´ 0).
But if additional variables are considered relevant determinants of future in‡ation and output
gaps, such a central bank will also react to those determinants (as in (11) when zt 6= 0).
   Interestingly, Gerlach and Smets [40], Peersman and Smets [58] and Taylor [78] have already
estimated and used variants of the simple Rudebusch and Svensson model [62] for the EMU

                                                 33
area. Their results indicate that reaction functions similar to the Taylor rule are likely to
perform reasonably well for the EMU. As for the United States, the reaction functions in Taylor
[75] and Henderson and McKibbin [43], although not optimal, could thus perhaps serve as rough
benchmarks, but not as rules, for the interest rates actually set by the Eurosystem.


5     Exchange-rate management

The EMU will be a more closed economy than the individual Member States of the EMU. What
implications does this have for the exchange-rate management and the exchange-rate variability
of the Euro relative to third-country currencies? This has been discussed at length in the
literature, with regard to exchange-rate policy both relative to the currencies of the “outs,” the
countries in the European Union who are not members of the EMU (Greece, Sweden and the
United Kingdom) and relative to the large currencies, the US dollar and the yen.45 Here, I will
brie‡y discuss two issues, the institutional framework for exchange-rate policy in the EMU and
the role of exchange rate policy under in‡ation targeting in a relatively closed economy.


5.1    Exchange-rate policy in the EMU

The institutional framework for exchange-rate policy in the EMU is speci…ed in the Maastricht
Treaty. As is widely known, this constitutes a major inconsistency in the Treaty. As almost every
undergraduate economics student would know (but, it seems, not many legislators), monetary
and exchange rate policy cannot be separated under free capital mobility. A particular monetary
policy implies a particular exchange rate policy, and vice versa.46 Nevertheless, whereas the
Maastricht Treaty has assigned monetary policy decisions to the Eurosystem, it has assigned
decisions about exchange-rate policy for the Euro to the Council of the European Union, that
is, in practice the Council of …nance ministers of the EMU Member States.
    More precisely, Article 109(1) in the Treaty speci…es that the Council, “acting unanimously,
may conclude formal agreements on an exchange rate system for the [Euro].” By a quali…ed
majority, the Council may “adopt, adjust or abandon the central rates of the [Euro] within the
exchange rate system.” Furthermore, such decisions can only be taken after “consulting the
ECB in an endeavour [emphasis added] to reach a consensus consistent with the objective of
  45
     See, for instance, Persson and Tabellini [59] on the relation between ins and outs and Begg, Giavazzi and
Wyplosz [5] on exchange rate policy relative to the rest of the world.
  46
     This is most easily seen from uncovered interest parity, where expected depreciation is related to the interest-
rate di¤erential between domestic and foreign interest rates. Thus, under free capital mobility, interest rates cannot
be set independently of exchange rates, and vice versa.


                                                         34
price stability.” This seems to provide far from complete protection of the primary objective of
price stability.
    In addition, Article 109(2) speci…es that, in the absence of an exchange rate system, the
Council, acting by a quali…ed majority, “may formulate general orientations for exchange rate
policy in relation to these [non-Community] currencies.” Here, however, the primary objective
seems better protected: “These general orientations shall be without prejudice to the primary
objective of the Eurosystem to maintain price stability.” Furthermore, in its meeting in Luxem-
bourg, December 13, 1997, the European Council declared that such general orientations may
be formulated “in exceptional circumstances, for example in the case of a clear misalignment....”
and that these general orientations “should always respect the independence of the ESCB and
be consistent with the primary objective of the ESCB to maintain price stability..” Still, it is
not clear whether it is the council of …nance ministers or the Eurosystem that decides whether
a particular general orientation is without prejudice to the primary objective or not.47
    Thus, the Maastricht Treaty contains a conspicuous inconsistency and a potential threat to
the independence of the Eurosystem, by giving governments a potential direct in‡uence over
monetary policy. This need not be an innocuous inconsistency, with the rise of new social-
democrat and/or leftist governments in the European Union (currently only Spain and Ireland
have non-socialist or non-social-democrat governments), several of which have challenged the
Eurosystem and called for lower interest rates and monetary policy aiming at increasing growth
and employment. In particular, the new German chancellor and the …nance ministers of Germany
and France have been very vocal, the …nance ministers also asking for exchange-rate target zones.
This is certainly of some signi…cance, given that the Maastricht Treaty gives the governments
of the EMU the right to introduce such target zones. To quote the French …nance minister,
Strauss-Kahn [66],
      “... we should also monitor developments in exchange markets, and stand ready
      to express views on these developments, as well as make use if necessary of the
      provisions of art. 109 of the Maastricht treaty. There is in my view no contradiction
      between price stability and the reasonable degree of exchange rate stability we should
      be aiming at, but this will obviously require close co-operation between the ministers
      of the Euro-11, whose responsibility for exchange rate policy is clearly stated in the
   47
      The new Riksbank Law in Sweden provides a clever solution to this dilemma. Although the government
gets to decide on the exchange rate system, the Riksbank gets to decide on the implementation of the exchange
rate system, including central parities if there is a …xed exchange rate system. Thus, if the government tried to
circumvent the objective of price stability written into the law by deciding on a …xed exchange rate system against
a weak currency (or a basket of weak currencies), the Riksbank could still ful…ll the price-stability objective by
regularly revaluing the krona. Still, with regard to the exchange-rate policy (but not with regard to the primary
objective and the independence of the Riksbank) the new law is a deterioration, in that the previous law allowed
the Riksbank, as one of the few central banks in the world, to decide on the exchange-rate system itself.


                                                        35
      treaty, and the ECB, which has the duty of maintaining price stability. Or aim
      should be to make clear to our partners, and to the markets, that speculations about
      a ‘European benign neglect’ are entirely misplaced.” [Emphasis added.]
      “A reasonable degree of exchange rate stability between the dollar and the euro will
      not only be required on bilateral grounds. It will also be a public good for the
      world economy, that will bene…t to [sic] a large number of countries with diversi…ed
      trade and …nancial relations. Europe and the US will have a joint responsibility in
      delivering this public good, and... we should discuss with our American friends how
      best to avoid the coexistence of two large currency zones, whose degree of openness
      is limited, giving rise to a kind of ‘reciprocal benign neglect’.”48

    Thus, the classic time-consistency problem may not be dead in Europe. Short-run political
manipulation of monetary policy cannot be excluded, either via political pressure on the Gov-
erning Council, or via decisions on exchange-rate management. The latter can appear either in
the form of formal agreements with non-Community countries (although they do not seem very
likely and require unanimity by the governments) or in the form of general orientations (which
may be more likely and only requires quali…ed majority).
    What is the best defence of the Eurosystem in the face of such an onslaught? I am afraid that
the traditional instinctive reaction of many central bankers when attacked is to hide behind less
transparency and more ambiguity. I believe this is an increasingly inappropriate and ine¤ective
method of defense. Instead, I believe more transparency is a more appropriate defense and
probably also more e¤ective. As further discussed in section 6, with clear targets, transparent
explanations and, in particular, published in‡ation forecasts, the Eurosystem can explain its case
more convincingly, and the critics are forced to be more speci…c. Do they want to change the
targets; if so, do they understand the consequences? Do they believe that their own analyses
and forecasts are better? Do they realize that exchange rate management could jeopardize
the in‡ation target? Do they realize that ‡exible in‡ation targeting, to some extent, takes the
stability of the output gap into account? More transparency would seem to help the Eurosystem
win the debate and maintain its professional reputation and political legitimacy.49
    Criticism of the Eurosystem and demands for a more expansionary policy can cause two un-
fortunate deviations from the appropriate policy. The Eurosystem may pursue a more restrictive
policy to demonstrate its independence and attempt to gain or not to lose credibility. Or the Eu-
rosystem may pursue a more expansionary policy than appropriate, in order to de‡ect criticism
  48
     Strauss-Kahn gave his remarks at a CEPR meeting in London. In a previous CEPR Occasional Paper, Begg,
Giavazzi and Wyplosz [5] had stated that “most of the time the European and the US authorities will treat the
dollar-euro rate with benign neglect.”
  49
     I interpret the Swedish experience of the last few years as an example of how an open and transparent central
bank essentially has won a similar debate with its critics.


                                                       36
and avoid more substantial consequences. In both cases, it seems that high transparency would
make it easier for the Eurosystem to stay the course and defend the appropriateness of its policy.
Furthermore, high transparency would increase the incentive to stay the course, since deviations
from the appropriate policy would be more easily discovered and the costs of associated losses
of credibility would be higher.


5.2      Exchange-rate management under in‡ation targeting

Leaving the possibility of government interference in exchange-rate policy aside, what is the role
of exchange-rate management under in‡ation targeting in a relatively closed economy like the
EMU? In an open economy, the exchange rate channel is an essential part of the transmission
mechanism for monetary policy. The exchange rate a¤ects the target variables of monetary
policy, in‡ation and the output gap, in di¤erent subchannels. There is a direct exchange rate
channel via import prices to CPI in‡ation, with, normally, a relatively short lag. There are also
indirect exchange rate channels. The real exchange rate a¤ects aggregate demand, with a lag,
which a¤ects the output gap and, with another lag, in‡ation. The exchange rate also a¤ects
aggregate supply with a lag, since costs of production are a¤ected by the costs of imported
intermediate inputs, and wage compensation is a¤ected by CPI changes caused by exchange
rate changes.
       The exchange rate is, in turn, a¤ected by interest-rate di¤erentials, foreign-exchange risk
premia, various foreign disturbances, including the credibility of the in‡ation target and related
expectations of future exchange rates. Therefore, the exchange rate is important under in‡ation
targeting in an open economy, both in transmitting the e¤ects of interest rate setting and in
transmitting various disturbances. Since some foreign disturbances are transmitted through the
exchange rate, and the exchange rate a¤ects CPI in‡ation, there is some element of stabilizing
exchange rates under CPI-in‡ation targeting.50            51


       In a more closed economy, the importance of the exchange rate and the exchange rate channel
  50
     More speci…cally, from results in Svensson [71], there seems to be a considerable amount of inherent exchange-
rate stabilization under ‡exible CPI-in‡ation targeting. In contrast, under strict CPI-in‡ation targeting, when
CPI in‡ation is the only target variable in the central bank’s loss function, the loss function is minimized if CPI
in‡ation is stabilized at the shortest possible horizon. Since the direct exchange rate channel seems to be the
channel with the shortest transmission lag, this implies considerable reliance on exchange rate movements to
stabilize CPI-in‡ation via compensating movements of import prices. This seems to result in high variability not
only of nominal and real exchange rates but also the output gap and other variables than CPI in‡ation. Thus,
with some weight on the stability of other variables than CPI in‡ation, strict in‡ation targeting appears to be an
unsuitable policy. Flexible CPI-in‡ation targeting, with some weight on output-gap stability, implies targeting
in‡ation at a longer horizon and seems to achieve a good compromise between stabilizing CPI in‡ation, the output
gap and the real exchange rate.
  51
     Brash [10] provides an illuminating discussion of exchange-rate problems under in‡ation targeting in New
Zealand.


                                                        37
is obviously smaller. Intuition suggests that exchange-rate variability is likely to be larger under
in‡ation targeting in a relatively closed economy compared to a relatively open one, since the
impact on the CPI will be less and the need to stabilize the exchange rate to stabilize CPI
in‡ation will be less.52
    Variable real exchange rates can, of course, also cause problems in a relatively closed economy,
for instance, by causing variability in the relative size of the tradable and nontradable sectors. In
principle, ‡exible in‡ation targeting need not be inconsistent with some weight on real exchange
rate stability. In the same way as we can consider an output gap in (5), we can consider a
real exchange-rate gap, qt ¡ qtn , where qt is the log real exchange rate in period t and qtn is
a log “natural” real exchange rate, although estimating a natural real exchange rate may be
more di¢cult than estimating a potential output level, for instance because it may be more
variable. Given an appropriately estimated real exchange rate, ‡exible in‡ation targeting can
be consistent with a period loss function of the form

                                1
                            Lt = [(¼t ¡ ¼¤ )2 + ¸(yt ¡ ytn )2 + ¸q (qt ¡ qtn )2 ];                          (43)
                                2

with some weight ¸q on stabilizing the real exchange rate. Of course, any bias in estimates of
the natural real exchange rate, as for estimates of the potential output level, would potentially
result in a (positive or negative) in‡ation bias. A loss function like (43) might be equivalent to
a loss function with some weight on stabilizing the output gaps in the tradable and nontradable
sectors separately. The result of (43) would generally be some stabilization of the real exchange
rate at the cost of some increased variability of in‡ation, that is, the output gap, or both.
    Although such inclusion of real exchange rate stability is not inconsistent with ‡exible in‡a-
tion targeting, it is associated with several di¢culties. The problem of estimating the natural
real exchange rate and corresponding risks for the average in‡ation bias has already been men-
tioned. Another is the transparency of the regime. Generally, transparency would tend to be
smaller, and the amount of discretion larger, the more target variables there are in the loss
function. It seems that the Eurosystem would probably be wise to avoid considering the real
exchange rate too much (beyond its e¤ect on EMU-wide in‡ation and the output gap), except
perhaps if serious misalignments seem to result (to the extent that these can be identi…ed and
veri…ed). (This would mean that the real exchange rate still enters the loss function, although in
some more complicated, nonlinear way, that need not a¤ect monetary policy in normal times.)
  52
     Still, as examined in Martin [53] and discussed in Begg, Giavazzi and Wyplosz [5] and Begg [3], the relation
need not necessarily be monotionic.


                                                       38
         That ‡exible in‡ation targeting can, to some extent, incorporate some weight on real ex-
change rate stabilization does, of course, not make the problem with the control of exchange rate
policy in the EMU less serious. For one thing, “stabilizing the exchange rate” is, in practice,
likely to mean either “preventing a real appreciation” or “achieving a real depreciation” for the
…nance ministers concerned in EMU, with all the accompanying in‡ation-bias consequences.


6         Transparency

6.1        The general role of transparency in monetary policy

What is the role of transparency in monetary policy? Consider the following three-part scheme
for e¢cient delegation of monetary policy in a democratic society: (1) society (the collective
of the citizens) announces goals for monetary policy, (2) the central bank receives instrument
independence to pursue the goals without short-term political inference, and (3) the central
bank is accountable to society for ful…lling the goals. Transparency of the goals and the policy
is then crucial for the accountability of the central bank, that is, for society’s monitoring and
evaluation of monetary policy. Transparency thus improves the central bank’s incentives to
pursue the announced goals. Transparency may also facilitate public understanding of monetary
policy and make monetary policy more predictive, which may stabilize in‡ation expectations
and increase the credibility of monetary policy. Improved public understanding and increased
credibility is likely to facilitate the implementation of monetary policy and thereby contribute
to the achievement of the goals.53
         This view of the role of transparency is supported in recent work by Faust and Svensson [34].
Building on a previous work by Cukierman and Meltzer [22], Faust and Svensson examine the
role of transparency in a model with a central bank that is tempted to deviate from an announced
in‡ation target due to ‡uctuations in an idiosyncratic component of the bank’s goals, exempli…ed
by an employment target. The employment target is private information to the central bank
and unobservable to the private sector. For instance, it represents changes in the composition of
the Board, or the response of the bank to external pressure from various special interests. The
private sector observes the macroeconomic outcome and imperfectly infers the central bank’s
employment target, which inference a¤ects the bank’s reputation in the private sector and the
corresponding private-sector in‡ation expectations.
    53
         See section 4 on the bene…ts of increased credibility.



                                                            39
    Increased transparency allows the private sector to infer the bank’s employment target with
greater precision, which makes the bank’s reputation and the corresponding private-sector in‡a-
tion expectations more sensitive to the bank’s actions. This, in turn, increases the cost for the
bank of deviating from the announced in‡ation target and pursuing its idiosyncratic employment
target. Consequently, increased transparency induces the bank to follow the announced policy
more closely. It simply provides an implicit commitment mechanism that reduces the bank’s
discretion to deviate from the announced policy.54
    Faust and Svensson show that society almost always prefers more transparency to less,
whereas the central bank often prefers less transparency to more, since this gives the bank more
discretion to pursue its idiosyncratic goals with less cost to its reputation. An obvious conclusion
from this …nding is that society, rather than the central bank, should decide on the degree of
transparency.


6.2    Transparency of Eurosystem monetary policy

To what extent is the Eurosystem accountable, and how transparent should it be?55 Article
105(1) in the Maastricht Treaty announces the goal for monetary policy. This corresponds to
part (1) of the three-part delegation of monetary policy referred to above, if the Maastricht
Treaty is interpreted as re‡ecting the European society. The Maastricht Treaty also speci…es
the independence of the Eurosystem, corresponding to part (2) of the delegation. Since the
announcement of the goal in article 105(1) is not su¢ciently speci…c to be operational, the in-
dependence of the Eurosystem also includes its formulating operational goals consistent with
the general goal. Whereas the Maastricht Treaty hence takes care of part (1) and part (2), it
is unfortunately rather weak on part (3), the accountability of the Eurosystem. Article 109b(3)
only speci…es that the ECB shall present an annual report of the activities of the Eurosystem
to the European Parliament (EP), the Council of the European Union and the European Com-
mission, and that the members of the Executive Board may be heard by committees of the
European Parliament, at the EP’s or at their own initiative. Article 15 of the Protocol (No 3)
  54
     McCallum [54] has expressed doubts about the relevance of discretion equilibria and argued that central banks
can achieve the commitment equilibrium and “just do it,” although without specifying a mechanism which would
make such behavior consistent with an equilibrium. The results of Faust and Svensson [34] can be interpreted as
suggesting such a mechanism.
  55
     For more discussion of the accountability and transparency of the Eurosystem, see Begg [3], Begg, De Grauwe,
Giavazzi, Uhlig and Wyplosz [4], Bini Smaghi [8] and Blanchard, Gros, Emerson, Mayer, Saint-Paul, Sinn and
Tabellini [42]. Buiter [15] and [16] has critized the Eurosystem with regard to its accountability and transparency
and compared it unfavorably with Bank of England; Issing [45] and Duisenberg [26] have defended the Eurosystem.
For general discussions of central-bank accountability and transparency, see Briault, Haldane and King [11] and
de Haan, Amtenbrink and Eij¢nger [24].


                                                        40
on the Statute of the European System of Central Banks and of the European Central Bank
also mandates an, at least quarterly, report on the activities of the Eurosystem (the Eurosystem
has, in e¤ect, announced the publication of a monthly bulletin). The Treaty imposes no speci…c
transparency requirement on the Eurosystem with regard to the contents of the reports, and even
includes a clause that can be used in order to reduce the transparency and accountability of
the Eurosystem.56 Thus, nothing prevents the Eurosystem from publishing voluminous reports
with little actual content, a practice which is not unheard of among central banks. The Treaty
leaves the impression that its drafters and signers have not understood, or not accepted, the role
of transparency and accountability for creating the best incentives towards ful…lling the goals
of society. In contrast, New Zealand’s Reserve Bank Act of 1989 contains detailed instructions
for the mandatory 6-monthly Monetary Policy Statements by the Reserve Bank (section 15),
and the new Bank of England Bill mandates publication of minutes and voting records of the
Monetary Policy Committee and a quarterly report, the In‡ation Report. The Act and the Bill
are, of course, very explicit on the accountability of the banks.
    The EP may be the natural institution to which the Eurosystem should be accountable. The
Maastricht Treaty already gives the EP the right to arrange hearings with the president and the
other members of the Eurosystem’s Executive Board. Tabellini [74] has provided a complete
scheme according to which the EP could take the initiative and hold the Eurosystem accountable
in an e¤ective way, and in this way, organize the third part of the three-part delegation scheme
more satisfactorily. Tabellini suggests that the EP should insist on the Eurosystem publicly
announcing an in‡ation target and then hold the Eurosystem accountable for achieving that
in‡ation target. After the Eurosystem’s recent announcement of its de…nition of price stability,
the 1–2 percent range and the 1.5 percent point in‡ation target (or the 0–2 percent range and
the 1 percent point target) can serve as this in‡ation target. Tabellini also suggests that the EP
should discard any announcement of any intermediate monetary targets, which is obviously sup-
ported by the above criticism of the Eurosystem’s proposed reference value. The EP could insist
on receiving a periodic In‡ation Report, similar to those produced by the in‡ation-targeting
central banks. This report would then explain and motivate policy decisions, describe current
in‡ation trends, and include quantitative in‡ation forecasts. The EP would then evaluate mon-
etary policy decisions by comparing the in‡ation forecasts with the in‡ation target. If current
   56
      Article 10.4 in the Protocol No. 3 annexed to the Mastricht Treaty states: “The proceedings of the meetings
[of the Governing Council] shall be con…dential. The Governing Council may decide to make the outcome of its
deliberations public.”



                                                       41
in‡ation deviates su¢ciently from the in‡ation target in either direction, the EP could request
a speci…c explanation from the Eurosystem and obtain assurances about the appropriate action.
The reporting procedure could fruitfully be institutionalized through an agreement between the
Eurosystem and the EP.
   Tabellini’s suggestion seems to be a very e¤ective way of improving the accountability of the
Eurosystem. The EP could thus establish a practice of close scrutiny of the Eurosystem, for
instance with a committee of appointed experts that holds hearings with members of the Exec-
utive Board and the Governing Council, demands access to all information, and writes thorough
regular reports evaluating the performance of the Eurosystem, including the appropriateness of
its targets, the framework for policy decisions and communication with outsiders and the general
public. This could establish the accountability part of the three-part delegation in a satisfactory
way. A great advantage with Tabellini’s suggestion is that it could be done at the initiative and
the insistence of the EP, which should have an incentive in raising its pro…le and establishing
itself as an e¤ective surveillor of the Eurosystem.
   What degree of transparency would be required for e¢cient external monitoring and evalu-
ations of the Eurosystem policy? Minimum requirements would seem to include (i) transparent
targets and framework for policy decisions, (ii) transparent motivations of policy decisions, and
(iii) transparent explanations and discussion by the Eurosystem of outcomes relative to targets.
With regard to (i), the Eurosystem would need to clarify the lower bound and the midpoint in
the de…nition of price stability. It could also be more transparent about the role of the output
gap. With regard to the framework for policy decisions, the emphasis on the reference value for
monetary growth is misleading and designed to reduce transparency. Instead, the Eurosystem
would have to be explicit about the crucial role of conditional forecasts of in‡ation and the out-
put gap. With regard to (ii), given the crucial role of conditional forecasts in forward-looking
medium-term monetary policy, the best motivation of interest changes or the absence thereof is
with reference to conditional forecasts, especially an unchanged-interest-rate in‡ation forecast.
Thus, the Eurosystem would have to publish its forecasts, and use them to motivate its policy.
Motivations with reference to deviations between monetary growth and the reference value are
likely to be misleading and reduce transparency. With regard to (iii), the most relevant deviation
is the one between actual in‡ation and previous forecasts and the reasons for such deviations,
whether they are due to unanticipated shocks or errors in data, models or judgement. Again,
such deviations cannot be discussed without published forecasts. The transparency of Eurosys-


                                                42
tem monetary policy would seem to be well served by a regular publication, a Price Stability
Report, modeled on the high-quality Monetary Policy Statements and In‡ation Reports issued
by the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, Bank of England and Sveriges Riksbank.
   Increased transparency and published forecasts will reduce the discretion of the Eurosys-
tem, more clearly reveal any errors and mistakes, and prompt its sta¤, Executive Board and
Governing Council to work harder and better. This may be perceived as demanding and dis-
advantageous by the Eurosystem (but, of course, not by society). Still, there are some direct
bene…ts from transparency for the Eurosystem. For instance, the debate on monetary policy
may improve. Criticism of monetary policy may have to specify whether it refers to the numer-
ical in‡ation target, the quality and the potential bias of Eurosystem forecasts, or something
else. Respectable requests for lower interest rates must be accompanied by an argument why
Eurosystem forecasts are biased, or why targets should be changed. The Eurosystem’s target
becoming widely accepted and its analysis becoming widely respected, should provide the best
protection from short-run political pressure. In particular, the Eurosystem may more easily
defend itself against the current onslaught of political interference on interest-rate setting and
exchange-rate policy, see the discussion in section 5.1.
   The publication of minutes has been intensively discussed. E¤ective monitoring and eval-
uation of monetary policy decisions would seem to require knowledge about the amount and
quality of information available for those decisions and the quality of the analysis and discussion
preceding the decisions. This is a strong argument for the publication of the material available
to the Governing Council and the minutes from its discussions. Only then can outsiders make
sure that the analysis, discussion and decisions are of appropriate quality. Published minutes
would also provide the best information about the decision procedure and the information taken
into account, and this way make monetary policy more predictable.
   An argument used against publishing minutes is that it might deter honest and frank discus-
sion and possibly move such discussion outside the meetings. Non-attributed minutes, however,
would reduce or remove such deterrence. Su¢cient personal integrity of and peer pressure among
Governing Council members may also prevent discussions from moving elsewhere.
   Another contentious issue is the publication of voting records. Without voting records, it
will be impossible for less informed outsiders to evaluate the quality of decisions by individual
Governing Council members. Published voting records would then improve incentives for good
decisions. Conspicuous deviations from the analyses and in‡ation forecasts will then not go


                                                43
unnoticed.
    An argument used against publishing voting records is that they might increase national po-
litical pressure on national governors to adopt a national rather than an EMU-wide perspective.
As noted by Buiter [15] and [16], however, national governments are likely to know the voting
record in any case, so not publishing voting records would not protect national governors from
secret pressure from national governments. Published voting records would then make it more
di¢cult for such pressure to go unnoticed, in that conspicuous deviations from the message of
received analyses and forecasts would be more easily spotted. Furthermore, transparent tar-
gets, analyses and forecasts together with published voting records may actually make it easier
for national governors to defend their votes and resist pressure and therefore provide the best
protection against national pressure.
    Could there be too much transparency? From the point of view of the Eurosystem, trans-
parency would more easily reveal mistakes in data, models or judgements, including imperfec-
tions in the Eurosystem understanding of the transmission mechanism. Although this may cause
the Eurosystem some embarrassment at times, at the same time, it provides strong incentives
for the Eurosystem to improve the quality of its analysis and its understanding. This is likely
to be bene…cial to society. Could too much transparency give an exaggerated impression of the
precision of the forecasts of the Eurosystem and its degree of control of in‡ation? Hardly, since
the Eurosystem has very strong incentives to always emphasize the size of potential forecast er-
rors and the limited degree of control, in order to avoid future embarrassment. It seems that too
much transparency could only be counterproductive if it inhibits honest and frank discussions.
Still, nonattributed minutes and honest reports of uncertainty and likely forecast errors need
not inhibit such discussion.57
    One might wish that central banks in general, and the Eurosystem in particular, would
choose openness and transparency as the default case, and only resort to secrecy and obfuscation
when the arguments for this are strong. Unfortunately, central-bank tradition is usually the
other way around, with the few in‡ation-targeting central banks being very recent exceptions.
In case the Eurosystem should choose secrecy and obfuscation rather than transparency and
accountability, which, given the prominent role for the reference value and the insistence on secret
   57
      It has been suggested that the time input required by a central bank’s most quali…ed o¢cials would be a
signi…cant cost of transparency. Still, the cost of hiring additional information o¢cials for the necessary external
contacts would be neglible compared to the tens of thousands of people already employed by the Eurosystem.
Besides, the top o¢cials give many speeches and interviews already; the di¤erence may be more in the substance
than in the number of engagements.




                                                        44
in‡ation forecasts cannot be excluded, the best solution for outside monitoring, as suggested by
Tabellini [74], may be that the European Parliament, the general public and other outsiders
evaluate monetary policy performance as if the ECB had an explicit in‡ation target. With
unpublished conditional in‡ation forecasts, monetary policy can still be monitored by comparing
reputable outside forecasts with the in‡ation target. For instance, if the Eurosystem refuses to
cooperate, the European Parliament can organize their own committee of forecasters as part of
the evaluation of the Eurosystem. In any case, independent bodies of experts will play a crucial
part in scrutinizing and evaluating ECB monetary policy and, fortunately, several such bodies
have already been formed.58


7    Conclusions

As noted above, there are many sensible aspects of the Eurosystem’s monetary strategy, for
instance, the choice of the MUICP (which does not include interest-rate costs) as the main
index, the focus on the Euroarea as a whole, the warning about unavoidable and uncontrollable
short-term volatility of prices, the emphasis on the medium term, and the rejection of money-
growth targeting. Still, the strategy proposed has a number of conspicuous de…ciencies.
    After clari…cations by the Eurosystem and the announcement of the reference value, there is
still some ambiguity with regard to the de…nition of price stability. It is strange that observers
should have to piece together the de…nition from di¤erent statements, including the announce-
ment of the reference value. It seems that any remaining ambiguity with regard to the de…nition
serves no purpose. Public understanding of ECB policy would seem to be facilitated by re-
placing the ambiguous and asymmetric statement “below 2 percent” by an unambiguous and
symmetric in‡ation target, by clarifying the lower bound and the midpoint, possibly with the
addendum that this de…nition may be slightly modi…ed, when more evidence about the quality
of the MUICP becomes available. In the absence of such a clari…cation, observers should prob-
ably, for the time being, interpret and evaluate the Eurosystem as having an in‡ation target of
1–1.5 percent.
    If monetary policy is to be e¤ective, the Eurosystem needs to develop its capacity to make
the “broadly based assessments of the outlook for future price developments,” that is, to con-
struct conditional in‡ation forecasts. It also needs to be able to construct output-gap forecasts,
  58
     Three such independent bodies have been announced to date, organizied by CEPR [4] in London, CEPS [42]
in Brussells, and ZEI [82] in Bonn.



                                                    45
in order to evaluate consequences of its policy for output-gap stability and to …nd the appro-
priate gradualist and measured response to disturbances. If its conditional in‡ation forecast for
unchanged interest rates overshoots or undershoots the in‡ation target at the relevant horizon,
probably 1.5–2.5 years, the Eurosystem would normally need to adjust its repo rate.
    For policy to be e¤ective, the weights given to di¤erent indicators should be derived from their
predictive power in the broadly based assessment of the outlook for future price development,
that is, the conditional in‡ation forecast, as well as in the conditional output-gap forecast. There
is no convincing case for giving money a primary role beyond that motivated by its weight
in the broadly based assessment. Indeed, the deviation of money growth from the reference
value is likely to be a redundant, or even misleading, indicator. Clarity and transparency of
the Eurosystem monetary policy may be best served by letting the reference value fade into
oblivion, unless new surprising evidence to the contrary is found. For the time being, observers
should probably just disregard statements about the reference value.
    Whether new information warrants an adjustment of the repo rate depends on whether the
new information a¤ects the conditional in‡ation and output-gap forecasts. In this way, new
information is “…ltered through the forecasts.”
    Thus, the conditional in‡ation and output-gap forecasts, including how they are a¤ected by
new information and disturbances, will in practice be the decisive input in Eurosystem decisions
about the repo rate. Therefore, clarity and transparency would seem to be best served if the
Eurosystem were also to use the conditional forecasts in its announcements to motivate its
policy. This, in turn, requires published forecasts, with the corresponding assumptions and
analyses. Otherwise, outside observers’ evaluation of Eurosystem policy is made unnecessarily
di¢cult. Without such a publication, the information made available by the Eurosystem, in
spite of its volume and frequency, will in e¤ect have much less content. Observers will then, to
a large extent, have to rely on outside forecasts to evaluate policy. Publishing the forecasts is
also likely to provide the best incentive for the Eurosystem to improve its understanding of the
transmission mechanism and the quality of the forecasts, and, in this way, improve the quality
of its policy.
    Transparency and accountability is thus likely to be best served by publishing non-attributed
minutes of the General Council, including voting records, as is currently done by Bank of Eng-
land, the Federal Reserve System, Sveriges Riksbank and several other central banks.
    Generally, it is di¢cult to …nd any good reason why the Eurosystem should set lower stan-


                                                46
dards with regard to intellectual coherence, analysis and transparence than the best practice
of current in‡ation-targeting central banks. It also seems that the European Parliament would
gain a great deal from making its monitoring and evaluation of the Eurosystem in line with the
best current practice.




                                             47
References
 [1] Akerlof, George A., William T. Dickens and George L. Perry (1996), “The Macroeconomics
     of Low In‡ation,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1:1996, 1–76.

 [2] Ball, Laurence (1997), “E¢cient Rules for Monetary Policy,” NBER Working Paper No.
     5952.

 [3] Begg, David (1997), “The Design of EMU,” IMF Working Paper WP/97/99.

 [4] Begg, David, Paul De Grauwe, Francesco Giavazzi, Harald Uhlig, and Charles Wyplosz
     (1998), The ECB: Safe at any Speed?, Monitoring the European Central Bank 1, CEPR,
     London.

 [5] Begg, David, Francesco Giavazzi and Charles Wyplosz (1997), “Options for the Future
     Exchange Rate Policy of the EMU,” CEPR Occasional Paper No. 17, CEPR, London.

 [6] Bernanke, Ben S., Thomas Laubach, Frederic S. Mishkin, and Adam S. Posen (1998),
     In‡ation Targeting: Lessons from the International Experience, manuscript.

 [7] Bernanke, Ben S., and Ilian Mihov (1997), “What Does the Bundesbank Target?” European
     Economic Review 41, 1025-1054.

 [8] Bini Smaghi, Lorenzo (1998), “The Democratic Accountability of the European Central
     Bank,” Banca Nazionale de Lavoro Quarterly Review 51, 119–143.

 [9] Brainard, William (1967), “Uncertainty and the E¤ectiveness of Policy,” American Eco-
     nomic Review 57, Papers and Proceeding; 411–425.

[10] Brash, Donald T. (1999), “The New Zealand Dollar and the Business Cycle,” speech, Jan-
     uary 29, 1999.

[11] Briault, Clive, Andrew Haldane, and Mervyn King (1997), “Independence and Account-
     ability,” in Iwao Kuroda, ed, Towards More E¤ective Monetary Policy, St. Martin’s Press,
     New York.

[12] Brunner, Karl, and Allan H. Meltzer (1967), “The Meaning of Monetary Indicators,” in G.
     Horwich, ed., Monetary Process and Policy, Irwin, Homewood, Ill., 187–217.

[13] Brunner, Karl, and Allan H. Meltzer (1969), “The Nature of the Policy Problem,” in Karl
     Brunner, ed., Targets and Indicators of Monetary Policy, Chandler, San Francisco, 1–26.

[14] Bryant, Ralph C. (1980), Money and Monetary Policy in Interdependent Nations, Brook-
     ings, Washington, DC.

[15] Buiter, Willem H. (1998), Letter to the Editor, Financial Times, September 24, 1998.

[16] Buiter, Willem H. (1999), “Alice in Euroland,” CEPR Policy Paper No. 1.

[17] Bundesbank (1996), Annual Report 1995, Deutsche Bundesbank.

[18] Bundesbank (1998), Monthly Report January 1998, Deutsche Bundesbank.

[19] Cabrero, Alberto, José Luis Escrivá, Emilio Muños, and Juan Peñalosa (1998), “The Con-
     trollability of a Monetary Aggregate in EMU”, Working Paper No. 9817, Banco de Espana.

                                             48
[20] Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali, and Mark Gertler (1998), “Monetary Policy Rules in Practice:
     Some International Evidence,” European Economic Review 42, 1033-1067.

[21] Clarida, Richard, and Mark Gertler (1997), “How the Bundesbank Conducts Monetary
     Policy,” in Romer, Christina, and David Romer, eds., Reducing In‡ation: Motivation and
     Strategy, Chicago University Press.

[22] Cukierman, Alex, and Allan H. Meltzer (1986), “A Theory of Ambiguity, Credibility, and
     In‡ation under Discretion and Asymmetric Information,” Econometrica 54, 1099-1128.

[23] De Grauwe, Paul (1998), “ECB is Law unto Itself,” Financial Times, November 12, 1998.

[24] de Haan, Jakob, Fabian Amtenbrink, and Sylvester C.W. Eij¢nger (1998), “Accountabil-
     ity.of Central Banks: Aspects and Quanti…cation,” CentER Discussion Paper No. 9854.

[25] Dornbusch, Rudi, Carlo Favero, and Francesco Giavazzi (1998), “Immediate Challenges for
     the European Central Bank,” Economic Policy 26, 15–64.

[26] Duisenberg, Willem F. (1998a), “The ESCB’s Stability-Oriented Monetary Policy Strat-
     egy,” speech in Dublin, November 10, 1998.

[27] Duisenberg, Willem F. (1998b), “The Stability-Oriented Monetary Policy Strategy of the
     European System of Central Banks and the International Role of the Euro,” speech in New
     York, November 12, 1998.

[28] Estrella, Arturo, and Frederic S. Mishkin (1997), “Is there a Role for Monetary Aggregates
     in the Conduct of Monetary Policy?” Journal of Monetary Economics 40, 279–304.

[29] European Central Bank (1998), “The Quantitative Reference Value for Monetary Growth,”
     Press Release, December 1, 1998, http://www.ecb.int.

[30] European Central Bank (1998), “A Stability-Oriented Monetary Policy Strategy for the
     ESCB,” Press Release, October 13, 1998, http://www.ecb.int.

[31] European Central Bank (1999), “The Stability-Oriented Monetary Policy Strategy of the
     Eurosystem,” ECB Monthly Bulletin, January 1999, http://www.ecb.int, 39–50.

[32] European Monetary Institute (1997), The Single Monetary Policy in Stage Three: Elements
     of the Monetary Policy Strategy in the ESCB, European Monetary Institute.

[33] European Parliament (1998), Hearing of candidates to the Board of the ECB, 7 and 8
     May 1988, Committee on Economic and Monetary A¤airs and Industrial Policy, European
     Parliament.

[34] Faust, Jon W., and Lars E.O. Svensson (1999), “Credibility and Transparency: Monetary
     Policy with Unobservable Goals,” Working Paper.

[35] Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City (1996), Achieving Price Stability, Federal Reserve
     Bank of Kansas City.

[36] Financial Times (1998), “ECB: Flexible Strategy Set for EMU,” October 14, 1998.

[37] Freedman, Charles (1996), “What Operating Procedures Should Be Adopted to Maintain
     Price Stability?” in Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City [35].

                                              49
[38] Friedman, Benjamin M. (1975), “Targets, Instruments, and Indicators of Monetary Policy,”
     Journal of Monetary Economics 1, 443–473.

[39] Gerlach, Stefan (1994), “German Uni…cation and the Demand for German M3 ,” BIS Work-
     ing Paper No. 21.

[40] Gerlach, Stefan, and Frank Smets (1998), “Output Gaps and Monetary Policy in the EMU
     Area,” European Economic Review, forthcoming.

[41] Gordon, Robert J. (1996), “Comments and Discussion,” Brookings Papers on Economic
     Activity 1:1996, 60–66.

[42] Gros, Daniel, Oliver Blanchard, Michael Emerson, Thomas Mayer, Hans Werner Sinn,
     Gilles St. Paul and Guido Tabellini (1998), “Macroeconomic Policy in the First Year of
     Euroland,” First Annual Report on the European Economy of the CEPS Macroeconomic
     Policy Group, Centre for European Poicy Studies, Brussells.

[43] Henderson, Dale W., and Warwick J. McKibbin (1993), “A Comparison of Some Basic
     Monetary Policy Regimes for Open Economies: Implications of Di¤erent Degrees of Instru-
     ment Adjustment and Wage Persistence,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public
     Policy 39, 221-317.

[44] Issing, Otmar (1997), “Monetary Targeting in Germany: The Stability of Monetary Policy
     and of the Monetary System,” Journal of Monetary Economics 39, 67–79.

[45] Issing, Otmar (1998a), “Open for Business,” Financial Times, September 22, 1998.

[46] Issing, Otmar (1998b), “Monetary Policy in EMU,” speech, October 13, 1998.

[47] Issing, Otmar (1998c), “The European Central Bank at the Eve of EMU,” speech November
     26, 1998.

[48] Issing, Otmar, and Karl-Heinz Tödter (1995), “Geldmenge und Preise im vereinten Deutsch-
     land,” in D. Duwendag, ed., Neuere Entwicklungen in der Geldtheorie und Währungspolitik,
     Duncker and Humblot, Berlin.

[49] Kareken, John H., Thomas Muench and Neil Wallace (1973), “Optimal Open Market Strat-
     egy: The Use of Information Variables,” American Economic Review 63 (1973), 156–172.

[50] Laubach, Thomas, and Adam S. Posen (1997), Disciplined Discretion: Monetary Targeting
     in Germany and Switzerland, Essays in International Finance, No. 206, Princeton Univer-
     sity.

[51] Leiderman, Leonardo, and Lars E.O. Svensson, eds. (1995), In‡ation Targets, Centre of
     Economic Policy Research, London.

[52] Lohmann, Susanne (1996), “Why Do Central Banking Institutions Matter?” Working Pa-
     per, University of California, Los Angeles.

[53] Martin, Phillippe (1997), “The Exchange Rate Poicy of the Euro: A Matter or Size?”
     CEPR Discussion Paper No. 1646.

[54] McCallum, Bennett T. (1997), “Crucial Issues Concerning Central Bank Independence,”
     Journal of Monetary Economics 39, 99-112.

                                             50
[55] Neumann, Manfred (1997), “Monetary Targeting in Germany,” in Kuroda, Iwao, ed., To-
     wards More E¤ective Monetary Policy, St. Martin’s Press, New York.

[56] Obstfeld, Maurice (1998), “EMU: Ready or Not?” Essays in International Finance No. 209,
     Princeton University.

[57] Orphanides, Athanasios, and Volker Wieland (1998), “Price Stability and MonetaryPolicy
     E¤ectiveness when Nominal Interest Rates Are Bounded at Zero,” WorkingPaper, Federal
     Reserve Board.

[58] Peersman, Gert, and Frank Smets (1998), “The Taylor Rule: A Useful Monetary Policy
     Guide for the ECB?” paper presented at Banca d’Italia worskhop on ”Monetary Policy of
     the ESCB: Strategic and Implementation Issues,” 6-7 July 1998.

[59] Persson, Torsten, and Guido Tabellini (1996), “Monetary Cohabitation in Europe,” NBER
     Working Paper No. 5532.

[60] Posen, Adam (1998), “No Monetary Masquerade for the ECB,” in Ellen Meade, ed., The
     European Central Bank: How Accountable? How Decentralized?, American Institute for
     Contermporary German Studies, Washington, forthcoming.

[61] Ramaswamy, Ramana, and Torsten Sloek (1997), “The Real E¤ects of Monetary Policy in
     the European Union: What are the Di¤erences?” IMF Working Paper WP/97/160.

[62] Rudebusch, Glenn, and Lars E.O. Svensson (1998), “Policy Rules for In‡ation Targeting,”
     in Taylor [77], forthcoming.

[63] Rudebusch, Glenn, and Lars E.O. Svensson (1999), “Empirical Evidence on Targeting
     Money: Data from the U.S. and Lessons for the Eurosystem,” in preparation.

[64] Schmid, Peter (1998), “Monetary Targeting in Practice: The German Experience,” Working
     Paper, Deutsche Bundesbank.

[65] Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson (1998), “Forecasting In‡ation,” Working Paper.

[66] Strauss-Kahn, Dominique (1998), “Remarks,” presented at CEPR, London, on November
     9, 1998.

[67] Svensson, Lars E.O. (1996), ”Commentary: How Should Monetary Policy Respond to
     Shocks while Maintaining Long-Run Price Stability?—Conceptual Issues,” in Federal Re-
     serve Bank of Kansas City [35].

[68] Svensson, Lars E.O. (1997a), “In‡ation Forecast Targeting: Implementing and Monitoring
     In‡ation Targets,” European Economic Review 41, 1111-1146.

[69] Svensson, Lars E.O. (1997b), “In‡ation Targeting: Some Extensions,” NBER Working
     Paper No. 5962. Scandinavian Journal of Economics, forthcoming.

[70] Svensson, Lars E.O. (1999a), “In‡ation Targeting as a Monetary Policy Rule,” Journal of
     Monetary Economics, forthcoming.

[71] Svensson, Lars E.O. (1999b), “Open-Economy In‡ation Targeting,” Journal of Interna-
     tional Economics, forthcoming.


                                            51
[72] Svensson, Lare E.O. (1999c), “Price Level Targeting vs. In‡ation Targeting,” Journal of
     Money, Credit and Banking, forthcoming.

[73] Svensson, Lars E.O. (1999d), “Price Stability as a Target for Monetary Policy: De…ning
     and Maintaining Price Stability,” Working Paper, http://www.iies.su.se/leosven.

[74] Tabellini, Guido (1998), “In‡ation Targeting and the Accountability of the European Cen-
     tral Bank,” statement prepared for a hearing organized by the Subcommitte on Monetary
     A¤airs, European Parliament, January 6, 1998.

[75] Taylor, John B. (1993), “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie-Rochester
     Conference Series on Public Policy 39, 195-214.

[76] Taylor, John B. (1998a), “A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules,” in Taylor [77],
     forthcoming.

[77] Taylor, John B., ed. (1998b), Monetary Policy Rules, Chicago University Press, forthcom-
     ing.

[78] Taylor, John B., (1998c), “The Robustness and E¢ciency of Monetary Policy Rules as
     Guidelines for Interest Rate Setting by the European Central Bank,” IIES Seminar Paper
     No. 649.

[79] von Hagen, Jürgen (1995), “In‡ation and Monetary Targeting in Germany,” in Leiderman
     and Svensson [51].

[80] von Hagen, Jürgen (1998), “Money Growth Targeting,” IIES Seminar Paper No. 643.

[81] Wolters, Jürgen, Timo Teräsvirta and Helmut Lütkepohl (1998), “Modeling the Demand
     for M3 in the Uni…ed Germany,” Review of Economics and Statistics 53, 399-409.

[82] ZEI (1998), “EMU Monitor: Press Statement,” July 9, 1998, Zentrum für Europäische
     Integrationsforschung, University of Bonn.




                                              52
</ref_section>
