I.    Introduction

       A basic first-order condition holds that firms invest in produced capital to
the point that its discounted return is equal to its production cost. How effective
are firms in satisfying this condition? The endogenous investment hypothesis
considered in this paper holds that the condition applies as a workable
approximation, if not from year to year, at least over longer periods. Under the
reasonable assumption that the securities issued by a firm are claims on its capital
and therefore have a total value equal to the value of the capital, the observed
value of the securities reveals the quantity of capital. The endogenous investment
hypothesis implies that securities markets provide a way to measure intangible
capital accumulated by the corporate sector, where both the flow of investment
and the stock of capital are not directly observed. There are good reasons to
believe that otherwise unmeasureable intangible capital is an important part of the
capital of a modern economy.
       The endogenous investment hypothesis involves more than the proposition
that the stock market capitalizes future shareholder returns. Capitalization occurs
whether the returns earned by firms are exogenous or endogenous. Claims on
endowments are valued in the stock market according to principles set forth in
Lucas [1978]. But there is no investment in the endowment economy. The
endogenous investment hypothesis holds that firms will purchase newly produced
physical capital whenever such a purchase generates an expected gain, with
suitable discounting for risk. In that case, there is feedback from financial markets
to the substantive activities of firms, via the discount rate. Capital accumulation
and stock market valuations are jointly determined. A key implication of the
hypothesis is that, in equilibrium with zero expected discounted profit, the value




                                         1
of the stock market and other securities equals the production cost of corporate
assets. In other words, we can read the quantity of produced capital from the value
of the securities of a firm or a sector. This paper considers the ramifications of
that conclusion, using data from the U.S. non-farm, non-financial corporate
sector.
          I formulate the polar opposite of the endogenous investment hypothesis as
the endowment hypothesis. Here, the productive facilities of a firm or sector are
fixed and exogenous, and the flow of value derived from the facilities is an
endowment flow. Although the problem of valuing corporate securities under the
endowment hypothesis was formulated and solved in Lucas’s celebrated paper, I
make no claim that Lucas or any other economist actually believes that the
endowment hypothesis is a useful way to characterize the U.S. economy. Rather,
the endowment hypothesis plays a role in the explanation of the testable
implications of the endogenous investment hypothesis.
          Under the endogenous investment hypothesis, the quantity of capital is
endogenous and its price is exogenous. Capital earns no rent because it is in
perfectly elastic supply. Under the endowment hypothesis, the quantity of capital
is exogenous and its price is endogenous. The price of capital is determined
entirely by the rents that capital earns.
          Although the endogenous investment hypothesis is not a statement about
the values of securities in relation to the returns paid by the securities,
nonetheless, I will examine the data used in this paper within modern valuation
theory. If there are anomalies in the valuation of corporate securities, they become
anomalies in the measurement of produced capital, under the endogenous
investment hypothesis.
          With important exceptions—notably Cochrane [1991, 1996]—financial
economics has not emphasized real capital. On the other hand, the theory of the
stock market implicit in all macroeconomic models in the Dynamic Stochastic




                                            2
General Equilibrium tradition that now dominates macroeconomic theory links
the stock market directly to the real produced assets accumulated by firms. In fact,
because the size of the capital stock is always equal to the value of the stock
market—thanks to instantaneous satisfaction of the first-order condition—many
DSGE models do not refer to the stock market explicitly. Even in DSGE models
where capital can earn rent because of adjustment costs, the resulting fluctuations
in the price of capital are transitory. Over the longer run, securities markets reveal
the quantity of capital.
        The endogenous investment hypothesis and its corollary, the revelation of
the quantity of capital in securities values, is an old idea. In particular, it was
stated clearly by Baily [1981] in the context of the events of the 1970s, events
shown to be important in this paper as well.
        I believe that there is strong evidence that a general-equilibrium
understanding of the stock market requires consideration of produced capital. The
reason is that a general equilibrium model without produced capital cannot make
sense out of the data on the flow of value from corporations to their owners. In
three of the years since 1945, resources flowing from corporations to their owners
have been negative. In other years, the flow has been positive and highly variable.
It would strain credibility past the breaking point to suggest that the flow is
exogenous—a predetermined endowment. Rather, the interplay between
corporations and their owners—as determined in securities markets—causes the
flows to respond to the forces that perturb general equilibrium.
        I also report econometric results that support the hypothesis that corporate
payouts are endogenous, that is, responsive to changes arising outside
corporations. I find that payouts increase during periods of military buildup. This
evidence is consistent with the view that corporations accumulate capital at rates
depending on the relative value of capital within the corporation and outside it.




                                        3
The evidence is unfavorable to the endowment hypothesis, where the capital
within a corporation is not subject to those induced changes.
       I read the evidence to support the view that firms retain shareholder value
as endogenous capital. And they issue debt to increase their holdings of produced
capital. Given the evidence that firms choose their stocks of produced capital, it is
a short step to the view that they satisfy the first-order condition for optimal
accumulation, as a reasonable approximation.
       It does not appear to be possible to test the endogenous investment
hypothesis directly. Modern financial economics tests asset pricing theory by
asking if the properly discounted returns from an asset are equal to its market
price. The test rests on the observability of the returns to each asset. But the
returns to corporate capital are not observed directly: Conditional on the
endogenous investment hypothesis, the data show conclusively that U.S.
corporations own substantial amounts of intangible capital not recorded in the
sector’s books or anywhere in government statistics. There is a large discrepancy
between the market value of corporate assets—as inferred under the endogenous
investment hypothesis—and the purchase or reproduction cost of recorded
produced capital. This point is well known from research in the framework of
Tobin’s q. When securities markets record an increase in the firm’s quantity of
capital greater than its observed investment, the appropriate inference is that the
firm has produced and accumulated the additional capital. The extra production is
not included in accounting records of returns. Consequently, the return to
produced capital is not observed—it is not possible to infer the actual earnings of
capital as a residual of revenue over expenses. Hence, the standard approach of
testing the hypothesis that expected discounted returns equal price cannot be
applied.
       Cochrane [1991 and 1996] measures the return to physical capital as its
marginal product within a parametric production function, rather than as a




                                        4
residual. If intangible capital is an important factor of production, the marginal
product of physical capital will depend on the quantity of intangible capital.
Hence, within the framework of this paper, Cochrane’s test for physical capital is
contaminated because it ignores intangible capital. And the data are completely
absent for extending Cochrane’s strategy to intangible capital or total capital.
       The primary goal of this paper is to appraise the view that securities
markets record the quantity of produced capital accumulated by corporations.
Although this view is particularly interesting with respect to huge increases in
stock-market values that have occurred over the past five years, this paper has
ambitions beyond an attempt to explain recent events. Rather, I look at data over
the entire postwar period to see if the hypothesis of optimal accumulation of real
capital holds up, when the quantity of capital is measured from the value of
securities. I concentrate not on the stock market, but on the combined value of
equity and debt. By and large, I conclude that the evidence supports the
hypothesis. At all times over the past half century, there has been substantial noise
in the relation between the stock market and the capital stock. Interestingly, the
only major outlier in the relation occurred not in the late 90s, but in 1974, when
the data suggest a significant fraction of the capital stock effectively disappeared.
       The concept of capital relevant for this discussion is not just plant and
equipment. It is well known from decades of research in the framework of
Tobin’s q that the ratio of the value of total corporate securities to the
reproduction cost of the corresponding plant and equipment varies over a range
well under one (in the period from 1974 to 1982) to as high as 1.7 (in the 1960s
and 1990s). A concept of intangible capital is essential to the idea that the stock
market measures the quantity of capital. In addition, the view needs to include
capital disasters of the type that seems to have occurred in 1974. The relevant
concept of reproduction cost is more subtle than a moving average of past
measured investments.




                                        5
        The view that emerges from my review of the data is the following, based
on averages from 1945 to 1998. Firms produce productive capital by combining
plant, equipment, new ideas, and organization. The average annual net marginal
product of capital is 9.8 percent. That is, a unit of capital produces .098 units of
output beyond what is needed to exchange for labor and other inputs and to
replace worn capital. Corporations divide this bonus between accumulating more
capital at a rate of 6.0 percent per year and paying their owners 3.8 percent of the
current value of the capital.
        It is an interesting implication of this view that U.S. corporations are
generally self-perpetuating. At the end of 1945, non-farm, non-financial
corporations had capital worth $799 billion in 1998 dollars. Shareholders and debt
holders have been drawing out of this capital at an average rate of 3.8 percent per
year. The power of compounding is awesome—the $799 billion nest egg became
$10.7 trillion by the end of 1998, despite substantial invasion by shareholders and
debt holders in most years. The evolution of the capital stock is described by an
endogenous growth model, applied to corporations rather than the entire
economy. The idea that securities markets channel funds from savers to
corporations is almost completely off the point for corporations as a whole.
Rather, the function of securities markets is to divide the surplus from
endogenous growth into a component that is paid out to owners and a remainder
that is reinvested.
        Spectacular increases in stock-market/capital values in 1994-1998 are
associated with only modest increases in the net product of capital. The average
for the 1990s of 17 percent is not far above the 13 percent in another period of
growth and prosperity, the 1950s. I discuss some evidence linking the higher
product of capital in the 1990s to information technology.




                                       6
II. Conditions for Securities Values to Reveal the Quantity
of Capital

        The following argument is a modern formulation of ideas in Hall [1977],
Brainard, Shoven, and Weiss [1980], and Baily [1981]. Define the following
notation:

               vt         =     value of securities in consumption units, at the
                                beginning of the period, after payouts to
                                owners (ex dividend)
               vt         =     value of securities in consumption units, at the
                                beginning of the period, before payouts to
                                owners (cum dividend)
               kt         =     quantity of capital held for productive use
                                during the period
               kt         =     capital and newly produced output held by the
                                firm at the beginning of the period, before
                                payouts to owners

                    b g
               π t kt     =     the restricted profit function showing the
                                firm’s maximized profit as a function of its
                                capital stock, with all other inputs variable
               st,τ       =     the economy’s universal stochastic discounter,
                                in the sense of Hansen and Jagannathan
                                [1991], from period τ back to period t
               xt         =     investment in new capital, in consumption
                                units
               δ          =     depreciation rate of capital


        I assume constant returns, competition, and immediate adjustment of all
factors of production. Consequently, the restricted profit function has the form
  b g
π t kt = zt k t where the product of capital, zt , depends on the prices of non-

capital inputs. At the beginning of period t, the firm has resources k t to divide




                                      7
between capital k t and payouts to its owners, k t − kt . In future years, payouts are
profit less investment, zt +τ k t +τ − xt +τ . The value of the firm is the present value
of the future payouts:


                                    b            g               b            g
            vt = k t − k t + Et st ,t zt k t − xt + st , t +1 zt +1k t +1 − xt +1 +L        (2.1)


        The capital stock evolves according to:

                                                 b g
                                   k t +1 = xt + 1 − δ k t ,                                (2.2)


so the value of the firm can be written in terms of the capital stock alone as

     vt = k t − k t +
        n                    b g                                        b g             s
     Et st ,t zt kt − k t +1 + 1 − δ k t + st ,t +1 zt +1kt +1 − k t + 2 + 1 − δ k t +1 +L
                                                                                           (2.3)



and this in turn can be written as


                                             b               g
                          vt = k t + Et st ,t zt + 1 − δ − 1 kt
                                                                                            (2.4)
                                         b               g
                          + Et st ,t +1 zt +1 + 1 − δ − st k t +1 +L


A standard perturbation argument establishes that the first-order condition
associated with a present or future value of the capital stock, k t +τ , τ ≥ 0 , is


                                     b               g
                         Et st ,t +τ zt +τ + 1 − δ − st ,t +τ −1 = 0                        (2.5)


Note that this is a restriction on the factor prices embedded in zt +τ and on the
stochastic discounter—it does not involve the capital stock itself. The basic story
of this condition is that the wage rises to the point of extinguishing profit as firms
expand to exploit a positive value of expected profit.




                                             8
       Substitution of the first order condition into the expression for the value of
the firm, equation 2.4, yields the conclusion that vt = k t . Further, since the ex

                                          c       h
dividend value of the firm is vt = vt − k t − k t , the conclusion also follows that

the ex dividend values are equal: vt = k t . I summarize as


       Theorem (Quantity Revelation) With competition and constant
       returns to scale, and no adjustment costs, the value of the firm
       equals the quantity of capital.

       It is always true that the value of the firm equals the value of its capital
stock, assuming that ownership of the capital stock is equivalent to ownership of
the firm. But only under limited conditions does the value of the capital stock
reveal the quantity of capital. These conditions are, first, the absence of monopoly
rents that would otherwise be capitalized in the firm’s value, and, second, the
absence of scarcity rents associated with capital. These conditions rule out the
possibility that capital is non-produced (such as land) or that resources are
required to adjust the capital stock.
       The key factor that underlies the quantity revelation theorem is that
markets—in the process of discounting the cash flows of corporations—anticipate
that market forces will eliminate pure rents from the return to capital. Hall [1977]
used this principle to unify the seeming contradiction between the project
evaluation approach to investment—where firms invest in every project that
meets a discounted cash flow criterion that looks deeply into the future—and the
neoclassical investment theory—where firms are completely myopic and equate
the marginal product of capital to its rental price. The two principles are identical
when the projection of cash flows anticipates that the neoclassical first-order
condition will hold at all times in the future.




                                         9
           Baily [1981] formulated and proved a version of the quantity revelation
theorem. His assumptions included a Cobb-Douglas technology, because he
assumed a vintage structure in which capital aggregation is permissible only with
that technology. My approach is less restrictive with respect to technology, but
does require capital aggregation.
           This paper asks if the value of corporate securities, interpreted as a
measure of the quantity of capital, behaves reasonably. The answer is basically
yes.
           Much of the increase in the market values of firms in the past decade
appears to be related to the development of successful differentiated products,
protected to some extent from competition by intellectual property rights relating
to technology and brand names. These firms do not satisfy the conditions
described above for market value to reveal the quantity of physical capital. It is an
interesting question—not to be pursued in this paper—whether there is a concept
of capital for which a more general version of the quantity revelation theorem
would apply. In the more general version, monopolistic competition would
replace perfect competition.



III. Data

           My data are taken from the flow of funds accounts maintained by the
Federal Reserve Board.1 The data are for all non-farm, non-financial corporations.
I measure the value of their financial securities as the market value of outstanding
equities plus the reported value of financial liabilities less financial assets, all
divided by the consumption deflator from the U.S. National Income and Product
Accounts. I measure payouts to security holders as the flow of dividends plus the

1
    http://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/z1/data.htm




                                               10
flow of purchases of equity by corporations plus the interest paid on debt
(imputed at Moody’s AAA bond rate) less the increase in the real volume of net
financial liabilities, again divided by the consumption deflator. Figures 1 through
4 display the data for the value of securities, payouts, and the payout yield (the
ratio of payouts to market value).

12000
10000
 8000
 6000

 4000



 2000




        45   50   55   60   65   70   75        80   85   90   95


Figure 1. Value of the Securities of Non-Farm, Non-Financial Corporations in
Billions of 1998 Dollars, Log Scale


        In 1990, the real value of the sector’s securities was about the same as in
1968. By 1998, it had almost tripled its 1990 level. As Figure 2 shows, the sector
began and ended the period without little debt in relation to equity. But debt was
more than 35 percent of the total value of securities at its peak in 1981.




                                           11
 0.4



 0.3



 0.2



 0.1



 0.0
       45     50   55   60   65   70   75     80   85   90   95

Figure 2. Ratio of Debt to Total Value of Securities.


            Figure 3 shows the cash flows to the owners of corporations. It breaks
payouts to shareholders into dividends and net repurchases of shares. Dividends
move smoothly and all of the important fluctuations come from the other
component. That component can be negative—when issuance of equity exceeds
repurchases—but has been at high positive levels since the mid-1980s, with the
exception of 1991 through 1993.




                                         12
 0.08


 0.04
                     Dividends


 0.00
                                                     Net repurchases
                                                     of equity
-0.04


-0.08
                    Interest and repyament of principal on debt

-0.12
        45    50     55   60   65   70    75        80   85    90   95

Figure 3. Components of Payouts, as Fractions of GDP.


           Payouts to debt holders have been remarkably erratic, as the solid line in
Figure 3 shows. The jumps upward in 1974 and downward in 1975 looks
suspiciously like a data error, so I have examined the details of the data that
account for these movements. The volatility comes entirely from the volume of
debt-type liabilities of the sector. The relevant data are, in billions of nominal
dollars:


                                      Assets         Liabilities

             1973                        575               761
             1974                        620               765

             1975                        778              1087




                                               13
Since the price level rose dramatically in 1974, the real value of debt liabilities
fell correspondingly. The decline was concentrated in trade payables, which fell
from $228 billion in 1973 to $165 billion in 1974 in nominal terms. Suppliers of
inputs from other sectors lowered their lending in the form of payables. There was
little offsetting reduction in the sector’s receivables. I see no signs of any data
errors in 1974—rather, the data reflect the extreme conditions of the financial
crisis of that year.
         The huge increase in 1975 was entirely in the category “miscellaneous
liabilities,” which rose from $20 billion in 1974 to $313 in 1975. Although I have
not yet been able to determine what is included in this category, I have no reason
to think that the numbers are incorrect. Rather, it appears that there was a massive
outflow of funds, in real terms, from the sector in 1974 and an even larger inflow
in 1975.

 0.10



 0.05



 0.00



-0.05



-0.10
        45   50   55   60   65   70    75    80   85    90   95

Figure 4. Total Payouts to Owners, as a Fraction of GDP




                                       14
       Figure 4 shows total payouts to equity and debt holders in relation to GDP.
Note the disturbances in 1974-75 and 1999 and the remarkable growth since
1980. Cash flowing from corporations to their shareholders and debt holders was
about 4 percent of GDP in 1980 and reached a peak of over 8 percent in 1997. A
primary source of the conclusion that large amounts of capital built up in
corporations during that period is the growth of the actual flow of cash out of
corporations. Note that there were three years when the owners of corporations
contributed resources to them, rather than receiving resources—1946, 1950, and
1975. And in 1992, both debt holders as a group and shareholders took out far less
cash than normal.
       Figure 5 shows the payout yield, the ratio of total cash extracted by
securities owners to the market value of equity and debt. The yield has been
anything but steady. It reached peaks of 9.3 percent in 1949, 14.1 percent in 1974,
and 10.5 percent in 1984. As the lower line shows, much of the variability comes
from debt. The 1998 level of the yield, 4.9 percent, is below its general level for
the period since 1980 but above its postwar average of 3.8 percent. This finding
should be compared to the extraordinarily low level of the dividend yield in the
stock market, the basis for some concerns that the stock market is grossly
overvalued. As the data in Figure 3 show, dividends are only a fraction of the
story of the value earned by shareholders. In particular, when corporations pay off
large amounts of debt, there is a benefit to shareholders in future payouts.
Concentration on dividends, or even dividends plus share repurchases, gives a
seriously incomplete picture of the buildup of shareholder value. It appears that
the finding of Campbell and Shiller [1998]—that the dividend yield of stocks has
dropped far below its historical level—has the uninteresting explanation that
dividends have declined as a method of payout, rather than the exciting
conclusion that the value of the stock market is too high to be sustained.




                                        15
 0.15


 0.10


 0.05


 0.00


-0.05


-0.10


-0.15
        45   50   55    60    65    70    75     80   85    90    95


Figure 5. Payout Yield (Ratio of Payout to Value of Securities)
The upper line is the total payout to equity and debt holders and the lower line is the
payout to debt holders only, as a ratio to the total value of securities.


         It is worth noting one potential source of error in the data: Corporations
frequently barter their equity for the services of employees. This occurs in two
important ways. First, the founders of corporations generally keep a significant
fraction of the equity. In effect, they are trading their managerial services and
ideas for equity. Second, many employees receive equity through the exercise of
options granted by their employers, or receive stock directly as part of their
compensation. The accounts should treat the value of the equity at the time the
barter occurs as the issuance of stock, a deduction from what I call payouts. The
failure to make this deduction results in an overstatement of the apparent return to
corporations. The total overstatement does not appear to be very large, however.
The average annual equity return in the data for the non-farm, non-financial sector




                                            16
is less than a percentage point higher than the annual return from holding the S&P
500, as measured by Ibbotson Associates [1999].



IV. Valuation

       Although, as I noted earlier, the endogenous investment hypothesis is not
a statement about the relation between the value of a security and its future
earnings, it is useful as a preliminary matter to look at valuation. If modern ideas
about valuation do not apply, it would alter the interpretation of the endogenous
investment hypothesis. It is useful to check the valuation relationship over the
sample period to see if it performs suspiciously. Many commentators are quick to
declare departures from rational valuation when the stock market moves
dramatically, as it has over the past few years.
       Some reported data related to valuation move smoothly, particularly
dividends. Consequently, economists—notably Robert Shiller [1989]—have
suggested that the volatility of stock prices is a puzzle given the stability of
dividends. The data discussed earlier in this paper show that the stability of
dividends is an illusion. Securities markets should discount the cash payouts to
securities owners, not just dividends. Figure 4 shows how volatile payouts have
been throughout the postwar period. As a result, rational valuations should
contain substantial noise. The presence of large residuals in the valuation equation
is not by itself evidence against rational valuation.
       Modern valuation theory proceeds in the following way. Let


                vt                    =        value of securities in consumption
                                               units
                dt                    =        cash paid out to holders of these
                                               securities




                                          17
                        v +d
                 Rt +1 = t +1 t          =        return ratio
                            vt



As I noted earlier, finance theory teaches that there is a family of stochastic
discounters, st , sharing the property,


                                             b g
                                      Et −1 Rt st = 1                            (4.1)


(I drop the first subscript from the discounter because I will be considering only
one future period in what follows.) Kreps [1981] first developed an equivalent
relationship; this form was developed by Hansen and Jagannathan [1991].
        I am interested in the valuation residual or expectation error in the return,

                                    ε t = Rt − Et −1Rt                           (4.2)

From equation 4.1,


                        b Et −1Rt gb Et −1st g + Covt −1d Rt ,st i = 1           (4.3)


so


                              Et −1Rt =
                                                       d i
                                          1 − Covt −1 Rt , st
                                                                                 (4.4)
                                               Et −1st

                                                      ~
        Now consider the return to a safe investment, Rt , known in advance:
     ~
Et −1Rt st = 1 , so

                                                 1
                                       Et −1st = ~                               (4.5)
                                                 Rt




                                             18
Let   φ = −Cov ( Rt , st ) , assumed             to     be        approximately   constant.   Then
                ~
                 b g
Et −1Rt = 1 + φ Rt and, finally,


                                                 b g  ~
                                           Rt = 1 + φ Rt + ε t                                (4.6)


The parameter φ is identified by this condition.
                         ~
       As a measure of R I take the one-year Treasury bill rate less the rate of
inflation. Thus I treat the rate of inflation as known in advance. I believe this is a
reasonable approximation. OLS resulted in an estimate of the risk premium φ of
0.085 with a Newey-West standard error of 0.014. This should be interpreted as
the risk premium for real corporate assets, related to what is called the “asset
beta” in the standard capital asset pricing model.
            Figure 6 shows the residuals, the surprise element of the value of
securities. The residuals show fairly uniform dispersion over the entire period.
The four consecutive positive residuals in 1995-98 are a little unusual, but not
large.

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0

-0.1

-0.2

-0.3

-0.4
       45   50    55   60   65   70   75    80   85    90    95


Figure 6. Valuation Residuals.




                                                  19
       I see nothing in the data to suggest any systematic failure of the standard
valuation principle—that the value of the stock market is the present value of
future cash payouts to shareholders. Moreover, the recent surge in the stock
market—though not completely explained by the corresponding behavior of
payouts—is within the normal amount of noise in valuations.



V. Evidence about the Endogenous Investment
Hypothesis

       One approach to evaluating the evidence about the endogenous investment
hypothesis is to consider the polar alternative, the endowment hypothesis. Again,
I make no claim that any economist believes in the endowment hypothesis. It is a
way to explain some of the implications of the endogenous investment hypothesis.
But I note than any economist who explains persistent changes in the value of the
stock market as reflecting variations in the discount rate applied to the stream of
future profits is rejecting the endogenous investment hypothesis. Similarly, any
theory that attributes the value of a particular firm to some unique source of
profit—rather than the accumulation of past investment and the retention of its
returns—is also rejecting the endogenous investment hypothesis.
       The endowment hypothesis holds that the flow of value a corporation
earns is exogenous and not the earnings of purchased capital. A corporation with
purely exogenous earnings from its operations may still hold financial securities.
But these holdings only affect the division of the flow of value between debt and
equity and do not alter the proposition that the total cash received by all securities
holders is the exogenous flow. To see this, let



                 dt       =     Endowment flow




                                        20
                 bt        =      end of period debt outstanding (if positive) or
                                  debt held (if negative)
                 rt        =      interest rate on debt
                 ct        =      cash paid out to shareholders (dividends plus
                                  repurchases of stock)



The corporate sector’s budget constraint is:

                                      b gb                 g
                               bt +1 = 1 + rt bt − d t + ct .                       (5.1)


The total cash paid out to debt and shareholders is

                                 ct + rt − bt +1 + bt = dt .                        (5.2)

Thus, the endowment flow is always observed as the total cash payout of the
corporate sector. The holders of the sector’s securities, as a group, cannot use the
firm as a bank, where resources can be invested. Observed cash payouts to
securities holders collectively measure endowment returns exactly.
        I believe that Figure 4 effectively disposes of the endowment hypothesis
and thus supports the hypothesis that capital formation is endogenous. The
fluctuations in payouts—and particularly the negative values—seem compelling
evidence that resources move in and out of corporations in the same way that
funds move in and out of a bank. The 50 percent decline in payouts in 1992 is
especially significant. Nobody thinks that corporations suffered a large decline in
net output in that year. Rather, it was a year when the conditions within
corporations and in the rest of the economy made it appropriate for owners to
extract rather less cash than in the years just before or just after.
        The endowment hypothesis holds that payouts to corporate owners are
invariant to conditions in the rest of the economy. In particular, payouts are




                                           21
invariant to the amount of government purchases of goods and services. By
contrast, the endogenous investment hypothesis predicts that corporations
accumulate capital less rapidly—and thus raise payouts—when government
purchases rise. The government can divert resources from other uses, such as
corporate capital accumulation, by purchasing more output. This proposition is
particularly true for military purchases, which tend to be transitory. The following
regression tests the invariance hypothesis using data on the ratio of military
purchases to total GDP ( mt / yt ):


                  dt / yt =   0.031 +         b
                                         0.23 mt / yt − mt −1 / yt −1   g
                              (.006)     (.05)


Newey-West standard errors are in parentheses. Although this regression strongly
rejects invariance in the direction favoring the endogenous investment hypothesis,
other specifications yielded weaker evidence.
       Another approach to testing the endowment hypothesis against the
endogenous investment hypothesis is to consider the relation between payouts,
considered as an exogenous variable according to the endowment hypothesis, and
endogenous aggregate variables. In particular, in almost any general equilibrium
model, an exogenous increase in output will lower the short-term interest rate.
The lower rate induces intertemporal substitution toward the present in order to
absorb the extra resources. But the bivariate relation between the realized real
one-year Treasury bill rate, rt , and the ratio of corporate payouts to GDP is:


                       rt =   -0.008 +     0.69 d t / yt
                               (.006)      (.15)




                                         22
Payouts are strongly positively associated with the interest rate, contrary to the
implication of the endowment hypothesis. This finding would make sense under
the endogenous investment hypothesis, where an increase in the demand for funds
from outside the corporate sector would raise the interest rate and payouts at the
same time. Although there is a possibility of a small amount of bias in the
estimated relationship because interest rates enter the construction of the payout,
this influence is nowhere near strong enough to explain the finding.



VI. The Capital Accumulation Model

       Under the endogenous investment hypothesis, the value of corporate
securities measures the quantity of the capital stock. To build a simple model of
capital accumulation under the hypothesis, I redefine zt as an index of
productivity. The technology is linear (it is what growth theory calls an “Ak”
technology). The quantity of capital is the value of corporate securities in units of

output, vt . Thus output is zt vt . Output is defined as the resources remaining after
using gross output to pay for other variable inputs and to replace worn-out older
capital. It is the same as profit as defined in Section 2, but at this point I drop the
reference to other factors of production. Output is divided between the payout to
the owners of corporations, dt , and capital accumulation:


                                 zt vt = d t + vt +1 − vt                        (6.1)

The value of the productivity index can be calculated from observed data as

                                      d +v −v
                                  zt = t t +1 t                                  (6.2)
                                          vt




                                          23
Note that this is exactly the one-period return from holding a stock whose price is
vt and whose dividend is dt .
       The linear technology has the important property that depreciation is not
distinct from productivity. To see this, consider the economy with securities value
vt and payouts to owners, dt . Instead of equation 6.1, this economy is
hypothesized to suffer depreciation of its capital at rate δ , so that its capital
accumulation equation is

                            ~                   b g
                            zt vt = d t + vt +1 − 1 − δ vt .                   (6.3)

But this can be written in the form of equation 6.1 as


                            b~zt − δ gvt = dt + vt +1 − vt .                   (6.4)


So it is completely equivalent to consider the first economy with productivity
index zt and no depreciation or the second economy with productivity index
~
zt = zt + δ   and depreciation at rate δ . For simplicity, I will normalize
depreciation at zero.
       If there are diminishing returns to capital, so the technology is not linear,
then the calculated value of the productivity index zt will decline during periods
when capital is accumulated faster than other factors, such as the decade of the
1990s. The data considered in this paper do not support diminishing returns,
however.
       The capital accumulation model overcomes the implausible implications
of the endowment hypothesis by adding increases in the market value of




                                         24
corporations to their payouts to measure output.2 The increase in market value is
treated as a measure of corporations’ production of output that is retained for use
within the firm. Years when payouts are low are not scored as years of low output
if they were years when market value rose. Again, the inclusion of any
consideration of retention of resources in corporations is prohibited by the
assumptions of the endowment hypothesis.
               Equation 6.2 shows that the productivity of capital can be calculated as the
ratio of net output to capital, again measured as the market value of the
corresponding securities. Figure 7 shows the result of the calculation.

    0.4



    0.2



    0.0



-0.2



-0.4
          45     50    55   60   65    70   75     80   85   90     95

Figure 7. Estimated Net Product of Capital, by Year and by Decade




2
 The idea that capital gains measures capital formation was advocated by Bradford [1991] and has
been explored recently by Gale and Sablehaus [1999]. In addition to adding capital gains to
output, they should be added to income and saving.




                                              25
       Apart from noise, Figure 7 says the following: the product of capital
implicit in securities markets has been roughly constant around its mean of 0.098
units of output per year per unit of capital. The marginal product has been higher
during the good years since 1994, but then it was almost as high in the good years
of the 1950s. The most notable event recorded in the figure was the deeply
negative value of the marginal product in 1974. That finding is consistent with the
idea that the huge increase in energy prices in that year effectively demolished a
good deal of capital (see Baily [1981]).
       The noise in Figure 7 appears to arise primarily from the valuation noise
reported in Figure 6. Every change in the value of the stock market—resulting
from reappraisal of returns into the distant future—is incorporated into the
measured product of capital. Much of this noise can be eliminated by taking
averages over decades, as shown in the figure.



VII. The Nature of Accumulated Capital

       Firms own produced capital in the form of plant, equipment, and
intangibles such as intellectual property. Hall [1999] suggests that firms also have
organizational capital resulting from the resources they deployed earlier to recruit
the people and other inputs that constitute the firm. Decades of research in the
framework of Tobin’s q have confirmed that the categories other than plant and
equipment must be important (for example, Brainard, Shoven, and Weiss [1980]).
In addition, the research has shown that the market value of the firm or of the
corporate sector may drop below the reproduction cost of just its plant and
equipment, when the stock is measured as a plausible weighted average of past
investment. That is, the theory has to accommodate the possibility that an event
may effectively disable an important fraction of existing capital. Otherwise, it




                                       26
would be paradoxical to find that the market value of a firm’s securities is less
than the value of its plant and equipment.
            Tobin’s q is the ratio of the value of a firm or sector’s securities to the
estimated reproduction cost of its plant and equipment. Figure 8 shows my
calculations for the non-farm, non-financial corporate sector, based on 10 percent
annual depreciation of its investments in plant and equipment. The results in the
figure are completely representative of many earlier calculations of q. There are
extended periods, such as the mid-1950s through early 1970s, when the value of
corporate securities exceeded the value of plant and equipment. The difference
could reasonably be attributed to intangibles. A capital catastrophe occurred in
1974, which drove securities values well below the reproduction cost of plant and
equipment. Under the hypotheses advanced in this paper, the explanation would
have to be that adverse developments in 1974 destroyed large amounts of capital,
both physical and intangible.


 2.4
 2.2
 2.0
 1.8
 1.6
 1.4
 1.2
 1.0
 0.8
 0.6

       50      55    60   65    70    75    80    85    90    95

Figure 8. Tobin’s q—Ratio of Market Value to Reproduction Cost of Plant and
Equipment




                                           27
       Greenwood and Jovanovic [1999] have proposed another explanation of
the capital catastrophe—that the economy first became aware in that year of the
implications of a revolution based on information technology. Although the effect
of the IT revolution on productivity was highly favorable, in their model, the
firms destined to exploit modern IT were not yet in existence, and the incumbent
firms with large investments in old technology lost value sharply.
       Brynjolfsson and Yang [1999] have performed a detailed analysis of the
valuation of firms in relation to their holdings of various types of produced
capital. They regress the value of the securities of firms on their holdings of
capital. They find that the coefficient for computers is over 10, whereas other
types of capital receive coefficients below 1. They replicate Bronwyn Hall’s
[1993] finding that the coefficient on research and development capital is well
below one. The authors are keenly aware of the possibility of adjustment of these
elements of produced capital, citing Gordon [1994] on the puzzle that would exist
if investment in computers earned an excess return. They explain their findings as
revealing a strong correlation between the stock of computers in a corporation and
unmeasured—and much larger—stocks of intangible capital. In other words, it is
not that the market values a dollar of computers at $10. Rather, the firm that has a
dollar of computers typically has another $9 of related intangibles.
       Brynjolfsson and Yang discuss the nature of the unmeasured capital in
detail. One element is software—purchased software may account for one of the
extra $9 in valuation of a dollar invested in computers, and internally developed
software another dollar. But they stress that a company that computerizes some
aspects of its operations is developing entirely new business processes, not just
turning existing ones over to computers. They write, “Our deduction is that the
main portion of the computer-related intangible assets comes from the new
business processes, new organizational structure, and new market strategies,
which each complement the computer technology…computer use is com-




                                       28
plementary to new workplace organizations which include more decentralized


line workers.”



VIII. The Speed of Adjustment

       The proposition that the value of corporate securities measures the


proposition cannot apply literally in the short run, because purchasing and
installing capital takes time. During the interval between the detection of an


existing capital earns rents, and the value of these rents is incorporated in the
value of securities. Abel [1990] provides a detailed and clear explanation of the


are a convex function of the flow of investment.
       I believe that it is generally accepted that the pattern of movements of
over time as shown in Figure 8 are beyond the reach of an explanation based
exclusively on adjustment costs (see, for example, Summers [1981]). Most
                                                                                  q
sometimes remains above one for a decade or more. Adjustment costs inferred
                             q are far higher than seem reasonable.


as one of the many sources of noise in the calculation of the product of capital.
Like valuation noise, scarcity rents average to zero over longer spans of time.


averages over several years, I do not believe that refinements to recognize scarcity
rents would alter the basic message of the calculations.
IX. Concluding Remarks

       I believe that the evidence supports the endogenous investment
hypothesis, though the support is less than definitive at this stage. The data tell a
sensible and interesting story conditional on the hypothesis. Because the
hypothesis makes the total capital stock of corporations observable as the total
value of securities, it is possible to quantify otherwise elusive concepts that
appear to be central to the modern economy. These are technology, organization,
business practices, software, and the other produced elements of the successful
modern corporation.
       Corporate capital has grown at a high rate during the 1990s. Interpreted
within the endogenous investment framework, the reasons are, first, the high
return to capital, which averaged 17 percent per year during the decade. An
important contribution to the high average was the absence of any notable capital
disaster—a contrast to the 1970s. Second, most of the return has been reinvested.
Securities holders have been extracting only about 5 percentage points, leaving 12
percent per year for capital and output growth.




                                        30
References

Abel, Andrew. 1990. “Consumption and Investment,” Chapter 14 in Benjamin
       Friedman and Frank Hahn (eds.) Handbook of Monetary Economics,
       North-Holland. 725-778.
Baily, Martin Neil. 1981. “Productivity and the Services of Capital and Labor,”
       Brookings Papers on Economic Activity No. 1. 1-50.

Bradford, David F. 1991. “Market Value versus Financial Accounting Measures
       of National Saving,” in B. Douglas Bernheim and John B. Shoven (eds.)
       National Saving and Economic Performance Chicago: University of
       Chicago Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research. 15-44.
Brainard, William C., John B. Shoven, and Laurence Weiss. 1980. “The Financial
       Valuation of the Return to Capital,” Brookings Papers on Economic
       Activity. 453-502. Number 2.
Brynjolfsson, Erik, and Shinkyu Yang. 1999. “The Intangible Costs and Benefits
       of Computer Investments: Evidence from Financial Markets,” Sloan
       School, MIT, April.

Campbell, John Y, and Robert E. Shiller. 1998. “Valuation Ratios and the Long-
     Run Stock Market Outlook,” Journal of Portfolio Management 24(2):11-
     26. Winter.
Cochrane, John H. 1991. “Production-Based Asset Pricing and the Link between
      Stock Returns and Economic Fluctuations,” Journal of Finance 209-237.
_________. 1996. “A Cross-Sectional Test of an Investment-Based Asset Pricing
      Model,” Journal of Political Economy 104: 572-621.
Gale, William, and John Sablehaus. 1999. “Perspectives on the Household Saving
       Rate,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, forthcoming.

Gordon, Robert J. 1994. discussion of S.D. Oliner and S.E. Sichel. “Computers
      and Output Growth Revisited: How Big is the Puzzle?” Brookings Papers
      on Economic Activity 273-334. Number 2.
Jeremy Greenwood and Boyan Jovanovic, “The IT Revolution and the Stock
      Market,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 89:116-
      122, May 1999.




                                     31
Hall, Bronwyn H. 1993. “The Stock Market’s Valuation of R&D Investment
       During the 1980s,” American Economic Review. 84:1-12. January.
Hall, Robert E. 1977. “Investment, Interest Rates, and the Effects of Stabilization
       Policies,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity No. 1. 61-121
____________ 1999. “Reorganization,” forthcoming in the Carnegie-Rochester
      public policy conference series.
Hansen, Lars Peter, and Ravi Jagannathan. 1991. “Implications of Security
      Market Data for Models of Dynamic Economies,” Journal of Political
      Economy, vol. 99, pp. 225-262.

Ibbotson Associates. 1999. Time Series Editor, version 7.0. www.Ibbotson.com
Kreps, David M. 1981. “Arbitrage and Equilibrium in Economies with Infinitely
       Many Commodities,” Journal of Mathematical Economics 8: 15-35.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr. 1978. “Asset Prices in an Exchange Economy,”
      Econometrica 46:1429-1445, November.
Shiller, Robert E. 1989. Market Volatility. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Summers, Lawrence H. 1981. “Taxation and Corporate Investment: A q-Theory
     Approach,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 67-127. Number 1.




                                       32
</ref_section>
