1. Introduction
The decline in self-employment during this century is one of the major historical trends in
the U.S. labor market. The fraction of white male workers who were self-employed fell from one
in six in 1910 to one in ten in 1970. It is also striking that this trend stopped and reversed itself
between 1970 and 1990. The self-employment rate rose from 10.0 percent in 1970 to 11.4
percent in 1990. Given the magnitude of these changes in self-employment, surprisingly very little
research has documented the changes and identified their causes. Trends in black selfemployment have been studied even less, despite much recent interest in the lack of black-owned
businesses and frequent conjectures about historical levels of self-employment and their causes.
We use Census microdata covering most of the twentieth century to document the trends in selfemployment among both white and black men and to explore their potential causes.
An examination of long-term trends in self-employment is important for several reasons.
First, it has been argued that small businesses create a disproportionate share of new jobs in the
economy, are an important source of innovation, and have an important effect on political
decisions in the United States.1 Second, many academicians and policy makers view selfemployment as a route out of poverty and as an alternative to unemployment or potential
discrimination in the labor market.2 Third, the institutional environment in which the selfemployed work differs in important ways from that of wage/salary workers. The self-employed
are not subject to the usual labor contracts and their consequent incentives, and they either do not
receive, or purchase for themselves, fringe benefits provided by employers, such as health

1

For example, see Birch (1979) for job creation, and Glazer and Moynihan (1970) and Brown,
Hamilton, and Medoff (1990) for political power. Also, see "Small Product-development Firms
Show Solid Growth; Entrepreneurs Fill a Void as Big Concerns Trim Their Internal R&D Staffs,"
Wall Street Journal, April 22, 1997, p. B2, "For New Jobs, Help Small Businesses," Wall Street
Journal, August 10, 1992, p. A12, "New York City Is Looking to Small Businesses to Provide
Jobs," New York Times, May 3, 1993, p. B12, "Start-up Firms Can Balance Downsizing, Create
Jobs," Los Angeles Times, February 14, 1993, p. D1, Job Growth Stalls, Despite Recovery, as
Many Small Businesses Stop Hiring," Wall Street Journal, February 12, 1993, p. A2.
2

See Glazer and Moynihan (1970), Light (1972, 1979), Sowell (1981), and Moore (1983).
Also, many states and the federal government are currently promoting self-employment as a way
to leave the welfare and unemployment insurance rolls. For descriptions of these programs see
Guy, Doolittle, and Fink (1991) and Raheim (1997) for the AFDC program, and U.S. Department
of Labor (1992) and Benus et al. (1995) for the UI program.

insurance and pensions. Past research has argued that the self-employed have a different return to
education, will have a different age-earnings profile, and have more variability in hours worked
than wage/salary workers.3 Finally, the self-employed are often singled out in the formation of
public policy. They are treated differently in various aspects of the tax code and are frequently
excluded from social insurance programs.
Past studies have examined trends in white or total self-employment during various
periods of the twentieth century, however, these studies have generally been limited by their
reliance on published aggregate data and their use of a short time period.4 Several social scientists
near the middle of this century, most notably Weber (1947), C. Wright Mills (1951) and Phillips
(1962) documented the decline in self-employment over the first half of the century and predicted
that it would continue to decline.5 A few studies have focused on the recent rise in selfemployment; only one of these studies, however, includes an empirical analysis of its potential
causes. Blau (1987) finds that changes in technology, industrial structure, tax rates, and social
security retirement benefits contributed to the rise in self-employment from 1973 to 1982. We
test these explanations using Census microdata covering a longer time period.
Although several recent studies have documented and analyzed the causes of the
alarmingly low rate of self-employment among blacks in the U.S., none of these studies have
examined the trend over the twentieth century.6 In the past few years, many news articles and
editorials have referred to estimates from the Survey of Minority-Owned Business Enterprise
(SMOBE) which show a large increase in the number of black-owned businesses over the last 20

3

See Wolpin (1977), Lazear and Moore (1984), and Rettenmaier (1996).

4

See Phillips (1962) for 1929-60, Bregger (1963) for 1948-62 and updates by Ray (1975),
Fain (1980) and Becker (1984), Blau (1987) for 1948-82, and Aronson (1991) for 1955-88.
5

The clearest statement comes from Phillips (1962, p. 1) who reports that "...the proportion of
self-employed persons in the American labor force has been declining for many decades. This
trend will no doubt persist in the future."
6

See Bates (1987, 1989), Borjas and Bronars (1989), Meyer (1990), Fairlie (1996, 1999), and
Fairlie and Meyer (1996).
2

years.7 Estimates that we present in this paper, however, do not lend support to this finding and
instead suggest that the black self-employment rate has not changed relative to the white selfemployment rate over the last 20 years or, for that matter, over the last 80 years.8 The issue of
convergence in racial self-employment rates is of special interest because many early researchers
emphasized the role that past inexperience in business played in creating low rates of business
ownership among blacks. In particular, Du Bois (1899), and later Myrdal (1944), Cayton and
Drake (1946) and Frazier (1957) identify the lack of black traditions in business enterprise as a
major cause of low levels of black business ownership at the time of their analyses. We create and
employ a simple intergenerational model of self-employment to simulate how quickly the initial
condition of low black self-employment in the past would have faded if there were no other
factors depressing black self-employment.
Using Census microdata, we first examine potential causes of the long-term decline in the
white male self-employment rate from 1910 to 1970 and the reversal of this trend after 1970. We
also briefly examine recent Current Population Survey data to confirm some of our results. The
main findings from this analysis are:
1) We do not find strong support for a few recently proposed explanations for the rise in selfemployment. (a) The long-term pattern of tax rate changes, as well as the1970-90 pattern does
not accord well with the change in self-employment rates. (b) Self-employment has risen sharply
even for those groups unlikely to be affected by social security retirement incentives. (c) Changes
in immigration patterns or immigrant self-employment rates cannot explain a significant portion of
the recent upturn in self-employment for whites.
2) A simple model of sectoral choice in which self-employment rates are determined by relative
earnings in self-employment and wage/salary work cannot explain the decline in self-employment
from 1950 to 1970, nor the increase from 1970 to 1990.

7

See "Black-Owned Firms in U.S. Are Increasing at Rapid Rate," Wall Street Journal,
September 12, 1990, p. B2, "Black Business Ownership Up," New York Times, September 13,
1990, p. D5, and "Black Firms Increasing in Number," Washington Post, September 12, 1990, p.
C1.
8

See Appendix A for a comparison of our estimates of white and black self-employment rates
to those from other data sets.
3

3) The long-term decline in the self-employment rate reflects declining rates within nearly all
industries. Technological change favoring capital-intensive, large-scale production may be
responsible for this trend. The long-term decline, however, was weakened somewhat by a shift in
total employment towards high self-employment industries.
4) The recent increase in the self-employment rate was caused by an end to the overall decline in
self-employment within industries and the continuing shift of overall employment from low selfemployment industries, such as manufacturing, towards high self-employment industries, such as
construction, professional, and business and repair services. We also find offsetting increases and
decreases in self-employment across a few industries. These findings are consistent with changes
in consumer demand, increased global competition, and changes in technology driving the recent
upturn in self-employment.
We also explore the factors contributing to the trend in the black male self-employment
rate. We focus on the trend in black self-employment relative to white self-employment. The
main findings from this analysis are:
1) The self-employment rate of black men relative to white men has remained roughly constant
from 1910 to 1990 (at a level of approximately one third the white rate).
2) The large gap between the black and the white self-employment rates is due to the lower selfemployment rates of blacks in all industries and not due to the concentration of blacks in low selfemployment rate industries.
3) From 1950 to 1990, the earnings of blacks in self-employment relative to wage/salary work
rose more than relative earnings for whites, making the near constancy of the black/white ratio of
self-employment rates more surprising.
4) We find that major demographic changes that occurred during the twentieth century, such as
the Great Black Migration and the racial convergence in educational attainment, did not have
large effects on the racial self-employment rate gap.
5) Evidence from simulations using a simple intergenerational model of self-employment suggests
that, if not for continuing factors reducing black self-employment, racial convergence in selfemployment rates would occur within a few generations.
6) Low levels of, and a slow rate of growth in, black assets relative to white assets over the past
three decades may have contributed to the lack of racial convergence in self-employment rates.
2. Data
This study uses individual data from seven decennial Censuses of Population: 1910, and
1940 through 1990. A public use sample is not currently available for the 1930 Census, and only
4

a preliminary version of the 1920 Census sample exists.9 We use random samples of the
population for each year to obtain approximately 40,000 individuals of each race if more than that
many are available.10 Further details and the exact samples used are provided in Appendix B. The
Current Population Survey data that we briefly examine at the end of the paper are described in
Section 5.
Our Census microdata have two major advantages over other data sources for this
analysis. First, each Census provides a sample large enough to examine self-employment rates
and/or earnings within fairly detailed race, industry, age, education and region categories. This
detail also allows us to conduct multivariate analyses of the determinants of racial differences in
self-employment. Second, this collection of Census data allows us to analyze racial selfemployment patterns from near the beginning of the twentieth century to the present.
The final sample that we use for each of the Census years only includes respondents who
meet several restrictions. First, we only include men in this analysis because the study of female
self-employment is complicated by overall changes in labor force participation, education, and
fertility of women that are beyond the scope of this paper. Second, consistent with previous
studies of self-employment, we exclude individuals who work in agriculture. Third, we restrict
our samples to include individuals who are between the ages of 16 and 64 (unless noted
otherwise) and who report working at least 15 hours during the week prior to the interview and at
least 14 weeks during the year prior to the interview. In 1910, however, we do not impose the
hours and weeks worked restrictions because these variables are not available.
We distinguish between self-employment and wage/salary work based on the individual's
response to the class of worker question found on each of the included Censuses. The selfemployed in our study are those individuals who report primarily being an employer, working on
own account, or being self-employed with own incorporated or not incorporated business. For
example, in 1990 the relevant choices on the Census questionnaire were 6) "SELF-EMPLOYED

9

The final version of the 1920 Census will be a 1 percent sample and will be released this year.

10

For the 1910, 1940, 1950, 1960, and 1970 Censuses we are limited to 5057, 14715, 6934,
27054, and 35627 black men, respectively.
5

in own NOT INCORPORATED business, professional practice, or farm" and 7) "SELFEMPLOYED in own INCORPORATED business, professional practice, or farm" (U.S. Census
Bureau 1993: E-15).

3. Results for White Men
In this section, we document the patterns and analyze the causes of changes in selfemployment rates for white men over the twentieth century. Figure 1 displays black and white
male self-employment rates for 1910 and decennially for 1940 through 1990. The white male
self-employment rate decreased steadily from its highest point in 1910 (16.0 percent) to its lowest
point in 1970 (10.0 percent).11 In 1970, the downward trend in the self-employment rate ended
and began a climb to 11.4 percent in 1990.12 If we limit the sample to full-time, full-year workers,
we find a similar trend (see Figure 2).13 This similarity rules out the possibility that
underemployment or "disguised unemployment" are the driving force behind the major changes in
self-employment during the twentieth century (Lebergott 1964; Carter and Sutch 1994).
We now explore potential explanations for the pattern of white self-employment over the
twentieth century with an emphasis on hypotheses regarding the recent upturn. These
explanations have been proposed in previous studies of self-employment or are suggested by
current research on the determinants of self-employment.

TAXES
A number of authors have argued that taxes will affect the tendency to be self-employed.
The usual claim is that high income taxes induce a shift to self-employment in large part because

11

We defer our discussion of the trend in the black male self-employment rate to Section 5.

12

Estimates from other data sources confirm this pattern and demonstrate that selfemployment rates do not change substantially on an annual basis (see Aronson 1991 and
Steinmetz and Wright 1989).
13

We define full-time, full-year workers as those who worked at least 35 hours in the week
prior to the survey date and at least 40 weeks in the year prior to the survey date. The 1910
estimates, however, include all workers due to data limitations.
6

self-employment income can more easily be hidden or sheltered from tax authorities (see Long
1982). Blau (1987), in his study of recent trends in self-employment, attributes most of the
increase from 1973 to 1982 to tax changes. In this section, we examine the relationship between
trends in tax rates and self-employment since 1910.
Taxes affect the decision between wage/salary work and self-employment by altering the
after-tax return to work in the two sectors. Suppose an individual would earn approximately the
same in each sector pre-tax, but is able to hide a fraction of that income if the individual chooses
self-employment. The return to self-employment is then affected by the tax rate on the last
fraction of income that the individual earns, since the individual avoids this tax by being selfemployed. If those deciding to become self-employed are distributed evenly across the income
distribution and they expect to hide only a small part of their income, then the average marginal
tax rate should capture the tax incentives to be self-employed. Even when these assumptions do
not hold precisely, the average marginal tax rate should be a good approximation to the tax
advantage of being self-employed.
We focus on the federal income tax here because it is the largest income or payroll tax and
because its rates have fluctuated substantially over our period. We use the average marginal tax
rate, which is just the average of the marginal rates weighted by the number of taxpayers that pay
that rate. In Figure 3, we display the white male self-employment rate and the average marginal
tax rate for the period 1910 through 1990. We use the average marginal tax rate calculated by
Barro and Sahasakul (1983) through 1980, which we update through 1990.14 The average
marginal tax rate is under one percent through 1940. It temporarily rises during WWII and the
Korean War and then falls after each war, but the rate otherwise has an upward trend through
about 1980. After 1980, tax rates fall substantially. This trend does not accord well with
hypotheses concerning the relationship between taxes and the trend in the self-employment rate
during the twentieth century. Interestingly, the only extended period of time in which selfemployment rates and tax rates move in the same direction is during the 1970s. This period

14

We use and update their returns weighted arithmetic average marginal tax rate. This
average is calculated by weighting the individual marginal rates by the number of returns with
income such that they pay that marginal rate. Our updated series are available upon request.
7

happens to be the stretch of time on which Blau (1987) focuses (actually 1973-1982). In the
decade following this period, the self-employment rate continues to rise, while the tax rate falls
sharply. It is unlikely that the recent changes are due to lagged adjustment because the downturn
in rates occurred soon after 1980 and most of the fall in rates had occurred by 1987. Overall, the
relationship between tax rates and self-employment appears to be weak during the twentieth
century.
The Social Security payroll tax is the next largest tax on labor, but its incentives are harder
to characterize. The self-employment decision depends on the level of the tax as with income
taxes, as well as the differential social security tax between wage/salary workers and the selfemployed, the incidence of the tax, and worker valuation of the retirement benefits connected to
the tax payments. Focusing first on the level of the tax, Figure 3 also shows the average marginal
income tax rate plus the OASDHI rate (employer plus employee) for taxable payroll. The
combined rate rises more quickly from 1950 through 1980 and falls less after 1980. While again
the longer term tax rate changes to not fit the trends in self-employment, the combined rate does
not fall sharply or is even flat during the 1980s as self-employment continued to rise.15 Now
turning to the differential treatment of self-employment and wage/salary work under Social
Security, there are three main periods to examine. From its inception in 1935 through 1950,
Social Security did not levy taxes on the self-employed or make them eligible for retirement
benefits. This arrangement probably favored wage/salary work, since the present value of the
retirement benefits provided greatly exceeded the present value of the taxes levied. From 19511983, the self-employed were eligible for retirement benefits, but paid a tax rate that was lower
than the combined employer and employee tax for wage/salary workers. The differential in the
tax rates began at .75 percent and rose to 4.05 by 1983. Assuming that, on the margin, the
incidence of taxes is the same in the two sectors, this differential would favor self-employment,
and favored it increasingly over time. Since 1984, Social Security has treated wage/salary
15

This discussion ignores the marginal return to social security tax payments through higher
retirement benefits. Accounting for this return would imply marginal rates lower than the
combined rates of Figure 3, but higher than the income tax only rates. It is probably also true that
the perceived marginal return to social tax payments has fallen over time, increasing the effective
marginal rate.
8

workers and the self-employed equivalently. Again, under the assumption that the incidence of
the tax is the same on the two types of workers, Social Security would now seem to not alter the
relationship between pre- and post-tax comparisons.

SOCIAL SECURITY AND POPULATION AGING
Quinn (1980) and Fuchs (1982) find that self-employment is much more common among
the elderly population. They argue that this is due to the large number of wage/salary workers
who switch to self-employment near the end of their careers as a form of partial retirement and
the lower likelihood of self-employed workers fully retiring near the end of their careers. These
two studies also point out that higher returns to retirement may induce higher rates of selfemployment among the elderly population because the self-employed can partially retire and still
receive benefits. In a related study, Blau (1987) uses aggregate U.S. time series data to test
whether changes in Social Security benefit levels can explain changes in self-employment from
1948 to 1982. He finds that the increase in the aggregate self-employment rate from 1973 to
1982 was partly due to increasing real Social Security benefits. His study, however, relies on
aggregate self-employment rate data and thus does not estimate the effects of these changes
separately for different age groups.
In this section, we examine whether the trend in benefits from the Social Security program
since its inception in 1935 has contributed to the trend in self-employment. We also study the
more general question of whether changes in self-employment rates among the elderly and/or
changes in the percent of the workforce who are elderly have contributed to the trend in the
aggregate self-employment rate over the twentieth century.
Over the past 50 years Social Security benefit levels have increased substantially.
Evidence of this trend is provided in Figure 4 in which we report the social security replacement
rate and the self-employment rates for two age groups.16 These two age groups correspond to the
16

The replacement rate is the annual amount of social security benefits payable at the normal
retirement age expressed as a percent of earnings in the year prior to the entitlement for the
average earner. These rates are taken from U.S. House of Representatives (1994). Blau (1987)
uses the average monthly social security benefit in real terms under the OASDI program in his
analysis. We prefer our measure because it accounts for changes over time in the level of earnings
9

different eligibility statuses within the program. Individuals ages 65 and over qualify for full
benefits in all years, and individuals ages 62-64 qualify for reduced benefits, but only after 1961.
The replacement rate increased from 26.2 percent in 1940 to 51.1 percent in 1980, then dropped
to 43.2 percent in 1990. Overall, the trend in the self-employment rate among workers ages 65
and over appears to follow the trend in social security benefits quite well.17 The main exceptions
are in the 1960s and 1980s when the changes are in opposite directions. Since 1961, the trend in
self-employment among workers ages 62-64 somewhat follows the trend in the replacement rate.
Again, the main exception was the increase in self-employment from 1980 to 1990 (which was
even larger for this group) and the decline in benefits over the same decade. These estimates
suggest that changes in social security benefits may partly account for the trends in selfemployment among the elderly.
We now examine the more general question of whether changes in the elderly selfemployment rate and/or changes in the percent of the workforce who are elderly contributed to
the trend in the aggregate self-employment rate. Table 1 reports self-employment rates and
employment shares by several age groups for white men. The results indicate that the selfemployment rate among workers ages 55-64 decreased more from 1910 to 1970 and increased
more from 1970 to 1990 than did the rate among workers ages 16-54. However, the effects of
these changes on the trend in the aggregate rate were small largely because this age group
represented only a small part of the total workforce throughout the twentieth century. Another
interesting finding is that the share of the workforce who were ages 55 and over increased 6.7
percentage points between 1910 and 1970 and decreased 3.6 percentage points between 1970 and
1990. These changes in the employment share of older workers, who have high self-employment
rates, thus worked to diminish both the long-term decline and the recent increase in the aggregate
self-employment rate.

of those individuals considering retirement.
17

We report separate self-employment rates for this age group here, although they are
excluded from all other analyses in the paper.
10

The net effect of the trend in elderly self-employment rates and the changes in elderly
employment shares on the trend in the aggregate self-employment rate was small because those
55-64 were under ten percent of employment in 1990. Furthermore, the self-employment rate
among workers ages 16-54 experienced nearly the same 6.0 percentage point decrease from 1910
to 1970 and a slightly larger 1.6 percentage point increase from 1970 to 1990 than occurred in the
aggregate self-employment rate.18 To conclude, these findings indicate that the long-term decline
and the recent upturn in the aggregate white self-employment rate cannot be explained by changes
in either the self-employment rate of older workers or the share of the workforce that is older.
Furthermore, the trend in social security benefits may have affected the trend in self-employment
among the elderly, but it cannot explain the overall trend in the white self-employment rate over
the twentieth century.

IMMIGRATION
Recent studies of self-employment, such as Borjas (1986), Light and Sanchez (1987),
Yuengert (1995), and Fairlie and Meyer (1996), find that immigrants have higher self-employment
rates than comparable natives. We explore whether changes in immigration patterns or changes in
immigrant self-employment rates over the twentieth century contributed to the trend in selfemployment among white men.19 In Figure 5, we display white native and immigrant selfemployment rates and the percent of the workforce that is immigrant for all Census years.
Remember that our self-employment rates are for white men, thus excluding the large number of
Asian immigrants since the passage of the Immigration Reform Act of 1965.20 The small
immigrant percentage of the white male workforce during most of the twentieth century suggests
18

The findings for the comparison of trends are the same if we use all workers ages 16 and
over to calculate the aggregate self-employment rate.
19

It is also possible that competition from immigrants could lower the self-employment rate of
natives. We look for, but do not find evidence that immigration lowered native black selfemployment in Fairlie and Meyer (1998), but we do find some preliminary evidence that it lowers
native nonblack self-employment.
20

Hispanics are included, however, because we cannot separately identify them for some of the
earlier Censuses.
11

that immigrants cannot account for a large part of the aggregate trend. Examining the trend in the
white native self-employment rate, it is evident that this trend is similar to the trend in the white
aggregate rate. In fact, the decrease in the white native rate from 1910 to 1990 was 0.60
percentage points larger than the decrease for the aggregate rate, and the increase from 1970 to
1990 was only 0.08 percentage points smaller.21 From 1970 to 1990, the faster increase in selfemployment among immigrants accounts for only 5.7 percent of the increase in the white selfemployment rate, while there was essentially no change in the percent of the workforce who were
immigrants. To conclude, patterns of immigration and immigrant self-employment cannot explain
the long-term decline in white self-employment or its recent upturn. Immigration dampened the
decline in self-employment from 1910 to 1970 and contributed only slightly to the recent upturn.

EARNINGS
The standard theoretical model of the decision between self-employment and wage/salary
work posits that individuals choose the work sector which provides the greatest expected net
income.22 Variations of this model also emphasize the roles that an individual's tolerance for risk
and the differential levels of risk in the two sectors play in the decision.23 Therefore, trends in the
distribution of self-employment earnings relative to wage/salary earnings may explain the trend in
the self-employment rate during the twentieth century. We examine self-employment and
wage/salary earnings for the period 1950 to 1990 because self-employment earnings are not
available in the 1910 and 1940 Censuses.
In Table 2, we report various measures of actual and log earnings for white and black fulltime, full-year self-employed and wage/salary workers in 1990 dollars. We report mean earnings,

21

From 1940 to 1970, however, the large decrease in the immigrant self-employment rate and
the declining share of the workforce who were immigrant contributed to the decline in the
aggregate self-employment over this period. The decrease in the white native self-employment
rate was 0.94 percentage points smaller than the decrease for the white aggregate rate
(accounting for 24.5 percent of the decrease in the aggregate rate).
22

23

S ee Rees and Shah (1986) and Evans and Jovanovic (1989) for examples.
See Kihlstrom and Laffont (1979).
12

and the median and mean of log earnings as measures of the central tendency of the return from
self-employment and wage/salary work. We report the variance of log earnings as a measure of
the dispersion of earnings in the two sectors. Implicit in this section is the assumption that these
measures reflect marginal as well as average returns and that the changes over time in the earnings
distribution are exogenous. Thus, the tests in this section are joint tests of the model of sectoral
choice and these assumptions.24
The estimates reported in Table 2 demonstrate that white male workers experienced
significant growth in mean and median earnings from 1950 to 1990 in both the self-employment
and wage/salary sectors. Relative self-employment earnings, however, followed a different trend.
We find that the difference between self-employment and wage/salary mean and median earnings
generally increased from 1950 to 1970 and decreased from 1970 to 1990. Therefore, the selfemployment rate did not increase (decrease) when the financial returns to self-employment
relative to wage/salary work increased (decreased).25 These opposing trends are surprising in
light of the prediction of a positive relationship from the standard theoretical model of the selfemployment decision.
In Table 2, we also report the variance in log earnings for white self-employed and
wage/salary workers. In every Census year, the variance of log earnings among the self-employed
is substantially higher than among wage/salary workers, suggesting that the returns to selfemployment are riskier. What is important for this analysis is the trend in the relative variance of
self-employment earnings from 1950 to 1990. The relative variance of log self-employment
earnings decreased from 1950 to 1970 and remained roughly constant through 1990. Therefore,
the decline and recent increase in self-employment do not appear to be in response to changes in
the relative riskiness of self-employment earnings.

24

The estimates of self-employment income are also likely subject to error because of
imprecision in the definition of self-employment income and likely underreporting of income. Our
focus, however, on trends in relative income levels lessens the potential for misleading findings if
these factors do not change much over time.
25

Aronson (1991) also finds a commensurate rise in self-employment and drop in the relative
returns to self-employment in recent decades.
13

From 1950 to 1990, the self-employment rate appears to have followed a different trend
than that predicted by the standard theoretical model of sectoral choice. However, one may not
want to dismiss the model as the reported measures of earnings may not capture the marginal
returns in the two sectors and the changes in the returns may not be due to shifts in demand.

INDUSTRY DECOMPOSITIONS
We now examine patterns of self-employment across industries. In Table 3, we report
self-employment rates and employment shares by industry for white male workers in each
available Census year. Major changes in both self-employment rates within industries and
employment shares across industries occurred during the last 80 years.
To identify the relative importance of trends in these two factors in creating the trend in
the aggregate self-employment rate, we perform a decomposition. The aggregate selfemployment rate in each year is equal to the sum of the industry-specific self-employment rates
weighted by their employment shares. Therefore, we can represent the change in the aggregate
self-employment rate from year t to year t+s as:
j E t%s S t%s & j E t S t ,
I

(3.1)

i

I

i

i'1

i

i

i'1

where Eti is the share of total employment of industry i in year t, Sti is the self-employment rate for
industry i in year t, and I is the total number of industries. Equation (3.1) can be rewritten as two
alternative expressions:
j E t%s (S t%s&S t ) % j (E t%s&E t ) S t , or
I

(3.2)

i

i

i'1

i

i

i

i'1

j E t (S t%s&S t ) % j (E t%s&E t )S t%s .
I

(3.3)

I

i

i'1

i

i

I

i

i

i

i

i'1

These two equations represent the decomposition of the change in the aggregate self-employment
rate into the part that is due to changes in self-employment rates within industries holding
employment shares constant (represented by first summation in each equation) and the part that is

14

due to changes in employment shares across industries holding self-employment rates constant
(represented by the second summation).26
In Table 4, we report estimates of (3.2) and (3.3) for changes in the aggregate selfemployment rate from 1910 to 1940 and decennially from 1940 to 1990. We also report the
decomposition for the entire period of decline (1910-1970) and rise (1970-1990). The Census to
Census estimates and the longer time-period estimates essentially provide the same findings for
each period. The results indicate that the long-term decline from 1910 to 1970 in the selfemployment rate was due primarily to a decrease in self-employment rates within nearly all
industries. The within industry decline, however, was somewhat counterbalanced by a shift in
overall employment towards high self-employment industries. The evidence for this explanation is
provided by the large contribution (of the same sign as the change in the aggregate selfemployment rate) from changes in self-employment rates within industries from 1910 to 1970 and
the smaller contribution (of the opposite sign) from changes in employment shares. The increase
in self-employment from 1970 to 1990 was caused by an end to the decline in the self-employment
rate within most industries and the continuing shift in overall employment towards high selfemployment industries.
To further explore the causes of the recent increase in the aggregate self-employment rate,
we identify the specific industries which contributed to the trend. In particular, we decompose the
contribution of each industry to changes in the aggregate self-employment rate into the part that is
due to changes in its self-employment rate and the part that is due to changes in its employment
share. The contribution of industry i, Ci, to the change in the aggregate self-employment rate
from 1970 to 1990 can be measured as:
(3.4)

i

i

i

i

C i ' E 90 (S 90 & S̄ 90) & E 70 (S 70 & S̄ 90) ,

26

Two alternative decompositions arise because of the requirement of choosing a base year for
the self-employment rates and employment shares.
15

where S̄90 is the aggregate self-employment rate in 1990.27 This contribution depends on both the
size and change in the employment share of this industry and the size and change in the selfemployment rate of this industry relative to the average self-employment rate in 1990. Next we
i

i

i

i

add and subtract E 70 (S 90 & S̄ 90) or E 90(S 70 & S̄ 90) to (3.4) to get:
i

i

i

i

i

i

(3.5)

C i ' [E 70 (S 90 & S 70)] % [(E 90 & E 70) (S 90 & S̄ 90)] or

(3.6)

C i ' [E 90 (S 90 & S 70)] % [(E 90 & E 70)(S 70 & S̄ 90)] ,

i

i

i

i

i

i

respectively. The first term in brackets in each equation represents the contribution from the
change in the self-employment rate of industry i to the increase in the aggregate self-employment
rate from 1970 to 1990. The second term represents the contribution from the change in the
relative share of total employment experienced by industry i from 1970 to 1990.
In Table 5, we report estimates of (3.4), (3.5), and (3.6). These estimates indicate that the
upturn from 1970 to 1990 was partly due to decreases in employment shares in manufacturing and
public administration (low self-employment industries) and increases in employment shares in
construction, professional services, and business and repair services (high self-employment
industries). Increases in the self-employment rate within construction, manufacturing,
transportation, and FIRE exerted upward pressure on the aggregate self-employment from 1970
to 1990. However, the large decrease in the self-employment rate within trade and the smaller
decrease within personal services acted to cancel out these effects.
In summary, we find that the long-term decline in self-employment earlier in this century
was primarily due to declining rates of self-employment within almost all industries. These
patterns are consistent with technological change favoring capital-intensive, large-scale
production during this period (see Blau 1987). In comparison, we find that the recent upturn in
the aggregate self-employment rate was mainly due to an industrial shift from low to high selfemployment industries. This shift may be due to factors such as changes in consumer demand,
increased global competition, and changes in technology. Our findings, however, do not allow us

27

An alternative method of writing the industry contribution is to replace S̄90 with S̄70 in (3.4).
Although not reported, we find that this method provides nearly identical results.
16

to disentangle the effects of each of these factors on the trend in the aggregate self-employment
rate.
Our results also imply a small role for changes in total factor productivity, as measured by
Blau (1987), in explaining the self-employment trends.28 Such changes in productivity were one
of the two most important explanations Blau (1987) provides for the 1973-82 changes in selfemployment. Blau uses changes in industry employment to calculate the relative total factor
productivity in self-employment compared to wage/salary work. Since his measure depends
solely on changes in the industry composition of employment, our finding of small effects of such
changes between 1910 and 1970 provides an upper bound on the importance of total factor
productivity changes of this sort during this earlier period.

4. Results for Black Men
We now examine trends in black self-employment during the twentieth century. A few
recent studies document and explore causes of the low rate of self-employment among black
men.29 Using various data sources, these studies generally find that black men are one-third as
likely to be self-employed as white men. Low levels of education, low asset levels, smaller
probabilities of having self-employed fathers, and consumer discrimination are found to contribute
to the lack of self-employment among black men. In addition to these recent studies, a few older
studies argue that the absence of black traditions in the field of business enterprise is a major
cause of the low level of black self-employment.30 We examine whether the long-term trends in
several of these or related measures can explain the pattern of black self-employment relative to
white self-employment during the twentieth century.
28

Blau (1987) finds that a measure of technology (total factor productivity weighted by selfemployment and wage/salary industry distributions) explains a large portion of the increase in
aggregate self-employment from 1973 to 1982. Changes in his measure of technology, however,
may also be due to demand-induced changes in industry structure. He concludes that "the source
of the favorable shift in TFP for the self-employed is uncertain."
29

See Bates (1985, 1989), Borjas and Bronars (1989), Meyer (1990), Fairlie (1996, 1999),
and Fairlie and Meyer (1996).
30

See Du Bois (1899), Myrdal (1944), Drake and Cayton (1945) and Frazier (1949).
17

Referring back to Figure 1, we display the black and white self-employment rates and the
ratio of the two rates from 1910 to 1990. During this period, the black self-employment rate
generally followed the same time pattern as the white self-employment rate. The main difference
was that the decline in black self-employment continued until 1980 and reversed only after that
period. The similar trends in the racial self-employment rates resulted in a roughly constant
black/white ratio during the past 80 years. These trends in the self-employment rates and the
black/white ratio remain essentially unchanged when we include only full-time, full-year workers
(see Figure 2). In most years, conditioning on full-time employment increases the white selfemployment rate and decreases the black self-employment rate. These changes, however, are
small and thus do not substantially alter the black/white ratio in any of the Census years.
The constancy of the black/white ratio is surprising in light of the substantial gains blacks
have made in education, earnings and civil rights during the twentieth century and the numerous
government programs created to promote minority business ownership.31 We now investigate
several possible explanations.

INDUSTRY ANALYSES
Although black and white overall self-employment rates did not converge during the
twentieth century, there may have been convergence or partial convergence in racial selfemployment rates within some industries during this period. In Table 6, we report black selfemployment rates and black/white self-employment rate ratios by industry for 1910 to 1990. The
most striking finding from this table is that black men had substantially lower self-employment
rates within all industries and Census years. Transportation and Business and Repair Services are
the only industries in which the black self-employment rate was consistently greater than 50
percent of the white rate. This finding indicates that the large racial gap in self-employment
throughout the twentieth century was primarily due to low black self-employment rates within
industries and not due to blacks being overrepresented in low self-employment rate industries. In

31

See Smith and Welch (1989) for an analysis of black economic progress from 1940 to 1980
and Balkin (1989) for a description of many of the government programs that promote minority
self-employment.
18

fact, the largest positive contribution from racial differences in industry distributions to the
black/white gap in aggregate self-employment rates in any Census year is 11.6 percent.32 Another
interesting finding is that the trends in the black/white ratio for most industries were roughly flat
over the twentieth century.
In Table 6, we also report black employment shares by industry. Although a comparison
of these estimates to the white employment shares reported in Table 3 reveals some convergence
in racial industry distributions, the results indicate that blacks and whites mainly experienced
growths and declines in the same industries over the century.33 The direct contribution of relative
changes over time in racial industry distributions is 0.1 to 13.5 percent of the 1990 black/white
self-employment rate gap.34 The industrial changes of the U.S. workforce from 1910 to 1990
apparently did not alter the racial gap in the aggregate self-employment rate. Clearly, the similar
levels and trends in the black/white self-employment rate ratios across industries were responsible
for this finding.
Overall, the findings from this analysis demonstrate that the large gap between the black
and the white self-employment rate during the twentieth century was due to the fact that blacks
had lower self-employment rates in all industries and not due to the fact that blacks were more

32

The contribution from racial differences in industry distributions in year t is

j St (Et &Et ) . The contributions are generally smaller using black self-employment rates as
I

W

W

B

i'1

weights.
33

One industry in which blacks experienced faster growth than whites during the twentieth
century is Public Administration. This industry is of special interest because a recent study shows
that the low rate of self-employment among blacks is partly due to the group's overrepresentation
in public sector jobs (see Boyd 1991). We estimate aggregate black and white self-employment
rates for each Census year excluding this industry and find that the resulting black/white ratios are
very similar to the original ones.
These contributions are j S1910[(E1990&E1990) & (E1910&E1910)] and
I

34

B

W

B

W

B

i'1

j S1910[(E1990&E1990) & (E1910&E1910)] using black and white self-employment rates,
I

W

W

B

W

B

i'1

respectively.
19

likely to be located in low self-employment rate industries. Furthermore, the similar trends of
blacks and whites in self-employment rates within industries and employment shares across
industries contributed to the constancy in the black/white ratio of the aggregate self-employment
rate.

EARNINGS
Since the middle of this century, black men have made substantial improvements in their
levels of earnings relative to white men. Evidence of this growth in relative earnings for full-time,
full-year workers is provided in Table 2. Both black self-employed and wage/salary workers
gained considerable ground on white workers in terms of income levels. What is important in this
analysis, however, are comparisons between black and white men in the relative returns to selfemployment. Therefore, we examine patterns of racial differences in the central tendency and
dispersion of earnings in self-employment relative to wage/salary work.
The results for relative earnings indicate that the earnings advantage in self-employment,
measured as the difference between the median or mean level of log self-employment and
wage/salary income, was greater for white men than for black men in almost every year. From
1950 to 1990, however, the earnings advantage in self-employment improved for blacks relative
to whites. In contrast, there does not appear to be a clear trend in the relative riskiness of selfemployment for blacks and whites. The relative riskiness of self-employment measured as the
difference between the variance of log self-employment and wage/salary earnings was fairly
similar for blacks and whites over this century. It fell over time for both groups, with the fall for
blacks slightly greater than that for whites.
Again, assuming that the return to a marginal person entering self-employment or
wage/salary work is well approximated by the average return, our findings are consistent with
lower levels of black self-employment than white self-employment. However, they suggest that
the black self-employment rate should have increased relative to the white self-employment rate
over the period, given the increased attractiveness of self-employment. Thus, the changes or the
lack of changes in the return to self-employment do not appear to be a good explanation for the
roughly constant black/white relative self-employment rate over the past 80 years.
20

EDUCATION, MIGRATION AND OTHER DEMOGRAPHIC FACTORS
We now examine the influence of demographic factors on the racial trends in selfemployment. During the twentieth century, the U.S. labor force experienced major geographical,
age, and educational shifts. Although the black self-employment rate remained relatively low
during the century, these demographic changes may have had large offsetting effects on the
difference between white and black self-employment rates. To explore this hypothesis, we
employ the decomposition methodology used by Smith and Welch (1989) in their study of trends
in racial earnings differences. This decomposition is a dynamic generalization of the familiar
method of decomposing intergroup differences in a dependent variable into those due to different
observable characteristics across groups and those due to different returns to characteristics
across groups (Blinder 1973; Oaxaca 1973).
The first step in computing the decompositions is to estimate a linear probability model of
the relationship between self-employment, S, and demographic characteristics, X, using separate
cross sections for each race and time period:
i

i

i

i

St = Xt $t % ,t,

(4.1)

where t indexes the Census year (1910, . . ., 1990) and i indexes the race (B, W).35 Having
obtained estimates of the linear probability models by time period and race, the self-employment
rate is equal to the inner product of the mean characteristics and the vector of coefficients. We
are interested in decomposing changes in the racial self-employment rate gap, defined throughout
this analysis as the white rate minus the black rate. Therefore, the change in the racial selfemployment rate gap between two Censuses, t=1 and t=2, is simply
(4.2)

W W

B B

W W

B B

(X̄2 $2 & X̄2 $2 ) & (X̄1 $1 & X̄1 $1 ).

35

The linear structure of the decomposition described below makes it substantially more
difficult to use a nonlinear method of estimating the self-employment probability, such as a logit
or probit model.
21

The decomposition of this expression requires first choosing a base year and base race. We use
the earlier Census year (t=1) as the base year and white as the base race.36 Using white as the
base race, (4.2) can be expressed as:

(4.3)

B

W

B

W

W

(i)

[(X̄2 & X̄2 ) &(X̄1 & X̄1 )]$1 ]

(ii)

(X̄2 & X̄1 ) ($1 &$1 )

(iii)

(X̄2 & X̄2 ) ($2 &$1 )

(iv)

X̄2 [($2 & $2 ) & ($1 & $1 )]

B

%

B

B

W

B

%

W

B

W

W

%

W

B

W

B

Given the linearity of the decomposition, each of the four components can be further
decomposed to capture the contributions of specific variables. We calculate separate
contributions from age, family characteristics, education, and region.37 To provide an
interpretation of each of the components (i-iv) in the decomposition, it is useful to select a specific
variable, such as region, in the discussion. The interpretations of the components for the variable,
region, are as follows. (i) The "Characteristics Effect" is positive if blacks relative to whites move
into low self-employment regions of the country.38 This contribution is positive because it
increases the racial gap measured as the white minus the black rate. (ii) The "Characteristics-Race
Interaction" is positive if blacks relative to whites move into regions which have large racial self-

36

Smith and Welch (1987) argue for using the white or majority parameter estimates because
these estimates more closely resemble market prices of attributes. Donohue and Heckman
(1991), however, note that the decomposition results presented in Smith and Welch (1989) are
somewhat sensitive to the choice of base race. To address this concern, we also calculate
decompositions using black as the base race and compare results.
37

We also calculate decompositions which include industry controls and compare results. Our
primary specification does not include industry controls due to the potential simultaneity of the
self-employment and industry decisions.
38

The terminology for this and the following components of the decompositions follows Fairlie
and Sundstrom (1999).
22

employment rate gaps. Part of this component may be due to the effect of blacks moving to areas
of the country which have high levels of consumer discrimination against self-employed
minorities. (iii) The "Coefficients-Race Interaction" is positive if blacks are overrepresented in the
regions of the country which have falling self-employment rates over time. Thus, the effect of
demand shifts for the goods and services produced by the self-employed are partly captured in this
term. (iv) The "Coefficients Effect" is positive if the racial self-employment rate gap is increasing
within region.39
In Table 7, we report the decomposition of the change in the racial gap for each decade
between 1940 and 1990.40 The decomposition results for the change between any two Census
years (e.g. 1940 to 1990) can be calculated by summing the included decadal decomposition
results. In the underlying regressions, we include a constant, age, age squared, and dummy
variables for marriage, presence of children, three educational categories (high school graduate,
some college, and college graduate), and eight Census divisions.41 The difference between the
white and black self-employment rates was large in each Census year and experienced only minor
changes during this period. Although the changes in the racial gap were small from 1940 to 1990,
individual demographic variables may have had large effects on the trend in the gap. We first
examine the effect of these variables during the period from 1940 to 1960.
One of the most important demographic changes occurring during the twentieth century
was the large exodus of blacks from rural areas in the South to urban areas in the North from
1915 to 1960, known as the Great Black Migration. Using our sample of workers in
nonagricultural industries, we find that the percent of black workers living in the South fell from

39

The interpretation of this term for specific subsets of variables is problematic, because it is
sensitive to the choice of excluded category. Therefore, we only report the total contribution of
this component for all of the variables.
40

We do not include estimates for 1910 because we do not have measures of some of our
important independent variables in this year.
41

The left-out educational category and Census division are high-school dropouts and New
England, respectively. The coefficient estimates from these regressions generally have the
anticipated sign in all of the Census years. We find that the probability of being self-employed
increases with age, education level, and living in the Pacific division.
23

68 percent in 1940 to 52 percent in 1960, whereas the percent of whites living in the South
increased slightly over the same period. Our decomposition results indicate that this relative
regional shift increased the racial gap during this period somewhat as evidenced by the positive
estimates of (i) for 1940 through 1960 that sum to just under .6 percentage points. This small
positive direct effect of the Great Black Migration due to the lower self-employment rates in the
North that increased the racial gap was more than offset by the fact that blacks were moving into
regions with smaller racial gaps in self-employment and that self-employment was increasing in
the regions overrepresented by blacks. Evidence of these latter factors, which worked to reduce
the racial gap, are provided by the negative estimates of contributions (ii) and (iii) which sum to
just over .6 percentage points for this period. All of these effects, however, were small, implying
that the major regional shifts that occurred during this period of time had little effect on black selfemployment relative to white self-employment.
During the 1940s and 1950s, racial trends in age, family characteristics and educational
distributions also had little effect on changes in the racial self-employment rate gap. These
findings are less surprising, however, as the racial difference in mean values of these variables did
not change substantially during this period. There is some evidence that the relative trends in selfemployment across educational levels were favorable to less-educated blacks.
We now examine the period from 1960 to 1990. Perhaps the most important
demographic change that occurred during this period was the substantial increase in black
educational levels relative to those of whites. The percent of the white male workforce who were
high school graduates grew from 51.1 percent in 1960 to 85.8 percent in 1990. In comparison,
25.4 percent of employed black men were high school graduates in 1960 increasing to 74.7
percent in 1990. Past research and our regression estimates indicate that the probability of selfemployment increases with education.42 Therefore, we expect the relative increase in black
educational levels to reduce the racial gap in the self-employment rate (holding other factors

42

The positive association between education levels and self-employment is partly caused by
the higher return to education for self-employed workers than for wage/salary workers. See
Evans and Leighton (1989) and Fairlie and Meyer (1996) for evidence.
24

constant). Our decomposition estimates indicate, however, that the relative racial trends in
educational attainment had only a minor effect on changes in the racial gap.
Examining the other contributions from education, we find that the educational
improvements made by blacks placed them in educational categories that had larger racial selfemployment rate gaps.43 The negative estimates of (iii) reported in Table 7 indicate that rising
self-employment rates among less-educated workers over time reduced the racial gap. Overall,
the racial trends in education did not have a large effect on the trend in the racial self-employment
rate gap from 1960 to 1990. Furthermore, none of the included variables provided large
contributions to changes in the racial gap during this period.
Our results indicate that trends in demographic factors, including the Great Black
Migration and the racial convergence in education levels, did not have large effects on the trend in
the racial gap in the self-employment rate.44 We therefore conclude that the constancy of the
racial gap in self-employment was not due to offsetting influences of important racial trends in
demographic factors.

PAST SELF-EMPLOYMENT EXPERIENCE
Past studies such as Du Bois (1899), and later Myrdal (1944), Cayton and Drake (1946)
and Frazier (1957) identify the lack of black traditions in business enterprise, in large part due to

43

An explanation that is consistent with this finding is that more-educated self-employed
blacks may have experienced higher levels of consumer discrimination than their less-educated
counterparts.
44

These results are robust to two alternative specifications of the decomposition. First, we
estimate (4.3) using blacks as the base race. This decomposition substitutes $1B for $1W in (i),
(X̄2W - X̄1W) for (X̄2B - X̄1B) in (ii), ($2B - $1B) for ($2W - $1W) in (iii), and X̄2W for X̄2B in (iv).
There are changes for some of the contribution estimates, however, these changes are small.
Furthermore, the changes are generally in the direction of finding weaker effects of our included
demographic variables on the trend in the racial self-employment rate gap. Second, we include
industry controls in the underlying regressions. We find that the contribution estimates or our
demographic variables are not sensitive to their inclusion. In most cases in which there are
changes, the estimates became smaller in absolute value.
25

slavery, as a major cause of low levels of black business ownership at the time of their analyses.45
We take this argument about past experience to mean that lack of past experience in selfemployment per se is the cause of current low rates. We do not take this argument to include
other human and physical capital as well as intangibles that are passed intergenerationally. To
examine whether this story can explain the lack of convergence of the black rate to the white rate
over this century, we begin by examining the microdata evidence on intergenerational links in selfemployment. After having seen that these links are strong, we then do two things. First, we
construct a simple model of serial correlation in self-employment rates using evidence from the
earlier microdata work. We use this model to approximate the speed with which the effects of the
initial low black self-employment would fade, in the absence of other forces reducing black selfemployment. Second, we examine if younger cohorts of blacks are more likely to be selfemployed as would be expected if other forces reducing black self-employment had only recently
diminished.
Two recent studies have used nationally representative surveys to examine the extent of
the intergenerational correlation in self-employment, Fairlie (1999) and Dunn and Holtz-Eakin
(1999). These studies find that an individual who had a self-employed parent is about two to
three times as likely to be self-employed as someone who did not have a self-employed parent.46

45

See Du Bois (1899, pp. 122-123), Myrdal (1944, pp. 308-309), and Cayton and Drake
(1946, p. 437). Frazier (1949, p. 411) provides the clearest statement: "Although no systematic
study has been undertaken of the social causes of the failure of the Negro to achieve success as a
business man, it appears from what we know of the social and cultural history of the Negro that it
is the result largely of the lack of traditions in the field of business enterprise."
46

Fairlie (1999) uses Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) data to analyze the transition
rates into and out of self-employment. He finds that having a self-employed father increases the
transition rate into self-employment by 55 percent and decreases the exit rate by 76 percent.
Under a constant hazard assumption, the resulting probability of self-employment increases by 72
percent. Dunn and Holtz-Eakin (1999) use National Longitudinal Survey (NLS) data.
Depending on the definition of self-employment and the control variables they find that the selfemployment rate of children of self-employed parents is between somewhat less than two and
almost three times that of children of parents who are not self-employed. Hout and Rosen (1997)
using data from the General Social Survey find that having a self-employed father roughly doubles
the probability of self-employment. Another study, Lentz and Laband (1990), examines a sample
of "independent businessmen" drawn from the National Federation of Independent Businesses for
26

This intergenerational relationship is substantial, but whether or not it can explain the constancy
of the black/white rate over time requires some modeling.
We use a simple intergenerational model of self-employment to determine how fast low
levels of black business ownership in the past should have faded in the absence of intervening
factors. The self-employment rate for generation t is given by the following equation:
(4.4)

St = St-1PS + (1-St-1)PN,

where St is the self-employment rate of generation t, PS is the probability that the son of a selfemployed man is self-employed, PN is the analogous probability for the son of a man who is not
self-employed. After assuming values for a few of these parameters, we can determine the
predicted black self-employment rate after a given number of generations. We first take the white
rate to be in a steady state so that St = St-1. We set St=.11, which is close to its average over the
last four Census years. We further take the initial black rate to be one third that of the white rate
and assume that in the absence of other forces depressing black self-employment PS and PN would
be the same for blacks and whites. We take the ratio PS/PN to be 3, which is toward the high end
of the past estimates. Given the steady-state self-employment rate, we then solve for PS and PN
using (4.4). Under these assumptions, the black rate would be 88 percent of the white rate after
one generation and 98 percent of the white rate after two generations.47
These calculations show that an initial lack of business experience cannot explain the
current low levels of black self-employment without major changes in our assumptions.
Substantial deviations from the steady-state assumption and the assumed white self-employment
rate are of little quantitative importance for the convergence calculations. The assumed PS/PN
ratio does matter, but values closer to the central tendency of estimates in the literature would
lead to faster convergence rates. The assumption that, if changed, could substantially alter the

selected industries. This study finds a much higher rate of intergenerational dependence, but
because it examines much larger businesses, we do not think that its results are applicable to the
broader group of self-employed that we examine here.
47

If we assume, instead, that the initial black rate is zero then the black rate achieves 82
percent of the white rate after one generation and 97 percent of the white rate after two
generations.
27

results is the assumption that business experience is passed from parents to children. It seems
likely that parents are the major influence, but other sources of information on acceptable careers
and the means to attain them are probably also important (uncles, cousins, neighbors, etc.).
However, as long as parents are the major influence, convergence would occur reasonably
quickly. It seems very likely to us that the correct interpretation of this discrepancy is that PS and
PN are much lower for blacks than for whites.48 In other words, the discrepancy is due to forces
which reduce current black self-employment besides the initial conditions of low black selfemployment. The empirical finding of a constant black/white self-employment ratio over the
twentieth century implies that there are continuing factors that depress the black self-employment
rate. These factors could be discrimination, or they could be skills, capital and intangibles that are
passed intergenerationally.
Additional evidence against the lack of traditions in business enterprises argument is
provided by the historical experiences of many disadvantaged immigrant groups that came to the
U.S. with little prior business experience and created high levels of business ownership after their
arrival in the U.S. Perhaps the best example is the experience of Greek immigrants who came to
the U.S. from small fishing villages and rural areas, but soon after their arrival created a
substantial presence in the restaurant industry in the U.S.49 The evidence from the experiences of
many immigrant groups in business and the results from our simple intergenerational model of
self-employment demonstrate that the lack of traditions in business enterprise among blacks that
resulted from slavery cannot explain a substantial part of the current racial gap in selfemployment.
We also examine whether more recent generations of blacks have higher relative selfemployment rates than older generations. In Figure 6, we plot the black/white ratio in the selfemployment rate from 1940 to 1990 for various age cohorts. For example, the oldest cohort
displayed was ages 15-24 in 1940. We follow this "synthetic" age cohort over time by examining

48

See Hout and Rosen (1997) for a related analysis which confirms that there are racial
differences in PS and PN.
49

See Aldrich and Waldinger (1990).
28

the black/white ratio for individuals who were ages 25-34 in 1950, ages 35-44 in 1960, ages 4554 in 1970, and ages 55-64 in 1990. There is no clear evidence of an improvement in relative
self-employment rates among younger generations of blacks. Although the youngest cohort has
the largest black/white ratio in 1990, the second and third youngest cohorts have low ratios in
both 1980 and 1990. The figure also indicates that the black/white ratio does not change
substantially as each "synthetic" cohort ages.

ASSETS
Several previous studies find that asset levels play an important role in determining who
enters into or exits from self-employment.50 Furthermore, recent studies show that blacks have
substantially lower levels of assets than whites and that these differences contribute to the current
racial difference in levels of self-employment.51 An examination of racial trends in asset levels,
therefore, may shed some light on the puzzle of the near constancy of the black/white selfemployment rate ratio over the past 80 years.
In Table 8, we report estimates of mean and median household net worth by race for
several years from 1962 to 1991. The sources of these data are also reported in Table 8. Census
data do not include a measure of net worth and only include a measure of interest income for
1980 and 1990. In 1962, which is the earliest year of data available on asset levels by race, the
mean value of net worth for blacks was 17.4 percent of the mean value for whites.52 The
black/white mean net worth ratio rose a small amount by 1967 and rose again by the late 1980s to
50

See Evans and Jovanovic (1989), Evans and Leighton (1989), Bates (1990), Holtz-Eakin,
Joulfaian, and Rosen (1994a,1994b), Dunn and Holtz-Eakin (1999), and Fairlie (1999) and
Blanchflower and Oswald (1998).
51

See Blau and Graham (1992), Oliver and Shapiro (1995) and Menchik and Jianakoplos
(1997) for racial differences in assets, and Bates (1990), Meyer (1990) and Fairlie (1999) for
evidence on their contributions to racial differences in self-employment, and Blanchflower, Levine
and Zimmerman (1998) for evidence on racial disparities in credit availability for small businesses.
52

Estimates from the 1963 Survey of Financial Characteristics of Consumers (SFCC) use
sample weights and are representative of the civilian non-institutional population of the United
States. The SFCC includes an oversample of households with income above $50,000. See
Projector and Weiss (1966) and Avery and Kennickell (1993) for more details on the survey.
29

early 1990s. However, even by 1991 black mean net worth was only 25 percent of white net
worth. Black median net worth relative to white median net worth was even lower and remained
roughly constant over this period. Although blacks have made some gains in mean asset levels
relative to whites since the early 1960s, these gains were small and the extremely low levels of
black assets throughout this period may have partly restricted a potential increase in the
black/white self-employment ratio. We should emphasize that there is a great deal of
disagreement in the literature about the importance of low assets in limiting self-employment.
There is a significant literature that argues that asset differences are not the crucial explanation
and points to the very low levels of investment needed to start enterprises, even ones that become
very large.53

5. A Brief Comparison to Numbers from the Current Population Survey (CPS)

The focus of this paper is the nature and determinants of long-term trends in selfemployment over the twentieth century. The only data available for this purpose are the decennial
Censuses. These datasets are also large enough to allow disaggregation of the population in ways
that facilitate explaining the changes. In this section we examine annual Current Population
Survey (CPS) data since 1966 to examine the trends shown in an alternative data source. This
source allows us to examine trends in the last few years and to determine more precisely when
declines or increases began. We undertake this analysis, in part, because other research has found
a decline in self-employment in recent years.54 Other research has emphasized increases in the
number of black owned businesses.55 We would like to examine if the decennial Censuses provide
a misleading picture. The evidence here suggests that the Censuses provide an accurate picture of
recent trends in self-employment (also see Appendix A).

53

See Light (1972), Sowell (1981), Meyer (1990) and Bhidé (1998), for example.

54

See Blanchflower (1998) for example.

55

See U.S. Small Business Administration (1999) for example.
30

Table 9 reports non-agricultural self-employment rates for those ages 16-64. We impose
minimum hours and weeks worked requirements to make the sample comparable to that from the
Census data. We report information from the March CPS Annual Demographic Survey that
provides retrospective information on the previous year. Thus, the numbers in the table for a
given year were collected the following year. Beginning in 1984, we also report information from
the merged outgoing rotation group (ORG) data which provides contemporaneous information on
employment during all of the months of the year. We report separate rates for white and black
men, as well as the ratio of the black rate to the white rate.
The main disadvantages of the CPS, besides its much shorter time-period, is its smaller
size, and that it has been subject to several changes in methodology that seem to coincide with
changes in self-employment trends. The changes in CPS methodology are indicated in Table 9
using horizontal lines where there are breaks in the data. These methodological changes make it
difficult and problematic to measure changes in self-employment rates around the break points.
The break between 1974 and 1975 in the March data is due to the exclusion of incorporated selfemployed among the self-employed prior to 1975. This change appears to raise the white male
self-employment rate about 3 percentage points.
In 1994 the CPS was also substantially redesigned.56 Since the redesign appears in the
March and ORG data in different years, we can examine the effect of the new survey by
comparing changes around the break points in the two datasets. These comparisons suggest that
the redesign led to a fall in the reported white male self-employment rate of about 1.0 percentage
points.57 On the other hand, the black male rate seems to have risen, by almost a full percentage
point. These results suggest that substantial biases may result from taking the recent CPS

56

For a description of this CPS redesign, see Cohany, Polivka, and Rothgeb (1994), and
Polivka and Miller (1998).
57

In a thorough analysis of the redesign using the “parallel survey”, Polivka and Miller (1998)
conclude that the redesign raised the self-employment rate of men by about one-half of a
percentage point. However the parallel survey seems two have to drawbacks. The sample used
for the parallel survey does not appear to have the same characteristics as the regular CPS sample,
and interviewer procedures were different. In particular, the interviewers had lower caseloads,
and the interviews were longer and were supervised more carefully.
31

numbers for the white or black self-employment rate at face value, and that recent changes in the
black/white ratio may be especially misleading.
Ignoring the changes in rates in the year of methodology changes, the CPS numbers
suggest that the white male rate fell slightly through the late 1960s and early 1970s and then rose
through 1992 or 1993. This pattern accords well with the timing in the Census data and in other
datasets (see Appendix A). Since 1993 or 1994 the white self-employment rate appears to have
fallen slightly. The black male rate has followed a similar pattern, though there is less suggestion
of a fall in recent years until 1997 when the rate drops substantially. The black/white ratio
appears to have been fairly steady at between 0.3 and 0.4 during the years of comparable data.
Overall, the changes in recent years do not appear large.

6. Conclusions
In our analysis of 1910 and 1940 to 1990 Census microdata, we find that the white male
self-employment rate fell from 16.0 percent in 1910 to 10.0 percent in 1970, then rose to 11.4
percent in 1990. We have ruled out a number of possible explanations for the long-term decline
and recent upturn in the white self-employment rate. In particular, we find that changes in tax
rates, Social Security benefits, the age distribution of the workforce, and immigration do not
explain the trends in self-employment. In addition, changes in self-employment earnings relative
to wage/salary earnings do not explain the trend in the white self-employment rate from 1950 to
1990. We do find, however, that the long-term decline was mainly due to declining selfemployment rates within nearly all industries, and the recent upturn was mainly due to a shift of
overall employment to high self-employment industries. These findings are consistent with
technological change favoring capital-intensive, large-scale production during the period from
1910 to 1970, and changes in consumer demand, increased global competition and changes in
technology favorable to self-employment during the period from 1970 to 1990.
We find that the self-employment rate of black men relative to white men has remained
roughly constant from 1910 to 1990. Substantially lower black self-employment rates were found
in all industries and Census years. The relative earnings of blacks in self-employment rose more
than relative earnings for whites in recent decades, making the near constancy of the relative self32

employment rates even more surprising. Major demographic changes occurring during the
twentieth century, such as the Great Black Migration and the racial convergence in educational
attainment, did not have large effects on the racial self-employment rate gap. We show using a
simple intergenerational model of self-employment that, if not for continuing factors reducing
black self-employment, racial convergence in self-employment rates should occur in only a couple
of generations. We also do not find higher relative self-employment rates among more recent
cohorts of black men than among older cohorts.
We show that blacks have gained little ground on whites in terms of asset levels in the past
three decades. These small gains and the extremely low levels of black assets throughout this
period may have partly restricted a potential increase in the black/white self-employment ratio.
However, more analysis of this issue is needed. The lack of data on racial differences in net worth
prior to 1962 and the comparability of data since then greatly limit our ability to compare long-run
trends in racial differences in asset levels and self-employment. With available data, we also
cannot carefully examine the role that other factors, such as consumer and lending discrimination,
and risk aversion, have played in causing the absence of convergence of the black and white selfemployment rates during this century.

33

References
Aldrich, Howard E., and Roger Waldinger. 1990. "Ethnicity and Entrepreneurship," Annual
Review of Sociology, 16, pp. 111-135.
Aronson, Robert L. (1991): Self-Employment: A Labor Market Perspective, Ithaca: ILR Press.
Avery, Robert B., and Arthur B. Kennickell. 1993. "U.S. Household Wealth: Changes from 1983
to 1986," Research on Economic Inequality: Studies in the Distribution of Household
Wealth, 4, p. 27-68.
Barro, Robert J., and Chaipat Sahasakul (1983): "Measuring the Average Marginal Tax Rate
from the Individual Income Tax," Journal of Business, 56, pp. 419-452.
Bates, Timothy (1987): "Self-Employed Minorities: Traits and Trends," Social Science Quarterly,
68, pp. 539-551.
Bates, Timothy (1989): "The Changing Nature of Minority Business: A Comparative Analysis of
Asian, Nonminority, and Black-Owned Businesses," The Review of Black Political
Economy, pp. 25-42.
Bates, Timothy (1990): "Entrepreneur Human Capital Inputs and Small Business Longevity,"
The Review of Economics and Statistics, 4, pp. 551-559.
Becker, Eugene H. (1984): "Self-Employed Workers: An Update to 1983," Monthly Labor
Review, 107, pp. 14-18.
Benus, J. M., Johnson, T. R, Wood, M., Grover, N., & Shen, T. (1995): Self-employment
programs: A new reemployment strategy: Final report on the UI Self-Employment
Demonstration (Unemployment Insurance Occasional Paper 95-4). Washington, DC: U.S.
Department of Labor, Employment and Training Administration, Unemployment
Insurance Service.
Bhidé, Amar (1998): "the origin and Evolution of New Businesses: Part I," Working Paper,
Division of Research, Harvard Business School, February 1998.
Birch, David (1979): The Job Creation Process, Cambridge, MA: Center for the Study of
Neighborhood and Regional Change, Cambridge: MIT Press.
Blanchflower, David G. 1998. “Self-employment in OECD Countries.” Dartmouth College,
Working Paper.

34

Blanchflower, David G and Andrew J. Oswald. 1998. “What Makes an Entrepreneur?” Journal
of Labor Economics 16, 26-60.
Blanchflower, David G., Phillip B. Levine, and David J. Zimmerman (1998). “Discrimination in
the Small Business Credit Market,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper #6840.
Blau, David M. (1987): "A Time-Series Analysis of Self-Employment in the United States,"
Journal of Political Economy, 95, pp. 445-467.
Blau, Francine, and David Graham (1990): "Black-White Differences in Wealth and Asset
Composition," Quarterly Journal of Economics, pp. 321-339.
Borjas, George (1986): "The Self-Employment Experience of Immigrants," Journal of Human
Resources, 21, pp. 487-506.
Borjas, George, and Stephen Bronars (1989): "Consumer Discrimination and Self-Employment,"
Journal of Political Economy, 97, pp. 581-605.
Bregger, John E. (1963): "Self-Employed in the United States, 1948-1962," Monthly Labor
Review, 86 pp. 37-43.
Brown, Charles, James Hamilton, and James Medoff (1990): Employers Large and Small,
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Blinder, Alan S., "Wage Discrimination: Reduced Form and Structural Variables." Journal of
Human Resources, 8 (1973), pp. 436-455.
Boyd, Robert L. (1991): "A Contextual Analysis of Black Self-Employment in Large
Metropolitan Areas, 1910-1980," Social Forces, 70, 2, pp. 409-429.
Carter, Susan B. and Richard Sutch (1994): "Self-Employment in the Age of Big Business:
Toward an Appreciation of an American Labor Market Institution," Working Papers on
the History of Retirement, History of Retirement Project, University of California.
Cayton, Horace R. and St. Clair Drake. 1946. Black Metropolis. London: Jonathan Cape.
Cohany, Sharon, Anne Polivka, and Jennifer Rothgeb (1994): “Revisions in the Current
Population Survey Effective January 1994.” Employment and Earnings, 41(2), February
1994, 13-37.

35

Donohue, John H., and James Heckman, "Continuous versus Episodic Change: The Impact of
Civil Rights Policy on the Economic Status of Blacks," Journal of Economic Literature,
29 (December 1991), pp. 1603-1643.
Du Bois, W.E.B. 1899. The Philadelphia Negro, Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania.
Dunn, Thomas A. and Douglas J. Holtz-Eakin. 1999. "Financial Capital, Human Capital, and the
Transition to Self-Employment: Evidence from Intergenerational Links," Journal of Labor
Economics forthcoming.
Evans, David, and Linda Leighton (1989): "Some Empirical Aspects of Entrepreneurship,"
American Economic Review, 79, pp. 519-535.
Evans, David, and Boyan Jovanovic (1989): "An Estimated Model of Entrepreneurial Choice
Under Liquidity Constraints," Journal of Political Economy, 97, pp. 808-827.
Fain, T. Scott (1980): "Self-Employed Americans: Their Number Has Increased," Monthly Labor
Review, 103 pp. 3-8.
Fairlie, Robert W. 1996. Ethnic and Racial Entrepreneurship: A Study of Historical and
Contemporary Differences. New York: Garland Publishing.
Fairlie, Robert W. 1999. "The Absence of the African-American Owned Business: An Analysis
of the Dynamics of Self-Employment." Journal of Labor Economics, 17(1): 80-108.
Fairlie, Robert W., and Bruce D. Meyer (1996): "Ethnic and Racial Self-Employment Differences
and Possible Explanations," Journal of Human Resources, 31, Fall 1996, pp. 757-793.
Fairlie, Robert W. and Bruce D. Meyer. 1998. "Does Immigration Hurt African-American SelfEmployment?," (with Robert W. Fairlie), in Help or Hindrance? The Economic
Implications of Immigration for African Americans, edited by Daniel S. Hamermesh and
Frank D. Bean, Russell Sage Foundation, 185-221.
Fairlie, Robert W. and William A. Sundstrom (1999) "The Emergence, Persistence, and Recent
Widening of the Racial Unemployment Gap," Industrial and Labor Relations Review,
52(2): 252-270.
Frazier, E. Franklin (1957): The Negro in the United States, 2nd Edition, New York: McMillan.
Fuchs, Victor R. (1982): "Self-Employment and Labor Force Participation of Older Males,"
Journal of Human Resources, 17, pp. 339-357.

36

Glazer, Nathan and Daniel P. Moynihan (1970): Beyond the Melting Pot, 2nd Edition,
Cambridge: MIT Press.
Holtz-Eakin, Douglas, David Joulfaian, and Harvey Rosen (1994a): "Entrepreneurial Decisions
and Liquidity Constraints," Rand Journal of Economics, 23, 2, pp. 334-347.
Holtz-Eakin, Douglas, David Joulfaian, and Harvey Rosen (1994b): "Sticking It Out:
Entrepreneurial Survival and Liquidity Constraints," Journal of Political Economy, pp. 5375.
Hout, Michael, and Harvey Rosen (1997): "Self-Employment, Family Background, and Race,"
Working Paper, September 1997.
Jovanovic, Boyan (1982): "Selection and the Evolution of Industry," Econometrica, 50, pp. 649670.
Kihlstrom, Richard, and Jean-Jacques Laffont (1979): "A General Equilibrium Entrepreneurial
Theory of Firm Formation Based on Risk Aversion," Journal of Political Economy, 87, pp.
719-748.
Lazear, Edward P., and Robert L. Moore (1984): "Incentives, Productivity, and Labor
Contracts," Quarterly Journal of Economics, (May 1984), 275-296.
Lebergott, Stanley (1964): Manpower in Economic Growth: The American Record Since 1800,
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Lentz, Bernard, and David Laband (1990): "Entrepreneurial Success and Occupational
Inheritance among Proprietors," Canadian Journal of Economics, 23, No. 3, pp. 563-579.
Light, Ivan (1972): Ethnic Enterprise in America, Berkeley: University of California Press.
Light, Ivan (1979): "Disadvantaged Minorities in Self Employment." International Journal of
Comparative Sociology 20(1-2): 31-45.
Light, Ivan and Angel A. Sanchez (1987): "Immigrant Entrepreneurs in 272 SMSAs."
Sociological Perspectives 30: 373-99.
Long, James E. (1982): "The Income Tax and Self-Employment," National Tax Journal, 35, 1,
pp. 31-42.
Lucas, Robert E. (1978): "On the Size Distribution of Firms," The Bell Journal of Economics, 9,
pp. 508-523.
37

Menchik, Paul L. and Nancy A. Jianakoplos. 1997. "Black-White Wealth Inequality: Is
Inheritance the Reason?," Economic Inquiry, 35(2), p. 428-442.
Meyer, Bruce (1990): "Why Are There So Few Black Entrepreneurs?," National Bureau of
Economic Research, Working Paper No. 3537.
Mills, C. Wright (1951): White Collar, New York: Oxford University Press.
Moore, Robert L. (1983): Self-Employment and the Incidence of the Payroll Tax," National Tax
Journal, 36, 4, pp. 491-501.
Moore, Robert L. (1983): "Employer Discrimination: Evidence form Self-employed Workers,"
Review of Economics and Statistics, 65 (August 1983): 496-501.
Myrdal, Gunnar. 1944. An American Dilemma, New York: Harper and Brothers.
Oaxaca, Ronald, "Male-Female Wage Differentials in Urban Labor Markets," International
Economic Review, 14 (October 1973), pp. 693-709.
Oliver, Melvin L. and Thomas M. Shapiro Black Wealth/White Wealth: A New Perspective on
Racial Inequality, New York: Routledge.
Phillips, Joseph D. (1962): The Self-Employed in the United States, Urbana: University of
Illinois.
Polivka, Anne E. and Stephen M. Miller (1998): “The CPS After the Redesign: Refocusing the
Economic Lens.” In Labor Statistics Measurement Issues. ed. John Haltiwanger, Marilyn
E. Manser, and Robert Topel, 249-286. University of Chicago Press.
Projector, Dorothy S., and Gertrude S. Weiss (1966): Survey of Financial Characteristics of
Consumers. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
Quinn, Joseph (1980): "Labor Force Participation of Older Self-Employed Workers," Social
Security Bulletin, 43, pp. 17-28.
Raheim, Salome (1997): "Problems and prospects of self-employment as an economic
independence option for welfare recipients," Social Work, 42, 1, pp. 44-53.
Ray, Robert N. (1975): "Self-Employed Americans in 1973," Monthly Labor Review, 98, pp. 4954.
Reardon, Elaine. 1992. "Self-Employment Programs for Low-Income Men: Spitting into the
Wind?," University of Chicago, Working Paper.
38

Rees, H., and A. Shah (1986): "An Empirical Analysis of Self-Employment in the U.K.," Journal
of Applied Econometrics, 1, pp. 95-108.
Rettenmaier, Andrew J. (1996): "A Little or a Lot: Self-Employment and Hours of Work," Paper
presented at the Society of Labor Economists Annual Meeting, Chicago 1996.
Smith, James P. and Finis R. Welch. 1989. "Black Economic Progress After Myrdal," Journal of
Economic Literature, XXVII, pp. 519-564.
Sowell, Thomas. 1981. Markets and Minorities. New York: Basic Books.
Steinmetz, George and Erik Olin Wright (1989): "The Fall and Rise of the Petty Bourgeoisie:
Changing Patterns of Self-Employment in the Postwar United States," American Journal
of Sociology, 94, pp. 973-1018.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. 1992. Characteristics of Business Owners. Washington: USGPO.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. 1993. Census of Population and Housing, 1990: Public Use
Microdata Sample U.S. Technical Documentation. Washington: USGPO.
U.S. Department of Commerce. 1994. Household Wealth and Asset Ownership: 1991. Current
Population Reports, Household Economic Studies, P70-34. Washington: USGPO.
U.S. Department of Labor. 1992. Self-Employment Programs for Unemployed Workers.
Unemployment Insurance Occasional Paper 92-2. Washington: USGPO.
U.S. House of Representatives. 1994. Overview of Entitlement Programs: 1994 Green Book.
Committee on Ways and Means. Washington: USGPO.
U.S. Small Business Administration. 1999. Minorities in Business. Office of Advocacy.
Washington, DC.
Weber, Max (1958): The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism, New York: Scribner.
Wolpin, Kenneth I. (1977): "Education and Screening," American Economic Review 67, 949958.
Yuengert, Andrew M. 1995. "Testing Hypotheses of Immigrant Self-Employment." Journal of
Human Resources 30(1):194-204.

39

</ref_section>

Appendix A
Comparison of Estimates of Black and White Self-Employment Rates
We can compare our Decennial Census results to those from other data sets where sample
frames and time periods allow an overlap. Our estimates for white men display a similar trend in
self-employment rates to estimates from other sources of total self-employment rates over the
second half of the century, in particular 1970 is often the year of lowest self-employment. Using
Social Security data, Aronson (1991, p. 3) reports that the total self-employment rate declined
from 1955 to 1970 and increased from 1970 to 1988. Becker (1984, p. 15) uses data from the
Current Population Survey (CPS) and finds that the proportion of nonagricultural workers who
were self-employed decreased from 1948 to 1970, then increased from 1970 to 1982.58
We also can compare our estimates to those from other data sets that include black men.
Estimates from the PSID indicate that black and white male self-employment rates did not change
substantially from the early 1970's to the late 1980's.59 Furthermore, black/white self-employment
rate ratios were equal to approximately one-third over this entire period. Reardon (1992) reports
estimates from the CPS which indicate that the black male self-employment rate increased from an
average of 4.1 percent between 1976 and 1981 to an average of 4.5 percent between 1985 and
1989. The white male self-employment rate increased from an average of 12.6 percent to 13.2
percent. These changes imply that the black/white self-employment rate ratio increased from
0.325 to 0.341 over this period. In addition, Devine (1992) reports estimates from the CPS
indicating that from 1975 to 1990 the black self-employment rate increased only slightly relative
to the white self-employment rate. Estimates from the PSID and CPS concur with our estimates
from Census microdata in reporting that the black self-employment rate did not change
substantially relative to the white self-employment rate in recent years.
Estimates from the SMOBE, however, show a different trend for black self-employment
rates over the last 20 years than do estimates from the Census. According to the SMOBE, the
number of black-owned businesses increased from 176,733 in 1969 to 411,600 in 1987.60 In
comparison, published Census estimates report that the number of black-owned businesses
increased from 208,606 in 1970 to 321,516 in 1990. Clearly, the Census estimates show a much
smaller increase over roughly the same period. Most of the discrepancy between the two
estimates of growth rates appears to have occurred between 1977 and 1987.
The number of businesses estimated in the SMOBE is different from Census estimates
because the methods used to create the samples are different. The SMOBE is drawn from IRS
records which identifies all individuals who file an IRS form 1040 Schedule C (individual

58

Blau (1987, p.447) reports a similar trend for the male self-employment rate.

59

These estimates are taken from background research for Fairlie (1994).

60

Estimates from the SMOBE do not include incorporated businesses other than Scorporations. Therefore, we remove S-corporations from the SMOBE counts and the
incorporated self-employed from Census counts to allow direct comparisons between estimates
from these two sources.
40

proprietorship or self-employed person), 1065 (partnership), or 1120S (subchapter S
corporation). Therefore, the SMOBE includes all individuals who report receiving selfemployment income. This includes a number of individuals whose primary job activity is
wage/salary work, but who also own a side business. This is different from the Census which
identifies the self-employed as those workers who report their primary job activity as being selfemployment. The Census provides estimates of the number of individuals whose primary job
activity is self-employment instead of wage/salary work. The differences in black selfemployment trends between SMOBE and other sources has not been resolved.

41

Appendix B
Description of Data
A. Sampling Procedure
This study uses individual data from seven decennial Censuses of Population: 1910, and
1940 through 1990. We create random samples from the following Census Public Use Microdata
files. For 1910, we select our sample from a nationally representative 1/250 sample which was
originally drawn from microfilmed records of the original Census enumeration forms. For 1940
and 1950, we use the 1/100 samples which were encoded from microfilmed copies of handwritten
enumeration schedules from the original Censuses. Many of the variables needed for this analysis
are only available for "sample line" individuals in the 1950 Census. These individuals represent
approximately 1/4 of the total sample. Estimates of black and white self-employment rates from
this sample are nearly identical to estimates from the full sample. For 1960 and 1970, we draw
from the 1/100 samples, and for 1980 and 1990 we draw from the 5% samples. The resulting
sample sizes are:
Census Year
1910
1940
1950
1960
1970
1980
1990

Black Men
5057
14715
6934
27054
35627
39646
37190

White Men
39733
39529
39211
39726
44394
39952
39471

B. Self-Employment Status
We distinguish between self-employment and wage/salary work based on the individual's
response to the class of worker question found on each of the included Censuses. The possible
responses to this question changed only slightly across Censuses, mostly affecting the possibility
of disaggregating the self-employed into subcategories in certain years. In the 1910 and 1940
Censuses, the self-employed are defined as those workers who respond as being an employer or
working on own account to the class of worker question, and wage/salary workers are those who
respond as being a wage or salary worker or an unpaid family worker. The 1910 Census does not
include "unpaid family workers" as a possible separate response. In the 1950 and 1960 Censuses,
self-employment is defined as those responding as self-employed with own business. In the 1970,
1980 and 1990 Censuses, the class of worker question includes separate responses for selfemployed with own not incorporated business and self-employed with own incorporated business.
For these three years both of these responses are coded as self-employment.
C. Racial Status
We are interested in comparing African-American self-employment patterns to those of
whites. Therefore, we only include individuals who indicate that their race is black or white. In
the 1940 through 1970 Censuses the response to the race question is actually "Negro" instead of
42

"black." We do not separately identify or exclude Hispanics from this study because they are not
identified in the earlier Censuses. The 1910 Census allows individuals to report their race as
being Mulatto in addition to being black. Of all sample members in the 1910 Census, 2.3 percent
and 8.5 percent report a Mulatto and black race, respectively. Census enumerators were
instructed to report a respondent's race as being "black" for all individuals who were "evidently
full-blooded Negroes," and "Mulatto" for all individuals having "some proportion or perceptible
trace of Negro blood". For the 1910 sample, we include both responses in our definition of black.
D. Income Measures
Measures of self-employment and wage/salary income changed slightly over the Censuses.
To obtain consistency in this measure across each Census year, we use several procedures. First,
we do not include data from the 1910 and 1940 Censuses because data on self-employment
income are not included in these years. Second, the 1950 and 1960 Censuses do not include
separate measures of non-farm and farm net business income. Therefore, we combine non-farm
and farm self-employment income for all years. Third, the 1950, 1960 and 1970 Censuses report
only categorical income data. For these years, we assign the midpoint of each interval. Fourth,
only the presence and not the actual amount of negative self-employment income is recorded on
the 1950 Census. Therefore, we recode negative self-employment income levels as being equal to
zero for all years. Fifth, the top codes for income levels (in 1990 dollars) are 56,100 in 1950,
109,000 in 1960, 161,500 in 1970, and 118,500 in 1980. The 1990 top codes are more
complicated and depend on the state (see the 1990 PUMS Technical Documentation). We assign
the value of the top code for these individuals. Finally, for each individual income is defined as
the sum of his/her self-employment and wage/salary incomes. Therefore, an individual's income
type is defined in our analysis solely by his/her work status.
D. Other Variables
Other variables important to this analysis, such as age, education, region, hours worked
last week, and weeks worked last year, remained fairly consistent over each Census. Measures of
education, hours worked, and weeks worked are not available in the 1910 Census. Detailed
industry codes changed from Census to Census, however, the broad groupings used in this
analysis are consistent across Census years.

43

Table 1
White Self-Employment Rates and Employment Shares by Age Group
Age Group

1910

Self-Employment Rates
Ages 16-24
4.6%
Ages 25-34
14.4%
Ages 35-44
21.8%
Ages 45-54
26.5%
Ages 55-61
29.0%
Ages 62-64
30.6%
Ages 16-54
15.1%
Ages 55-64
29.4%

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

4.6%
10.2%
15.7%
19.8%
22.8%
25.9%
12.8%
23.6%

4.0%
9.8%
15.9%
18.2%
17.2%
17.8%
12.5%
17.4%

2.7%
7.5%
12.5%
14.8%
17.2%
17.6%
10.2%
17.3%

2.3%
7.1%
12.4%
13.0%
15.2%
16.5%
9.1%
15.6%

2.9%
9.5%
14.0%
15.3%
14.3%
17.8%
10.1%
15.1%

2.8%
8.9%
14.3%
14.9%
16.7%
21.4%
10.7%
17.8%

Employment Shares
Ages 16-24
27.7%
16.7%
14.8%
13.0%
16.7%
21.0%
15.2%
Ages 25-34
29.4%
28.8%
28.2%
25.3%
24.0%
29.3%
30.0%
Ages 35-44
22.3%
25.5%
25.4%
27.0%
23.2%
20.8%
26.9%
Ages 45-54
14.1%
19.6%
19.6%
22.0%
22.8%
17.7%
18.3%
Ages 55-61
4.8%
7.1%
8.8%
9.2%
9.9%
8.8%
7.3%
Ages 62-64
1.7%
2.4%
3.2%
3.4%
3.3%
2.4%
2.2%
Ages 16-54
93.5%
90.5%
88.0%
87.4%
86.8%
88.7%
90.4%
Ages 55-64
6.5%
9.5%
12.0%
12.6%
13.2%
11.3%
9.6%
Sample Size
39733
39529
39211
39726
44394
39952
39471
Notes: (1) The sample consists of male nonagricultural workers (ages 16-64)
who worked at least 15 hours in the week prior to the survey date and at least
14 weeks in the year prior to survey date. We do not impose hours and weeks
worked restrictions in 1910 due to data limitations. (2) The self-employment
rate is the percentage of all those working who are self-employed.
(3) Estimates for 1990 are calculated using weights provided by the Census.

Table 2
Self-Employment and Wage/Salary Earnings by Race
(Full-Time, Full-Year Workers)
1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

White Men: Self-Employment
Mean Earnings
Mean Log Earnings
Median Log Earnings
Variance Log Earnings
Sample Size

22865
9.378
9.811
5.005
4450

34639
9.852
10.103
3.664
3915

46107
10.256
10.388
2.524
3995

40885
10.098
10.310
2.759
3688

48376
10.168
10.309
2.519
4013

White Men: Wage/Salary
Mean Earnings
Mean Log Earnings
Median Log Earnings
Variance Log Earnings
Sample Size

19011
9.678
9.747
0.951
28298

25917
10.001
10.057
0.669
30442

30711
10.177
10.226
0.456
34150

30044
10.135
10.209
0.478
30393

34267
10.230
10.275
0.452
29732

White Men: Self-Employment - Wage/Salary
Mean Earnings
3854
8723
Mean Log Earnings
-0.300
-0.149
Median Log Earnings
0.064
0.046
Variance Log Earnings
4.054
2.995

15396
0.079
0.162
2.068

10841
-0.037
0.101
2.281

14110
-0.062
0.034
2.067

Black Men: Self-Employment
Mean Earnings
Mean Log Earnings
Median Log Earnings
Variance Log Earnings
Sample Size

12678
8.650
9.247
5.763
214

16642
9.010
9.495
4.087
720

25016
9.665
9.794
1.988
1069

27998
9.671
9.851
2.836
1017

33421
9.798
9.999
2.168
1151

Black Men: Wage/Salary
Mean Earnings
Mean Log Earnings
Median Log Earnings
Variance Log Earnings
Sample Size

11600
9.182
9.350
0.906
5069

15321
9.468
9.589
0.702
20640

19711
9.711
9.864
0.583
28284

21535
9.778
9.851
0.580
31364

24643
9.938
9.952
0.349
29014

Black Men: Self-Employment - Wage/Salary
Mean Earnings
1077
1322
5305
6463
8778
Mean Log Earnings
-0.532
-0.458
-0.046
-0.107
-0.140
Median Log Earnings
-0.103
-0.094
-0.070
0.000
0.047
Variance Log Earnings
4.857
3.385
1.405
2.256
1.819
Notes: (1) The sample consists of male nonagricultural workers (ages 16-64)
who worked 40 or more weeks last year and 35 or more hours last week. (2)
Earnings in all years are measured in 1990 dollars. (3) Negative reported
earnings are set equal to zero. (4) Estimates for 1990 are calculated using
weights provided by the Census.

Table 3
White Self-Employment Rates and Employment Shares by Industry
Industry
Self-Employment Rates
Mining
Construction
Manufacturing
Transportation
Trade
FIRE
Bus. and Repair
Personal Serv.
Ent. and Rec.
Professional
Public Admin.
Total

1910

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

3.8%
20.8%
5.5%
2.9%
37.7%
26.9%
39.2%
35.6%
26.1%
42.3%
0.5%
16.7%

4.8%
21.2%
3.2%
6.4%
27.1%
14.8%
30.9%
29.6%
16.9%
27.8%
0.0%
13.9%

3.8%
19.2%
3.5%
5.2%
26.7%
16.1%
30.0%
29.5%
14.4%
20.5%
0.0%
13.1%

3.1%
19.9%
2.4%
4.6%
22.6%
13.8%
28.9%
34.8%
18.5%
19.4%
0.0%
11.4%

5.3%
17.2%
2.6%
4.2%
16.8%
12.6%
23.8%
32.3%
20.7%
15.3%
0.0%
10.0%

4.5%
21.3%
3.4%
4.7%
15.3%
14.3%
25.5%
30.1%
19.9%
14.8%
0.0%
11.0%

5.0%
22.0%
4.3%
5.8%
11.6%
18.5%
21.9%
23.6%
13.1%
14.5%
0.0%
11.4%

Employment Shares
Mining
6.0%
3.3%
2.9%
1.7%
1.3%
1.9%
1.1%
Construction
11.1%
7.4%
9.3%
9.5%
9.3%
9.7%
11.2%
Manufacturing
32.8%
33.8%
33.4%
36.3%
32.9%
28.7%
23.7%
Transportation
16.4%
11.3%
11.2%
10.0%
9.1%
9.9%
9.8%
Trade
18.6%
21.8%
21.3%
18.8%
20.0%
19.7%
20.6%
FIRE
2.8%
4.0%
3.3%
3.9%
4.5%
4.8%
5.7%
Bus. and Repair
1.8%
3.1%
3.8%
3.4%
3.6%
5.1%
5.9%
Personal Serv.
3.7%
3.7%
2.7%
2.2%
1.8%
1.4%
1.5%
Ent. and Rec.
0.8%
1.2%
1.0%
0.8%
0.7%
0.9%
1.5%
Professional
4.5%
5.7%
5.3%
7.3%
10.3%
12.1%
13.8%
Public Admin.
1.6%
4.8%
5.7%
6.1%
6.5%
5.9%
5.4%
Sample Size
37794
39070
39091
38394
44394
38948
39471
Notes: (1) The sample consists of male nonagricultural workers (ages 16-64)
who worked at least 15 hours in the week prior to the survey date and at least
14 weeks in the year prior to survey date. We do not impose hours and weeks
worked restrictions in 1910 due to data limitations. (2) The self-employment
rate is the percentage of all those working who are self-employed.
(3) Estimates for 1990 are calculated using weights provided by the Census.

Table 4
Decompositions of Aggregate White Self-Employment Rate
19101940

19401950

19501960

19601970

19701980

19801990

19101970

19701990

-2.8%

-0.8%

-1.7%

-1.4%

1.0%

0.4%

-6.7%

1.4%

-0.7%

-1.2%

-2.0%

0.4%

-0.6%

-9.4%

-0.1%

1.7%

-0.1%

-0.4%

0.7%

0.6%

1.0%

2.7%

1.5%

Method 2 (Equation 3.3)
Self-Employment Rates -3.5%
within Industries

-0.7%

-1.3%

-1.8%

0.4%

-0.5%

-7.0%

0.0%

Change in Aggregate
Self-Employment Rate

Contribution from Change in:
Method 1 (Equation 3.2)
Self-Employment Rates -4.5%
within Industries
Employment Shares

Employment Shares
0.6% -0.1% -0.4%
0.5%
0.6%
0.9%
0.3%
1.4%
Notes: (1) The sample consists of male nonagricultural workers (ages 16-64)
who worked at least 15 hours in the week prior to the survey date and at least
14 weeks in the year prior to survey date. We do not impose hours and weeks
worked restrictions in 1910 due to data limitations. (2) See text for a
complete description of the decomposition. (3) Estimates for 1990 are
calculated using weights provided by the Census.

Table 5
Industry Decomposition of Aggregate White Self-Employment Rate (1970-1990)

Industry

Method 1 (Equation 3.5) Method 2 (Equation 3.6)
Contribution from
Contribution from
Change in:
Change in:
Net Contribution
Self-Empl. Employment
Self-Empl. Employment
from Industry
Rate
Share
Rate
Share
(Equation 3.4)

Mining
Construction
Manufacturing
Transportation
Trade
FIRE
Bus. and Repair
Personal Serv.
Ent. and Rec.
Professional
Public Admin.
Total

-0.00%
0.45%
0.56%
0.14%
-1.04%
0.27%
-0.07%
-0.16%
-0.05%
-0.08%
0.00%
0.02%

0.02%
0.20%
0.66%
-0.04%
0.00%
0.09%
0.24%
-0.04%
0.01%
0.11%
0.13%
1.37%

-0.00%
0.54%
0.40%
0.16%
-1.07%
0.34%
-0.11%
-0.13%
-0.11%
-0.11%
0.00%
-0.09%

0.02%
0.11%
0.81%
-0.05%
0.03%
0.01%
0.29%
-0.07%
0.07%
0.14%
0.13%
1.48%

0.01%
0.65%
1.21%
0.10%
-1.04%
0.36%
0.17%
-0.20%
-0.04%
0.03%
0.13%
1.39%

Notes: (1) The sample consists of male nonagricultural workers (ages 16-64)
who worked at least 15 hours in the week prior to the survey date and at least
14 weeks in the year prior to survey date. We do not impose hours and weeks
worked restrictions in 1910 due to data limitations. (2) See text for a
complete description of the decomposition. (3) Estimates for 1990 are
calculated using weights provided by the Census.

Table 6
Black Self-Employment Rates and Employment Shares by Industry
Industry

1910

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

Self-Employment Rates
Mining
Construction
Manufacturing
Transportation
Trade
FIRE
Bus. and Repair
Personal Serv.
Ent. and Rec.
Professional
Public Admin.
Total

0.7%
11.7%
1.1%
1.6%
16.3%
3.7%
24.0%
9.2%
11.8%
11.9%
0.0%
6.0%

1.2%
10.2%
1.1%
4.7%
10.5%
4.2%
15.6%
7.9%
8.7%
8.7%
0.0%
6.0%

0.8%
6.1%
0.4%
3.2%
8.1%
5.3%
13.1%
7.9%
5.2%
5.9%
0.0%
4.1%

0.7%
8.8%
0.6%
3.6%
4.9%
2.9%
15.6%
9.6%
4.9%
3.7%
0.0%
3.8%

1.6%
9.8%
0.9%
3.8%
5.0%
3.4%
14.0%
12.1%
4.8%
3.5%
0.0%
3.9%

0.7%
8.7%
0.8%
2.7%
4.6%
3.9%
13.7%
11.5%
8.0%
3.3%
0.0%
3.5%

1.7%
9.9%
1.0%
4.1%
3.5%
5.9%
11.5%
11.3%
8.0%
3.4%
0.0%
4.1%

Employment Shares
Mining
Construction
Manufacturing
Transportation
Trade
FIRE
Bus. and Repair
Personal Serv.
Ent. and Rec.
Professional
Public Admin.
Sample Size

6.4%
10.6%
28.0%
21.6%
11.6%
1.9%
1.1%
13.4%
0.8%
3.8%
0.8%
4369

2.9%
8.9%
27.9%
12.0%
17.5%
3.3%
2.8%
15.0%
1.6%
5.3%
2.8%
14421

1.8%
10.4%
33.3%
12.6%
17.0%
2.2%
3.1%
7.9%
1.1%
5.2%
5.3%
6876

0.6%
10.7%
33.0%
10.4%
16.7%
2.2%
3.1%
6.2%
1.2%
8.1%
7.8%
24882

0.5%
9.6%
34.7%
10.6%
15.3%
2.8%
3.5%
3.7%
0.8%
10.2%
8.1%
35627

0.8%
8.0%
31.1%
13.6%
14.8%
3.7%
4.5%
2.0%
0.9%
13.1%
7.5%
37484

0.5%
7.9%
22.9%
14.2%
17.7%
4.6%
6.0%
2.5%
1.4%
14.8%
7.5%
37190

Black/White Self-Employment Rate Ratio
Mining
0.191
0.244
0.209
0.232
0.296
0.149
0.329
Construction
0.562
0.478
0.320
0.445
0.569
0.409
0.449
Manufacturing
0.192
0.340
0.111
0.249
0.348
0.236
0.239
Transportation
0.551
0.736
0.623
0.797
0.916
0.564
0.709
Trade
0.434
0.387
0.304
0.215
0.296
0.302
0.305
FIRE
0.138
0.285
0.329
0.213
0.269
0.272
0.317
Bus. and Repair
0.612
0.506
0.437
0.539
0.590
0.538
0.524
Personal Serv.
0.260
0.268
0.268
0.274
0.376
0.383
0.479
Ent. and Rec.
0.451
0.512
0.361
0.267
0.233
0.403
0.606
Professional
0.282
0.313
0.287
0.193
0.229
0.225
0.231
Public Admin.
Total
0.356
0.433
0.313
0.338
0.387
0.319
0.359
Notes: (1) The sample consists of male nonagricultural workers (ages 16-64)
who worked at least 15 hours in the week prior to the survey date and at least
14 weeks in the year prior to survey date. We do not impose hours and weeks
worked restrictions in 1910 due to data limitations. (2) The self-employment
rate is the percentage of all those working who are self-employed.
(3) Estimates for 1990 are calculated using weights provided by the Census.

Table 7
Decomposition of Changes in the Racial Self-Employment Rate Gap (1940-1990)
19401950

19501960

19601970

19701980

19801990

13.818
6.137
7.681

13.053
4.110
8.942

11.091
3.633
7.458

9.983
3.859
6.124

10.703
3.309
7.394

1.261

-1.485

-1.334

1.270

0.327

-0.189
-0.011
0.181
0.390

-0.128
0.001
0.146
0.192

-0.104
-0.058
0.113
0.142

0.078
-0.041
-0.090
-0.028

-0.003
0.030
-0.067
-0.032

(ii) Characteristics-Race Interaction
Age
0.281
Marriage/Children
0.241
Education
-0.091
Region
-0.312

0.323
0.130
0.057
-0.101

-0.118
0.008
0.101
-0.049

-0.592
-0.067
0.402
0.043

0.370
-0.073
0.293
0.026

(iii) Coefficients-Race Interaction
Age
-0.184
Marriage/Children
0.088
Education
0.168
Region
-0.132

0.016
-0.041
-0.487
-0.105

-0.054
-0.039
-0.143
0.071

-0.038
0.023
-0.197
0.161

0.027
0.047
-0.227
-0.131

Initial Year
White Self-Empl. Rate
Black Self-Empl. Rate
Gap: White-Black Rate
Decadal Change in Gap
Contributions Estimates
(i) Characteristics Effect
Age
Marriage/Children
Education
Region

(iv) Coefficients Effect
0.832
-1.487
-1.203
1.615
0.068
Notes: (1) The sample consists of male nonagricultural workers (ages 16-64)
who worked at least 15 hours in the week prior to the survey date and at least
14 weeks in the year prior to survey date. (2) See text for a complete
description of each component of the decomposition. (3) The black and white
self-employment rates in 1990 are 4.1 and 11.8 percent, respectively.

Table 8
Mean and Median Household Net Worth by Race (1990 Dollars)

Year

Source

Mean Net Worth
Black/White
Black
White
Ratio

Median Net Worth
Black/White
Black
White
Ratio

1962
A
19314
111280
0.174
3927
38116
0.103
1984
B
25462
108601
0.234
4273
49229
0.087
1988
B
26130
111950
0.233
4606
47815
0.096
1991
B
26716
107391
0.249
4418
42615
0.104
Sources: (A) Tabulations using the Survey of Financial Characteristics of
Consumers reported in Avery and Kennickell (1993). (B) The Survey of Income
and Program Participation reported in U.S. Department of Commerce, Household
Wealth and Asset Ownership.

Table 9
CPS Male Self-Employment Rates
March CPS 1966-1996, Outgoing Rotation Group (ORG) Data 1984-1996

Year
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997

White Rates
March
ORG
0.08267
0.08102
0.08423
0.07852
0.08112
0.07757
0.07979
0.07751
0.07385
0.10686
0.10977
0.11241
0.11526
0.12244
0.11984
0.12380
0.13165
0.12762
0.12792
0.13429
0.12357
0.13161
0.12487
0.13263
0.12674
0.13238
0.12660
0.13371
0.12589
0.13395
0.12836
0.13316
0.12752
0.13554
0.13539
0.13056
0.12265
0.14009
0.12070
0.12903
0.11930
0.12770
0.12107
0.12524
0.11749

Black Rates
March
ORG
0.04265
0.03571
0.03888
0.03640
0.03514
0.04572
0.03544
0.02832
0.03006
0.02678
0.03585
0.04633
0.03563
0.03891
0.03071
0.04992
0.03803
0.03776
0.03149
0.04982
0.04269
0.04579
0.04555
0.04993
0.03403
0.04892
0.04134
0.04988
0.04723
0.04798
0.05546
0.05469
0.04445
0.05365
0.04894
0.05151
0.05616
0.04873
0.04515
0.05867
0.05355
0.05554
0.05583
0.05783
0.04391

Black/White Ratio
March
ORG
0.51591
0.44069
0.46161
0.46359
0.43312
0.58944
0.44419
0.36535
0.40708
0.25056
0.32661
0.41216
0.30909
0.31776
0.25623
0.40320
0.28889
0.29589
0.24615
0.37097
0.34548
0.34795
0.36480
0.37645
0.26852
0.36956
0.32653
0.37305
0.37517
0.35819
0.43205
0.41074
0.34856
0.39582
0.37485
0.38046
0.45790
0.34785
0.37408
0.45472
0.44885
0.43491
0.46117
0.46176
0.37376

Notes: (1) The sample consists of male non-agricultural workers ages 16-64 who worked at least
15 hours last week (March and ORG) and at least 14 weeks during the year (March only). (2)
The lines represent changes in survey methodology as described in the text. (3) All rates are
calculated using sample weights.

Figure 1
Self-Employment Rates by Race
1.00

0.18

White Self-Employment Rate

0.16

0.90
0.80
0.70

0.12
0.60
0.10
0.50

Black/White Ratio

0.08

0.40
0.06
0.30
0.04

Black Self-Employment Rate

0.20

0.02

0.00
1910

0.10

1920

1930

1940

1950

Census Year

1960

1970

1980

0.00
1990

Black/White Ratio

Self-Employment Rate

0.14

Figure 2
Self-Employment Rates by Race
(Full-Time, Full-Year Workers)

0.18

1.00

0.16

0.90

White Self-Employment

0.80
0.70

0.12
0.60
0.10
0.50
0.08

Black/White Ratio

0.40

0.06
0.30
0.04

Black Self-Employment
0.20

0.02
0.00
1910

0.10

1920

1930

1940

1950

Census Year

1960

1970

1980

0.00
1990

Black/White Ratio

Self-Employment Rate

0.14

Figure 3
White Self-Employment Rate and Federal Tax Rates

0.18

0.4
Average Marginal Federal Income Tax Rate
Plus OASDHI Rate

0.16
0.14

0.3

0.12
0.10
0.2
0.08
0.06
Average Marginal Federal Income Tax

0.1

0.04
0.02
0.00
1910

1920

1930

1940

1950

Census Year

1960

1970

1980

0
1990

Tax Rate

Self-Employment Rate

White Self-Employment Rate

Figure 4
White Self-Employment Rates and Social Security (OASI) Benefit Levels
0.30

1.0

Self-Employment Rate (Ages 65 and Over)
0.9
0.25

0.7

Self-Employment Rate (Ages 62-64)

0.20

0.6
0.15

Self-Employment Rate (Ages 16-61)

0.5
0.4

0.10
0.3
0.2
0.05
0.1

Social Security (OASI) Replacement Rate
0.00
1940

1950

1960

1970

Census Year

1980

0.0
1990

Replacement Rate

Self-Employment Rate

0.8

Figure 5
Self-Employment Rates by Immigrant Status
0.20

0.5

0.18

Immigrant White Self-Employment Rate
0.4

0.14
0.12

0.3

Native White Self-Employment Rate

0.10
0.08

0.2

0.06
0.04

Fraction Immigrant

0.1

0.02
0.00
1910

1920

1930

1940

1950

Census Year

1960

1970

1980

0.0
1990

Fraction Immigrant

Self-Employment Rate

0.16

Figure 6
Black/White Self-Employment Rate Ratio by Age Cohort
0.7

0.6

Black/White Ratio

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0
1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

Census Year
Ages 15-24 in 1990
Ages 15-24 in 1950

Ages 15-24 in 1980
Ages 15-24 in 1940

Ages 15-24 in 1970

Ages 15-24 in 1960

1990

