                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             SIMULATING THE TRANSMISSION
                                OF WEALTH INEQUALITY
                                    VIA BEQUESTS

                                         Jagadeesh Gokhale
                                        Laurence J. Kotlikoff
                                            James Sefton
                                            Martin Weale


                                         Working Paper 7183
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w7 183

                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 1999




We thank Steven Caldwell for providing fertility data from CORSIM, his detailed micro simulation model of
the U.S. economy. We thank Pierre Pestieau and other participants of the ISPE conference on Bequests and
Inequality Across Generations, participants at the Federal Reserve System's Committee on Money and
Macroeconomics, James Poterba, and two referees for very valuable comments. Laurence J. Kotlikoff
gratefully acknowledges research support from the National Institute of Aging. All opinions expressed are
those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research, Boston University, the
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, or the National Institute for Economic and Social Research.

© 1999 by Jagadeesh Gokhale, Laurence J. Kotlikoff, James Sefton, and Martin Weale. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Simulating the Transmission of Wealth
Inequality via Bequests
Jagadeesh Gokhale, Laurence J. Kotlikoff,
James Sefton, and Martin Weale
NBER Working Paper No. 7183
June 1999
JELNo. D31

                                           ABSTRACT
       This paper develops, calibrates, and simulates a dynamic 88-period OLG model to study the
intergenerational transmission of U.S. wealth inequality via bequests. The model features marriage,
realistic fertility patterns, random death, assortative mating based on skills, heterogeneous skill
endowments, heterogeneous rates of return, skill inheritability, progressive income taxation, and
resource annuitization via social security. All bequests arise from imperfect amiuitization.
Nonetheless, the model generates a realistic ration of aggregate wealth to aggregate labor income,
a realistic bequest flow relative to the stock of wealth, and a realistic wealth distribution at
retirement. Skill differences, assortative mating, social security, and the time preference are the
primary determinants of wealth inequality. Bequests do propagate wealth inequality, but only in the
presence of social security, which disproportionately disinherits the lifetime poor. Intergenerational
wealth immobility, also considered here, is primarily determined by the inheritance of skills from
one's parents and the magnification of the impact of this inheritance by marital sorting.


Jagadeesh Gokhale                                     Laurence J. Kotlikoff
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland                     Department of Economics
1455 East 6th Street                                  Boston University
Cleveland, OH 44101                                   270 Bay State Road
jagadeesh.j .gokhale@clev.frb.org                     Boston, MA 02215
                                                      and NBER
                                                      kotlikof@bu.edu

James Sefton                                           Martin Weale
National Institute of Economic and Social              National Institute of Economic and Social
       Research                                               Research
2 Dean Trench Street                                   2 Dean Trench Street
Smith Square                                           Smith Square
London SW1P 3HE                                        London SW1P 3HE
UK                                                     UK
rn.weale@niesr.ac.uk                                   jseftonniesr.ac.uk
I.     Introduction

       Does inequality in inherited wealth exacerbate wealth inequality? If so, by how

much? These fundamental questions remain unresolved.             Although it may seem

counterintuitive, inherited wealth may be more evenly distributed than non-inherited

wealth and may reduce overall wealth inequality. The reason is that the distribution of

inheritances is largely governed by the random nature of longevity whereas the

distribution of non-inherited wealth is largely governed by the distribution of labor

earnings.

       Theoretical research has identified many of the channels through which

inheritances influence wealth inequality, but their relative importance is unresolved.

Empirical analysis of inheritances has been limited by the availability of reliable data.

An alternative approach initiated by Blinder (1974, 1976) and Davies (1982), and the one

taken here, is to simulate the transmission of inequality via bequests. Unlike previous

simulation studies, however, our focus is on unintended inheritances arising from random

dates of death and the dynamic impact of these inheritances on the distribution of wealth.

       To study this process, we construct an overlapping generations model with

uncertain lifespan. Each agent lives for at most 88 years — the first 22 years as a child,

the second 22 years as a young adult who marries and has children, the third 22 years as a

married, middle-aged adult who has no additional children, and the last 22 years as a

married or widowed older adult facing lifespan uncertainty. Agents who die prior to

reaching age 88 bequeath their wealth to their spouses. If their spouses are no longer

living, they bequeath in equal amounts to their children, all of whom are alive given the

models timing. Agents have life-cycle preferences, meaning they have no bequest
motive per se and leave bequests only because their resources are not fully annuitized.

Our model follows the economy and its existing and new agents through time. This is a

prerequisite to determining the impact of random inheritances on the long-run distribution

of wealth.

       The bequestlinheritance process is complicated. Other things equal, children

whose parents die relatively early receive larger inheritances than children whose parents

die relatively late. But how much one inherits depends both on the number of one's

siblings sharing the bequest and on the amount of non-aimuitized wealth one's parents

accumulate prior to their deaths. Parents' wealth accumulation depends, in turn, on how

much they themselves inherited (which depends on when their ancestors died), the level

of their earnings out of which they saved, the rate of return they received on their savings,

the number of children they had to support, and their own time-preference rates (which

influences their desire to save). Hence, earnings inequality, the transmission of earnings

inequality across generations, the number and spacing of children, assortative mating,

heterogeneous rates of return, time preference, the annuitization of retirement savings

through social security, and the progressivity of the income tax system can all play

important roles in influencing inequality in inheritances. We consider each of these

factors and their interactions in trying to account for wealth inequality and immobility.

       To parse our life-cycle effects and to ensure that we capture the receipts of all

inheritances, we measure intra-cohort wealth inequality at retirement. In studying wealth

mobility, we consider the wealth holdings of the children of rich and poor retirees when

these children reach retirement. Our results suggest that whether inheritances dampen or

exacerbate wealth inequality depends very strongly on social security's annuitization of
retirement savings. Absent social security, inheritances somewhat reduce wealth

inequality among members of the same birth cohort. In social security's presence.

however, inheritances play an important role in increasing wealth inequality. Social

security aside, the main determinants of our model's wealth inequality are inequality in

lifetime earnings (skill differences), assortative mating based on skills, and the rate of

time preference. Interestingly, holding constant inequality in skills, the fact that agents

inherit their skills from their parents does not materially alter wealth inequality.

       \\"hen all of the factors that influence wealth inequality are included and

calibrated to what appear to be the most realistic set of parameter values, our model

generates a distribution of wealth that closely approximate the degree of inequality and

skewness in the actual U.S. data. In particular, the richest 1 percent of our model's

retiring households hold 32.8 percent of total wealth, which is quite close to the

corresponding 30.4 percent figure in the Survey of Consumer Finances. Our model also

generates what appears to be a reasonable degree of wealth immobility. Under our most

realistic set of assumptions, 1 5.9 percent of the children of the super rich end up super

rich themselves.

        Our findings are striking, but their relevance to the U.S. economy is a matter of

opinion. True, we've considered a large set of important determinants of wealth

inequality. But we haven't considered all determinants; and although we've tried to

calibrate the model careftilly, our calibration is limited by the availability of data. These

points should be kept in mind in judging whether this paper's findings are telling us about

the real world or just about the life-cycle model.




                                              4
       The paper proceeds in Section II with a literature review. Section III presents our

simulation model and its calibration. Section IV presents simulation results. Our

strategy here is to start with extreme assumptions to illustrate the roles played by

different factors and then turn to a more realistic set of assumptions. Section V discusses

the impact of inheritances on the transmission of wealth inequality across generations,

and Section VI summarizes and concludes the paper.



II. Literature Review'

       Early studies of the link between inheritance and inequality focussed on the

relationship between the values of the estates of fathers and their Sons (Wedgwood, 1929,

Harbury and Hitchens, 1979). Wedgwood considered a sample of 99 people who left

estates of at least £200,000 (just under $1,000,000) between 1924 and 1925. He found

that 60 percent had a predecessor who died leaving at least £50,000, and that about one

third of the wealthy owed their position entirely to inheritance. Harbury and Hitchens

reported that in 1973, 58 percent of those men who died leaving at least £100,000 had

fathers who had left at least £25,000 at 1973 prices and that 67 percent of the variance in

a son's estate was explained by the variation in the father's estate.

       Interesting as they are, these data do not prove that inherited wealth is a source of

inequality. The data relate to the total value of the father's estate and not to the amount

inherited by the son, which may have been much less if the estate was divided equally

among a number of children. And they are perfectly consistent with the view that

wealthy fathers endowed their children with other advantages in life that helped them




                                              5
become wealthy. Nevertheless they reinforce the widely held view summarized by

Meade (1976) that inheritance is a source of inequality in the distribution of wealth, a

conclusion supported by the theoretical model of Wilhelm (1997) and the empirical work

of Menchik (1979). This view underlies support for estate taxation as a potential

mechanism for redistributing wealth.

        The alternative idea -- that intergenerational transfers can be equalizing -- can be

traced to Stiglitz (1969). In common with most of the growth literature of the day,

Stiglitz assumed that each individual's consumption was a linear function of her total

income. He demonstrated that a stable, egalitarian distribution of wealth would emerge if

inheritances were distributed evenly among all of one's children.

        Subsequent work focussed on the impact of inheritance on income inequality

rather than wealth inequality. Stiglitz and Atkinson (1980) used the same model, but

added earnings heterogeneity, to show that an increase in the size of inheritances, caused

by an increase in the rate of savings, would decrease income inequality. In essence,

inheritances act as insurance against the random receipt of lower than average labor

income. If an agent's earnings end up below (above) the average for his cohort, chances

are his parents' earnings were higher (lower), and their bequest will permit his parents to

share with him their better (worse) luck. Stiglitz and Atkinson also pointed out that for

inheritances to increase inequality in these linear models an additional mechanism needed

to operate to offset this insurance effect. Stiglitz (1969) suggested primogeniture (the

oldest son receives the entire estate). Blinder (1973) suggested class mating.



 Davies and Shurrocks (2000) provide an excellent review of the literature.


                                                    6
       The models of Becker and Tomes (1979) and Tomes (1981) highlight the joint

role that inheritances of financial wealth and earning power (human capital) play in

determining whether intergenerational transfers are equalizing. Their condition for this

outcome is that the propensity of parents to transfer financial and tangible resources to

their children exceeds the inheritability of human capital --      the   correlation coefficient

between the parent's and the child's human capital. Deardon. Machin and Reed (1997)

and Solon (1992) and Solon and Zimmerman (1992) have recently tried to estimate the

inheritability of human capital in the United Kingdom and the United States, respectively.

Their results suggest a coefficient of 0.5 for the correlation between a father's and a son's

earnings. Although this is a large correlation, it's not clear whether it arises because of

genetics or parents' human capital investment in their children.

       Laitner (1979a and 1979b) constructs a utility-maximizing framework in which

parents care about both their own and their children's consumption, bequests must be

non-negative, and there is no inheritability of human capital. He shows that an

equilibrium wealth distribution exists and that inheritances are equalizing if there is no

assortative mating. The studies of Meade (1964), Stiglitz (1969), Pryor (1973), Atkinson

and Harrison (1978), and Atkinson (1980) also point to the role of imperfect correlation

of spouses' inheritances in equalizing the distribution of inheritances.

       Theoretical work on taxation provides additional grounds for believing that

inheritances are equalizing. Becker and Tomes (1979) and Atkinson and Stiglitz (1980)

show that inheritance taxation can increase income inequality. However if there are

incomplete markets, such as the market for educational loans considered by Loury

(1981). redistributive taxation of bequests can reduce intragenerational inequality.

                                              7
       The question of whether inheritances increase or decrease income inequality has

also been studied empirically. Tomes (1981) examined this question directly and found

evidence in support of an equalizing effect. Davies and Kuhn (1991) suggest that even

though inheritances are equalizing in the long run, a rise in inheritance taxation will

reduce inequality in the short run, but raise it in the long run.



Previous Simulation Studies

       The simulation literature descends from Atkinson's (1971), Flemming's (1976),

Oulton's (1976), and Wolfson's (1977) analyses of whether a pure (no-bequest) life-cycle

model can explain wealth inequality. The general conclusion of this work is that, sans

bequests, the life-cycle model is unable to explain the extreme upper tail of the wealth

distribution. For example, Atkinson found wealth shares of the richest 1 and 5 percent of

just 2 percent and 10 percent. As pointed out by Davies and Shorrocks (1978), Oulton's

(1976) addition to the Atkinson model of a more realistic earnings distribution raised

these shares to 6 and 17 percent. These figures are far below the actual U.S. shares.

       Blinder (1974, 1976) conducts simulation studies with both intragenerational

heterogeneity and life-cycle accumulation. He finds that inheritances are unimportant in

determining inequality of annual income and that there is high intergenerational mobility

in the distribution of inherited wealth. Unfortunately, he doesn't consider the impact of

inheritances on the distribution of total wealth.

       Wolfson (1979) and Davies (1982) simulate a behavioral model of life cycle

saving and desired bequests. For example, in Davies' Canadian study parents maximize a

lifetime utility function defined over their own and their adult childrens' consumption

                                               8
subject to their own and their childrens' lifetime budget constraints.2 Davies' cross-

section wealth and income distributions closely match the corresponding 1970 Canadian

distributions.3 Davies explored only the role of intentional bequests on inequality and in

a static context; i.e.. he did not consider how the receipt of inheritances by one generation

would influence the receipt of inheritances by the next generation and so on. In contrast,

the bequests in our model are purely unintentional. They are also random, and this

randomness requires tracing their influence over successive generations; i.e.,                             it

necessitates a dynamic approach.

         Huggett (1996) develops a large-scale life-cycle simulation model with uncertain

lifetimes as well as uncertain labor income that follows an autoregressive process. He

compares the model's age-wealth distribution to the actual U.S. distribution and finds a

fairly close match except at the very upper tail. But unlike our analysis, which considers

how the distribution of inheritances alters the distribution of wealth, Huggett assumes that

all bequests are collected by the government and divided evenly across the population.

         The closest antecedent to our study is that of Flemming (1979). Like us,

Flemming considers earnings heterogeneity and unintended bequests arising from


2 Optimal consumption over a fixed and certain lifespan is simulated for 500 couples. Each parent couple
is identical on all but the following dimensions: Parents' own inheritances, earnings, rate of return. rate of
time preference, intensity of altruism toward children, and parentsl age of first birth. Random draws of
these variables from distributions calibrated to Canadian data are allocated to each couple before
computing its optimal consumption path and desired bequest. Bequests occur when parents die, which,
given there is no lifespan uncertainty, occurs at a common age. Bequests are distributed among children
equally or. alternatively, in a compensatory manner based on children's earnings. Assuming constant rates
of income and population growth over time, a single simulation over 500 couples suffices to generate a
cross-section distribution of wealth, income, and lifetime resources.
  Davies also attempts to explore the impact of the different sources of heterogeneity on inequality.
Unfortunately, the multi-generation (dynamic) simulations required to explore the long-run level of
bequests and inequality from resulting from removing, in turn, the heterogeneity in each of the variables
was precluded by limits on computational capacity. Consequently, Davies was forced to consider these
experiments assuming no bequests.


                                                      9
uncertain lifetimes and imperfect annuitization. But he also examines intentional

bequests and the inheritablity of skills. In contrast to our approach, Flemming's model

has parthenogenesis; i.e., there is no marriage. There is also no heterogeneity in the

number and spacing of children. Flemming finds that wealth is much more unequally

divided than is earnings, that random mortality in the absence of annuities and desired

bequests can increase wealth inequality by roughly a third, and that intentional bequests

can play an additional important role in raising wealth inequality.



Empirical Evidence on Altruism

       Since our model ignores intended bequests, it's important to consider past

research that has examined the motives underlying bequests. Laitner and Juster (1996)

find some limited support for altruism in the decision at retirement of most TIAA-CREF

participants not to annuitize fully their TIAA-CREF balances. In contrast, Boskin and

Kotlikoff (1985), Altonji, Hayashi and Kotlikoff (1992, 1997), Abel and Kotlikoff

(1994). Hayashi, Altonji, and Kotlikoff (1996). Gokhale, Kotlikoff, and Sabeihaus

(1996), and Wilhelm (1996) show that a) the distribution of consumption across cohorts

is very strongly dependent on the cross-cohort distribution of resources, b) the

distribution of consumption within extended families is very strongly dependent on the

distribution of resources within extended families, c) that taking a dollar from a child and

handing it to parents who are actively transferring income to that child leads the parent to

hand back only 13 cents to the child, d) that the very major postwar increase in the

annuitization of the resources of the elderly has not been even partially offset by an

increase in their holdings of life insurance, and e) that the vast majority of bequests are

                                             10
distributed equally among children independent of their economic needs.              Individually

and as a group, these studies constitute very strong evidence against intergenerational

altruism. suggesting that most bequests may be unintended or motivated by non-altruistic

considerations.

        Hurd (1992) examines the influence of children on saving by elderly people in the

United States. He finds that the elderly with children do save more than those without,

but that the effect is statistically insignificant. Thus his findings are consistent with a

view that bequests are largely accidental. According to his simulations, the bequest

motive is not only statistically insignificant; it's also small in absolute terms.

       It is frequently observed that retired consumers save rather than dissave. Prima

facie this might indicate a bequest motive in some form (Hurd, 1990). However Gokhale,

Kotlikoff. and Sabeihaus (1996) and Miles (1997) point out that when wealth is

calculated to include the capitalized value of social security receipts, it falls throughout

retirement. Hurd also concludes from a careful analysis of panel and cross-section data

that the evidence on wealth change is consistent with the life-cycle hypothesis and the

view that bequests are accidental.

       A final point concerning the likelihood of altruistic bequests was made by Meade

(1966) and Flemming (1976). They pointed out that anything less than very strong

altruism would not suffice to generate ubiquitous and significant bequests given that, on

average, the lifetime incomes of children significantly exceed those of their parents.



Evidence on Intergenerational Mobility




                                              II
        Paul Menchiks (1979) laborious study of wealth immobility appears to be the

most detailed analysis of wealth mobility in the U.S. Menchik examined probate records

of 1,050 Connecticut residents who passed away in the 1930s and 1940s. Each of these

decedents left an estate of $40,000 or more. Armed with these records, Menchik tried to

track down probate records of the spouses and well over 1,000 children of the 1,050

decedents. His search ended up locating only 199 children for whom probate records

were available for both parents. Menchik then considered the correlation between

different measures of parental wealth (such as the average of the father's and mother's

estates) with the estates of their decedent children. Menchik reports a child-parent wealth

correlation of close to .5 and concludes there is fairly high wealth immobility.4



III. The Model and Its Calibration

        This section describes the model's demographic structure, its marital
arrangements, its fertility patterns, its method of constructing an initial distribution of the

population. its method of populating the model through time, its allocation of skills to the

model's agents, its determination of bequests and inheritance, its time-zero wealth

distribution, the length of its simulations, and its consumption and saving behavior.


  Menchik's findings are suggestive of wealth immobility, but are certainly not definitive evidence. First,
the sample is quite small. Second, there are major issues of sample selection, foremost of which is that the
1.050 original decedents are hardly representative of the population as a whole.             $40,000 was a
considerable sum in the l930s and 1940s, and the parent-child wealth correlation might be quite different
in a complete and random sample. Third, the ages of death of both parents and children are highly varied,
and there is no correction for life-cycle differences in wealth accumulation by age. Thus the high parent-
child wealth correlation could simply reflect a correlation in the ages of death of parents and children.
Finally, most of the 199 children are married, but there is no analysis of the correlation of the household
wealth of the child and that of the child's spouse's parents (the child's in-laws). If the children of the rich
tend to marry children of the middle and poorer classes, their spouse's parents will likely have modest
amounts of wealth. Were they included in the sample, the parental-child wealth correlation might be much
lower than Menchik reports.


                                                      12
Demographic Structure

       Agents in the model can live for 88 periods. All economic and demographic

events (like earnings, consumption, marriages, births, deaths, wealth transfers and so on)

occur at the end of each period. Agents are children during their first 22 periods of life

and consume as part of their parent's households at ages 1 through 22. Agents marry on

their 22 birthday. They give birth to children at ages 22 through 43, depending on their

draw from a "birth matrixtt described below. They also enter the work force on their 27nd

birthday (receiving their first paycheck at age 23), and work through age 66. They face

positive probabilities of dying between ages 67 and 88. The probability of an agent's

dying on her 88th birthday given that she has lived to that date is one. The probabilities of

dying at ages 67 through 87 are taken from U.S. mortality statistics. The number, sexes,

and timing of children born to each couple are determined randomly as discussed below.

This distribution is aligned to ensure that an equal number of males and females —2000 --

are born each year. Hence, each cohort is of equal size and there is no population growth:




Marriage

        Agents marry at age 22, either on a random basis or on the basis of their skill (the

present value of their lifetime earnings). In the later case of assortative mating, agents are

married based on their skill rank, with the top skilled female marrying the top skilled

male, the next most skilled female marrying the next most skilled male, and so on.




Fertility

                                              13
        An initial population (at time t=0) of 4000 thousand individuals (2000 males and

2000 females) was created for each age between 0 and 87. First, a matrix of "birth ages'

was derived from a fertility simulation of CORSIM — a dynamic microsimulation model

of the U.S. economy described in Caidwell et al. (1998). The simulation considered

40,434 females born between 1945 and 2000 and recorded their ages of giving birth if

those ages fell between ages 22 and 43. For each female in our CORSIM sample, we

stored this information in our CORSIM birth matrix that accommodates a maximum of

10 birth ages, 5 for male and 5 for female births. Thus, the matrix has 40,434 rows and

10 columns. Table 1.1 shows the distribution of females in the matrix by number and sex

of births.

        Since, computer memory limitations allowed us to process only 4000 individuals

in each year of birth, we needed to pare down our birth matrix to end up with a modified

birth matrix that contains exactly 2000 male births and 2000 female births. We started by

selecting 2000 rows from the birth matrix. The selection was done at random without

replacement except that rows containing more than 5 births were excluded. The total

number of births in the selected 2000-row matrix exceeded 4000. Hence, we randomly

eliminated male and female births in the rows of this matrix for rows containing more

than one birth until we were left with precisely 2000 male and 2000 female births. This

guaranteed that the 2000 rows of the final birth matrix would generate exactly 2000

female and 2000 male births. Table 1.2 shows the distribution of females by the number

and sex of their births in the birth matrix used in the simulation.




                                              '4
Populating the Mode! at Time Zero

       We popu!ated our model by first creating 2000 male and 2000 female old-adults

for each age between 67 and 88. These males and females were then married to each

other sequentially. Some of these oldsters were treated as dead when we initiate the

simulation. But we needed to include their ghosts at this stage of our process of

populating the model in order to establish complete family trees. Marriage was allowed

only between people of the same age to be consistent with our assumptionthat marriage

occurs at age 22 (i.e., that initial oldster males married initial oldster females when they

were 22 and their wives were 22). Family relationships were established by exchanging

id numbers. For example, marriage involves entering the spouse's id numbers in the

spouse-id location of each person's record.         Oldsters have no living parents or

grandparents.
        Drawing from the 2000 thousand rows of the birth matrix at random and without

replacement, the middle-aged and young-adult children of the initial oldsters are created,

ranging in age from 24 through 66. Take, for example, the initial 70-year olds. For each

70 year-old female (including the ghosts), we assigned a row of the birth matrix drawn at

random without replacement. This row indicates how many children the female had and

the ages at which she had them. We repeated this process of drawing at random without

replacement from the birth matrix for each cohort of oldster females; i.e., we did it for 66

year-old oldster females, 67 year-old oldster females, and so on through 87 year-old

oldster females. In this process, we do not permit oldsters to bear children in their

twilight years, rather we are retrospectively considering the births of the initial oldsters

                                             15
when they were in their child-bearing years. When each child is created, the parents' id

numbers and years of birth are entered in the child's record, and the child's id number and

year of birth is entered in each of the parent's record.

       Given that females give birth between the ages of 22 and 43, oldsters aged 88 at

the initiation of our simulation (t=0) have children who are aged 45 through 66; oldsters

aged 87 at t=0 have children aged 44 through age 65; and so on, until we reach oldsters

aged 67 at t=0 who would have children aged between 24 and 45. Thus, at this stage of

our populating procedure, exactly 4000 (the full compliment of) 45 year-olds and less

than 4000 thousand individuals at other ages between 24 and 66 have been created. The

reason is that everyone (including oldster ghosts) who could have given birth to 45 year-

olds has been considered, but not everyone who gave birth to those between ages 24 and

44 and those between ages 46 and 66 has been considered. For example, some of those

aged 25 are children of the current middle aged rather than of the current oldsters

(including the ghosts), and some of those aged 50 are children of ghosts who are older

than the current oldsters.

       Since at this stage there are fewer than 4000 middle-aged males and females at

ages 46-66. additional middle-aged males and females are created such that they total

4000 for each of these age groups. Next, all middle-aged males and females (those aged

45 through 66) were married at random, making sure that siblings were not married to

each other. Next, the children of middle-aged adults were created, again taking draws

without replacement from the birth matrix for females of a given age and then doing the

same for females of another age until all females age 45 through 66 had been considered.




                                              16
The children produced by this process range in age from 2 through 44•5 Given that we've

already created the children of the t=0 oldsters, the addition of these children leave us

with exactly 2000 males and 2000 females aged 23 through 44—the young adults. The

procedure just described was also used to marry the young adults.

         The next step in the creation of the initial population was creating the children of

the t=0 young adults that were born at t=—l or earlier. Each young-adult female was

assigned a row of the birth matrix at random without replacement, and children were

created for all birth ages less than the age at t=0 of the female in question. For example, a

44 year-old female's children were created for birth ages between 22 and 43, but a 23

year-old's children are created only if her birth-row assignment contains a birth-age of

22. That is, children that will be born at t=0 or later were not created as yet. At the end

of this process, exactly 2000 males and 2000 females had been created for each age

between I and 88. The final step in creating the initial population was to kill off oldsters

(make the ghosts disappear) according to their cumulative mortality probabilities.6

         Each person-record contains id numbers and years of birth of the spouse, parents,

grandparents, and children. Also recorded is the position of the birth-matrix row selected

for each adult household, whether the person is alive or dead and, if dead, the year of

death.


   Sixty-six-year-olds have children aged between 23 and 44; 65 year-olds have children aged between 22
 and 43; and so on through 45 year-olds who have childrenaged between 2 and 23.
 6 The mortality probabilities are based on U.S. mortality tables. Conditional mortality probabilities below
 age 67 are set to zero and the conditional mortality probability at age 88 is set to unity. The probability of
• dying at age=a, da, is calculated as
          a-!

 da=(lYa) IJ
          s67
 where a is the conditional probability of surviving at ages.


                                                      17
Populating the Mode! through Time

       In populating the mode! through time we engaged in the following steps in each

year from t=0 onward. First, for t=0, we allocated at random and without replacement a

row from the birth matrix to all 22 year-o!d females. Second, 22-year-olds males and

females were married to each other (at random, or according to their skill ranks

depending on the case being considered). Third, females age 22-43 gave birth as

determined by their assigned birth matrix row thereby creating 2000 newborn (0-year-

old) males and 2000 newborn (0 year-old) females. Fourth, oldsters were killed off at

random according to the conditional probability of dying at their respective ages and the

existing wealth of those who just died was transferred to the surviving spouse or children.

Finally, we aged everyone, excluding those who died, by one year.

Skill Endowments

       In our simulations with no skill differences, all working agents are assigned a skill

level of 1 and receive an annual wage of $1 because we normalize at unity the wage per

unit of skill. In the case of skill differences, but no assortative mating, we assign wage

profiles to agents when they reach age 23 and begin earning a living. These profiles are

derived from CORSIM simulations.

       CORSIM simulates wage trajectories for a representative sample of U.S.

individuals either alive in 1960 or born thereafter. We use a subsample of 2000 male and

2000 female wage trajectories selected randomly from the CORSIM cohort of individuals

born between 1970 and 1974. The wage trajectories are growth adjusted to conform to

the earnings of the cohort born in 1970 (aged 23 in 1993). For example, the wages at

                                             18
each age (ranging from 23 through 66) of those born in 1974 are adjusted downward by

the compound growth factor applicable between 1970 and 1994. The growth factors are

derived from on the U.S. Social Security Administration's average wage index.

       These trajectories are placed in two earnings arrays (named M for males and F for

females) with 2000 rows and 44 columns in each. In the simulations with no skill

differences, each year's aggregate wages equal $176,000 (2000 males and 2000 females

in each of 44 earning years earning $1 per year). To generate the same annual wage flow

for the simulations with skill differences, we normalize the two earnings arrays by a

factor a such that the a*(u'Mv + u'Fv) =     176,000,   where u and v are unit vectors of

lengths 2000 and 44 respectively. This yields normalized earnings arrays M' and F'. The

2000 rows of M' and F' are then ranked and sorted according to the present value of

earnings for each trajectory. The present values of earnings are calculated using a

discount factor of 4 percent. These present values represent the skill level embodied in

each of the 2000 male and 2000 female wage trajectories.

       Each of the 2000 males (females) in a birth cohort is then assigned one of the

2000 male (female) rows at random. This assignment is done without replacement in

order to ensure that each cohort that comes along has precisely the same distribution of

earnings trajectories. In the case of assortative mating, we repeat the above assignment of

skills, but then marry the highest skilled female with the highest skilled male, the second

highest skilled female to the second highest skilled male, and so on, where skill is

measured by the present value of lifetime earnings. In the case of inherited skills, we

assign to each male agent the skill level of his father and to each female agent the skill




                                            19
level of her mother. In the case of inherited skills and assortative mating, males and

females inherit their father's and mother's skills, respectively, and assortative mating

proceeds based on this skill distribution.



Bequests and Inheritances

       When a married oldster dies, his or her spouse retains all the marital wealth.

When a widowed oldster dies or if both spouses in a married couple die at the same time,

the decedent(s') wealth is evenly divided among the children.



Initial Wealth Endowments and Length of the Simulations

       To initiate a simulation, we give all adults at t=0 an endowment of wealth of 1

unit. We then run the model for enough years into the future until the distribution of

wealth of 67 year-olds as well as the total amount of wealth in the economy stabilizes.

Since the asymptotic wealth distribution as well as the total level of wealth are

independent of the initial level and distribution of wealth, the fact that we start with this

particular initial endowment of wealth doesn't alter our results. In practice, both the

wealth distribution of 67 year-olds and the total level of wealth converge well before 150

years in each of our simulations. But to guarantee consistency across simulations, we ran

each simulation for 150 years.



Consumption and Saving Behavior

        Agents' expected utility are time-separable isoelastic functions of their own

current and future consumption as well as that of their children through age 22. Consider,

                                             20
as an example, the expected utility of a couple that is age 23 and will have two children.

one when the couple is age 25 and the other when it is 28:



(1)      EU =
                  a=87
                         fl (PaC             + p aC'a'   ) + 8I3U c                 +   8/ c
In (1), the first summation considers the utility of each spouse from his or her own

consumption at each possible age to which they could live. The second two summations

consider the utility that the couple derives from the consumption of their two children.

The terms cha ,       Cwa   ,   Ck]a   ,   and Ck2a refer, respectively, to the consumption of the

husband. wife, first child, and second child when the couple is age a. The term /1 is the

time-preference factor, a is the intertemporal elasticity of substitution, and S is a child-

consumption weighting factor. In our first set of simulations, we set the time preference

rate (which equals (1/J)-1) equal to the interest rate. We also set Sequal to .4.

         As a approaches zero, households become more and more reluctant (they become

 more and more concerned about) consuming smaller amounts in the future than they

 consume in the present. Since the inverse of a is the household's coefficient of relative

 risk aversion, a value of a close to zero translates into a coefficient of risk aversion close

 to infinity. In our simulations, we assume that ais very close to zero.

          Assuming that a is very close to zero simplifies enormously household

 consumption decisions. First this assumption in conjunction with the assumption of a

 time preference rate equal to the interest rate means that households seek to maintain the

                                                                                                 substitution is
  Hall (1988) reports that there is "... no strong evidence that the elasticity of intertemporal
 positive. Earlier findings of substantial positive elasticities are reversed when appropriate estimation


                                                         21
same level of consumption over time for each spouse. Households also seek to maintain

a constant level of consumption for their children, when they are children. Given the

value of c this child-consumption level equals 40 percent of the parental consumption

level.

         But most important, our assumption that o- is very close to zero means that

households only consider their safe resources in deciding how much to consume at each

point in time. Thus households who expect to receive an inheritance, but don't know for

sure that they'll get one (because all of their parents may to age 88), will ignore this

potential source of future income in making their current consumption and saving

decisions.

         At each point in time, married households will calculate the number of years of

remaining life, multiply this amount by 2 (to take into account the presence of both

spouses) and then add to the resulting value .4 times the number of years of consumption

of their children. This total number of effective adult consumption-years is then divided

into the household's safe resources to determine consumption per effective adult. The

household's safe resources consist of its wealth (which may reflect the receipt of past

inheritances) plus the present value of its remaining lifetime labor earnings. Given the

level of consumption per effective adult, it's straightforward to calculate total household

consumption and subtract it from total household income to determine household saving.

         We want to emphasize that inheritances affect consumption behavior, but only

once they are received. There is no consumption out of potential future inheritances.

Instead households, at each point in time, consider the worst-case scenario arid formulate


methods are used."
their consumption and saving plans accordingly. Were we to assume a positive value of o

  households would take a gamble and consume more in the presence in anticipation of

possibly inheriting in the future. But their decision as to how much to consume would be

extraordinarily complex. The reason is that they would, at certain ages, have to take into

account not simply their own resources, including their own wealth, but also that of their

parents and their grandparents, assuming their grandparents are still alive. Take, for

example, a 25 year-old couple with two sets of living parents and four sets of living

grandparents. In deciding how much to consume the household has to consider its own

current wealth level as well as the wealth levels of all six parental and grandparental

households. Formally, the dynamic program that the household must solve to determine

how much to consume involves up to seven state variables, namely all seven of these

wealth levels.8 Unfortunately, solving dynamic programs with seven state variables

appears to be beyond the capacity of current computers.9



Data and Calibration

         The mortality probabilities used in the analysis are those released by the U.S.

Social Security Administration for 1995. The interest rate (equal to the time preference

rate) used in the simulations is 4 percent. As mentioned, the earnings and fertility

matrices are derived from the CORSIM module. The CORSIM simulation modules for

both are highly detailed. The earnings module was estimated from PSID data and

 We say "up to" because during years in which the household is age 66 and over, it has neither living
parents nor living grandparents, and during years in which the household is age 44 through 65, it has no
living grandparents.




                                                  23
includes separate logistic and regression equations for determining whether an agent

works, whether a working agent works full or part year, how many weeks full-year or

part-year workers work, how many hours per week full-year or part-year workers work,

and how much full-year and part-year workers earn per hour. The intercept of each of

these functions is adjusted to align the population-weighted labor supply behavior of

CORSIM to national labor supply and earnings aggregates.

        The fertility module includes separate logistic functions for 30 different

subgroups of women estimated using data from the National Longitudinal Survey. The

subgroups are distinguished by age, the presence of children, marital status, race, and

work status. The regressors in the logits are age, duration of current marriage, earnings,

family income, homeowner status, marital status, schooling status, work status, and

duration since the birth of women's two youngest children. In producing the larger birth

matrix from which we selected 2000 rows, we ran the CORSIM model from its start year

of 1960 through 2000. In so doing, we used the entire panoply of CORSIM modules to

assign CORSIM agents the various socio-economic characteristics, such as work status,

entering as regressors in the fertility logits.




  The fact that even supercomputers would have difficulty solving this problem in a reasonable amount of
time raises the question of how mere mortals can actually deal with this complexity.


                                                  24
IV.     Findings

Wealth Inequality in the SCF

        For reference, we first report findings from the 1995 SCF on the distribution of

net worth among married households with household heads aged 60 to 69.10 The richest

1, 5. and 10 percent of households hold 30.4, 51.0, and 62.5 percent of aggregate U.S. net

worth. respectively. The Gini coefficient for this wealth distribution is 0.727. These

calculations indicate two things: first, the U.S. wealth distribution is highly unequal

among married households whose household heads are of retirement age and second, the

very rich account for a very sizeable fraction of total wealth.



Wealth Inequality Generated by Our Model

        Table 3 begins to consider wealth inequality generated by our model. In this

table. as well as Tables 4 through 6, all households are assumed to earn a 4 percent real

rate of return and the distribution of earnings is determined simply by the CORSIM data,

i.e.. there is no adjustment for the upper tail of the earnings distribution.

        Table 3 reports Gini coefficients of wealth and consumption distributions for

households aged 66. It also shows the flow of bequests as a share of labor income, and

the flow of bequests left to children (as opposed to spouses) as a share of the economy's

labor income. The odd-numbered rows report results without inheritances and the even




o The net worth calculation is based on computer code provided in the SCF documentation. The net worth
percentiles are calculated using the final non-response-adjusted sample weights provided in the SCF.


                                                 25
numbered rows those with inheritances; i.e., the odd-numbered simulations assume no

mortality prior to age 88.

       The first point to make about Table 3 is that the flow of bequests is a significant

fraction — roughly 9 percent --   of labor income for each of the simulations involving

uncertain lifetimes. The flow of bequests to children, as opposed to spouses, is also

significant — roughly 3 percent of labor income. Roughly speaking, the sizes of these

flows correspond to estimates of bequest flows in the United States. For example,

Auerbach. et. al. estimate the 1990 total U.S. bequest flow at $218 billion, which amounts

to about 6 percent of the wage flow in that year. Second, the flow of consumption is

higher with inheritances than without. This is as expected since inheritances constitute an

intergenerational redistribution from the old to the young. This raises the lifetime

resources of each successive new generation, permitting it to consume at higher levels.

        The first column of Table 3 indicates that the inclusion of uncertain lifetimes in

the simulation has only a modest effect on wealth inequality. Leaving out skill

differences and mortality, the Gini is just 0.05. This Gini is non-zero because of

differences across households in the number and timing of their children. These

differences influence the amounts that households consume when young and, thus, the

amounts of wealth they bring into old age. Although the addition of uncertain lifetimes

raises the Gini coefficient by almost two thirds, to 0.08, this is still a very small value and

suggests that, by themselves, inheritances arising from random death are not a major

source of wealth inequality across members of the same cohort.

        In contrast, Table 3 shows that skill differences are a major force behind wealth

inequality in our model. With inheritances, the introduction of skill differences increases

                                              26
the wealth Gini from 0.08 to 0.44 (compare rows 2 and 4). Under our assumptions and

parameterization, fertility differences, inheritances, and skill differences jointly explain

more than 60 percent of the intragenerational inequality observed in the SCF data, with

skill differences being the predominant factor.

       The inclusion of marital sorting by skill further increases the wealth Gini

coefficient to 0.53 (Table 3, row 6). This effect is significant, but not huge. The reason is

that the rate of increase in skill levels for each skill-rank increment is small for the first

1900. Hence, marital sorting by skill class does not imply pairing individuals with very

different skill levels relative to marrying them at random. This effect accounts for a

further 13 percent of the Gini observed in the SCF data. Adding inheritance of skills only

marginally increases the Gini coefficient on wealth to 0.57 (Table 3, row 10). Thus,

inheritance of skills contributes only marginally to intragenerational wealth inequality.

       Although uncertainty in dates of death raises wealth inequality slightly in the

absence of skill differences, it does the opposite in the more realistic case that skill

differences exist. As rows 3 through 10 in Table 3 indicate, this is true whether or not

couples sort themselves in the marriage market based on skills or whether skills are

inherited. Under each of these assumptions, the Gini coefficient is somewhat smaller

with uncertain lifetimes than without; that is, inheritances reduce, rather than raise,

wealth inequality. This result is not surprising. Because only a few households in each

birth cohort have very high skills, very large bequests are likely to go to children with

skill levels lower than their parents' skill level. This has a slight equalizing effect on the

distribution of wealth at retirement.




                                             27
       Note that the Gini values for consumption at retirement are the same as those for

wealth. This is because for a given number of children, lifetime resources, consumption,

and wealth at retirement are all strictly proportional in all of the simulations reported in

Table 3. Table 4 shows wealth held by households in the top x percentiles for selected

values of x. Consistent with the results of Table 3. wealth held by richer households is

much larger when skill differences are present. In the presence of inheritances, for

example, the share of wealth held by the richest 5 percent of households increases by

more than a factor of three (compare rows 2 and 4 in Table 4). With inheritances and

skill differences, the fractions of wealth held by the richest 1, 5, and 10 percent of

households are all higher when marital sorting by skill is introduced (compare rows 6 and

4). They are not very different when children inherit skills from their parents compared

to the case that skills are assigned at random to members of each cohort (compare rows 8

and 4). The wealth distributions reported thus far exhibit much less inequality than found

in the SCF. In each of the rows in Table 4, the shares of wealth held by the richest 1, 5,

and 10 percent of households are much smaller compared to those reported in Table 2.




                                             28
Introducing Progressive Income Taxation and Social Security11

       We introduce the annuitization of retirement savings via social security by

assuming that 15.3 percent (the OASDHI Social Security and Medicare payroll tax rate)

of each year's labor income, up to a maximum taxable limit (calibrated to correspond to

the U.S. Social Security System's taxable limit), is accumulated at a 4 percent interest

rate and converted, at retirement, into an actuarially unfair annuity. Caidwell, et. a!.

(1999) estimate that on average, 67 cents of every dollar paid in OASI payroll taxes

represents a pure tax. That is, the present value of Social Security OASI benefits at

retirement equals the accumulated value of only 33 percent of OASI payroll taxes paid

during the working lifetime. Unfortunately, similar money's worth" calculations are not

available for Medicare of the Disability Insurance program. We assume only 30 percent

of each person's payroll taxes are converted into an annuity, with the rest representing a

pure tax.

        Adding social security to the model raises the possibility that households for

whom consumption per adult is small relative to annuity income per adult will wish to

borrow against their benefits. To prevent households from leaving negative bequests, we


  Introducing progressive income taxation by itself does not qualitatively change the results reported in
                                                                                           households with
Table 3. As expected, wealth inequality at retirement is lower in all cases simply because
higher income face higher average tax rates. In addition, consumption inequality      is lower than wealth
 inequality at retirement because greater wealth cannot be converted into a proportionally greater
consumption stream at retirement: The asset income generated along the way is taxed at higher average
income tax rates. Table 3's result that inheritances reduce rather than increase wealth inequality at
retirement is not overturned by the introduction of progressive income taxes alone. However,the impact of
progressive income taxation in the presence of social security is qualitively different. Apparently,
progressive income taxation in the presence of social security acts like higher levels of social security
benefits in limiting the wealth accumulation of the poor and the middle class and disenfranchisingtheir
children with respect to inheritances. This causes a reduction in the flow of bequests as a share of labor
income. On the other hand, the differentially higher burden that progressive income taxation imposes on
high income households, limits their wealth accumulation as well. The net impact is this rather minor
decline in wealth inequality.


                                                    29
subject such households to a borrowing constraint at retirement. That is. net borrowing is

permitted prior to retirement but the liability must be extinguished to leave the household

with exactly zero net worth at retirement.

       In each case, introducing annuitization considerably increases wealth inequality.

For example, Table 5 shows that when all the factors are present, the introduction of

social security increases the Gini coefficient from 0.57 to 0.71 (compare rows 10 in

Tables 3 and 5)—very close to the 0.73 value of the SCF wealth distribution. Wealth

inequality is increased because a sizable fraction of low earning households now arrive at

retirement with low or zero wealth. In contrast, richer households--for whom the annuity

is very small relative to consumption per capita--accumulate roughly the same amount of

wealth that they would have accumulated in the absence of social security.

       The introduction of social security changes qualitatively the impact of
inheritances on intragenerational wealth inequality: Now, inheritances increase wealth

inequality. For example, the Gini coefficients for the experiments of rows 9 and 10

become 0.65 and 0.71 respectively. The explanation here is that the availability of

annuities makes the distribution of bequeathable wealth much less equal and perpetuates

wealth inequality across extended families. High earning parents who accumulate

positive wealth through retirement will bequeath a substantial sum if they die early. The

receipt of inheritances by their children causes them to arrive at retirement with

substantial wealth. Hence, they may, in turn, bequeath substantial wealth to their children

and so on.

       This sequence of bequests and accumulation by rich households stands in sharp

contrast to that of poor households. The latter do not bequeath much wealth to their

                                             30
children. Indeed, those who are borrowing constrained arrive at retirement with zero

wealth, live entirely off of social security during retirement, and make no bequests when

they die. As a result, their children arrive at retirement with less wealth than otherwise.

The annuitization of lifetime resources makes the distribution of inheritances much more

unequal and increases persistence in the incidence of bequests across bequeathing and

non-bequeathing households. Consequently, the inheritance process reinforces rather than

reduces wealth inequality at retirement. Social security's role in reducing bequests

through its provision of annuities is also evident in its impact on the ratios of aggregate

and cross generational bequests to aggregate labor income: Both ratios fall to about 30

percent of their values in Table 3.

        Turn next to Table 6's wealth distributions. In the row-lO simulation, the top 1,

5, and 10 percent of 66-year-old households hold 22.7, 51.0, and 64.3 percent of

aggregate wealth, respectively. These figures are much closer to the SCF wealth

distribution than those in Table 4. Almost all of the increase in the concentration of

wealth arises from the introduction of social security. That said, this simulation is not

particularly realistic given that it assumes perfect marital sorting and perfect inheritance

of skills.



Sensitivity to the Assumed Degree of Actuarial Fairness of Social Security Benefits

        The simulation findings turn out to be highly sensitive to the degree to which U.S.

Social Security benefits are assumed to be fair. If we assume that Social Security

(including Medicare) pays benefits that equal, in present value, 35 percent of the present

value of contributed taxes, the wealth Gini for the row- 10 case of Table 7 increases from

                                            31
0.71 to 0.80. Moreover, the top 1, 5, and 10 percent of 66 year-old households now hold

27.5, 60.6, and 75.3 percent of aggregate wealth, making the upper tail of the wealth

distribution noticeably more skewed than that found in the SCF data (see Table 2).

Sensitivity to the Assumed Interest Rate

       We also ran our Table 5, row-lO simulation assuming a 6 percent real rate of

interest (and a 6 percent time preference rate). In so doing, we left unchanged the level of

social security benefits provided each worker. Interestingly, neither the Gini coefficient

nor the upper tail of the wealth distribution is much affected by the choice of interest rate.

The Gini coefficient for this run is 0.71, and the top 1, 5, and 10 percent of wealth holders

account for 21 6, 50.5, 64.8 percent of total wealth. These values are almost identical to

those reported in rows 10 of Tables 5 and 6. The explanation for this is that a higher

interest rate. by lowering the price of future consumption, permits households to consume

more at every age. This is true notwithstanding the reduction in the present value of their

human wealth and social security benefits due to the higher interest rate. Although

planned pre- and post-retirement consumption is higher, the assets at retirement needed to

finance post-retirement consumption are not necessarily larger—again because of the

lower price of post-retirement consumption. Hence, a higher interest rate materially

alters neither household assets at retirement nor the distribution of those assets.



Toward a More Realistic Simulation

        The previous simulations invoked extreme assumptions with respect to marital

sorting, the inheritance of skills, and the uniformity across households of rates of return.

These assumptions were made to clarify the nature of the effects of these and other

                                             32
factors on bequests and wealth inequality. In the remainder of the paper, we show how

more realistic assumptions alter our findings. In this regard, we also consider a lower rate

of time preference and what appears to be a more realistic upper-tail of the distribution of

lifetime labor earnings.



Imperfect Marital Sorting and Imperfect Inheritablity of Skills

        There is little solid evidence to use to calibrate the degree of marital sorting and

inheritability of skills. But what evidence exists, together with our priors, leads us to

consider 0.5 rank correlation coefficients between the lifetime earnings of husbands and

wives. Solon (1992) and Solon and Zimmerman (1992) suggest a value of 0.5 for the

inheritability coefficient (the correlation between parents' and childrens' earnings). But

this value generates what appears to us to be a bit too much wealth mobility.

Consequently, we choose a value of 0.7 for our final simulations.'2 This decision does

not materially alter simulated wealth concentration at retirement.



Including Interest Rate Heterogeneity

        Different individual face different rates of return in capital markets. To

incorporate rate-of-return heterogeneity, we use data on the portfolio holdings of

households from the 1995 SCF. We classify household reported assets into several

categories, assign a rate of return to each category, and compute each household's



  Matching spouses by skill levels (or associating child-parent skill levels) to deliver a correlation
coefficient close to the selected value in each year of the simulation is achieved by taking a linear
combination of the two extreme cases of perfect matching and random matching of individuals by skill.


                                                  j.)
portfolio-weighted rate of return.'3 The weighted frequency of households for rates of

return ranging from zero to 10+ percent in steps of 0.5 percent is used to randomly

allocate the average rate of return within each step to households in the simulation.

Households are assumed to earn their assigned rate of return in each year of their lives

and there is zero correlation between rates of return earned by parent and child

households.



Calibrating the Rate of Time Preference

         In addition to including unrealistic assumptions about assortative mating and

inheritance of skills, the simulation in row 10 of Table 5 produces two ratios that are

unrealistic — one is a 1 .9 ratio of aggregate wealth to aggregate labor income, the other is

a .025 ratio of the flow of bequests to aggregate labor income. In the U.S, these two

ratios are roughly 6 and .06, respectively. To produce a more realistic set of results, we


  The asset categories are liquid assets, government bonds, private bonds and bond mutual fund shares,
stocks and stock mutual funds, real estate, and other non-financial assets. Liability categories include
mortgages and real estate debt and other debt. In forming a weighted average rate of return on each
households portfolio, we used the absolute value of liabilities. For liquid assets we assumed the geometric
average annual real rate of return (0.68 percent) on U.S. Treasury bills during the period 1926-97. For
government bonds we use the geometric average annual real rate of return on long and intermediate term
government bonds between 1926 and 1997 (2.09 percent). For private bonds and bond mutual funds we
use the geometric average rate of return on long-term corporate bonds between 1926 and 1997 (2.52
percent). For stocks and stock mutual funds, we use the weighted average of real rates of return on large
and small company stocks (8.00 percent). The weights for the two stock market returns were obtained
from analysts at the Wilshire 5000 company. The source for the aforementioned average rates of return is
the 1998 Yearbook published by Ibbotson Associates. The average rates of interest on mortgages and other
real estate debt was constructed using date from Case and Shiller (1990) who report annualized excess
returns (excess over the 3-month T-bill return) on home-purchases for each quarter between 1971 and 1986
in four large U.S. metropolitan areas. We computed the total returns by adding the annualized real T-biIl
return for each quarter, calculated the geometric mean over the period of the study, and averaged the rates
of return over the four metropolitan areas. This procedure yields a real rate of return of 0.45 percent.
Finally the rate of return for mortgage and real estate debt was calculated as the geometric average nominal
mortgage rate between 1973 and 1997 divided by the geometric average rate of inflation over the same
period. This yielded 3.91 percent. The average real rate on other debt was assumed to be 13.54 percent the
rate applicable for 1995—obtained from the Statistical Abstract for the United States, 1998, Table 820.


                                                    34
modified our assumption of zero life-cycle growth in consumption per adult equivalent,

apart from that arising from liquidity constraints and the receipt of inheritances.

Specifically, we assumed that (apart from the aforementioned caveats), consumption per

equivalent adult rises at 1.5 percent per year through age 66. This produces a
longitudinal age-consumption profile that accords much more closely with the actual U.S.

profile. We refer below to this adjustment in terms of a reduction in the time-preference

rate through the age of retirement.



Adjusting for the Upper Tail of the Distribution of Lifetime Earnings

       As mentioned, the econometric functions comprising CORSIM's earnings module

were estimated from the PSID. Although the PSID has many advantages, sampling high

income and high wealth households is not one of them. Consequently, CORSIM's

earnings module appears to considerably understate the degree of skewness in the actual

distribution of lifetime earnings. For example, the present value of earnings of the

highest earning male in CORSIM is only 4.4 times as large as that of the male in the 95t1

percentile. For females the corresponding earnings multiple is 12.7. Across the 4000

males and females, the present value of earnings has a Gini coefficient of 0.129. In the

SCF however, the earnings multiple is 65.3 for the highest earning male and 44.7 for the

highest earning female. In order to incorporate a more realistic earnings distribution in

the simulation we replace the top 5 percent of the CORSIM earnings distribution with




                                           35
that obtained from the 1995 SCF.4 Despite the adjustment, the Gini for the present value

of earnings across the 4000 individuals increases only slightly to 0.133.



Results Based on More Realistic Assumptions

        Tables 7 and 8 show how the more realistic assumptions just described alter the

results. The first row of each table begins with the respective row- 10 results of Tables 5

and 6. Rows 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 in each table show the impact of deviating from the

previous row- 10 assumptions by respectively incorporating partial marital sorting, partial

inheritance of skills, rate of return heterogeneity, a lower time-preference rate through

retirement, and the top earnings tail adjustment. The last row, row 7, in each table

simultaneously invokes all five of the new assumptions.

        Although we ran the simulations involving the top earnings tail adjustment out for

over 200 years, the distribution of wealth fluctuated from year to year to a much greater

degree than was the case for all the other simulations. For example, in the last 15 years,

the Gini coefficient for the run with all five new assumptions fluctuated between .624 and

.729 and the wealth share of the richest 1 percent fluctuated between 24.7 percent and

41.1 percent. To deal with this issue, we report in rows 6 and 7 the average values of

variables over the last 15 years of the simulations.


  This is accomplished by re-scaling the CORSIM longitudinal profiles for the top 100 skill ranks for both
males and females. The CORSIM skill ranks are based on present values of earnings of the longitudinal
earnings profiles calculated using a 4 percent rate of discount. The 1995 SCF skill ranks are based on the
wage and salary levels of randomly selected samples of 2000 males and 2000 females age 35 to 45. We
used this age range because we felt that the distribution of annual earnings would better approximate the
distribution of lifetime earnings at these ages than at other ages. First, the skill levels for both the
CORSIM and the SCF skill distributions are normalized to make the skill level at the 95th percentile equal
to unity in each. Second, each CORSIM longitudinal skill profile corresponding to the 100 ranks higher
than the 95th percentile are re-scaled by the ratio of the SCF normalized skill level to the CORSIM


                                                   36
        The major new messages of Tables 7 and 8 are the importance of both the rate of

time preference and the critical importance of the shape of the top tail of the lifetime

earnings distribution to wealth inequality. As row-S shows, a lower rate of time

preference prior to retirement age reduces wealth concentration. The top 1 percent of

wealth holders now hold only 16.3 percent of total wealth, compared to 22.6 percent

when there is no desired growth in consumption per adult equivalent. This makes sense.

The lower time-preference rate produces relatively more wealth accumulation at the

bottom end of the wealth distribution, which is otherwise almost exclusively dependent

on social security benefits in retirement. Although it makes wealth concentration too

low, this change in assumptions dramatically raises the economy's ratios of wealth to

labor income and bequests to labor income. The two ratios are now 5.4 and .05.

        Adding just the top-tail adjustment to the distribution of lifetime earnings

considerably increases the degree of wealth inequality as measured by the share of wealth

of the top 1 percent. Now the top 1 percent have 39.7 percent of total wealth. In

considering this result, it's important to bear in mind that our top-tail earnings adjustment

is crude for two reasons. First, the SCF doesn't provide information about lifetime

earnings. Second, try as it may, the SCF is unlikely to be sampling the Bill Gates of this

world. whose annual labor earnings run into the hundreds of millions if not billions,

thereby understating earnings as well as wealth inequality.

        As the row-7 results show, including the top tail adjustment with all the

modifications in the other assumptions generates wealth shares for the top 1, 5. and 10


normalized skill level for that skill rank. Finally, the entire set of 2000 CORSIM longitudinal profiles are
re-normalized to deliver a total wage flow of$ 176,000 in each period of the simulation.


                                                    37
percent of 32.8 percent, 49.4 percent, and 58.8 percent. These figures are very close to

the corresponding SCF values of 30.4 percent. 51.0 percent, and 62.5 percent. Thus,

based on the combined set of more realistic assumptions, our model appears capable of

reproducing actual U.S. wealth inequality. Furthermore, under these assumptions, the

model generates realistic ratios of wealth to labor income and bequests to labor income.

The respective values of 6.0 and .055 are quite close to their empirical counterparts.



V. Intergenerational Wealth Mobility

          This section considers the degree of intergenerational wealth mobility arising in

our final simulation (the last row of Table 7). Table 9 presents a wealth mobility matrix

in which the rows represent parent-household wealth positions and the columns indicate

child-household wealth positions, both at age 66. The numbers in each row show the

probability (in percentage terms) of the child being in the column wealth range given the

parent wealth range represented by that row.'6 Consider a wealth value of 1 8 in the table.

This is the cutoff value for the top 20 percent of wealth holders. According to the table,

almost one half of children whose parents are in the top 20 percent of wealth holders at

age 66 end up in the top 20 percent of wealth holders when they themselves reach age 66.




'
6
    Transition matrices for other simulations are available from the authors upon request.
   Each child household has two parent households. Hence, in forming the probabilities in the transition
matrices of Table 9, we count each child household twice. First we pair the child's household wealth at
age 66 with the male spouse's parent household wealth at age 66 and enter this pairing in the appropriate
cell of the transition matrix. Next, we pair the child's household wealth with the female spouse's parent
household wealth at age 66 and enter this pairing again in the appropriate cell of the transition matrix.
These entries are aggregated for all child households after the I32" year of the simulation. Thus, the
transition probabilities reflect both parent household wealth positions. The probabilities reported are those
of the child household's wealth position (column) conditional of the parent household's wealth position
(row).

                                                      38
This result is in rough agreement with the evidence in Wedgwood (1929), Harbury and

Hitchens (1979) and Menchick (1979).'

        Next, consider parents in the poorest group, whose wealth ranges from 0 to 6.

The children of these parents have a 47.4 percent chance of finding themselves in the

same wealth group when they reach age 66. And they have a similar likelihood of being

in the one of the next two higher wealth groups. So 95 percent of these children will end

up poor as vel1. Indeed, the chance that these children will end up in one of the top 5

wealth ranges is only 0.5 percent.8 For the children of the richest parents, this chance is

22 percent. ' These results notwithstanding, Table 9 shows that wealth mobility is fairly

high from some perspectives. Take the richest parents. The probability that their children

will be end up at age 66 in one of the five lowest poorest wealth ranges is 52 percent.

        Wealth mobility is highly sensitive to our assumed degree of inheritability of

skills. And for high degree of skill inheritance, wealth mobility is substantially reduced

by assuming higher degrees of assortative mating. For example, the probability that the

children of the super rich end up super rich themselves rises from 15.9 percent to 49.3

percent if the correlation coefficient of inheritability is increased from 0.7 to 1 .0. And

holding this coefficient at 0.7, this probability rises from 15.9 percent to 20.9 percent if

the correlation coefficient of assortative mating is raised from 0.5 to 1.0.




   Note, however, that these studies do not control for the age at which wealth of parents and children is
observed and it is unclear to which segments of the wealth distribution their samples correspond.
 8
   This number does not correspond to the sum of those reported in the table because of rounding.
   The correlation coefficient of parental and child age-66 wealth in this final run is 10 percent. This is
much smaller than the correlation reported by Menchik. but, as argued above, Menchik's is correlating
wealth at different ages and doing so on a restricted subset of the population.


                                                   39
VI. Caveats and Conclusion

       Because of their random nature and receipt by a lucky few, many people

intuitively believe that inheritances cause considerably greater wealth inequality among

members of the same cohort. Surprising as it may seem. this is not necessarily the case.

Because the process underlying inheritances is largely' unrelated to the earnings

differences that are the key determinant of life cycle wealth accumulation, inheritances

can be wealth-equalizing.

       This paper develops a large-scale, life-cycle simulation model to explore the role

of inheritances and other factors in generating wealth inequality. The model includes

uncertain longevity, fertility differences, skill differences, assortative mating, inherited

skills, heterogeneous rates of return, annuitization via a •social security system, and

progressive income taxation. We find that skill differences, the annuitization of

retirement savings. assortative mating, and the skewness of the upper tail of the earnings

distribution, are the major factors underlying intragenerational wealth inequality. In

addition, the inheritance of bequests is an important contributor to wealth inequality, but

only in the presence of social security; That is, without social security, bequests actually

reduce wealth inequality, albeit to a minor degree. Interestingly, the inheritance of skills

from one's parents does not much matter for wealth inequality. Most of wealth inequality

stems from earnings inequality, and how members of a particular generation came to have

their unequal earnings doesn't change the fact that their levels of accumulated wealth will

differ. Another minor factor with respect to the wealth distribution is progressive income

taxation.

                                            40
         All told, the factors examined in this paper are capable of reproducing observed

U.S. wealth inequality among married couples at retirement. What we believe to be our

most realistic simulation produces a Gini coefficient of 0.65 — not far from the .73 Gini

coefficient found in the SCF. This same simulation leaves the top 1, 5, and 10 percent of

wealth holders holding 31.6, 47.0, and 55.9 percent of aggregate wealth, respectively.

These wealth shares are quite close to the corresponding 1995 SCF values for married

couples in their 60s of 30.4, 51.0 and 62.5 percent.

         We also learned that inheritance of skills and its interaction with marital sorting,

rather than inheritance of wealth, are the main factors in limiting intergenerational

mobility across wealth levels. Under the most realistic calibration of the simulation, the

probability is 15.9 percent that children of the super rich will themselves be super rich.

         We've taken our model through a number of paces, but left others for future

research. These include adding heterogeneous saving preferences (i.e., differences in

time preference rates), income- or wealth-correlated mortality probabilities, different ages

of first marriage, changes in marital status, and a more detailed set of fiscal institutions as

in the impressive study by Hubbard, Skinner, and Zeldes (1994).20


        20
           Including a distribution of time preference rates would generate even greater wealth inequality
if the propensity to save were correlated with the level of lifetime earnings or inherited wealth. On the
other hand, if saving behavior were uncorrelated with economic resources, the dispersion in time
preference rates would produce a larger dispersion in wealth at retirement, but not necessarily larger
measures of wealth concentration. One could also consider preferences espoused by Carroll (1998) in
which people accumulate wealth for the sake of power and status, rather than to finance consumption.
Incorporating earnings uncertainty (as in Hubbard, Skinner, and Zeldes, 1994), health-care expenditure
uncertainty, and rate of return uncertainty are additional key elements to consider in future work.
Incorporating higher survival probabilities for those with greater economic resources
(more money buys better health care) would reduce the model's wealth inequality and
immobility. The reason is that the richest elderly would live the longest and would, as a
group, spend down a larger fraction of their wealth before they died. This, of course,
means reduced inheritances for the children of the rich, making the wealth holding of

                                                   41
       Whatever the true merit in our preference and other assumptions, this paper has, at

a minimum, introduced some new technology for studying key factors underlying wealth

inequality. Its rather surprising findings — that intentional bequests are not needed to

generate either a very high degree of wealth concentration or a realistic stock of wealth

relative to the size of the economy, that inheritances, absent social security, can equalize

the wealth distribution, that social security is likely to make inheritances much more

unequal, and that the skewness of the distribution plays a pivot role in wealth inequality —

may bring us somewhat closer to understanding the key factors underlying the actual U:S.

distribution of wealth.




these children and their contemporaries less concentrated and less correlated with that of
their parents. The forgoing argument postulates causality from resources to longevity.
However, the opposite possibility cannot be ruled out. If longevity affects saving
behavior, the wealth distribution across each retiring cohort may well exhibit greater
inequality as longer lived households saved more to finance a lengthier retirement.



                                            42
                                        References

Abel, A., Kotlikoff, L.J., 1994. "Intergenerational Altruism and the Effectiveness of
Fiscal Policy: New Tests Based on Cohort Data," in Savings and Bequests. Ann Arbor,
Michigan: University of Michigan Press.

Altonji, J.G., Hayashi, F., Kotlikoff, L.J., 1992. "Is the Extended Family Altruistically
Linked? Direct Tests Using Micro Data," The American Economic Review, December.

Altonji, J.G., Hayashi, F., Kotlikoff, L.J., 1997. 'Parental Altruism and Inter Vivos
Transfers: Theory and Evidence. 'Journal of Political Economy 105(6), 1121-66.

Atkinson, A.B., 1980. "Inheritance and the Redistribution of Wealth," in G.M. Heal
and Hughes, eds., Public Policy and the Tax System, London: Allen and Urwin.

Atkinson, A.B., 1971. "The Distribution of Wealth and the Individual Life Cycle,"
Oxford Economic Papers 23, 239-54.

Atkinson. A.B., Harrison, A.J., 1978. Distribution of Personal Wealth in Britain,
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.

Atkinson, A.B., Stiglitz, J., 1980. 'Lectures in Public Economics', McGraw-Hill,
Singapore.

Auerbach, A.J., Gokhale, J., Kotlikoff, L.J., Sabeihaus, J., and Weil, D., 1999. "The
Annuitization of Americans' Resources — A Cohort Analysis," mimeo.

Becker, G.S., Tomes, N., 1986. 'Human Capital and the Rise and Fall of Families.'
Journal of Labor Economics 4(3). Part II, S 1-39.

Becker. G.S. and Nigel, T., 1979. 'An Equilibrium Theory of the Distribution of
Income and Intergenerational Mobility. 'Journal of Political Economy 87(6), 1153-89.

Blinder, A.S., 1973. 'A Model of Inherited Wealth. 'Quarterly Journal of Economics
87(4), 608-26.

Blinder, A.S., 1974. Toward An Economic Theory of Income Distribution, Cambridge,
MA, MIT Press.

Blinder, A. S., 1976. 'Inequality and Mobility in the Distribution of Wealth,' Kyklos
29, 607-3 8.

Boskin, M.J., Kotlikoff, L.J., 1985, "Public Debt and U.S. Saving: A New Test of the
Neutrality Hypothesis," Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Poljçy
Autumn.

                                         43
CaIdwell. S., Favreault, M., Gantman. A., Gokhale, J.. Johnson, T., Kotlikoff, L.J.,
1999, "Social Security's Treatment of Postwar Americans," forthcoming in Tax Policy
and the Economy, NBER volume, 13, MIT Press.

Case, Karl E., and Shiller, Robert J. "Forecasting Prices and Excess Returns in the
Housing Market," AREUEA Journal, Vol. 18, No. 3, 1990, pp. 253-73.

Davies, J.B., Kuhn, P.J., 1991. 'A Dynamic Model of Redistribution, Inheritance, and
Inequality. 'Canadian Journal of Economics 24(2), 324-44.

Davies. J.B., 1982. 'The Relative Impact of Inheritance and Other Factors on
Economic Inequality.' Quarterly Journal of Economics 97(3), 471-98.

Davies, J.B. and Shurrocks, A., 1971. "Assessing the Quantitative of Inheritance in the
Distribution of Wealth," Oxford Economic Papers 30(1), 239-254.

Flemming, J.S., 1976, "On the Assessment of the Inequality of Wea1th, in Selected
Evidence Submitted to the Royal Commission: Report No. 1, Initial Report of the
Standing Reference (Royal Commission on the Distribution of Income and Wealth,
HMSO, London), 34-70.

Flemming, J.S., 1979. "The Effects of Earnings Inequality, Imperfect Capital Markets,
and Dynastic Altruism on the Distribution of Wealth in Life Cycle Models,"
Economica 46, 363-80.

Gokhale. J., Kotlikoff, L.J., Sabelhaus. J., 1996, "Understanding the Postwar Decline
in United States Saving: A Cohort Analysis," The Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity.

Harbury, C.D. and D.M.W.N. Hitchens, 1979. Inheritance and Wealth Inequality in
Britain. London. George Allen and Unwin.

Hubbard, R.G., Skinner, J.S., Zeldes, S.P, 1994. "The Importance of Precautionary
Motives for Explaining Individual and Aggregate Saving," in Meltzer, A.H., Plosser,
C.I., (Eds), The Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 40, 59-126.

Huggett, M., 1996. "Wealth Distribution in Life Cycle Economies." The Journal of
Monetary Economics 38, 469-94.

Hurd, M.D., 1990. "Research on the Elderly: Economic Status, Retirement and
Consumption & Saving". Journal of Economic Literature 28, 565-637.




                                        44
Hurd. M.D., 1992. "Measuring the Bequest Motive: the Effect of Children on Saving
by the Elderly in the United States". in Savings and Bequests. Ed. I. Tachibanaki.
University of Michagan Press, 111-136.

Laitner. J., Juster, F. T., 1996. 'New Evidence on Altruism: A Study of TIAA-CREF
Retirees. 'American Economic Review 86(4), 893-908.

Laitner. J., 1979a. 'Household Bequests, Perfect Expectations, and the National
Distribution of Wealth. 'Econometrica 47(5), 1175-93.

Laitner. J., 1979b. 'Household Bequest Behaviour and the National Distribution of
Wealth. Review of Economic Studies 46(3), 467-83.

Loury. G., 1981. "Intergenerational Transfers and the Distribution of Earnings".
Econometrica 49(4). Pp 843-67.

Meade. J.E. (1964). Efficiency, Equality, and the Ownership of Properly, London:
Allen & Urwin.

Meade. J.E., (1966), "Life-cycle Savings. Inheritance and Economic Growth". Review
of Economic Studies. Vol 33. Pp 6 1-78.

Meade. J.E. (1976). The Just Economy. George Allen & Unwin, London.

Menchik. P., 1979. "Intergeneration Transmission of Inequality: An Empirical Study
of Wealth Mobility" Economica 46:349-362.

Miles. D., 1997. "Demographics and Saving: Can we Reconcile the Evidence". Paper
presented to National Institute Conference on the Macroeconomics of Inequality.
Churchill College, Cambridge.

Oulton. N., 1976. "Inheritance and the Distribution of Wealth," Oxford Economic
Papers 28, 86-101.

Pryor, F., 1973. "Simulation of the Impact of Social and Economic Institutions on the
Size Distribution of Income and Wealth," American Economic Review 63, 50-72.

Solon. G., 1992. 'Intergenerational Income Mobility in the United States. 'American
Economic Review 82(3), 393-408.

Solon. G., Zimmerman, D.J., 1992. 'Regression toward Mediocrity in Economic
Stature. 'American Economic Review 82(3), 409-29.




                                       45
Stiglitz. J.E., 1969. 'Distribution of Income and Wealth among Individuals.
'Econometrica 37(3), 382-97.

Tomes. N., 1981. 'The Family, Inheritance, and the Intergenerational Transmission of
Inequality. 'Journal of Political Economy 89(5), 928-5 8.

Wilhelm, Mark 0., 1996. 'Bequest Behavior and the Effect of Heirs' Earnings: Testing
the Altruistic Model of Bequests. 'American Economic Review, 86(4), 874-92.

Wilhelm. M.0., 1997. 'Inheritance, Steady-State Consumption Inequality, and the
Lifetime Earnings Process. 'Manchester School of Economic and Social Studies, Vol.
65(4), 466-76.

Wolfson, M., 1977. "The Causes of Inequality in the Distribution of Wealth: A
Simulation Analysis," Ph.D. thesis, Cambridge University.

Wolfson, M..1979. "The Bequest Process and Causes of Inequality in the Distribution
of Wealth." In J.D. Smith (Ed), Modelling the Intergenerational Transmission of
Wealth. New York: NBER.




                                       46
</ref_section>
                       Table 1.1     Distribution of Females by Number and Sex of Births At Ages 22 Through 43

CORSIM DATA

Female      Births        -3        0             1            2        3        4       5

Male Births           4'

                      0        20.68         12.94           6.96      1.49      .33     .10
                      1        13.64         14.77           5.32      1.38      .35     .13
                      2         7.83           5.06          2.16       .70      .24     .12
                      3          1.87          1.38            .64      .23      .12     .05
                      4            .41           .33           .17      .12      .08     .00
                      5            .12           .13           .11      .05      .00     .00
*
 Females with at least one but less than 5 births numbered 40434
Source: Authors calculations based on CORSIM Birth Matrix



                       Table 1.2 Distribution of Females by Number and Sex of Births At Ages 22 Through 43


BIRTH MATRIX USED IN SIMULATION

Female      Births -->                  0             1            2         3       4       5

Male Births            4
                       0           .00       13.00           9.00      2.20      .55     .15
                      1        16.05         22.40           6.45      1.60      .50     .00
                      2        12.20           7.15          2.50       .80      .00     .00
                      3          2.85            .95           .75      .00      .00     .00
                      4            .40           .40           .00      .00      .00     .00
                      5            .10           .00           .00      .00      .00     .00

Source: Authors' calculations



                                                                        47
                                                                                  Table 2

                                 SCF Wealth Distribution of Married Householdswith Household Heads Aged 60-69



                                                            Percent of Wealth Held By Top*                                                   Gini
                                                                                                                                          Coefficient
                           99%          95%         90%         75%         50%         25%         10%           5%          1%


        SCF               100.0       100.0         99.9        98.7        92.9        79.8        62.5        51.0        30.4              0.73


* Weighted by the SCF's non-response adjusted "final weight"
Source: Authors' calculations from the Survey of Consumer Finances, 1995. The 1995 SCF data is available at website: http://www.bog.frb.fed.us/pubs/oss/oss2/scIindex.htm
The net worth calculationemployed here is based upon the SAS program provided in the 1995 SCF's documentation.




                                                                             48
                       Table 3: Inequality and Bequest Flows, No Social Security and No Progressive Income Taxation



Row                               Simulation                                                  Total X-Gen
                                                                            GiniW   GiniC                         CIL (%)
                                                                                             BIL (¼) BIL (¼)

 I                              No Inheritances                             0.045   0.045       0.0       0.0       74.6


 2                                Inheritances                              0.075   0.075       9.0       2.9       76.6


 3                   No Inheritances and Skill Differences                  0.460    0.460      0.0       0.0       74.3


 4                      Inheritances and Skill Differences                  0.441    0.441      9.3       3.0       76.2


 5     No Inheritances, Skill Differences, and Perfect Marital Sorting      0.565    0.565      0.0       0.0       74.2


 6       Inheritances, Skill Differences, and Perfect Marital Sorting       0.534    0.534      8.5       2.4       76.2

        No Inheritances, Skill Differences,and Perfect Inheritance of
 7                                                                          0 454    0.454      0.0       0.0       74.3
                                     Skills


 8     Inheritances, Skill Differences, and Perfect Inheritance of Skills   0.451    0.451      9.0       3.1       75.8


       No Inheritances, Skill Differences, Perfect Marital Sorting and
 9                                                                           .        .          .0       0. 0      7 3
                       Perfect Inheritance of Skills


10       Inheritances, Skill Differences, Perfect Marital Sorting, and
                        Perfect Inheritance of Skills                       0.570    0 570      88        2.8       76.4



      Note:   All wealth and consumption distributions are across 66-year-old households in the simulation. W - wealth, C - consumption, B -
                               -
      aggregate bequests, L aggregate labor earnings, X-Gen - cross generational, I - inherited wealth.
                           Table 4: Wealth Distribution -- No Social Security and No Progressive Income Taxation


                                                                                  Percent of Wealth Held by Top
Row                 Simulation                      99%          95%       90%        75%     50%     25%         10%    5%     1%

 I               No Inheritances                    99.2         95.9      91.5       77.7    53.2    27.3        11.1   5.6    1.1


 2                  Inheritances                    99.3         96.1      91.9       78.7    55.1    29.7        13.1   7.0    1.6


 3     No Inheritances and Skill Differences        99.9         99.4      98.3       93.6    80.5    57.8        34.4   22.3   7.3


 4       Inheritances and Skill Differences         99.9         99.3      98.1       93.0    79.3    56.4        33.2   21.5   7.0

      No Inheritances, SkiI Differences, and
 5                                                  100.0        99.7      99.2       96.4    86.4    66.5        43.0   29.6   11.1
             Perfect Marital Sorting


 6      Inheritances, Skill Differences, and
                                                    100.0        99.7      99.1       95.6    84.6    63.8        40.5   27.7   10.4
              Perfect Marital Sorting

      No Inheritances, Skill Differences, and
 7                                                  99.9         99.4      98.4       93.6    80.3     57.3       33.7   21.5   6.8
           Perfect Inheritance of Skills

 8      Inheritances, Skill Differences, and
                                                    99.9         99.3      98.3       93.3    79.8     57.1       34.3   22.4   7.5
           Perfect Inheritance of Skills

        No Inheritances, Skill Differences,
 9      PerfectMaritalSortingandPerfect             100.0        99.7      99.2       96.3    86.8    67.2        44.0   30.8   11.8
              Inheritance of Skills
      Inheritances, Skill Differences, Perfect
10         Marital Sorting, and Perfect             100.0        99.7      99.2       96.4    86.5     67.0       43.9   30.4   11.8
               Inheritance of Skills

      Note: All wealth distributions are across 66-year-old households in the simulation.
                    Table 5: Inequality and Bequest Flows With Social Security and With Progressive Income Taxation




Row                              Simulation                                                   Total     X-Gen
                                                                            GiniW   GiniC                         CIL (%)
                                                                                              B/L (%)   BIL (%)

 I                             No Inheritances                              0.108   0.038      0.0       0.0       56.2


 2                               Inheritances                               0.188   0.040       1.4       0.5      57.6


 3                  No Inheritances and Skill Differences                   0.556   0.424       0.0       0.0      54.2


 4                    Inheritances and Skill Differences                    0.617   0.418       2.8       0.9      55.6


 5     No Inheritances, Skill Differences, and Perfect Marital Sorting      0.639   0.523       0.0       0.0      52.8


 6        Inheritances, Skill Differences, and Perfect Marital Sorting      0.687   0.508       2.4       0.6      54.1


        No Inheritances, Skill Differences, and Perfect Inheritance of
 7                                                                          0 549   0.419       0.0       00       54 3
                                     Skills


 8     Inheritances, Skill Differences, and Perfect Inheritance of Skills   0.627   0.423       2.8       1.0      55.3

       No Inheritances, Skill Differences, Perfect Marital Sorting and
 9                                                                           .
                                                                            0 649   0 . 529     0.0       0.0      52 9
                       Perfect Inheritance of Skills

         Inheritances, Skill Differences, Perfect Marital Sorting, and
10                                                                          0.711    .           .         .       5
                        Perfect Inheritance of Skills


      Note: All wealth and consumption distributions are across 66-year-old households in the simulation.W - wealth, C -
      consumption, B - aggregate bequests, L - aggregate labor earnings, X-Gen - cross generational, I - inherited wealth.
                         Tab'e 6: Wealth Distribution--With Social Security and With Progressive Income Taxation


                                                                                 Percent of Wealth Held by Top
Row                Simulation                      99%          95%       90%        75%     50%      25%        10%    5%     1%


 I               No Inheritances                   99.5         97.2      93.7       81,7    57.8     30.6       12.5   6.3    1.3


 2                 Inheritances                    99.9         96.7      96.3       66.1    63.6     34.9       15.1   8.1    1.9


 3     No Inheritances and Skill Differences       99.9         99.4      98.5       94.5    84.3     67.8       46.1   31.8   11.5


 4       Inheritances and Skill Differences        100.0        99.6      98.8       95.6    87.5     73.3       51.9   36.8   13.6

      No Inheritances, Skill Differences, and
 5                                                 100.0        99.7      99.2       96.5    88.1     73.6       55.3   42.0   17.7
             Perfect Marital Sorting


 6      Inheritances, Skill Differences, and
                                                   100.0        99.7      99.3       97.0    90.1     78.1       61.1   47.3   20.8
              Perfect Marital Sorting

      No Inheritances, Skill Differences, and
 7                                                 99.9         99.4      98.5       94.4    84.1     67.0       45.2   30.8   10,5
           Perfect Inheritance of Skills


 8      Inheritances, Skill Differences, and
                                                   100.0        99.6      98.9       95.8    87.7     73.8       53.5   38.6   14.6
           Perfect Inheritance of Skills

        No Inheritances, Skill Differences,
 9      Perfect Marital Sorting and Perfect        100.0        99.7      99.2       96.5    88.6     74.5       56.6   43.6   18.7
               Inheritance of Skills
      Inheritances, Skill Differences, Perfect
10          Marital Sorting, and Perfect            100.0        99.8      99.4      97.3    91,0     79.9       64.3   51.0   22.7
                Inheritance of Skills
      Note: All wealth distributions are across 66-year-old households in the simulation.
            Table 7: Inequality and Bequest Flows -- Adding Partial Martial Sorting, Partial Skill Inheritances, Rate of Return
               Heterogeneity, Consumption Growth, and Adjusting for the Top Tail in the Lifetime Earnings Distribution


                                                                                             Total     X-Gen
Row                               Simulation                               Ginu W   Ginu C                        C/L (%)
                                                                                             BIL (%)   BIL (%)

         Inheritances, Skill Differences, Perfect Marital Sorting, and
 I              Perfect Inheritance of Skills (Table 5, row 10)            0 711    0.527      25       08         54 2



 2                          Partial Marital Sorting                        0.661    0.476      2.6      0.8        54.8



 3                        Partial Inheritance of Skills                    0.7 12   0.530      2.4      0.8        54.0



 4                      Rate of Return Heterogeniety                       0.717    0.525      2.6      0.8        52.9



 5                           Consumption Growth                            0.613    0.516      5.1          1.6    39.5



 6                      Top Earnings Tail Adjustment                       0.721    0.713      2.4      0.8        66.7


         Partial Marital Sorting, Partial Inheritance of Skills, Rate of
 7      Return Heterogenity, and Top Earnings Tail Adjustment, and         0.674    0.670      5.5          1.7    47.0
                              consumption growth


      Note: All wealth and consumption distributions are across 66-year-old households in the simulation.W - wealth, C - consumption, B -
      aggregate bequests, L - aggregate labor earnings, X-Gen - cross generational, I - inherited wealth.
            Table 8: Inequality and Bequest Flows -- Adding Partial Martial Sorting, Partial Skill Inheritances, Rate of Return
                          Heterogeneity, and Adjustingfor the Top Tail in the Lifetime Earnings Distribution



                                                                                 Percent of Wealth Held by Top
Row                Simulation                      99%          95%       90%        75%     50%      25%        10%    5%        1%

      Inheritances, Skill Differences, Perfect
 I        Marital Sorting, and Perfect            100.0         99.8      99.4       97.3    91.0     79.9       64.3   51.0   22.7
               Inheritance of Skills


 2            Partial Marital Sorting             100.0         99.7      99.1       96.5    89.4     76.8       57.1   41.6   16.4




 3         PartiallnheritanceofSkills             100.0         99.8      99.4       97.4    91.3     80.3       64.0   50.1   21.7




 4        RateofReturnHeterogeniety               100.0         99.9      99.6       97.6    91.5     80.4       64.4   50,8   22.6




 5            Consumption Growth                  100.0         99.7      99.1       96.1    87.1     71.2       52.2   39.1   16.3




 6        TopEarningsTailAdjustment               100.0         99.8      99.5       97.8     91.7    78.9       63.6   54.7   39.7


           Partial Marital Sorting, Partial
       Inheritance of Skills, Rate of Return
 7                                                  100.0       99.7       99.3      96.9     89.6    75.2       58.8   49.4   32.8
       Heterogenity, and Top Earnings Tail
       Adjustment   and consumption growth
      Note: All wealth distributions are across 66-year-old households in the simulation.
                      Table 9. Transition Matrix:WealthAt Retirement   for Parent- and Child-Households

             Skill Differences, MaritalSorting, and Inherited Skills
             Partial Marital Sorting and Inheritance of Skills, Skewed Earnings Distributionat Upper Tail, and Rate of Ret
             Consumptiongrowth = 1.5% through age 66; 0% thereafter.

         J    0-6     6-12 12-18 18-24 24-30 30-36 36-42 42-48 48-54 54-60 66-72 72-78 78-84 84-90 90+

  0-6         47.4     41.0    7.1    2.2    0.9    0.4   0.3   0.1     0.1   0.1    0.0   0.0    0.0     0.0    0.3
 6-12         23.3     45.9   15.5    6.6    3.0    1.6   1.0   0.6     0.4   0.3    0.2   0.2    0.1     0.1    1.2
 12-18         9.8     41.7   22.3   10.4    5.3    2.9   1.9   1.1     0.7   0.5    0.3   0.3    0.2     0.2    2.3
 18-24         5.7     35.0   25.1   13.2   6.9     3.7   2.6   1.5     1.1   0.6    0.5   0.4    0.3     0.2    3.1
 24-30         3.9     28.1   27.1   15.1    8.0    4.9   2.9   2.0     1.2   0.8    0.5   0.5    0.4     0.6    3.7
 30-36         3.3     23.5   25.1   16.9   10.0    5.5   4.2   2.7     1.9   1.2    0.5   0.7    0.3     0.2   4.0
 36-42         2.3     21.8   25,6   18.4   10.1    6.3   4.5   2.2     1.7   1.4    0.4   0.8    0.5     0.3   3.6
 42-48         2.3     18.0   24.7   20.8   11.5    6.3   4.5   3.2     1.4   1.0    0.6   0.8    0.4     0.3   4.2
 48-54         2.5     14.2   22.5   18.9   11.5    7.8   5.4   3.5     2.2   1.7    1.0   1.0    0.5     0.4   6.7
 54-60          2.1    14.0   22.3   20.7   12.6    7.9   5.6   2.1     2.8   1.5    0.8   1.1    0.2     1.3   4.9
 66-72          1.1    14.8   21.3   15.6   14.3    9.2   5.9   2.2     3.2   2.4    0.8   1,3    1.1     0.3   6.5
 72-78          3.2    13.6   21.2   19.2   10.6    8.8   6.2   4.7     2.1   0.9    1.5   1.2    1.2            5.0
                                                                                                          0.6
 78-84          3.0    13.2   18.4   14.3   15.8   12.0   7.5   3.0     3.0   2.3    1.1   0.4    0.8     0.8   4.5
 84-90          2.5    15.2   17.3   20.3    9.1   10.2   6.6   5.1     2.5   2.0    1.0   1.5    0.0     0.5   6.1
  90+           3.6    11.6   11.6   13.8   11.0    8.4   6.5   5.0     3.3   3.3    1.9   1.7    1.5     1.0   15.9


                                                                                                                         range i.
Note: Numbers indicate probability (%) that child-householdwill be in wealth range j given parent-household is in wealth
Source: Authors' calculations.
