                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               INFORMATION AND COMPETITION
                                   IN U.S. FOREST SERVICE
                                      TIMBER AUCTIONS

                                              Susan Athey
                                             Jonathan Levin


                                          Working Paper 7185
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w7185

                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 1999




We are grateful to Glenn Ellison, Sara Ellison, Phil Haile, Jerry Hausman, Paul Joskow, Bob Marshall, Wally
Mullin, Whitney Newey, Mike Niccolouci, Tom Stoker and seminar participants at Alabama, Berkeley, IDEI
Toulouse, MIT, Toronto, Tufts, the NSF Conference on Auctions and Infrastructure, and the NBER for
helpful comments. Patrick Wang and Leigh Linden provided exceptional research assistance. We would also
like to thank the numerous employees of the U.S. Forest Service and the timber industry who took time to
answer our questions. Athey acknowledges financial support from NSF Grant SBR-963 1760 and the
Provost's Fund for Humanities and Social Sciences at MIT, as well as the hospitality and support of the
Cowles Foundation for Economic Research at Yale University. All opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 1999 by Susan Athey and Jonathan Levin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Information and Competition in
U.S. Forest Service Timber Auctions
Susan Athey and Jonathan Levin
NBER Working Paper No. 7185
June 1999
JELNo. D44 D81, D82, L73

                                           ABSTRACT
       This paper studies the bidding behavior of firms in U.S. Forest Service timber auctions in
1976--1990. When conducting timber auctions, the Forest Service publicly announces its estimates
of the tract characteristics before the auction, and each bidder additionally has an opportunity to
inspect the tract and form its own private estimates. We build a model that incorporates both
differential information and the fact that bids placed in timber auctions are multidimensional. The
theory predicts that bidders will strategically distort their bids based on their private information,
a practice known as "skewed bidding." Using a dataset that includes both the public ex ante Forest
Service estimates and the ex post realizations of the tract characteristics, we test our model and
provide evidence that bidders do possess private information. Our results suggest that private
information affects Forest Service revenue and creates allocational inefficiency. Finally, we
establish that risk aversion plays an important role in bidding behavior.


Susan Athey                                      Jonathan Levin
Department of Economics                          Department of Economics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology            Massachusetts Institute of Technology
50 Memorial Drive                                50 Memorial Drive
E52-252C                                         Cambridge, MA 02139
Cambridge, MA 02139                              and NBER
and NBER                                         jd1evinrnit.edu
athey@mit.edu
1 Introduction
This paper studies the extent to which bidders in auctions obtain and strategically exploit private
information. Since the private signals of bidders are not typically observable by an econometrician,
it is in general difficult to test theories about how bidders make use of these signals. In this paper we
identi a setting in which a post information about attributes of the object is available, attributes
that affect the value of the object to all bidders. Using this information, we are able to empirically
examine the extent to which bidders possess private information about these common attributes,
as well as the effect of such private information on behavior and the outcome of the auction. In
particular, we are able to test predictions in the spirit of Milgrom and Weber's (1982) model of the
"mineral rights" auction.
    The setting for our study is the U.S. Forest Service timber auction program in the Pacific
Northwest from 1976 to 1990.1 Our analysis relies on a particular auction format — called a "scale
sale"  used by the Forest Service. Each tract of timber contains multiple species. Before the sale,
the Forest Service conducts a "cruise" and estimates the volume of each species (as well as other
factors such as timber quality and logging costs). These estimates are publicly announced at least
a month before the sale, at which time bidders have the opportunity to hire their own cruisers and
form independent estimates. In a scale sale, firms bid a price per unit of volume for each species.
The winner is the firm that places the highest estimated total bid, computed as the sum of the
prices on each species weighted by the Forest Service quantity estimates. The contract requires
the winner to remove all designated timber from the tract. As the timber is removed, the Forest
Service measures the volume of each species, and the winner pays for the timber removed at the
rates specified in the bid. Thus, there may be a significant gap between the average bid, weighted
by the Forest Service estimates, and the average payment, weighted by the actual proportion of
each species. Such a gap is typical: on tracts with two main species of timber, the Forest Service's
estimate of the proportion of timber that is the primary species turns out to be within 5% of the
actual proportion that is removed on only half of the sales.
   While scale sales may appear particular to the Forest Service, similar rules are in fact used
in many government auctions. Examples include bidding for highway construction contracts and
"indefinite quantity" procurement auctions for goods and services. In such procurements, the gov-
ernment specifies its estimated demand for different goods, which are used as weights in computing
the total bids. But, the government can also choose to order more than those estimated quantities.
   Despite the prevalent use of scale sales, the equilibrium behavior of firms in such auctions has
not to our knowledge received a general theoretical or empirical analysis in the economics literature.
   1Other recent analyses of Forest Service timber auctions include Hansen (1986), Leffler and Rucker (1988), Cum-
mitts (1995), Baldwin, Marshall, and Richard (1997) and Haile (1998).


                                                       1
Our formal model of equilibrium bidding behavior in scale sales can be described as follows. There
are two species, 1 and 2, and each (risk-averse) bidder receives a signal about the true proportion
of species 1, and places bids for each species, b1 and b2. If the Forest Service has estimated that
the proportion of species 1 timber is Xl, and the total quantity is QEST, then the total bid B is
computed as B = QEST x (bixi + b2(1 — xfl). The winner, who submitted the highest total bid,
ultimately pays P = QACT x (bjp1 +152(1 —Pi)), where QACT is the realized quantity on the tract,
and Pi is the realized proportion of species 1 on the tract. In such an auction, bidders have an
incentive to "skew" their bids onto the species they believe the Forest Service has over-estimated.
The intuition is that a bidder can achieve the same total bid (and thus the same probability of
winning the auction) while paying less if the total bid is allocated mainly to species that are over-
estimated, since each dollar bid on an over-estimated species increases the total bid by more than
it increases the expected payment.
     To see how this would work in practice, consider a simple example. Suppose that the Forest
Service announces a tract with 1000 units of volume, and estimates that half of the tract is Douglas
Fir, and half is Western Hemlock. A bidder can achieve a total bid of $100,000 by bidding $100 on
each species. Another way to achieve the same total bid is by bidding $150 per unit on Douglas
Fir, and $50 on Spruce. Suppose that a bidder's cruise indicates that the expected proportion of
Douglas Fir is in fact 0.25, not 0.5 as the Forest Service estimated. Then the bidding strategy
($100,$100) yields an expected payment of $100,000. However, the bidding strategy ($150,$50)
yields an expected payment of $75,000.
    We analyze the equilibria of sealed bid auctions and a stylized oral ascending bid auction. The
theory exploits a basic insight, that bid decisions can be decomposed into two components: a
choice of what total bid B to submit, and a decision about how to allocate that bid across the two
species, that is what level of bid skew, ZS.b = — b2, to select. We show that bidders who have
higher signals about the extent to which the Forest Service has over-estimated one species (i.e.
about lxi — Pi I) will skew their bids more aggressively, and will be more optimistic about the gap
between submitted bid and payment. As a consequence, they will also submit higher bids. The
oral ascending bid auction works in a similar fashion, although some subtleties arise from the fact
that bids at any point in time have two dimensions, a total bid and a skew. The theory we develop
has the attractive feature that skewing behavior at each stage of the auction corresponds to the
optimal skew of a bidder who is just indifferent about dropping out of the auction. Thus, we can
give a precise interpretation to losing bids in our oral auction data.
    We test our theoretical predictions using data from sales in Oregon and Washington during
1976—1990. We match bidding data, which includes information from the Forest Service cruise as
well as the bids and bidder identities, with ex post cutting data from the tract. Since we observe
both the estimated quantities of each species and the quantities that are removed, we are able to

                                                 2
use the difference between the estimated and actual proportions of species 1, x -møi, as a proxy for
the private information potentially available to the firms. We refer to this difference, x1 — Pi, as the
"mis-estimate" of the Forest Service. Using this data, we estimate the extent to which information
about Forest Service mis-estimates affects bidding behavior and Forest Service revenue.
   Our empirical analysis broadly confirms the predictions of our theoretical model. We find strong
evidence that bidders respond to mis-estimates by skewing their bids, and also that higher-ranked
bids tend to be better matched to mis-estimates than lower-ranked bids. Likewise, we see that
conditional on the level of a bidder's total bid, the amount paid (or the amount the bidder would
have paid, had they won) is decreasing in lxi — Pi Forest Service revenue is also systematically
                                                              .



affected by mis-estimates. We further find that in a given sale, there is often heterogeneity in the
extent and direction of the skew, consistent with private information on the part of the bidders.
Higher bidders at an auction tend to also skew their bids more, and we find some evidence that
bidders incorporate information in the course of an oral auction. Finally, we frequently observe firms
using moderate skews, which can only be optimal for risk averse bidders (in or out of equilibrium).
    The results in this paper contribute to the existing literature in several ways. We have extended
Milgrom and Weber's (1982) theory of mineral rights auctions to the case of "scale sales," as
described above. Previous papers have looked at auctions with multidimensional bids and scoring
rules, but these studies consider settings with independent private values, and there is no analog
to the skewing behavior identified here.2 Baldwin (1995) and Wood (1989) have formally analyzed
skewing: Baldwin considers the bid allocation problem, taking the bid level as exogenous. Wood
restricts attention to pre-selected linear bidding rules and looks at second-price auctions. Neither
considers both the full decision problem and equilibrium behavior when information is dispersed
among the bidders. Baldwin also empirically estimates the degree of risk aversion of bidders at
Forest Service timber auctions. Her dataset, however, does not include the ex post realizations of
the volumes of each species on the tract, and thus her conclusions are based on revealed preference
rather than direct measures of the returns to skewing.
   The effects of private information in "mineral rights" auctions have also been empirically ana-
lyzed by Hendricks and Porter (1988) in the context of leases for off-shore oil drilling. Hendricks
and Porter identi the effects of informational advantages using ex post information about the
tracts (in this case, the amount of oil in the tract), and testing to see whether "neighboring" firms
have better information. In contrast to oil lease auctions, scale sales have the attractive feature
that it is possible to distinguish the effect of information on each bidder's decision-theoretic choice
about skewing (which does not directly affect the probability of winning the auction) from her
    2Osband and Reicheistein (1985), Che (1993) and Bushnell and Oren (1994) study auctions where bidders can bid
in two dimensions (cost and quality in the case of Che, and fixed and variable cost in the case of Bushnell and Oren).
The winner is determined by a scoring rule.


                                                         3
strategic decision about the total bid.
   This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides background on the Forest Service Timber
Program and describes some of the relevant institutional details of the timber auctions. Section
3 presents a formal model that captures many of the main elements of bidding behavior at scale
sales. Section 4 describes the data, while Sections 5 and 6 provide our main empirical analysis.
Section 7 concludes.


2 Background: The Forest Service Timber Program
In the northern and western regions of the U.S., the national forests have been the primary source of
timber for mills, logging companies, and forest products companies. During 1976—1990, the Forest
Service conducted well over a thousand auctions per year in these areas, generating annual revenue
of around $1 billion. Our empirical work will focus on Forest Service Regions 5 (California) and 6
(Oregon and Washington); in the 1980s, these regions accounted for two-thirds of all Forest Service
timber sold and 80% of all Forest Service timber receipts.


                    USFS Timber Auctions, 1976(1)—1990(2), Statistics
                                                        Region 5 Region 6
                   Sales                                      6009       16,857
                   Avg. Volume (mbf)3                       3752.6       3994.6
                   Avg. Reserve Price ($)                  184,897      329,280
                   Avg. Winning Bid ($)                    542,047      682,227
                   Avg. Bid per unit vol ($/mbf)            110.34       151.69
                   Avg. Number of Bidders                     3.67         5.07
                   % Oral Auctions                            47.5         87.1

Since details of the Forest Service timber program have been discussed elsewhere (see, for example,
Baldwin, Marshall, and Richard (1997)), we touch only on a few key aspects of the industry
organization, and focus our discussion on the process through which bidders acquire information
and prepare a scale sale bid.
   Bidding in Forest Service sales is undertaken by a diverse collection of timber conglomerates,
smaller mills, and independent logging operations. Timber from a sale is frequently processed in
mills proximate to the national forest. In Region 6, there are several hundred mills of different
types, each demanding different species and qualities of timber. Conglomerate firms (such as
Weyerhauser, Boise-Cascade, and Georgia-Pacific) own many mills all over the country, and may
be able to process the whole range of species and timber qualities on a given tract. Smaller mills


                                                 4
and independent "gyppo" logging operations do not have this ability. When these smaller bidders
win Forest Service auctions, they tend to resell some or all of the timber. In the 1980s, this resale
was done either through private bilateral trades or, in smaller quantities, through prices posted by
the mills (see Haile (1998) for an analysis of resale in timber auctions).
    The Forest Service begins preparation for a sale several months prior to the sale date. The
forest manager organizes a cruise and publicly announces the findings at least 30 days before the
sale date. The manager also decides, based on tract characteristics and expected competition,
whether to conduct the sale by oral or sealed bidding         in Region 6, the great majority of the
sales are oral auctions. Once the sale is announced, each firm must "qualify" for an auction by
submitting a deposit of 10% of the bid in a sealed bid auction, or 10% of the appraised value of
the sale in an oral auction.4 This deposit is held until the contract is awarded.
    In addition to the scale sale format already mentioned, the Forest Service occasionally uses an
alternative "lump-sum" format. In a lump-sum sale, each firm makes a fixed bid, and the firm
with the highest bid wins the auction and pays that bid, irrespective of the realized volumes of
each species. As described above, bidders in a scale sale submit a bid rate for each species and
the winner pays the bid rate for the realized volume of each species. The reserve price mechanism
differs slightly between the two formats: in a lump-sum sale, the Forest Service sets a fixed reserve
price for the whole tract; in a scale sale, there is a minimum acceptable bid for each species.
    Scale sales are used mainly in the Northern and Western regions of the country. The main
motivation for using scale sales is to reduce risk on the part of the bidders.5 If the bidders face
substantial risk about the value of the sale, their bidding will be less aggressive (not only do they
require a risk premium, but they may be more concerned about the winner's curse, whereby the
bidder who wins is generally the one whose cruiser gave the most optimistic estimate). In lump-
sum bidding, bidders bear all of the risk about the species composition of a tract. In contrast, a
scale auction automatically mitigates uncertainty about the total volume of timber on a tract, and
bidders can in principle insure against uncertainty concerning the proportion of each species on the
tract by bidding the same profit margin on each species.
    Before submitting their sealed bids or qualifying bids, the bidders have the opportunity to cruise
the tract and form their own estimates of tract characteristics. Cruising a tract has traditionally
been considered something of an art by industry insiders, and many cruisers have an undergraduate
degree in forestry (such a degree as well as two years of experience are requirements for admission
   41n oral sales, a bidder can cboose to raise the bid above the reserve price in this initial qualifying round of bidding,
in which case the deposit must be equal to 10% of the bid.
   5Forest Service personnel also bear political costs when their ex ante estimates are incorrect. The scale sale system
has the potential to reduce the sensitivity of bidder outcomes to volume mis-estimates, thus making it politically
desirable. Firms in the industry have historically excercised great influence over Forest Service policy.



                                                            5
to the industry association). According to industry sources, beginning cruisers in the 1990s made
about $30,000 to $40,000 per year, while more experienced cruisers made $60,000 or more. Large
forest product companies have in-house cruising staffs, while smaller companies may use for-hire
cruisers from consulting companies. These for-hire cruisers typically price their services either by
the acre or by the hour. While the costs vary substantially from tract to tract, one firm estimated
a "typical" cost of $10/acre. The average tract size in our sample is 380 acres, putting this cost at
about .6% of the tract value. While bidders reportedly spend more resources on cruising for "lump
sum" rather than "scale" sales, industry sources in the Pacific Northwest report that it is unusual
for a bidder to place a bid on a tract without cruising. Moreover, firms that have incurred the costs
of surveying a tract generally submit bids — thus, one can think of the decision to survey a tract
as roughly equivalent to an entry decision.
    To cruise a tract, the cruisers go out into the forest for several days. A difficult aspect of the
job is detecting potential defects in trees. For example, insects can damage old growth trees, but
this may be difficult to verify from external characteristics; and different kinds of insects may have
caused problems in different areas of a forest. Cruisers must guess at the defects in trees and
determine the "merchantable" timber, which will be sold at the prices bid at the auction, and the
 "non-merchantable" timber, which is essentially scrap.
   The Forest Service has long been aware of the problems of "skewed bidding" in scale sale auctions
(see, for example, GAO Report RCED-83-37, which documented revenue losses from skewing). In
order to limit such behavior, rules have been adopted over time that limit the scope for skewing.
For example, during the 1980s, in some forests bidders could only place bids above the reserve price
on "major species," which account for more than 25% of the volume. In 1995, some parts of the
Forest Service moved to "proportional bidding," whereby bidders are required to distribute their
bids across species according to fixed proportions.


3 The Model
In this section, we build a stylized model of equilibrium bidding behavior in scale auctions. We
abstract from a number of considerations, most notably heterogeneity in the values of firms for each
species of timber, as well as privately observed cost or inventory shocks. Thus, our results can be
viewed as providing insight into one component of bidding behavior, while stopping short of a full
analysis of the real-world auction setting. In particular, with private values as well as a common
component, the tract would be allocated in part on the basis of individual preferences and in part
on the basis of signals about the common value. It is important to note, however, that if the FS
had the same information as the bidders about the value and extraction costs of each species of



                                                 6
timber (as in our formal model), there would be no need for an auction at all.6
    The model can be outlined as follows. There are two species, 1 and 2. These species have
commonly known values Vi V2, which are the same for all bidders. The auctioneer provides
estimates of the total volume on the tract, QEST, and the proportion of the volume that is species
1, x (and let x2 = 1 — xi). These estimates are announced, together with the reserve prices for
each species, r1 and r2. We assume that v1 > r and v2 > r2.
    Each bidder has an identical utility function defined over wealth uQ, which we assume to
be strictly increasing and (weakly) concave. Let p indicate the true, unobserved, proportion of
species i, and let S x — p be the difference between the estimated and actual proportion, so
that 8 > 0 corresponds to an over-estimate of the proportion of species i. All bidders observe a
public signal, x {1, 2}, which is informative about the direction of the auctioneer's mis-estimate.
We will assume that x conveys enough information that all bidders will choose to skew in the same
direction. This substantially simplifies the analysis, without disturbing the underlying ideas, by
allowing us to ignore the extent to which bidders learn about the direction of the mis-estimate
when they discover that they have won. Each bidder j also observes a private signal, 4, about
the auctioneer's mis-estimate (under the assumption below, E[5I4} will be increasing in 4). We
assume that the total volume, QACT, is fixed and commonly known to the bidders, though not
necessarily equal to QEST. Alternatively, we can allow QACT to be stochastic so long as it varies
independently of S. We make the following assumptions about the random variables:

(Al) (i) support(SIx,4) = [x — l,xJ and E[bIx,4,...,d] >0 for all (4,...,d); (ii) condi-
     tional on x, (4,        (x,8x) are strictly affiliated and (4 ,d) are exchangeable.

Part (i) implies that the public signal is sufficiently informative that the bidders always agree
in their assessment of the expected direction of the mis-estimate; however, even after seeing the
public signal, any mis-estimate is possible (that is, the support does not change with the public
signal). The affiliation and exchangeability assumptions (ii) will allow us to establish the critical
comparative statics results in the analysis.
    We now consider the sealed bid auction and the oral ascending auctions in turn. We then
discuss the empirical implications of the model. Proofs are deferred to the Appendix.

3.1 The Sealed Bid Auction
Consider a first-price, sealed bid auction. After observing the auctioneer's announcements, the
public signal x and a private signal 4, each bidder j submits a sealed bid for each species, b
    5For this reason, it is trivial to describe the optimal mechanism in this context: the Forest Service should simply
set a rate for each species equal to its value and sell to any bidder. If one were to add a private value component,
the question of optimal auction design would become interesting.

                                                          7
and 14, to the auctioneer. The total bid is computed as B2 = QEST bx and the highest bid
wins. After the sale, the true total volume QACT and proportion of species , /h, are realized.
Ordering the bidders j = 1, .., J in descending order of their total bids, the winning bidder pays
P' = QACT > bfp.
    It is useful to think about each bidder's decision in two parts: selecting a total bid B and
allocating that bid over the two species, i.e. choosing Abx =               — b_ix.7   Given opponent strategies,
each bidder j faces a two-part optimization: first, for any total bid B1, what is the optimal bid
allocation A14(Bi , 4)? Second, given that any total bid will be allocated optimally, what is the
optimal total bid B1(4)?
    Only a bidder's decision about his total bid affects his probability of winning the auction; his
bid allocation is relevant only if he wins. Thus, bidder j's bid allocation problem, for which we
assume a unique solution, can be written as follows (letting LXvx v —v,>, and V = QEST(V . x)):


         rnaxE {u (QAcT ((bx — Avy)
                                                    .
                                                        5+                I 4,;     Vk    j, Bk(d) <B2], (1)
                               subject to:       b1 r1, b2 r2,

where j conditions on winning with total bid B1 (accounting for the winner's curse), as well as his
own private information.
    The bid allocation problem is formally equivalent to a portfolio problem; think of the bidder
as choosing his "investment,"        —
                                       vx, in the risky asset, 6. A bidder can eliminate the risk
due to b by bidding a constant profit margin on each species (setting Abx = vx). We refer to
this as "full-insurance," and we refer to any departure from this strategy as a "skew." Assumption
 (Al) ensures that the expected value of the risky asset O is positive. Thus, if a bidder is risk-
neutral, he will invest as much of his total bid B as possible on species x, maximizing Ab —
subject to the reserve price constraints. The latter finding is quite robust (and in particular, it
does not depend on our assumption that x is publicly observed). So long as the bidder believes
that there is, on average, a mis-estimate, risk-neutrality implies that skewing should be maximal.
In contrast, for a risk-averse bidder, the solution will involve some investment in the risky asset,
that is, zb — 1Vx > 0, but in general the solution will be interior.

Proposition 1 Consider the bid allocation problem. (i) If a bidder is risk-neutral, then the optimal
bid sets b_iy = r-.y. (ii) If the bidder is risk-averse, and B2 V — (v — r2), it is optimal to set


   TNote that b = B/QEsr+&(1—xx) and                = B/QEST—LS.bXXX, so choosing B and Ab uniquely determines
bx and bx (and vice-versa).
   51f B' < V— (v2 —r2), a risk-averse bidder will skew maximally, setting b., =r_., but the reserve price constraints
imply that ib < Av.

                                                          8
    Proposition 1 tells us that the solution to the bid allocation problem entails taking on some
risk, despite the fact that a full-insurance policy is available. Consistent with portfolio theory, the
next Proposition establishes that bidders with higher signals about Forest Service mis-estimates
will skew their bids more aggressively.

Proposition 2 Suppose that B(d) is nondecreasing in d for all Ic j, and that B3 V. If
preferences satisfy C'ARA or IARA, any optimal b(B1, 4) will be nondecreasing in B and 4.

   Proposition 2 also establishes that the optimal skew is increasing in the total bid. One reason
for this is straightforward    when opponents use nondecreasing bidding functions, winning with a
higher total bid means that the distribution of (defeated) opponent types is more favorable. There
is also a further effect, which is the reason we require constant or increasing absolute risk aversion
(CARA or IARA). When the total bid is higher, bidders evaluate the species composition risk from
(essentially) a position of decreased wealth. Under decreasing absolute risk aversion (DARA), this
decrease in wealth would lead to an increase in risk-aversion and a reduced propensity to skew,
introducing a competing effect that, though presumably small, would greatly complicate the model.
Thus, while DARA would seem to be a reasonable assumption (and indeed, one that is supported
by Baldwin's (1995) empirical work), we rule it out.
   We now establish the existence of a pure strategy Nash equilibrium in which bidders with more
optimistic signals skew more aggressively and submit higher total bids. Our approach is to show
that, for each bidder j, if all opponents Ic 0 i use identical strategies                  that
are nondecreasing in (B", d) and d respectively, then bidder j's best response must be similarly
nondecreasing. Under this condition, Athey (1997) has shown that a pure strategy Nash equilibrium
exists.

Proposition 3 (i) For each bidder j, suppose that all opponents Ic         j choose B/C according to
the strategy fl(d), which is nondecreasing in d with f3(.) V. If preferences satisfy CARA or
IARA, any best response function Bi(4) will be nondecreasing and have Bi(.) V. (ii) Thus, a
pure strategy Nash equilibrium exists in nondecreasing strategies where all bids submitted are greater
than or equal to V.

    Recall from Proposition 1 that bidders choose to skew their bids as the optimal solution to their
first-stage portfolio problem. Proposition 3 implies that bidders must skew to win. A bidder who
chooses a full-insurance policy that does not result in a sure loss can bid at most B = V. He will
thus be outbid by an opponent who believes that the Forest Service estimates are incorrect, since
by skewing, such an opponent can generate a higher total bid, while still expecting to pay less than
the full-insurance policy. The monotonicity of the equilibrium bid functions implies that the bidder
who gets the highest signal about the mis-estimate will skew his bid the most and win the auction.

                                                  9
    Our model assumes that bidders have identical signal quality and that this quality is exogenous
and fixed. Hendricks and Porter (1988) have demonstrated the importance of superior informa-
tion in oil lease auctions; bidders who have already drilled a neighboring tract are better informed
than outsiders. In the case of timber auctions, this extreme form of information asymmetry seems
unlikely, although it seems plausible that firms with greater resources could invest more in infor-
mation gathering. Indeed, there is significant evidence that bidders can invest varying amounts in
"cruising" the tract. Persico (1998) has shown that endogenizing the information acquisition de-
cision can have important consequences for revenue predictions. Essentially all of the comparative
statics results we will seek to test would persist in a symmetric model with endogenous information
acquisition. Heterogeneity of information quality is a more difficult problem, and we will not pursue
it here.

3.2 Equilibria in Oral Ascending Auctions
We now describe equilibria in a stylized version of an oral ascending auction. The oral auctions
conducted by the Forest Service are "free-form": after each bid is placed (where each bid must
specify bids for each species, not just the total bid), any bidder can choose to raise the bid. A
bidder may place a bid, stay silent for a time, and then become active againY If more than one
bidder indicates a desire to bid, the auctioneer selects one. Importantly, a bidder is not permitted
to raise her own bid at the end of the auction. If an auction ends, the high bidder is stuck with
the skew they have chosen.
    One concern with oral auction data is that announced bids may not be accurate indicators of
beliefs, and in particular, that non-winning bids may be difficult to interpret. In the scale context,
this problem might be acute since bidders have significant leeway to engage in strategic bidding
behavior (such as skewing dramatically or onto the wrong species) early on to try to signal to
or confuse the other bidders. Anecdotal evidence suggests these practices are not widespread,
but nevertheless, we want to consider a more formal analysis of bidder behavior in oral auctions.
In particular, we are interested in interpreting the skews of non-winning bidders, since these are
observed in our data. We also wish to analyze the extent to which information is accumulated
in the course of an oral auction, as many comparative statics results (for example, the prediction
that the expected winning bid and winning skew will be larger in an oral auction than a first-price
sealed bid auction) follow from this information accumulation.
    Our oral auction model is similar to Milgrom and Weber's (1982, henceforth MW) "English"
auction, which requires total bids to rise smoothly and does not permit bidders to drop out of the
   5The Forest Service does have a rule stating that a bidder who has placed a bid earlier in the auction cannot lower
his bid on any given species. Past bids by other bidders do not place any restriction on a given bidder's behavior,
except for the standard requirement that total bids must go up.


                                                         10
bidding and re-enter.

 (English scale auction) All bidders are active at zero. The auctioneer raises the total bid
    in small increments. At any bid increment, all bidders call out a skew (L\b) for the next
     increment. They then announce their activity for the next increment. No bidder who has
     dropped out can become active again. If only one bidder announces activity, that bidder is
     declared the winner at her last announced bid.

   Observe that relative to MW, the scale auction has an additional ambiguity. In the MW English
auction, a bidder's only decision is whether to remain active — and by remaining active, he reveals
only that his signal is above some lower bound. In the scale auction, each bidder must also announce
a bid allocation. A bidder could conceivably reveal all of his information in the first round of the
auction. A simple argument, however, suggests that in equilibrium, the release of information
must be gradual. Suppose that when the total bid was B, each bidder's strategy was to announce
a distinct bid allocation depending on their signal. For example, they might choose the value
zb(B, d) that maximizes their expected utility conditional on their signal and on winning at the
next increment. Then each bidder's information could be immediately inferred by all opponents.
From that point on, all bidders would have the same information and thus the same conditional
expected value for the object. All bidders would bid until the expected utility from winning is
zero, conditional on the signals of all of the bidders. This cannot be an equilibrium, since any
individual bidder has an incentive to deviate by announcing a lower signal. Doing so would reduce
the drop-out level of all opponents, and give the deviator positive expected profits. We conclude
that there must be some "pooling" of signal types in equilibrium.
    Given a history and a bid level B, we define the "marginal" private signal d to be the signal
that leaves a bidder indifferent between winning and losing at B, when the skew is chosen to
maximize expected utility conditional on winning at B. We propose an equilibrium whereby, at
each point in time, all active bidders mimic the optimal bid allocation announcement of a firm with
the marginal signal. Further, bidders drop out at exactly the point where their signal becomes
marginal, so that bidders with higher signals stay in the auction longer. Thus, our equilibrium has
the same qualitative features as the MW equilibrium: (1) bidders with lower signals drop out first,
and fully reveal their information when they drop out; (2) bidders remain in the auction until they
are just indifferent between dropping out and winning the auction at the current bid; (3) the only
information that can be inferred about active bidders is that their signals are at least as great as
some marginal signal.
   Formally, order the bidders in descending signal order. If k bidders have dropped out, let
   = {p1, ...,pk} be the vector of total bids at which the drop-outs occurred. Then, define the

                                                11
function Bt(D; k, Pk) as the solution to the following problem:


          0 =rnaxE [u(QAcT. ((b_v)+ LB)) 4 = ... =d = DPkX]                                       (2)
               subject to : (B/QEST) + b(1 — x1)          r1, (B/QEST) — zbxi      r2.
Given earlier drop-out prices Pk, the function B*(D; k, Pk) corresponds to the total bid level at
which a bidder with signal d = D can achieve a payoff of at most zero given that all other remaining
bidders also have signal D.

Proposition 4 B*(D; k, Pk) is strictly increasing in D, and B*(D; k, Pk) > V.

   Defining D*(B; k, Pk) to be the inverse of B*, we have now identified the "marginal" type given
drop-out points Pk, and bid level B. Let /bE(B;k,Pk) be the bid difference that delivers the
solution D*(B; k, Pk). We can describe behavior in the auction as follows:

Proposition 5    Assume   that 'utility functions are CARA or IARA. (i) There exists a Perfect
Bayesian equilibrium of the English scale sale auction with the following bidding strategies. Given
that k bidders have dropped out and until another opponent drops out, each bidder stays in the auc-
tion untilB = B*(d;k,Pk). For each B < B*(4;k,Pk), active bidders announce 1bE(B;k,Pk).
(ii) The player with the highest signal wins the auction, and the (sb, B) that wins the auction solves


             0=rnaxE [u(QAcT. ((b_v)+B))
                  subject to: (B/QEST) +                r, (B/QEST) —               r             (3)



    Once again, the equilibrium has the property that bidders must skew to win any winning
total bid is greater than the maximum full-insurance bid with positive profits. It also has the
feature that as the bid level rises, skewing becomes more aggressive, until only the bidder with the
highest signal is willing to own the contract.
    Though bidders can make a wide variety of deviations from the equilibrium strategies, the off-
equilibrium-path beliefs required to support the equilibrium are weak. The main restriction is that
following a larger than expected skew by a given bidder, marginal opponents, i.e. those who are
about to drop out, must become slightly optimistic about that bidder's signal. The idea is that
announcing a deviant bid allocation is payoff-relevant only if a bidder wins at that exact bid, that
is, only if all opponents the marginal sigial D*(B, Pk, k). If a deviation makes marginal bidders
more optimistic, they will stay in the auction, and no gain can be realized. The assumption of
increased optimism is reasonable since a bidder with a signal less than or equal to D*(B, Pk, k)
would lose money if the auction ended following a deviation.


                                                 12
    As mentioned above, the real-world Forest Service auction differs from our theoretical model in
several ways. Bidders can drop out and re-enter the bidding and the bidding may rise in jumps.
However, even in a more "free-form" model — where bidders do not necessarily have to indicate
their activity at every point and where arbitrary jumps are possible — the behavior described
above can be supported in a Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium given strong enough assumptions about
off-equilibrium-path beliefs.
    Consider an auction similar to the one above, except that after bidders indicate activity at a
given round (for example, by raising their hands), one bidder is recognized and allowed to raise the
total bid and call out an arbitrary skew. Bidders then indicate their activity for the next round,
and the process repeats. Moreover, bidders may drop out (not announce activity at a given bid)
and then re-enter later. In this auction, there will be an equilibrium in which bidders remain active
until dropping out once and for all, raise the bid level only in the minimal increments, and skew
according to bE(.) as defined above. Essentially, two assumptions are sufficient to support this
behavior as an equilibrium: following a 'jump bid" (i.e. larger than some minimum increment),
or an unexpected skew, opponents assign probability one to the deviant bidder having the highest
possible signal. Moreover, if a bidder drops out and then re-enters, announcing activity at a later
time, bidders similarly assign probability one to their having the highest possible signal. These
off-path beliefs support the above strategies as an equilibrium, since there is no way for a deviator
to make positive expected profits.
   Although bidding behavior is unlikely to proceed in such a structured way in practice, the main
qualitative feature of the equilibrium is somewhat more robust: bidders announce skews that are
consistent with having observed the lowest possible signal that makes them profitable if they win.10
This feature is natural because inducing more optimistic beliefs by the opponents simply leads
them to bid more aggressively. It is particularly useful for interpreting the data recorded by the
Forest Service. The FS simply reports the highest bid placed by a particular bidder. Since that
bidder might have been willing to bid at higher prices than the last recorded price, this bid can
serve only as a bound on the bidder's total value. However, if the bidder is playing according to the
equilibrium described above, the bid does have an exact interpretation. The losing bid allocation
can be interpreted as the optimal choice by a bidder whose signal is marginal for the level of
the total bid. Although we will not pursue it here, this fact could be used to recover parametric
estimates of the underlying risk aversion and signal distribution in a structural model.
  '°Equilibria 'with this feature also could be constructed with different rules about activity announcement, as in
Harstad and Rothkopf's (1997) "alternating recognition" model, where only two bidders at a time announce activity.




                                                       13
3.3 Predictions of the Theory
We now summarize a number of theoretical predictions that we will attempt to check against the
data. Since the private signals of the bidders are not observable, we frame our predictions in terms
of the relationship between the observed bids and the Forest Service mis-estimates (the difference
between the estimated and actual species proportions). From the perspective of the econometrician,
both the mis-estimate, S = x1 —Pi, and the observed bids, B and Ab = b1 —b2, are random variables.
The theoretical model predicts a systematic relationship, summarized in Proposition 6.

Proposition 6 Assume that utility functions are CARA or IARA. In the oral and sealed bid
auction, bidder j's equilibrium choice of          is affiliated with (5 and the same conclusion holds
conditional on any fired total bid B.

   We now briefly summarize a number of comparative statics implied by the model. To state
some of the predictions, it is useful to order the species so that the Forest Service mis-estimate is
positive. Let be the species that is over-estimated, so that 6 = — Pçt' 0 and bct, = bço —
Observe that Proposition 6 holds no matter how we choose to order the species; £5 . Lsb1 is positive
exactly when the bid and the skew are in the same direction.

   1. The amount bid per unit of volume is expected to be greater than the amount paid per unit
      of volume, i.e. E[B/QEST — P/QACT} = E[L\bi . 6] > 0.

  2. On average, bidders skew in the "right" direction: Pr{Ab, —         Avç,,   > 0} > and further,
       Pr{zb — Avp > 0164     is   increasing in 6,.

  3. The expected skew will be nondecreasing in the mis-estimate, i.e. E[zbi — vI6] is increasing
     in 6; and similarly for a fixed total bid B, E[Ab1 — AvlB, 6] is increasing in 6.

  4. The skews of the higher ranked bidders should be larger, both unconditionally and for any
     given bid level B, i.e. E[Ab, — &], E[Ah, — àvøIB] are decreasing in j.

  5.   Conditional on the per-unit bid, the amount paid per unit of volume, E[P/QAcTIB/QEsT, 6],
       is decreasing in the over-estimate 5,.

  6. Under CARA, the second-highest bid should be more skewed in an oral than in a sealed bid
       auction, i.e. E[b — 1Xv6j,,ORAL] —                   — AvøIS#,SEALED] is increasing in 6.




                                                       14
4 Data on Forest Service Auctions
4.1 The Data
Our data set includes a subset of the bidding and cutting data from Forest Service timber sales
described in Section 2. To our knowledge, we are the first to combine bidding and cutting data
to systematically analyze bidding behavior in timber auctions.11 We restrict attention to "two
species" sales, where two species, but no more than two, each comprise at least 25% of the volume
on the tract. We have found the most transparent way to think about skewing is in the context
of two-species sales because bidders can skew their bids only along a single dimension.12 In much
of our analysis, we restrict attention to oral auctions in Region 6 (Oregon and Washington) that
required only a small amount of road construction.13 In Section 5.4, we consider sealed bid sales
in Region 5 (California).
    In the bidding data, we observe all information that the Forest Service makes public after its
cruise: its estimated volumes of timber, the reserve price, and also its estimates of end-product
selling values and projected processing costs. The bidding data also includes the identities of all
bidders and their bids. In the oral auctions, the bid we observe for bidder j is that bidder's last
announced bid.14 The cutting data allows us to observe the total volume and species proportions
actually removed from the tract (these are the same records used to bill the winning bidder).
    In our empirical analysis of skewing and revenue, we include a number of control variables,
referred to as X. These include the volume of the tract and the average reserve price, whether or
not the sale was a small-business set-aside sale, and controls for other sale characteristics. These
include the number of months in the contract per unit of volume; the density of timber (where a
higher density may indicate "old-growth" and thus more variable volumes); the volume of per-acre
material, which is essentially scrap; the estimated logging costs for the tract; and the estimated
amount of road construction required. A variety of additional sale characteristics are also available
in the data; the results we report are robust to our choice of controls. In our analyses of skewing
(but not revenue), we control for the number of biddersj5 Last, we include dummy variables for
   "Although see Cummins (1995), who uses the cutting data to analyze how the timing of timber harvesting varies
with market prices through the life of the timber contract.
   '2When analyzing skews, we simply ignore any bids and/or mis-estimates on the remaining species. In contrast,
when we study revenue, we consider bids on all species.
   "In Forest Service auctions, bidders are "reimbursed" for road-building using a system of credits that can be
redeemed for timber. Restricting attention to sales where road construction is minimal allows us to more drectly
interpret the prices paid by the bidders.
   "As noted above, a bidder's last observed bid might bear only a distant relationship to the highest bid the bidder
is willing to place, but our theoretical model gives some guidance in interpreting the data: even if the bidder is willing
to place much higher bids, the observed skew is optimal for some "marginal" signal.
   "Our results about the number of bidders should be treated with some caution, since unobserved features of the


                                                          15
the time period, for several large forests, and for several common species combinations.
    Appendix B provides further details about our data sources and sample selection criteria. Table
I contains summary statistics.

4.2 Preliminary Observations
On average, the revenue the Forest Service collects from a given sale is around 9% (in our main
sample, $40,692) less than the winning bid. To see how the gap between winning bid and revenue
arises, we can decompose it as follows:

                         B — P = (B/QEST)(QEST — QACT)               + (ah• 5) . QACT,

where the first term is the portion of the bid-revenue gap due to the volume shortfall (on average,
tile volume cut is 5.8% less than the volume estimated), and the second term is due to the bidder
systematically paying a different amount than he bid for a "representative tree" from the tract. In
our sample, the first term accounts for $30,110 of the $40,692 bid-revenue gap, while the second
terms averages out to $10,582. Thus for the average thousand board feet of timber removed from
a tract, the auction winner pays about $4 less than it bid (the average winning bid is $143).
    A second feature of the data is the significant variance in the Forest Service estimates and in the
amount of skewing. Chart I shows the distribution of Forest Service mis-estimates, demonstrating
the potential return to information. The Forest Service estimates of the species proportions differs
from the proportions removed by more than 5% in nearly half the sales (45%) and by more than
10% in about one of six sales (17%). Chart II shows how the winner distributed his or her overbid
(the difference between the total bid and the reserve price) among the two species. As established in
the theoretical analysis, a risk-neutral bidder with information would place his or her entire overbid
on one species or the other, but the chart shows significant dispersion and many sales where the
winning overbid is distributed across both species.
    Finally, we note one aspect of the data that is, strictly speaking, inconsistent with our model.
While our model assumes the existence of enough public information so that in equilibrium all
bidders skew in the same direction, this is clearly not the case in practice. Chart III shows a
scatter-plot of the skew of the winning and second-place bids (III.A), and of the winning and
tract may affect both participation and skewing behavior. However, our feeling is that for skewing regressions, this
endogeneity problem is less significant than in standard analyses of auctions, where the main dependent variable is
the magnitude of the bid. Here, the unexplained portion of a bidder's skew should correspond to private information
obtained during the cruise. If one thinks of the cruise as tantamount to an entry decision, it is plausible that
unobserved factors leading to entry will be unrelated to information obtained after the decision to cruise is made. In
any event, our results are robust to both the omission of the number of bidders as an explanatory variable, as well as
to instrumenting for the number of bidders using some of the standard approaches from the existing literature (such
as the forest and district of the tract and related measures, as in Hansen (1985) and Haile (1998)).

                                                        16
 third-place bids (III.B). Both scatter-plots exhibit a clear positive dependence but also significant
 variation. In some auctions, bidders skew in entirely opposite directions: one bidder has all of the
 overbid on species 1, the other on species 2.

 4.3 Bid Skewing: Some Examples
To give some sense of the pattern of bid allocation in oral auctions, we briefly discuss a few "case
studies" of bidding in oral auctions. In our theoretical model, skews increase monotonically with
oral auction bids. While this is the case in many sales in the data, the it is byno means the rule.
Moreover, in many auctions, the reserve price plays an important role — at least one of the bidders
places his entire overbid on one species, so that the reserve prices are binding. In fact, there are
relatively few examples of auctions where every observed bid is an intermediate skew, and the skews
are ordered exactly as predicted by theory. The following is one such case:




     Bidder B/QEST Sp. 1 skew: tb —
           1     347.8              339.39
                                                r
                Example: Monotonic Bidding Behavior. 5 = .019
                                        % overbid on sp. 1 (Lb —
                                                               .94
                                                                                     r)
                                                                                   6.45
                                                                                           .



           2     346.5              334.39                     .94                 6.35
           3     285.6              50.39                      .56                  .96
           4     277.5              33.39                      .52                  .63
           5     250.72              .39                       .48                 .007

   On occasion, skewing can have very large consequences. Consider the following sale where the
bidders skewed heavily in one direction at the start, then switched later in the auction.



     Bidder B/QEST Sp. 1 skew: b —
           1     234.3             523.96
                                               r
                            Example: Switching Skews. 5 = .227
                                                     % overbid
                                                                1
                                                                    on sp. 1 (b — ir) .
                                                                                   118.9
           2     233.9             522.96                       1                 118.7
           3     207.6             —396.62                     0                   —90
           4     193.8             —353.66                     0                   —80

In this example, earlier bids are skewed into species 2, which was in fact under-estimated. As it
turned out, the average payment was less than half of the winning bid; if the third or fourth bidder
had been awarded the contract, they would have paid significantly more than their average bid.
The Forest Service would have received more revenue from awarding the tract toone of the lower
bidders.

                                                17
    There are a small number of cases where bidders seemed to place a "surprise" skew at the end
of an auction. Boise Cascade did this in two instances. In each instance, several lower-ranked
bidders had placed large skews in one direction, and Boise Cascade won the auction with a very
small increase in the average bid, but with a switch in the skew of several hundred dollars. In
one case, the skew turned out to be in the right direction; in the other, it was wrong. It appears
that information affects allocation of the tract, since the winner pays a very different price than
the next-lower bidder would have for the same object, and the winner's behavior reveals that the
winner anticipates this.


5 Evidence on Skewing
We now turn to testing whether the predictions of the theory are consistent with the Forest Ser-
vice data. Before presenting our empirical analysis, we discuss two choices we made that merit
discussion.
    First, the theoretical model suggests thinking about the skewing relative to a "full-insurance"
allocation; that is, the variable of interest is Ab —Av. However, the data contain no exact analogue
to the "values" in our model. We use the difference in reserve prices as a proxy for the difference
in the values of the species, i.e. we assume that Av = Ar. In a linear regression of z?b on Ar,
this amounts to a restriction on the coefficient of Ar. Such a restriction seems reasonable — in
a subsample of 97 auctions where mis-estimates are small and the reserve prices do not bind, a
regression of Ab on Ar leads to a coefficient of 1.055 on Ar (with a standard deviation of .171 and
an B2 of 0.28).
   A second point concerns the way in which we order the species. If we were interested only in the
unconditional relationship between Ab and 6, the order of the species would be irrelevant (because
(Ab1, 61) = — (Ab2, 62)). Yet we would like to control for the possibility that some observable
features of the tract might explain the fact that bidders skewed in the right direction. This suggests
studying the relationship between the absolute magnitude of the mis-estimate (6 > 0) and the
skew in the "right" direction Ab4, — Ar4,. We follow this approach in order to test the model's
predictions. In Section 6, we consider an alternative approach: namely, we assume that the model
is correct, infer x (the species that the winning bidder believes is most likely to be over-estimated),
and then directly estimate bidding functions Ab9, B@).

5.1 Winning Bids Reflect ex ante Information
We begin with the primary question of whether winning bids in Forest Service auctions reflect ex
ante information about Forest Service mis-estimates. The following cross-tabulationsuggests that


                                                 18
winning bids tend to be skewed in the right direction, especially when the Forest Service makes a
significant mistake in estimating the species proportions.


 Mis-estimates and Skews in Region 6 Oral Auctions
                                   Tncorrect Skew                     Small Skew                     Correct Skew

   Small mis-estimate
                                 (b — Ar < —20)               (—20   <       —       < 20)        (b0 —    ir >     20)

                                           83                              44                              90
        (5 < .025)
   Larger mis-estimate
                                          139                              104                             239
        (b > .025)
    Overall, the winning bid is skewed correctly (zb—zr0 0) in 58% of the sales. Table 2 reports
a probit regression, confirming the theoretical prediction that, conditional on the control variables
(X), larger mis-estimates correspond to a higher probability that the winning bid is skewed in the
right direction. An increase in the magnitude of the mis-estimate of .01 is associated with roughly
a 1-2% higher chance of the winning bid being skewed correctly. Column (2) establishes that the
relationship is concave: the initial effect of an increase of .01 in the mis-estimate is a 2-4% increase
in the probability of a correct skew, but the slope diminishes in 5. Of the control variables, the
most interesting result is that the number of bidders increases the probability of skewing in the
right direction. This finding supports the hypothesis that information is revealed in the auction.'6
    To obtain a more rigorous test of whether bidders in fact have ex ante signals about the ex post
value beyond what can be publicly observed, we would like to account for the competing hypothesis
that Forest Service estimates are systematically biased, and bidders have realized this and just skew
systematically in response. To do this, we ask whether unanticipated deviations in S help to explain
the winning bid allocation, controlling for exogenous sale characteristics (X) that might "predict"
the mis-estimate. However, theoretically we have no reason to expect a linear relationship between
X and the skew; X might affect the bidder's risk aversion, or her beliefs, in a variety of ways. Since
empirically, X is correlated with 6, it is important to isolate the effect of the mis-estimate from
a potential nonlinear relationship between X and the distribution of 6. To accomplish this, we
consider the following model:

                                                                                                                 (4)

where   X contains sale characteristics as described above. If the bidders do not have ex ante
information about S, we should find 'y = 0.
  '5As dicussed in footnote 15, it seems plausible that the number of bidders is exogenous in the skewing regression,
as bidders must cruise the tract to learn about mis-estimates. Our results are robust to excluding this control.

                                                         19
   We consider a semi-parametric approach to estimation. Dividing the control variables X
(as listed in Table 2) into continuous regressors Z and dummy variables W, we allow h(X) =
i(Z) + Wf3, where ii is an arbitrary continuous function of two indices (Ziai, Z2a2). We begin
by estimating
                       —       = ha(Z) + Ca, W = iiw(Z) + 6w and 5             = ui5(Z) + 65,                 (5)

letting ha, hw and h5 take a double-index form.17 While it should be noted that our double-index
model is still somewhat restrictive, our results are robust across a wide range of specifications of
the two indices Z1 and Z2. In the specifications we report, we let Z1 be the average reserve price,
while Z2 contains the remaining continuous control variables. Denoting the residuals from these
semi-parametric regressions as Ca,ew and 6, we then use ordinary least squares18 to estimate
                                                 = ewf3+esy + a                                              (6)
    Our estimate of the coefficient 'y is 406.8 with a standard error of 114.8. That is, an increase
in the mis-estimate of .01 is associated with a $4 increase in the skew (in the right direction).
We can reject the null hypothesis that 'y = 0 at the 1% level. These findings can be compared
with a simple linear specification, assuming h(X) = X/3. As shown in Table III (2), this yields
an OLS estimate of 'y of 383.8 with a standard error of 140.1. Table III (3) includes a control
for the magnitude of the bid; this captures the idea that part of the effect of the mis-estimate is
to encourage more aggressive bidding. Indeed, we find a positive, significant effect of the value
bid on the skew, alongside a somewhat smaller point estimate of 'y (319.6 with a standard error
of 121.9). However, we are cautious about interpreting these coefficients as structural parameters
of the bidding function, due to the fact that we have ignored the issue of the reserve prices. The
per-species reserve prices bind in about 42% of our observations; this implies that bidders were not
able to skew as much as they would have liked, without further raising their overbid. Further, the
magnitude of the overbid, an endogenous variable that depends on b,, determines whether or not
the reserve prices bind. Thus, we interpret the coefficients in Table III as reduced-form correlations,
deferring a more formal analysis of the reserve prices to Section 6.
    Finally, all of these specifications restrict the relationship between (b —r) and 8 to be
linear. While establishing a linear relationship is sufficient for testing our hypotheses about bidder
   7To estimate, e.g., ib0 — Ar., = iia(Z) + e, we used the average derivative method of Powell, Stock and Stoker
(1989) to obtain consistent (up to scale) estimates of a1,a2, where &a(Z) = hA(Zlal,Z2cx2). We then then used a
kernel estimator (with a normal density) to estimate the function hA, estimating abø—r# =hA(Zjâi, Z2a2)+r.
We used a routine described in Stoker (1989) to choose the bandwidth (the values were .41 for the first index and
1.1 for the second), and we used a trimming rule of 5%. Tom Stoker generously provided portions of code for the
estimation.
  '5As Robinson (1988) points out, OLS estimation of eA on ew and e5 yields consistent estimates of j3 and -y and
the OLS standard errors are correct. See also Stoker (1989) for a clear discussion of the model we consider.

                                                      20
information, it is interesting to inquire more generally into the relationship between skews and
mis-estimates. To do this, we estimated the model tb0 — 1rçf, = h(Zck,              + Wf3+c (where
Z = (Zr, Z2) and W are defined as above), using the density-weighted average derivative method
of Powell, Stock and Stoker (1989) as described above. The main finding, robust across a variety
of specifications of the index Z, is that the average derivative with respect to 6 is positive and
statistically significant at a 5% level of confidence. To see the shape of the functional relationship,
Chart IV plots the resulting estimate of the relationship between the skew and the mis-estimate
(h(Za,64, evaluated at the mean of Z). The chart illustrates the positive slope and a generally
convex shape over the region of 6 with most of the density weight.

5.2 Bidders have Different (Private) Information
A key aspect of our skewing model, and indeed of any "common-value" auction, is that allocation
is driven by private information rather than preferences.'° In our model, bidders who are more
optimistic about the gap between bids and payments skew more aggressively and submit higher
bids. Thus, we would like to know in the data whether higher-ranked bidders were more aggressive
in their skews. We also seek to test whether higher-ranked bids are more likely to be skewed in
the right direction: because information is revealed during the course of an oral auction, the th
highest bid should incorporate strictly more information than the (j + l)st.20 Finally, our model
of information revelation implies that the top two bidders should exhibit very similar skewing
behavior. The top bidder should stay in the auction for only one bid increment past the second-
highest bider, while lower-ranked bidders will in expectation drop out at significantly lower bid
levels with significantly less aggressive skews.
    To investigate whether higher-ranked bidders allocate their bids more accurately, we look at
the following model:


             Duny(Skew in right direction)t =                    . Dmy(Rank j) + X + Ut + &t.                         (7)


We estimated this as a fixed-effects linear probability model. Using a fixed effect for each auction
eliminates the auction-specific sale characteristics and the disturbance Ut, allowing us to isolate the
effect of the rank. The results are reported in Table IV. As expected, we find that the winning and
   '5lndustry sources reported complaints by bidders that mis-allocation results when their opponents have "bad"
information (i.e. were "over-optimistic" about tbe skew).
   20As we noted in Section 4.2, our theoretical model is not consistent with the data on this point, since in equilibrium,
it suggests that all bidders will skew in the same direction (which is not the case in practice). However, the result
that bid i in an oral auction will be based on more information than bid j + 1 should be robust across a wider range
of models.



                                                           21
second-highest bid are significantly more likely to be skewed in the right direction than the third
and fourth-highest bids.
   The second question is whether the skews of higher-ranked bidders are more aggressive. Here,
we restricted attention to sales where none of the top four bids is censored by the reserve price.21
We estimated

                       (M —     rø) =               . Dummy(Rank j) + X$ + Ut +            E,                      (8)

again using a fixed effects specification. As is shown in Table IV (2), the winning and second-
highest bids were similarly skewed, while the third and fourth-highest bids were significantly less
skewed (by roughly $20—30) 22 The third column of Table IV reports a final specification where
the dependent variable is an alternative measure of aggressiveness: the absolute magnitude of the
bidder's skew. This specification separates out the fact that higher-ranked bidders skew more
accurately and concentrate solely on the size of the skew. We again find that the top two bids
are very close, while the third and fourth bids are less skewed. In this case, there is a substantial
difference between the magnitude of the third and fourth-highest bids; both are significantly less
skewed than the top bids.
    Our findings are consistent with the hypothesis of differential information among the bidders.
Suppose, alternatively, that bidders have identical beliefs about the true volumes on the tract and
choose optimal decision-theoretic skews. In this case, observed differences in bids and skews might
be driven by differences in costs, private values for the species, or risk aversion (either intrinsic or
due to different bid levels and values for the tract). For instance, if bidders have decreasing absolute
risk aversion, then bidders with a higher overall value for the tract would be willing to skew more
aggressively.23 Such a model has higher-ranked bids being more skewed, though all bids skewed in
the same direction. Idiosyncratic variation in tsv also could generate variation in skewing, simply
through differences between the "full-insurance" allocation.
    These private value explanations have number of shortcomings. First, there is no reason to
think higher-ranked bids should be more accurate. Second, there are numerous cases in the data
where we observe a given bidder bidding on some combination of two species (e.g. hemlock and
fir) in multiple sales and skewing in different directions in different sales. Third, reconciling the
  21Although this restriction leads to a non-representative sample, it is still possible to test predictions about dif-
ferences in behavior across ranks within an auction. We expect that the sample of uncensored auctions displays less
pronounced skewing behavior than the full sample.
  "One concern is that we have relatively few sales in which none of the top four bidders were constrained by the
reserve prices. We performed a robustness check by enlarging the sample to include all sales where the top three
bidders were unconstrained. We obtained similar results — no significant distinction between the top two bidders;
the third-highest bid tends to be closer to full-insurance.
  "We are grateful to Phil Haile for pointing out this potential explanation for monotonicity of the skews.

                                                         22
observed data with differences in private values or risk parameters seems to require implausible
differences across bidders. The fact that bidders can resell timber and subcontract logging suggests
some compression in values for the different species. Yet, among the subset of 72 auctions in which
the top four bids are not close to the reserve price, the average difference between the largest and
smallest skew was substantial $46 (with a standard deviation of $86 and maximum of $393). To
place this in perspective, the average winning bid was $167, while the average magnitude of the
winning skew was $87. Finally, while our information-based model of bid allocation is consistent
with the similar skews of the top two bidders relative to the others, it is hard to see how this could
be explained in a model without some aspect of differential information.
    We draw three conclusions regarding the variation in skews across bidders. First, dispersion in
skews can be large within a given sale. Second, it appears that bids later in the auction are "more
informed." This might reflect either more accurate prior estimates or the fact that information
is acquired during the auction. Third, given that winning bidders are effectively paying a lower
percentage of their bids than lower-ranked bidders, the logical consequence of our findings is that
information should have an effect on allocation.

5.3 Revenue Effects
One simple consequence of the scale sale format is that losing bidders might have actually generated
more revenue than the winners, given the actual volumes cut. In our sample, a losing bidder would
have generated more revenue in 17% of the sales; the revenue "loss" from this misallocation is $5.39
million, about 1.7% of the total revenue. While such discrepancies have attracted the attention of
policy-makers (see GAO report RCED-83-37), such magnitudes should be interpreted with caution:
the losing bids as well as the winning bids were placed taking into account the benefits of skewing,
so clearly, any change in the allocation rule would also change the equilibrium bidding strategies.
    Given our model, it is interesting to ask how revenue changes in response to an arbitrary Forest
Service error, that is when b increases. With two species, the revenue collected by the Forest
Service per unit of volume is equal to B/QEST —         6, so the change in revenue is
                        a—Revenue = .a—B/QEST — —h0 .                —
                                                                                                 (9)

An increase in b affects both the magnitude of the bid and the gap between bid and payment,
      5. Consider first the latter effect. We have already established that J-Ab0 > 0, a force in
favor of a reduction in revenue. However, the sign of     is ambiguous. If Ar1, is greater than 0,
then on average we expect iXb,1, > 0 as well. But, if & <0, we cannot sign b#. In our sample,
when & 0, the mean of Ab0 = $99; when &0 <0, the mean of              = —$46. To capture the
net effect of the mis-estimate on the gap between the bid and the payment, Table V (1) reports

                                                 23
the results from the following specification:24

                     B/QEST — .P/QACT         = So1{zr>o}"yi + So1{ar0c0}'72 + X@ + a                              (10)

Overall, the gap between, the bid and the payment is increasing in 80 irrespective of the sign of
Ar0, but derivative is larger when Arqs 0 than when Ar0 <0 ($110 with a standard error of 34,
versus $82 with a standard error of 24).
    Now consider —B/QEST. Our theoretical analysis established that the level of the bid increases
when O increases. However, it is not necessarily true that = x. As analyzed above, Pr(i = xI°o)
is nondecreasing in o; but, for those cases where     x, then 8 is affiliated with    A higher 6.
leads such bidders to be less optimistic about the magnitude of the mis-estimate, and to bid less.
Overall, if Pr( = x8o) is high enough, the expected value of the winning bid should be increasing
in the actual mis-estimate 8; but, in general the relationship may be ambiguous.25 Table V (2)
reports a regression of B/QEST on sale characteristics, following the specification from (10). We
see that when Ar0 <0, higher mis-estimates lead to higher bids, but not when Ar0 0.
    Finally, to estimate the net effect of a Forest Service mis-estimate on revenue, in Table V (3)
we report the relationship between revenue (P/QACT) and the mis-estimate, following the same
specifications as above. An increase in the mis-estimate, conditional on Ar0 0, is associated
with a statistically significant reduction in revenue. The effect is relatively small in magnitude (a
mis-estimate of .05 is associated with roughly a $12,500 reduction in revenue). Conditional on the
lower-valued species being over-estimated, a larger mis-estimate is associated with an (even smaller
in magnitude) increase in revenue.
    Summarizing, mis-estimates appear to have a negative effect on the revenue received by the
Forest Service. However, we mention several caveats. The first is functional form; the specifications
include only linear functions of X and 6. While the result about revenue loss is only reinforced
when we allow for richer functional forms for X,26 the functional relationship between B/QEST
and b appears to be non-monotonic, and our estimates are somewhat sensitive to specification.
Second, as discussed above, we have not accounted for the fact that the reserve prices constrain
skewing behavior in 42% of the sales. We return to this issue in Section 6.
  24As the sales in our sample have more than two species, B/QEST — P/QAcT Ab., . 6, although this is a close
approximation. The empirical results report the gap between the bid and payment including all species.
  25Even if $—B/QEST 0, the magnitude of —B/QEST depends on a number of factors, including the risk
aversion of bidders and the variance of 6.
  26We also estimated the models of Table V (2) and (3) using the semi-parametric methods from Section 5.2,
 following the two-step procedure described in equations (5) and (6). In the bidding equation, our estimates of 7i and
'72 are 110 with a standard error of 43, and -16 with a standard error of 39, respectively. In the revenue equation, our
estimates of 'y, and '72 are 49 with a standard error of 42, and -121 with a standard error of 37, respectively. Thus,
relative to the linear model, these results suggest greater revenue loss.


                                                         24
5.4 Sealed Bid Auctions
We now report some evidence on sealed bid auctions. We are especially interested in sealed bid
auctions because the interpretation of skewing behavior is unambiguous — each firm's bid is only
relevant in the event that the firm wins, and so it is a dominant strategy for each bidder to choose
the skew that maximizes expected utility conditional on winning and the bidder's private signal.
Using a small (63 sales) sample of "two-species" sales from Region 5, we reprise the main tests
conducted on the oral auction sample. We chose Region 5 because sealed-bid auctions were more
prevalent there.
    The first column of Table VI reports sealed bid estimates of the probit model from Section
5.1, where the dependent variable is the probability that the winner skewed correctly. Overall, the
winner skewed in the right direction in 65% of the sealed bid sales, and was more likely to skew in
the right direction when the mis-estimate was large. The size of the winner's skew (Ab, — r0) is
increasing in the mis-estimate B0 (Table VI (2)). An increase in the mis-estimate of .01 is associated
with an additional $3.80 skew in the right direction (our point estimate in the oral auction sample
was $3.83). Thus it appears that in sealed bid auctions, as well as in oral sales, the winner's bid
does incorporate information about the species proportions beyond what is known from the Forest
Service estimates.
    The last three columns of Table VII report sealed bid estimates of the fixed-effects panel specifi-
cations, analogous to Section 5.2. We restricted the sample first to sales where there were at least
three bids (column (3)) and then (columns (4)-(5)) to a still smaller sample where the top three
bids are unconstrained by the reserve prices (that is, where the overbid was large enough relative to
the skew that the reserve prices do not bind). Across ranks, we did not find significant differences
in the accuracy of the skews, nor in the magnitude of the skews in the right direction (Ab0 —Ar0).
We did, however, find that the winner's skew is significantly larger in absolute magnitude than the
skews of the lower-ranked bidders. In fact, the magnitude of the skew is ordered by rank. These
findings are fairly consistent with the logic of information-based skewing, though not perfectly
so. Since there is no learning in a sealed bid auction, it is not clear that the winner should have
more accurate information than other bidders. However, according to theory, the winner is more
optimistic, and hence skews more aggressively, leading to larger absolute skews (which we found).
Because bidders are likely to skew in the right direction, this should presumably also lead to larger
skews in the right direction (which we did not observe).27
  "One theoretical prediction that we were unable to test is that the skews of the second-highest bids should he
larger in an oral sale. Our samples of Region 6 oral sales and Region 5 sealed bid sales are sufficiently different
(Region 5 sales generally having younger, less-valuable, second-growth trees, and fewer bidders) that we did not feel
confident making direct comparisons. Moreover, the choice of auction format is conditioned on sale characteristics
and is endogenous. In exploratory work using a mixed sample of sales from Region 1 (Idaho and Montana), we did


                                                        25
5.5 Moral Hazard in Cutting: An Alternative Hypothesis
An alternative story, that can potentially explain many of the empirical regularities described above,
is that bidders do not have private information ex ante, but instead are able to destroy some of the
timber on the tract rather than pay for it. This would lead to a moral hazard problem, where sale
winners would have incentives to destroy low-quality timber rather than harvest it.28 Anecdotal
accounts from the industry suggest that loggers may have a limited ability to manipulate the ex
post measurement process. This would help to explain the 6% difference between the estimated
and observed volumes.29 Moral hazard could also explain observed skewing, since higher bids on a
given species would imply a larger motivation to destroy low-quality logs of that species30 — thus
generating a correlation between skews and differences in estimated and cut species proportions.
Of course, the presence of moral hazard is not inconsistent with our story of ex ante information
and might reinforce incentives to acquire information — bidders may want to examine a tract to
see whether it will be easy or difficult to destroy low-quality timber of a given species. We can
place this in the framework of our model by thinking of easy-to-destroy low-quality timber as being
simply not present. In general, the more skewed the bidding, the higher the incentives for ex post
destruction of one of the species;31 and, conversely, the easier it is to destroy low-quality trees of a
particular species ex post the more incentive to skew.
   Several pieces of evidence weight against an explanation of the data based solely on moral haz-
ard. With pure moral hazard, the total volume of timber destroyed should be strongly correlated
with the "observed mis-estimate." But in the data, the correlation between the proportions esti-
mated and cut and the total volume estimated and cut is very low and insignificant: 0.053 (with
a t-statistic of 0.32). This finding is confirmed when we control for observed sale characteristics.32
Moreover, the distribution of skews within sales is hard to rationalize with a moral hazard story.
We found in Section 5.2 that the second-highest bidder was just as likely to skew in the right direc-
tion as the winner, while the lower-ranked bidders were significantly less likely to skew in the right
find some difference between skewing behavior in oral and sealed sales, but perhaps due to the very small sample the
results were sensitive to specification.
   28A similar story has loggers colluding with the monitors responsible for measuring the timber as it leaves the tract.
   2'Leffier and Rucker (1988) analyze the effects of various policies on the harvest rates on Forest Service contracts,
showing that a higher percentage of the estimated timber is extracted when contracts are shorter in duration.
   30Only logs that meet a certain threshold are counted at all; broken limbs and other damaged material is charged
at a different rate. Thus, a bidder could avoid "stealing" timber simply by breaking a log into pieces and paying a
  '
low price for it.
     Interestingly, one Forest Service official told us that cutting was monitored inteasely when bids were especially
skewed.
 32We also looked at how the gap between estimated and cut total volume and species proportions variedover time.
Because timber prices were quite volatile, one would expect the gap in total volume to vary a lot if moral hazard
were a primary concern. On average, it remained relatively stable over time.


                                                          26
direction. This is sensible in the context of an ex ante information story, but if moral hazard were
the primary force, the winning bidder's cutting behavior should respond to her own skew, while the
second-highest bidder's skew should be less closely related to the actual difference in proportions.

5.6 Bidder Heterogeneity
Our theoretical model assumes that bidders are homogeneous. However, in our background discus-
sion on the timber program, we raised the issue that bidders can be a very heterogeneous group,
with giant conglomerates bidding against small independent logging operations. Because it seems
plausible that there could be systematic differences between different type of bidders in terms
of their skewing behavior, we briefly note our attempts to uncover observed differences between
bidders that might be major (un-modeled) determinants of skewing behavior.
    We classified the bidders into three groups (small, mid-size and large) on the basis of the number
of employees. Small bidders have less than 100 employees, mid-size bidders have between 100 and
300, and large bidders have over 300. We then looked in a variety of ways for systematic differences
in the skewing behavior of these groups of bidders. Rather than report specific empirical results,we
give a brief summary of our findings. No particular class of bidders was more likely to skew in the
right direction, though larger bidders did appear to skew their bids somewhat more dramatically.
However, it also appeared that in sales where the mis-estimates were large, smaller bidders were
somewhat more likely to win. Overall, we did not find large differences between bid groups.
    We also examined the individual skewing behavior of a few frequent participants. None of
these were significantly more likely to skew in the right direction, although a few bidders (such as
Boise Cascade) skewed more aggressively (that is, the average magnitude of the skew was larger).
We might attribute this behavior to a lower level of risk aversion, as Boise Cascade is a large
conglomerate.


6 Direct Estimates of the Skewing Model
In the previous section, we tested whether predicted relationships between variables were borne
out in the data. We now take a somewhat different cut at the data, by assuming that the model is
correct and attempting to directly derive and parametrize bidding functions. There are a number
of reasons to take this approach: first, if the model is correct, it allows us to quantify thesensitivity
of bidders skews to information; and second, it allows us to investigate in some detail the way in
which the reserve prices constrain skewing behavior.




                                                  27
6.1 Structural Bid Functions
We start by assuming that bidders have (approximately) CARA utility, so that wealth effects can
be ignored. We impose a number of functional form assumptions, beginning with an assumption
about the species values v.

(B1) vk =   r + X Ck+7), for k =        1,2      (so zv = &), ij independent of r, X,x, 6.
   In an oral auction, the winning bid allocation solves equation (3) from Section 3.2. Writ-
ing the information that this bid is conditioned on as d, we can express the winning skew as
bx(B,dx,X,r,&,xx), where

            ab       —        —   f          —
                                                 R)/Qsp if f(d',X,e) > —(B — R)/QEST
                                  t      f(d, X)                      otherwise

When the reserve prices do not bind, our assumption that the utility function is CARA implies
that the optimal skew f(.) is independent of the total bid. Moreover, Proposition 1 implies that
at any equilibrium bid zb > L1v =           so the reserve constraints can only prevent bidders from
skewing as much as they want.
    The function of interest is the optimal unconstrained skew fØ, which we observe only when
the reserve price constraint does not bind. Because whether or not this constraint binds depends on
the total bid level B, we need to model this selection. The winning bid level again solves equation
(3) in Section 3.2, and can be written as

                         =f   gC(d,,Xrgjj) if f(d',x,X,e) >
              Qest            gU(W, , X, r,e, ij)                   otherwise

    To complete the model, we make assumptions about functional forms. Under the assumptions
of our theoretical model, the bidders observe x which provides information about the direction
of the optimal skew. As this can be inferred directly from the winner's skew, we order species so
that Ab — Ar 0. Thus, both the overbid and the skew will always be positive in our model.
This motivates a specification of the bidding functions in logarithms (recalling that our continuous
control variables are denoted Z1 and the dummy variables are denoted Wj):

(B2)     = ln(b + .3); X= ln(Z) + W2

(B3) d' ln(d') =Z+g, e independent of
(B4) ln f(.) =           +        + Ea1U€.

(B5) lng(.) =            + X/32 + e/3c + rn3c.

                                                        28
    Consider the interpretation of these equations. First, (B2) introduces logarithmic transforma-
tions of the continuous control variables; since our sample includes sales with mis-estimates of as
low as — .27, we add 3 to the mis-estimate. (B3) states that the bidder's signal about the mis-
estimate is the sum of the (transformed) actual mis-estimate, and an independently distributed
error term. We interpret e as the error in the bidder's estimate of 8x; a bidder with a higher & is
more optimistic about the extent of the over-estimate on species x In (B4) and (B5), we assume
that the log of the overbid and the log of the skew are both linear in the log of the signal.
    Of course, the functional forms in (B2)-(B5) are ad hoc, and we do not attempt to relate them to
the primitive utility function; but they offer several distinct advantages. First, below we will require
an assumption on the distribution of the errors, and the normal distribution will be convenient;
thus, we will assume below that & and tj are normally distributed. Second, although we did not
formally model the choice of transformation, several back-of-the-envelope calculations33 indicated
that a logarithmic transformation of the skew and overbid provides a better fit than linearity. Our
elasticity estimates are fairly robust to the way in which variables are scaled. Third, and most
importantly from a computational perspective, our functional form assumptions imply that the
probability that the reserve price binds is a linear function of observables and unobservables:

              Pr(res does not bind) = Pr(f(d,x,X,&) <-—f(d,x,X,r,&,uj))                                       (11)
                                                      Xx

                                          = Pr (     Sxai + Xa2 + ln(xx) — 8x/3 — XJ3
                                                            <fl6 + i/? La —
                                               Pr(h(d,x,X,r,xx) <
    Notice that x, the fraction of the volume estimated on the over-estimated species x affects
whether the reserve price binds. To understand its effect, observe that for a small Xx, only a small
overbid is required to achieve the desired level of skew. Thus, in principle, variation in x, can
be used to identify the full distribution of ii. However, in practice, due to Forest Service bidding
restrictions and our focus on sales with two primary species, our data set includes only sales where
x > .25. One-fourth of the observations (170 sales) have x E [.25, .44]; call this group A and the
complement group B (524 sales). In group A, the reserve prices bind 30% of the time, as opposed
to 45% of the time in group B. This suggests a crude approach to understanding the effects of the
reserve prices: estimate the effects of mis-estimates on skews and bids in each group and compare
them to results when the sales are divided according to whether the reserve pdces were binding in
practice. The following table summarizes the results about the effects of mis-estimates:34
  331n particular, we performed Box-Cox estimation on uncensored subsamples of the data, as well as the full sample
ignoring censoring; however, that approach is not rigorous unless censoring is accounted for.
  34These elasticities were estimated using OLS with robust standard errors, and using the specification of control
variables as in Table VII.


                                                       29
  Elasticities of:     Contrast: low        (A) v. high x> (B) Contrast: Reserve prices binding
   Skew w.r.t.          Group A            Group B               Not bind       Bind
   mis-est. b           0.065 (0.025)      0.018 (0.010)            0.020 (0.011) 0.032 (0.011)
   Overbid w.r.t.       Group A         Group B                 Not bind       Bind
   mis-est. 8x         0.045 (0.021) 0.013 (0.008)              0.010 (0.009) 0.035 (0.011)
    The elasticities in this table are all evaluated at the (overall) sample means. Note that there is
some ambiguity about interpreting the elasticities with respect to mis-estimates, as we are consid-
ering the effect of a larger mis-estimate in the "right" direction as perceived by the bidder. In sales
where the reserve prices bind (286 sales), bids and skews are more sensitive to mis-estimates than
in sales where the reserve prices did not bind. But when censoring is exogenously more likely, bid-
ding and skewing are less sensitive to mis-estimates. The latter conforms to our theoretical model:
when bidders are unconstrained in their skews, they are able to optimally adjust their skews, in
turn allowing them to place higher bids without expecting to pay more. Notice that in uncensored
sales, we find only a small and insignificant relationship between the overbid and the mis-estimate.
This indicates that in sales where firms chose to skew "moderately," they also chose not to increase
the total bid in response to the mis-estimate. On the other hand, when they skewed aggressively,
they also increased the total bid sharply in response to higher mis-estimates.
    The fact that the way in which the sales are divided affects our comparisons indicates that
the censoring is endogenous. Of course, our theoretical model predicts this: the error in the selec-
tion equation, ii, is correlated (though imperfectly so) with the errors in the skewing and overbid
equations. Formally:

             E[lnCAbx(.) —    r   )Ires does not bind] = 6xal + Xa2 + aiu6E[ev > h(j]             (12)


         E[ln
          \ Qest (       ,'
                              res does   not bind] =        +      + E[efia + flcjv > he)]        (13)



              E[ln (B@)_R) Ires binds] =
                       Qest
                                                 x+             + E[eu + flaIv ch(.)].            (14)

The model fits into the framework of sample selection problems (Heckman, 1976). Of
                                                                                   course, the
most efficient approach to estimation entails estimating the system of equations simultaneously;
with sufficient data, the exogenous variation in Xx further implies that we could allow for a flexible
functional form for the distribution of the errors. However, for computationalsimplicity and because
our dataset is limited, we instead estimate each equation individually using standard single-equation
selection routines (for each equation, we used Heckman's two-step procedure, with standarderrors
computed using full information maximum likelihood). Thus, we assume that ij and e are standard


                                                       30
normal, so that E[ev > h9j =                        Also for simplicity as well as robustness, we did
not impose the cross-equation restrictions between (11) and the other equations.
    Our results from this estimation are reported in Table VIII (1) and (2). We use a somewhat more
parsimonious specification than in earlier tables. First consider the probit estimates. As expected,
higher values of ln(x) lead to a lower probability that the reserve prices do not bind. The effect of
the mis-estimate is close to zero, although it is somewhat imprecisely estimated. This implies that
mis-estimates affect the overbid and the skew at approximately the same rate (cii
    Now consider the skewing regression, incorporating the selection correction Table WI (2). Our
parameter estimates can be interpreted as elasticities, although we must correct for the transfor-
mation of the mis-estimate (this requires multiplying the estimates by E[Sx]/(E[Sx] + .3) = .046 1).
The average value of the skew is $103.50, while the average mis-estimate is .014. We find thata 1%
increase in the mis-estimate leads to a .022% increase in the skew. Thus, if the mis-estimate rises
by one standard deviation (.075), on average the skew rises by about $12. Finally, the correlation
between the error in the selection and skewing equations is large and negative, at —.80. Recalling
the definitions of ii and & above, if e and i are independent or positively correlated, this implies
that cii is large relative to $. In words, the skew is more sensitive than the overbid to the private
signal about the mis-estimate.
    The selection model can be usefully contrasted with several alternatives. The first is an ordinary
least squares regression on the observations where the reserve price does not bind; the second is
a standard censored normal regression model (CNR), which requires that censoring is exogenous.
The CNR model estimates:

               —          = bxai +                                                     B—R
                   Ark]                   + 1{r blnds}01UeE[&fbU1 + Xci2 —                       <—&].         (15)
                                                                                      Qest

The results are reported in Table WI (3) and (4). Notice that the coefficients on the mis-estimate
from the selection model are greater than the OLS estimates and smaller than the CNR estimates.36
Intuitively, considering only the uncensored sample leads to a downward bias, as sales where skews
are particularly sensitive to mis-estimates may be censored. On the other hand, ignoring the
endogeneity of censoring yields an upward bias: the fact that    is positively correlated with
both & and 6 leads us to exaggerate the inferred effects of both variables on the desired skew for
censored observations. The selection model places a smaller weight on the censoring correction
term than the CNR model, leading to more conservative estimates about the effects of & and 8.
  35To evaluate the robustness of our results to the normality assumption, we verified thatour results do not change
when polynomial functions of the Mills ratio ./(1 — 4) are included as explanatory variables. Such an approach
serves as a simple first pass at semi-parametric estimation.
  36We also estimated (but did not report) an ordinary least squares regression on the full sample; the coefficients
on the mis-estimate variables were about 2% smaller than the censored normal regression.


                                                        31
    Now consider the results for overbids. The elasticity of the overbid with respect to the mis-
estimate is approximately .01 and significantly different from 0 only at the 15% confidence level.
Accounting for selection (as opposed to (unreported) OLS or CNR) lowers the estimated effects of
•   On the other hand, we find larger and significant effects of mis-estimates on overbid for censored
sales; the elasticity is approximately .03. This finding runs counter to the following intuition: we
would expect that when the bidders are constrained by the reserve price, they will not be able to
skew as effectively and efficiently, and thus their bids will be less sensitive to mis-estimates. One
way to reconcile our results with the intuition is to consider the possibility that the econometric
model does not fully account for the heterogeneity across sales. For example, the sales where
censoring occurs and bids are high, might be sales where the bidders are more confident about the
direction of the mis-estimate. Another hypothesis is that our functional form does not fully capture
nonlinear effects of the mis-estimate.
    Recalling our analysis from Section 5.3, we now use our estimates to calculate the effect of mis-
estimates on revenue. Equation (9) indicates that an increase in S,, affects the magnitude of the bid
as well as the gap between bid and payment, zXb.b. In contrast to Section 5.3, we now examine the
effect of an increase in the mis-estimate in the direction of x In our sample, the average predicted
Ah is quite large (107.8), so that an increase in the mis-estimate leads to a large increase in the gap
between the bid and the payment. We find that for uncensored sales, the elasticity of revenue with
respect to mis-estimates is -.0066; thus, an increase in the mis-estimate of one standard deviation
(.075) leads to a reduction in revenue of $4.74 per Mbf., or about $14,560 on the average sale.
In sales where the reserve prices bind, the bid increases at a rate proportional to the skew. For
these (less frequent) sales, we find that revenue actually increases when the mis-estimate grows;
the elasticity is .0032.
    Overall, the magnitudes of our estimates in this section should still be interpreted with caution,
due to the fairly strong functional form assumptions. Nonetheless, our results may provide some
insight into the direction of, and relative importance of, the effects of the reserve prices; as well,
they indicate that skewing leads to small but statistically significant reductions in revenue.


7 Conclusion
In this paper, we have considered the effects of information on bidding behavior in Forest Service
timber auctions. The rules of the "scale sales" create incentives for bidders to distort their bids.
By using ex post information about the value of the tract, we are able to provide evidence that
bidders are risk-averse, have private information about the underlying characteristics of the tract,
and exploit this information in their bidding behavior. This information appears to play a role
in allocating the tract between bidders, since bidders who take larger gambles are more likely to

                                                 32
win the auction. Further, larger realizations of the mis-estimate typically lead to lower revenue
for the Forest Service, consistent with the hypothesis that the bidders require a risk premium to
compensate for the large gambles they must take to remain competitive in the auction.
    Our use of ex post information has an additional advantage: our results provide evidence about
the validity of several of the assumptions commonly invoked in auction studies. The hypothesis
of pure private values, which requires that all private information on the part of a given bidder
concerns the bidder's own private costs and benefits, is not supported by our analysis. Observed
bidding behavior is also inconsistent with risk-neutrality. Finally, bidders clearly expend resources
to obtain strategically useful information, suggesting that attention should be given to the process
of information acquisition.
    In future work, it may be possible to use the ex post value information in a more complete
structural model. For example, we might be able to assess the relative salience of heterogeneous
values for the tract and private signals about mis-estimates. Alternatively, we could explore direct
estimates of bidder risk-aversion. We might also quantify the extent of the winner's curse in this
market, and the value of additional information. However, these questions would require a number
of demanding extensions to the theoretical and econometric models.


8 Appendix A: Proofs
The following results are used in the formal analysis. See the appendix of Milgrom and Weber
(1982) for basic results about affiliation and Athey (1998) for a unified treatment of these lemmas
and further references. For our purposes, we need the following definitions. 9         lIt is bivari ate
single crossing in (x; y) (see Milgrom and Shannon, 1994) if for all xH > x' and y" > ,,L g(xH yL) —
g@L,YL) (>)O implies g(xH,yH) _g(xL,yH) (>)O. A function I is supermodular if, for all
    > ,,L, f(yH, z) — f(y'-', z) is nondecreasing in z; f is strictly supermodular if the difference is
increasing. If f is positive, f is (strictly) log-supermodular if log(f) is (strictly) supermodular. If y
and z are random variables with positive joint density f(y, z) with respect to Lebesgue measure, y
and z are (strictly) affiliated if and only if f is (strictly) log-supermodular in (y, z) almost everywhere
(Lebesgue measure). A vector of random variables z with a positive joint density 1(z) is (strictly)
affiliated if 1(z) is (strictly) log-supermodular in (z, z) almost everywhere, for all i           j.
Lemma 7 (Milgrorn and Shannon, 1994) If g(X, 0) satisfies bivariate single crossing, X*(9) =
arg max g(X, 9) is nondecreasing ii 0


  "If there are multiple optima or no optima for some parameter values, the set of optimizers is nondecreasing in
the strong set order (Milgrom and Shannon, 1994).



                                                      33
Lemma 8 Let (y,z) be affiliated random variables with conditional density f(yz). If g(x,y,z) is
bivari ate single crossing in (x; y) and superrnodular in (x, z), then f g(x, y, z)f(ylz)dy is bivariate
single crossing in (x; z).

Lemma 9 Let u(w; 9) be differentiable and increasing in w, and suppose that 0 decreases the coef-
ficient of absolute risk aversion of u(w; 9) (u(w; 0) is log-supermodular). Then [u(x . y; 9)f(y)dy
is bivariate single crossing in (x; 0).

Lemma 10 If(y,z) are strictly affiliated, and g(y) is increasing, then E[g(y)z] is increasing in z.

Lemma 11 Suppose that (y,z) are strictly affiliated. (i) If g(y) is increasing, then E[g(y)I z e
[a,b],i = 1, ..,n] is increasing in a and b for all i. (ii) If g(x,y) is bivariate single crossing in
(x; y), then E[g(x, y) I z E [ai, b] , i = 1, .., n] is bivariate single crossing in (x; a) and (x; b).

Lemma 12 If (y,z) are affiliated, and g(x,y) is supermodular, then fg(x,y)f(yz)dy is super-
modular in (x, z).

Proof of Proposition 2. The bid allocation problem can be written as:


                              ((b &)               + v x—
                                 —                                           Vk
     rnaxEs                                   .



                                                                                   j, Bk(4) <B2]
                     (QACT.                                    QE8T))
                         subject to:     b1       r1,   b2   r2,

Let U(!Xb; B2,4) represent the objective in this optimization program. Fix B2. Then bidder j's
payoff function, u() is bivariate single crossing in (Lb, 6) i.e.  crosses zero once from below
as a function of     Moreover, from (Al), (o,4,d3) are affiliated. Thus, by Lemma 8, for fixed
B2, U(b; B2, 4) is bivariate single crossing in        4). The monotonicity theorem of Milgrom
and Shannon (1994) (Lemma 7) then implies that bjBi,4) is nondecreasing in 4 for a fixed
B2. Now fix 4. An increase in B2 has two effects. First, it acts as a downward movement in
wealth, which, under CARA or IARA, makes the bidder no more risk-averse and increases LXb
(Lemma 9). Second, it increases the set of opponent types defeated; by Lemma 11 this effect favors
an increase in        So a.b(B', 4) will be nondecreasing in B for a fixed 4.                   Q.E.D.

Proof of Proposition 3. (i) First, notice that by bidding B = V and Ab = Ivx (i.e. b, =
bidder j can ensure a payoff of zero. If j3(.) V, then any total bid B < V also results in a
payoff of zero, so bidder j can restrict attention to bids that are greater than or equal to V. We
now establish monotonicity. Define m3 =                      Since the signals were assumed to be
exchangeable, m3 is affiliated with 4 (Milgrom and Weber, 1982). Given an optimal choice of
     the bidder chooses B to maximize expected utility. In order to analyze the problem, it will
be convenient to break the interaction between B and 4 into two components, the direct effect of

                                                        34
4 on payoffs for a fixed  and the indirect effect arising due to the fact that the optimal choice
of Lb depends on 4. To separate the two effects, we write payoffs as

            (B,d,y) = U((B,y),B,d3)                 f     l{(m_j)<B}(mxi)dF(mxiIX,d),

and show that U(B, 4,4)  is bivariate single crossing in (B; 4), which by Lemma 7 will imply our
result. To do so, we show that Ti(B,4,y) is single crossing in 4 and y at y = 4.
   To begin, consider the effect of y on L7(B, 4, y). Letting subscripts denote partial derivatives
(and applying the envelope theorem in computing 7i(B, 4,y)), we have

               aL(B, d, y) = U1(b(B, y), B,

            +Ui2((B, y), B, d)                     y) f     l{i)<B}(mXi)dF(mXi lx, di).
Applying the envelope theorem again, we know that Ui (i4(B, y), B, 4) = 0 at y = 4. Further,
our arguments in Proposition 2 imply that U12(AJ4(B,y),B,4) 0 at y = 4, using the assump-
tion of CARA/IARA and Lemma 10. Since i4(B,y) 0 by Proposition 2, it follows that
ft7(B,d,y) Oat y = 4.
     Now consider the effect of 4 on   U(B, 4, y) when y is fixed. We introduce some additional
notation:

                                       =   f u (r (i4,B,)) dF(6xld,m,),
                                           [0,1]

so   that

       t7(B, d,y) =         (J(B,                    m) l{13(m_i)<B}(mxi)dF(7•flxilX, di).

By the envelope theorem, we can ignore the effect of B on U through                when computing
U(B,4,y). To apply Lemma 8, we need to show that Ci is supermodular in (B,4) and
(B, m3). This will in turn imply that the integrand in i(B, 4, y) is supermodular in (B; 4)
and   bivariate single crossing in (B; m3). To establish the desired properties of U, we compute
         (A4,B6)) =      —u'(r).       Recall from Proposition 1 that b(B,d) >           and thus
       B,     is nondecreasing in 6. Since u is concave, it follows that    is nondecreasing in
Sx. Then, since 6 and      are affiliated, Lemma 12 implies that U is supermodular in (B;m3).
The argument for (B; 4) is analogous.
   (ii) The above argument verifies the single crossing condition in Athey's (1997) existence theo-
rem for the case of two bidders. The result can be applied to the case of J symmetric bidders by

                                                    35
looking for a fixed point in the best response correspondence for a single bidder, whenall opponents
play the same nondecreasing strategy.                                                              Q. E. D.


Proof of Proposition 4: Suppose to the contrary that R < B* (D; k, Pk) < V. Then there
exist some b1, b2 such that QEST(b x) = B*(D; k, Pk) and r < b < v. This "safe" portfolio
has strictly positive expected profits for any resolution of uncertainty, contradicting the fact that
the optimal skew gives zero expected utility. So B*(.) > V. Now, by Proposition 1, at the
optimum, ib(D;k,Pk) >                which implies that b v > rx. Let r(b,B,5) =                   QACT•
((sb — v)c + (V — B)/QEST) and let ). and                    denote the Lagrange multipliers on the reserve
price constraints. We have

                                                                                    = D, Pk,   +
        0=      E [ (it(b(D; k, Pk), B*(D; k, Pk), ))                4 = ... =                         (16)

                +A [(B/QEST) + zb(1 — x1)         —
                                                       r1]   + )- [(B/QEST) — zbxi r2.].

Since Zb >          it is increasing in 5.. Lemma 11 implies the right-hand side of (16) is increasing
in D; it is decreasing in B since it is decreasing in B and .\_ 0 = X. The result follows. Q.E.D.

Proof of Proposition 5. (i) Suppose bidders I                     j follow the strategies described in the
Proposition. Then, if all opponents are still active at a bid B, all that can be inferred is that
4      D(B; k, Pk) for each opponent I. Suppose no one has dropped out; we will consider player
j's incentives to deviate from the equilibrium strategy. At B = B* (4; 0,0), bidder j knows that
he will win at B only if all opponent's signals are equal to D*(B; 0,0) = 4. For him to earn non-
negative expected profits if he wins, he must announce bE(B; 0,0). So bidder j has no incentive
to deviate at B =    B*(d;0,0).   Moreover, as B rises past B*(4; 0, 0), j can not possibly make
 positive expected profits if he wins. So he will drop out just beyond B*(4; 0, 0).
    Now consider j's bid allocation announcement tb when B < B*(4; 0,0). Consider first an
 announcement b < bE(B; 0,0). Suppose that following such a deviation, opponent's beliefs
 are the same as if j announced ibE(B; 0, 0), that is, opponents do not update at all. Then the
 deviation will be payoff-relevant only if bidder j actually wins at B, i.e. if 4 = D* (B; 0,0) for all.
 Given this event, we know that if j had signal D*(B; 0,0), he would prefer a skew of bE(B; 0,0)
 to any lower b. But in fact, 4 > Dt(B; 0,0), so j certainly prefers a skew of bE(B; 0,0) to any
 lower b (this follows from the fact that the objective defining bE is bivariate single crossing in
 sb and 4).   So this   deviation is not profitable.
    Finally, suppose B < B*(4; 0,0) and consider a deviation to ib > LbE(B; 0, 0). Note that
 if 4 < D*(B;0,0), then j's expected profits from bidding zb> bE(B;0,0) are negative. Since
 opponents already believe that 4 Dt (B; 0,0), it makes sense to assume that if they do update
 their beliefs they will revise upward. To this end, assume that any opponent 1 who is marginal,

                                                       36
i.e. who plans to drop out immediately, revises his beliefs about j to be that 4 D(B; 0,0) >
D* (B; 0,0), where D (B; 0,0) is large enough to deter 1 from dropping out. All other bidders
make no revision in their beliefs about 4. With these off-path beliefs, a bid allocation deviation
by bidder j to Ab > bE(B; 0,0) cannot increase and may decrease j's expected payoffs (since
opponents have more optimistic beliefs about his signal and will stay in the auction longer). The
same arguments can be applied after any number of bidders have dropped out, which ensures that
the proposed strategies form an equilibrium. Note that a variety of other off-equilibrium-path belief
restrictions would also suffice. So long as in the event of a bid allocation deviation by some bidder
j, opponents are at least as optimistic about his signal as in the equilibrium we have described, he
will have no incentive to deviate.
    (ii) The proposed equilibrium fully reveals the signals of all players except the player with the
highest signal.                                                                              Q.E.D.

Proof of Proposition 6: The result follows because nondecreasing functions of affiliated random
variables are affiliated. In the sealed bid auction equilibrium of Proposition 3,  dx) is nonde-
creasing in both arguments, and Bi(dx) is nondecreasing, so that abjBi(dx),dx) is nondecreasing
in dx. Since dx and O are affiliated, so are A14 and 6 (and similarly for a fixed bid B). Now
consider the oral auction equilibrium described in Proposition 5. Each bidder fully reveals their
signal on dropping out. Suppose Ic bidders have dropped out. Then the next observed drop-out
point B and skew Abx will be higher, the higher is the signal of each of the lowest Ic + 1 signals.
Since each of these signals is affiliated with 6, zbx will be affiliated with 6. Finally, if x = 1,
then 6 =  6  and zb =       so 6 and b are affiliated conditional on x = 1. If x = 2, then, an
increase in dx increases Ab and d. Since, conditional on x = 2, 6 and dx are affiliated, so are 6
and zXb. Thus 6 and Ab are affiliated.                                                     Q.E.D.


9 Appendix B: The Data
In this section, we briefly describe our data sources and criteria for selecting our sample. The data
can be divided into two categories: "bidding data" and "cutting data." The bidding data contains
sale appraisal information as well as the highest bids placed by each bidder at the auction. This
data is publicly available from the Forest Service immediately after the auction. The cutting data is
the ex post information about the timber actually removed from the tract. This data is also publicly
available from the Forest Service. Because the Forest Service uses different coding systems for the
different species of timber in the bidding and cutting data, the Forest Service data is somewhat
difficult to work with, and so we purchased "matched" data from one of the leading industry data
sources, Timber Data Company.


                                                37
   We selected a number of forests, focusing on larger forests that had a large fraction of sales with
two major species. The forests we obtained include Region 6, Forests 1-6, 9-12, and 15-18; Region
5, Forests 3, 5, 6, 10, 11, and 14-18. Among the sales from these forests, we consider only sales
where the matching process met certain reliability criteria. We then narrowed the sample along a
number of criteria.
    In Region 6, we ruled out sales where the average bid per Mbf. was within $1 of the reservation
price, as such sales leave little scope for skewing; similarly, we ruled out sales where the overbid per
MbL was less than 5% of the appraised difference in values, zr. We further ruled out sales with
extreme mis-estimates (greater than 27%) or gaps between aggregate volume sold and cut (greater
than 30% in magnitude on the sale, or 25% on either species), as these sales may have special
circumstances (for example, cutting may have been aborted for some reason). We then dropped
outliers along a number of dimensions, including only sales with volume estimated between 100
Mbf. and 25000 Mbf., and density less than 115 Mbf./acre. Finally, we dropped sales where road
construction was greater than 2.5% of the value of the sale. Since the government reimburses road
construction using a complicated system of credits, bids in sales with low road construction can
be interpreted more directly in terms of expected payments. For Region 5, we used essentially the
same criteria, with one notable exception: we allowed sales with road construction valued at up to
100% of the appraised value of the tract. This allows a larger sample size, a problem for Region 5
sealed-bid auctions.
   Finally, we note a subtlety that arises in interpreting the bidding data. Forest Service regulations
require that no matter what the appraised values and costs, all per-unit bids must clear a certain
minimum value, known as the "base rate." On a small number of sales, the base rate is greater than
the reserve price. Thus, the Forest Service might accept a bid that violates the base rate rule. In
such a case, the Forest Service uses a pre-announced mechanism to lower the bid on some species
aid raise it on others. In this way, firms can sometimes achieve skews that violate the posted
reserve price constraints. Fortunately, the Forest Service data includes the information required
for us to compute the amount a bidder anticipates paying when the bid is placed. This is known
as the "statistical bid," and all of our results use the statistical bids. In any case, only a few sales
are affected by this rule.


References
 [1] Athey, Susan, 1997, "Single Crossing Properties and the Existence of Pure Strategy Equilibria
     in Games of Incomplete Information," MIT Working Paper 97—11.




                                                  38
[2] Athey, Susan, 1998, "Comparative Statics Under Uncertainty: Single Crossing Properties and
    Log-Supermodularity," MIT Working Paper 96-22R.

[3] Baldwin, Laura, 1995, "Risk Aversion in Forest Service Timber Auctions," mimeo, RAND
   Corporation.
                                          Jean-Francois Richard, 1997, "Bidder Collusion in U.S.
[4] Baldwin, Laura, Robert Marshall, and
    Forest Service Timber Sales," Journal of Political Economy 105 (4), 657—99.

[51 Bushnell, James, and Shmuel S. Oren, 1994, "Bidder Cost Revelation in Electric Power Auc-
    tions," Journal of Regulatory Economics 6 (1), February, 5—26.

 [6] Che, Yeon-Koo, 1993, "Design Competition through Multidimensional Auctions," RAND
     Journal of Economics; 24 (4), Winter, 668—80.
                                         Under Uncertainty: Estimates from Panel Data on Pacific
 [7] Cummins, Jason, 1995, "Investment
     Northwest Forest Products Firms," mimeo, Columbia University.
                                         Resale: An Application to U.S. Forest Service Timber
 [8] Haile, Philip, 1998, "Auctions with
     Auctions," mimeo, University of Wisconsin.
                                                                                          In-
 [91 Hansen, Robert G., 1986, "Sealed-Bid versus Open Auctions: The Evidence," Economic
     quiry, 24, 125—142.
                                                                                           of
[10] Harstad, Ronald M. and Michael H. Rothkopf, 1997, "An 'Alternating Recognition' Model
     English Auctions," mimeo, Rutgers University.

[11] Heckman, James, 1976, "The common structure of statistical models of truncation, sample
     selection, and limited dependent variables and a simpleestimator for such models." The Annals
     of Economic and Social Measurement 5: 475-492.

 [12] Hendricks, Kenneth and Robert Porter, 1988, "An Empirical Study of an Auction with Asym-
      metric Information," American Economic Review 78 (5): 865—83.

 [13] Milgrom, Paul and Christina Shannon, 1994, "Monotone Comparative Statics," Econometrica,
     62, 157—180.

 [14] Milgrom, Paul and Robert Weber, 1982, "A Theory of Auctions and Competitive Bidding,"
      Econometrica, 50, 1089—1122.

 [15] Osband, Kent, and Stefan Reichelstein, 1985, "Information-eliciting Compensation Schemes,"
      Journal of Public Economics 27 (1), June, 107—15.


                                                39
[161 Persico, Nicola, 1998, "Information Acquisition in Auctions," Mimeo, University of Pennsyl-
    vania.

[17] Powell, James L., James H. Stock, and Thomas M. Stoker, 1989, "Semiparametric Estimation
    of Index Coefficients," Econometrica, 57, 1403—1430.

[18] Robinson, P. M., 1988, "Root-N-Consistent Semiparametric Regression," Econometrica, 56,
    931—954.

[19] Rucker, Randal R. and Keith Leffier, Keith, 1988, "To Harvest or Not to Harvest? An Analysis
    of Cutting Behavior on Federal Timber Sales Contracts," Review of Economics and Statistics
    70 (2) May, 207-13.

[20] "Skewed Bidding Presents Costly Prrihlems for the Forest Service Timber Program," GAO
    Report RCED-83-37, February, 1983.

[21] Stoker, Thomas M., 1989, Lectures on Semiparametric Econometrics, Louvain-la-Neuve: Core
     Foundation, Universite Catholique de Louvain.

[22] Wood, David J., 1989, A Study of Multiplicative-Strategy Equilibria in Second-Price Multi-
    Component Auctions, Ph.D. Thesis, University of California, Berkeley.




                                              40
             .1




 C
 0
 C)
 (a         .05
U-




              0-
                   - .4                    -.2                                    0                         .2                .4
                                                                      Misestimate

                  Chart I: Histogram of mis-estimates, species 1 is the high-valued species.
                                     Sample of 699 Region 6 oral auctions.

0)
a)
0
              1                                OD0l0 0 000 a000co 0 00 0                                                  o
a)
a-                                                       0
OD
                                                     0
0                                                                                  0           00
4-
Ca
                                                     0Q                   0
E
4-'
                                                     0cP0 ocP             0
(a                                                                                                                    0
a)
I-                                                   00 00                        0            0
>
                                                                                       00                             0
                    (9
0                   0                       8                             0            0
C
             .5                            0© 0
0                                      0   0
                                                              0
0                                                    0                0

a)
>
0
                    c9o oc°0
                    O                                         0
                                                                  0
                                                                              0
                                                                                                                 00

                    Oo % o0 0
0
C                             00 :i9° 0          0                                                          0
0                         0      0
                                                 0                0                        0
C)                                         0 0
                                           0                                  0
LL           0-                                                       ao 0 co 0 QL                      0
                    0                                    .1                                        .2                         .3
                                                 Magnitude of Over-estimate
      Chart H: Percentage of overbid placed on the over-estimated species against the over-
                       estimate. Sample of 699 Region 6 oral auctions.

                                                                  41
         1000 -

                                                                                                                 00
                                                                                                         0
          500 -                                                                                  0
                                                                     0           0                           0
                                                    00 00
 a)                                                      0
Cl)                                     0
c'J          0-                                                                              0
                                        0
C                                                                                                0
                                                                             0
                                                                                         0
                                                                 000             0           0

          -500 -                  0
                                                    0
                             0

                        0
        -1000   —



                -1000            -500                        0                               500                      1000
                                                        Rank 1 Skew
      Chart lilA: Plot of Rank 2 Skew Against Rank 1 Skew (onto over-estimated species);
                    Sample of Region 6 oral auctions with 3 or more bidders
         1000 -

                                                                                                                 0

          500-                                                                               0
                        0
                                                                     00
                                                             0
a)

Cl,
                                                    00                                               0       0
             0-                         000
                                        0
                                                                                         0   0           0
                                                                                                                 0
C                                                                        0           0
                                                                                 oo0
                                                B            8
                                            0            0                           0               0
                                  0
          -500 -
                             0

                                                                 0

        -1000 -
                -1000            -500                        0                               500                      1000
                                                        Rank 1 Skew

      Chart [HB: Plot of Rank 3 Skew Against Rank 1 Skew (onto over-estimated species);
                    Sample of Region 6 oral auctions with 3 or more bidders

                                                        42
      0.000   0.002   0.004   0.0Q   0.00   0.010
(-    C                                             0.012                         40   00   120
                                                                          0                       2"O
      C
                                                                         =
      P.—,
I,.   C                                                                  NJ
                                                                         C

                                                                  •      C
                                                            C,n




                                                            nfl
                                                            :            ,.-,-.
                                                            U')   -4
                                                                  - =
                                                            C,
                                                            '-C

                                                                     C-.
                                                                  '-"C

                                                                  (—I


                                                                  I'-,


3     L0
      C
                                                                         IC)
                                                                         C
      Table I: Summary Statistics for Oral and Sealed Auctions with Two Primary Species

                                                        Region 6 Oral                  Region 5 Sealed
N                                                                699                             63
                                                      Mean             Std. 0ev.      Mean            Std. Dev.
Bidding and Volume Variables
sl bid rate = bl                                         166.06              138.99      118.38           108.88
s2 bid rate = b2                                         135.34              116.42      106.00           111.42
Si reserve rate = rl                                      76.43               73.65       53.40            56.37
s2 reserve rate = r2                                      76.54               73.65       35.86            35.83
si market value                                          439.90               98.16      344.18           108.27
s2 market value                                          438.42               88.87      309.30            97.22
Volume est. (mmbf)                                         3.25                3.71        1.70             3.37
Volume cut (mmbf)                                          3.02              3.35          1.85             3.80
Average reserve price (per mbf)                           74.95             55.69         43.70            33.23
Estimated % of Volume on high-valued species              0.520             0.125         0.543            0.126
Actual % of Volume on high-valued species                 0.517             0.138         0.529            0.156
Tot. Bid (B)                                          467380.10         620525.50     247820.40        682193.00
Tot. Paid (P)                                         426688.40         566565.30     259778.20        741056.60
(Tot. Bid)/(Volume Est.) = BIQest                        142.98             83.44        104.85            56.73
(Tot. Paid)/(Volume Cut) = P/Qcut                        139.07             81.23            99.91         52.53
Skewing Variables
% of (Tot. Bid - Res. Price) on over-est. species          0.57               0.40            0.49           0.30
Skewontoover-estspecies: Lib-4r                           30.79             150.88           -5.35         139.15
Revenue Shortfall from Skew                            10581.69           57819.42      9780.05          28956.45
Revenue Shortfall from Undercut                        30109.96          110740.90    -21737.85          88802.78
Misestimate Variables
(Volume Cut—Volume Est)/(Volume Est.)                    -0.066               0.157          0.036           0.125
Misest. on si=high-valued sp: Est. % Si - Act. % si       0.003               0.076          0.015           0.072
Absolute magnitude of mis-estimate                        0.057               0.051          0.049           0.054
Bidder Participation Variables
# of bidders                                                 6.06              3.12           5.32            2.60
SBA dummy                                                    0.21              0.41           0.17            0.38
Sale Characteristics
Contract LengthNolume                                         0.01             0.02        0.02              0.02
DensityofTimber(nibf/acre)                                   27.98            24.31       12.32             14.74
Vo'ume per-acre material per mmbf                            80.87          168.29         0.00              0.00
Logging costs est. (thousands of $)                     401.05              566.08       159.34            213.17
Road construction (thousands of $)                           0.61             3.02        11.21             31.12




                                                       44
                    Table II: Probability of Skewing in the Right Direction

           Dependent Variable : Dummy = 1 if Skew*Misestimate =( b-ir)ô1 >0
                                                           (1)                                        (2)
                                                                              Probits
                                             coefficient         Robust s.e.            coefficient         Robust s.e.
Misestimate Variables
   = misestimate                               3.1378             (1.0884)                6.7987             (2.6894)
&1A2   (misestimate squared)                                                             -19.5529           (13.0112)
Volumeand Reserve Price Controls
Volume est. (mmbf)                             -0.01 69           (0.0448)               -0.01831           (0.04525)
Volume squared                                0.00387             (0.00276)              0.00386            (0.00279)
Average reserve price per mbf                 -0.00039            (0.00124)              -0.00041           (0.00125)
Bidder Participation
# bidders                                      0.0286             (0.0194)                0.0313             (0.0196)
SBA sale (dummy)                              -0.1189             (0.1302)                -0.1213            (0.1304)
Other Sale Characteristics
Contract LengthNolume                          4.7634             (3.5466)                4.8589             (3.5802)
Density of Timber                             0.00339            (0.00295)               0.00352            (0.00295)
Volume per-acre material                      -0.00041           (0.00034)               -0.00041           (0.00034)
Logging costs est. per mmbf                   -0.00014           (0.00021)               -0.00014           (0.00021)
constant                                       0.1064             (0.3856)                0.0110             (0.3960)
                                                        N=699                                      N=699
                                              Chi-sq(30)           44.37                 Chi-sq(31)            46.5

                                             Prob>Chi-sq           0.0441               Prob>Ch-sq            0.0364
                                            Psuedo R-sq            0.0496               Psuedo R-sq           0.0519


Notes: Species, Forest, and Year dummies included in each specification.
Sample includes Region 6 oral auctions. Species ordered so that sp. 1 is over-estimated.




                                                                                            45
                                       Table Ill: Skewing in Response to Misestimates
                Dependent Variable : Skew = Lb-tXr = (Si bid rate - s2 bid rate) -(si reserve - s2 reserve)
                                                            (1)                                       (2)                                (3)
                                                           OLS                                        OLS                             OLS
                                             coefficient     robust s.e.                coefficient         robust s.e.     coefficient   robust s.e.
Total Bid/Volume Est.
Total BidNolumeEst. = B/Qest                                                                                                   0.793             (0.277)
Misestimate Variables
   = misestimate                                                                          383.751           (140.117)         319.617           (121 .855)
Volume and Reserve Price Controls
Volume est. (mmbf)                             -2.206             (4.37)                  -1.257             (4.526)           -1.512            (4.401)
Volume squared                                 0.461              (0.302)                  0.423             (0.308)           0.438             (0.297)
Average reserve price per mbf                  0.081              (0.174)                  0.105             (0.174)           -0.753            (0.299)
Bidder Participation
#bidders                                       4.115              (2.48)                   4.061             (2.444)           -0.794            (2.610)
SBA sale (dummy)                              -12.677         (15.316)                    -14.568           (15.284)          -15.317           (15.474)
Other Sale Characteristics
Contract LengthNolume                         79.607          (469.51 0)                  52.235            (479.194)         34.857            (494.604)
Density of Timber                              0.511              (0.381)                  0.534             (0.381)           0.309             (0.374)
Volume per-acre material                       -0.029             (0.033)                 -0.031             (0.033)           -0.026            (0.032)
Logging costs est. per mmbf                    -0.030             (0.021)                 -0.030             (0.022)           -0.029            (0.023)
constant                                       42.4               (54.4)                   27.9               (55.3)           -16.18            (58.72)
                                                        N=699                                       N699                                N=699
                                          F( 29, 669)              1.41              F( 30, 668)              1.51        F( 30, 668)             1.95
                                          Prob> F                 0.0759             Prob> F                 0.0416       Prob>   F              0.0017

                                          R-squared               0.0604             R-squared               0.0754       R-squared              0.116


Notes: Species, Forest, and Year dummies included in each specification.
Sample includes Region 6 oral auctions. Species ordered so that sp.       I   is over-estimated.




                                                                                         46
            Table IV: Skewing and Skewing Outcomes, All Ranks
                                     (1)                              (2)                       (3)
                                                      Fixed Effect Regressions

Dependent Variable:         Dummy=1     if Skew                     b-Lr                      ILb-rl
                           in Right Direction                       Skew              Magnitude of skew
                         coefficient     s.e.         coefficient           s.e.    coefficient    s.e.
Rank Dummies
rank2                     2.04E-10         (0.0296)      4.8150        (12.8003)     -2.0061          (9.6092)
rank3                      -0.0365         (0.0299)     -24.6335       (12.8003)    -19.6113          (9.6092)
rank4                      -0.0776         (0.0299)     -34.3153       (12.8003)    -46.3047          (9.6092)
constant                    0.5799      (0.0211)        41.2283         (9.0512)     87.8910         (6.7947)
sale                                   =
                             F(218,654) 7.139             F(71   213) =  5.320         F(71   213) =  6.471
                             N=876         n=219              N=288         n=72        N=288         n=72

                          corr(u key, Xb) = 0.0000    corr(u_testn, Xb) = .0.0000   corr(u_testn, Xb) = -0.0000

                              F(3, 654) = 3.07                F(3, 213) = 4.37          F(3, 213) = 9.96
                              Prob>F = 0.0274                Prob> F = 0.0052            Prob>F = 0.0000
Notes: Sample includes Region 6 oral auctions. Species ordered so that sp. 1 is over-estimated.
Specification (1) includes all auctions with at least four bidders.




                                                                       47
                                       Table V: Reduced-Form Revenue Effects of Misestimates
                                                                        (1)                               (2)                            (3)
 DependentVariable                                         Total Bid/Volume Est                 Total BidNolumeEst          Total Paid/Volume Cut
                                                         - Total PaldNolume Cut
                                                                                                                                  OLS Regressions
                                                          coefficient     Robust s.e.       coefficient Robust se.          coefficient Robust s.e.
Total Bid/Volume Est.
Total BidNolume Est. = BIQest
Misestimate Variables
&ldummy(&<0) mis-est. on Tow-valued species                 110.26            (34.01)            171.10         (59.40)        60.84            (43.29)
1*dummy(Ar>=0) = mis-est. on high-valued species             81.63            (23.81)             1.19          (46.92)       -80.44            (43.63)
Volume and Reserve Price Controls
Ave. reserve price using actual volumes                     -0.616            (0.200)            -0.455         (0.278)        0.161            (0.230)
Ave. reserve price using estimated volumes                   0.633            (0.200)            1.537          (0.284)        0.904            (0.242)
Volume est. (mmbf)                                          -0.012            (0.431)            2.419          (1.266)        2.430            (1.245)
Volume squared                                               0.017            (0.027)            -0.108         (0.090)       -0.125            (0.088)
Bidder Participation
SBA sale (dummy)                                             -0.50             (1.31)            2.90                          3.40
                                                                                                                 (4.52)                         (4.78)
Other Sale Characteristics
ContractLengthNolume                                         -19.7             (50.1)             -8.4          (109.5)        11.3             (125.0)
Density of Timber                                            0.074            (0.029)            0.528          (0.105)       0.454             (0.101)
Volume per-acre material                                    -0.002            (0.003)           -0.010          (0.011)       -0.008            (0.010)
Logging costs est. per mmbf                                -0.0022            (0.0020)          -0.0036         (0.0053)      -0.0014          (0.0059)
constant                                                     -2.26             (4.39)            72.22                        74.48             (13.75)
                                                                                                                (14.23)
                                                                     N=699                             N=699                            N=699
                                                        F(31, 667) = 2.78                  F(   31, 667) = 51.92           F( 31, 667) = 56.35
                                                        Prob> F   = 0.0000                 Prob> F         0.0000          Prob> F      = 0.0000
                                                        R-squared         0.3008           R-squared      = 0.7552         R-squared     = 0.7580


Notes: Species, Forest, and Year dummies included in each specification.

Sample includes Region 6 oral auctions. Species ordered so that sp. 1 is over-estimated.



                                                                                   48
            Table VI: Skewing in Response to Misestimates in Region 5 Sealed Bid Auctions


                                                           (1)                             (2)                               (3)                              (4)                               (5)
Dependent Variable                             Skew In Right Dir.                         Skew                      Skew in Right Dir.                    Skew                     Magnitude of skew =
                                                Dummy=1 If Skew                           Ab-Ar                     Dummy=1 if Skew                       Ab-/sr                          lAb-MI
                                                in Right Direction                                                  in Right Direction                                               Magnitude of skew
                                                      Probit                               OLS                                                 Fixed Effect Regressions
                                             coefficient     s.e.             coefficient            s.e.         coefficient        s.e.      coefficient             s.e.        coefficient          s.e.
Rank Variables
Rank 2 dummy                                                                                                        0.107          (0.074)       5.181                (8.005)       -11.779           (4.977)
Rank3 dummy                                                                                                         0.054          (0.074)       -1.468               (8.005)       -17.246           (4.977)
Misestimate Variables
SI = misestimate                                5.241            (2.899)        380.929          (240.164)
Volume and Reserve Price Controls
Volume est. (mmbf)                              -0.213           (0.113)        -37.503            (13.025)
Averagereserve price per mbf                    0.008            (0.007)         0.103             (0.491)
BidderParticipation
# bidders                                       0.067            (0067)          -L890             (4.165)
SBA sale (dummy)                                -0.389           (0.483)        -1a498             (31 .265)
OtherSale Characteristics
Contract Length/Volume                         -17.706           (11.495)       -971.996         (786.576)
Density of Timber                               -0.004           (0.016)         2.554             (2.456)
Road costs est. per rnmbf                       -0.015           (0.023)         -2.191            (2.437)
constant                                        2.49              (2.79)        419.68             (262.44)          0.64           (0.05)        -0.09                (5.66)        30.58             (3.52)
                                                         N =63                            N = 63                     Ff55.110) = 2.138             F(38,76) = 2.154                    F(38,76) = 5.689
                                                                  18.63                               1.4              N=168       n=56             N=117            n=39               N=117         n=39
                                              Chi-sq(13)                     F(13, 49)
                                             Prob>Chl-sq          0.1350     Prob> F                0.1958         corr(u_key, Xb) = -0.0000    corr(u...key, Xb) = -0.0000         corr(u_key, Xb) = -0.0000
                                             Psuedo A-sq          0.1564     P-squared              0.4512             Ff2, 110) = 1.04             F) 2,76)        = 0.38               F(2, 76) = 6.27
                                                                                                                       Prob,-F = 0.3572            Prob > F = 0.6846                    Prob>F = 0.0030




Notes: Species, Forest, and Year dummies included in each specification. Sample includes Region 5 sealed bid auctions. Species ordered so that sp.        1   is over-estimated.

Specification (3) includes only sales with at least three bidders.
Specifications (4)-(5) include only sates with at least three bidders and all three bids uncensored.




                                                                                                             49
                                         Table VII: Bidding in Response                 to Misestimates and Binding Reserve Prices

                                            (1)                         (2)                     (3)                      (4)                        (5)                       (6)
Dependent Variable               Probability Reserve    ln(Magn. Of Skew)                ln(Magn. Of Skew)        ln(Magn. Of Skew)          ln(Overbid)                ln(Overbid)
                                 Prices Do Not Bind          ln(lAb-ArI)                      ln(lzth-iri)              ln(l.b-rI)           ln((B-R)/Qest)           ln((B-R)IQest)
                                     Full Sample          Res. doesn't bind               Res. doesn't bind           Full Sample           Res. doesn't bind           Res. Binds
                                         Probit       Heckman Selection Model                    OLS                Censored Normal                  Heckman Selection Model
                                   coeff. Robust s.e.     coeff.       s.e.               coeff.   Robust s.e.     coeff. Robust s.e.      coeff.       s.e.        coeff.       s.e.
Misestimate Variables (ordered by direction         of Skew)
ln(1+.3)                    -0.061                (0.192)      0.464          (0.251)     0.413       (0.250)      0.573      (0.263)      0.220          (0.152)     0.666         (0.168)
Volume and Reserve Price Controls
ln(Volume est. (mmbf))             0.435          (0.254)      -0.353         (0.376)    -0.200       (0.436)      -0.539     (0.404)      0.173          (0.233)     0.703         (0.218)
ln(Ave. reserve price per mbf)     -0.109         (0.076)       0.413         (0.114)     0.368       (0.144)      0.396      (0.131)     -0.014          (0.071)    -0.091         (0.066)
Bidder Participation
SBA sale (dummy)                   -0.261         (0.133)      0.274          (0.180)     0.161       (0.182)      0.417      (0.185)      0.075          (0.113)    -0.157         (0.121)
Other Sale Characteristics
ln(Contract LengthNolume)          0.166          (4.366)      -3.651         (5.009)    -2.734       (4.204)      -2.803     (5.227)      2.211          (3.002)     5.766         (3.933)
ln(Density of Timber)              0.211          (0.047)      -0.035         (0.066)     0.066       (0.075)      -0.137     (0.074)      0.107          (0.048)     0.271         (0.042)
ln(Volume per-acre material)       0.084          (0.027)      -0.055         (0.040)    -0.014       (0.046)      -0.086     (0.045)     0.015           (0.027)     0.099         (0.024)
ln(Log. costs est. per mmbf)       -0.616         (0.248)      0.588          (0.366)     0.36 1      (0.435)      0.849      (0.413)     -0.105          (0.232)    -0.724         (0.218)
Binding Reserve Prices
ln(% of est. volume on sp. 1)      -1.061         (0.216)
Distributional Parameters
Rho (correlation across eqn's)                                 -0.587                                                                      0.167                     -0.990
Sigma (std. dev. of bid or skew eqn)                            1.440                                                                      0.838                      0.937
Lambda (Rho*Sigma)                                             -0.845         (0.028)                                                      0.140          (0.218)    -0.928         (0.034)
Std. Dev (cens. Normal model)                                                                                      1.718       (0.093)
constant                           2.4        (1.4)             0.7      (2.1)             1.1       (2.4)           0.4        (?r3)       4.9            (1.3)      10.1       (1.2)
                                        N =694                     N =694                     N = 408                    N = 694                  N = 694                 N = 694
                                 Chi-sq(17)   134.9         Chi-sq(34) 162.13           F( 16,391) 4.79          Chisq( 16) 118.38       Chisq(34)        151.35    Chisq(34) -101.35
                                 Pr> Chisq 0.0000           Pr> Chisq 0.0000            Prob> F     0.0000       Pr> Chisq 0.0000        Pr> Chisq        0.0000    Pr> Chisq 0.0000
                                  Ps. R-sq   0.1434                                     R-sq        0.1357

Notes: Species, Forest, and Year dummies included in each specification. Sample includes Region 6 oral auctions where skew is strictly positive.
Species ordered so that the winners skew is positive.
Columns (2) and (5) are estimated using the full sample to determine the probability that the reserve price binds, but the skewing and bidding equations
are estimated on the subsample where the reserve prices do not bind. Column (6) estimates the bidding equation when the reserve prices do bind.
Column (3) includes only sales where reserve prices do not bind.




                                                                                                       50
