The Employment, Earnings, and Income of Less Skilled Workers
Over the Business Cycle

Hilary Hoynes
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3 880
hilary(djecon. berkeley. edit

April, 1999

Prepared for the Conference on "Labor Markets and Less Skilled Workers," November 5-6, 1998, in
Washington DC, sponsored by the Joint Center for Poverty Research. Warren Hrung and Darren
Lubotsky provided excellent research assistance. I would like to thank Joe Altonji, Tim Bartik, Becky
Blank, and Robert Moffitt for comments and David Card for many helpful discussions. Financial support
comes from the NICHD and the Sloan Foundation. Computing support was provided by the
Econometrics Laboratory at U.C. Berkeley.

Abstract
In this paper, I examine the effect of business cycles on the employment, earnings, and income of persons
in different demographic groups. I classify individuals by sex, education, and race. The analysis uses
data from the Current Population Survey's Outgoing Rotation Group file, covering the period 1979-1992,
and March Aimual Demographic files (ADF) covering the period 1975-1997. Many different individual
and family outcome measures are considered including: employment to population ratios, weekly
earnings, hourly earnings, aimual hours, aimual earnings, family earnings, family transfer income, and
total family income. The regression model is specified such that the key parameters measure how the
labor market outcomes of less skilled workers vary with the business cycle relative to the variability for
high skill groups. The analysis uses variation across MSAs in the timing and severity of shocks. The
results consistently show that individuals with lower education levels, nonwhites, and low skill women
experience greater cyclical fluctuation than high skill men. These results are the most striking when
examining comprehensive measures of labor force activity such as the likelihood of full-time year around
work. Government transfers and the earnings of other family members decrease the differences between
groups, as business cycles have more skill-group neutral effects on family income than individual
earnings. The paper examines the stability of these results by comparing evidence across the 1982 and
1992 recessions. The evidence suggests that the 1992 recession led to more uniform effects across skill
groups than earlier cycles.

1. Introduction
One of the most substantial risks facing workers is the potential for job loss, either permanent or

temporary. The possibility of a loss in earnings and employment is likely to be of greater concern to less
skilled workers because of difficulties in replacing lost income with savings and the earnings of

secondary earners. Many government transfer programs have been established to reduce the variability
of family income over the business cycle. Because of recent changes in welfare programs, however,
there is some uncertainty as to the role that the safety net can and will play in subsequent recessions.
Recent evidence suggests that state and federal policy changes are leading to increases in

employment among AFDC recipients (Blank, Card and Robins, this volume). With increases in labor
market attachment comes the potential for increases in family income and earnings. However, with
increasing labor market attachment, also comes the risk of recession and loss of family income. The
potential for cyclical fluctuation in earnings is very different than the relatively constant transfer that a
family expected from AFDC.

This paper examines the impact of changes in local economic conditions on the employment,

earnings and income of individuals in different skill groups. The skill groups are defined by sex, race,

and education level. The emphasis in the paper is evaluating the relative impact of cycles across these
demographic groups. This is done in three parts. First, I present trends in labor market outcomes by skill
group. This simple analysis provides suggestive evidence that the employment and earnings patterns of
less skilled groups show greater fluctuation in economic cycles than higher skill groups. Second, I
examine how changes in labor market outcomes vary across skill groups within metropolitan statistical

areas (MSAs). In particular, I present figures which compare the changes in a particular labor market
outcome over a particular time period (e.g. from peak to trough of a recession) for one skill group against

another within an MSA. Last, I extend the graphical analysis to a regression framework thereby
estimating quantitatively the impact of a shock to an MSA on the relative outcomes across skill groups.

1

The analysis uses data from the Current Population Survey's (CPS) Outgoing Rotation Group
(ORG) data, covering the period 1979-1992, and March Aimual Demographic files (ADF) covering the

period 1975-1997. The advantage of the ORG data is that the samples are about three times as large as
the ADF, which is particularly important when presenting results by skill groups within MSAs. The
labor market outcomes that can be identified in the ORG data, however, are somewhat limited and

include employment status last week and earnings last week. Ultimately, broader measures of individual
and family well-being are important. The ADF provides comprehensive data on employment, earnings,

and income over the past year. The analysis of the ADF data uses hourly earnings, aimual hours, aimual
earnings, family earnings, family transfer income, and total family income. By combining evidence from
the two data sources, the results tell a comprehensive story about the impact of business cycles on

workers and families. The data also cover a relatively long time period, allowing for examination of the
recessions over three decades.
The results consistently show that the labor market outcomes of less skilled workers exhibit more

variability over business cycles than higher skill groups. Nonwhites, and those with lower education
levels are more impacted by changes in local economic conditions. Further, high skilled women have
significantly less sensitivity to business cycles than low skilled, especially low skilled nonwhite, women.

These patterns hold for both recessions and recoveries. These groups are more likely to have reductions
in employment and earnings during a downturn, and also more likely to have gains in recoveries.
Examining individuals in isolation, however, gives an incomplete picture of the effect of cycles on well-

being. The results also show that government transfers and the earnings of other family members
decrease the differences between groups resulting in more skill-group neutral effects of business cycles
on family income than individual earnings.
Many previous studies have examined the effects of business cycles and local labor markets on

individuals and families. This paper contributes to the literature in three ways. First, the focus in this

2

paper is on comparing the responses across groups defined by sex, education and race. This provides a
comprehensive distributional analysis that has not been done in the existing literature. Second, the paper
presents an empirical framework and applies it to an extensive set of individual and family outcomes.

Previous studies typically focus on a relatively narrow set of outcomes. Third, the framework is used to
examine whether the effects vary different business cycles.
The study is inherently a descriptive one, and does not make any attempt to causally identify why

there is variation across skill groups in the relative responsiveness to cycles. Among the reasons that
groups may have different responses to cycles are that they have different mobility rates, labor supply

elasticities, and they work in different industries and occupations. There are two ways that I explore
why the differences occur. First, we can examine the "channels" by which the differences occur by
looking at wages, hours, and earnings separately and by examining the components of family income.
Second, I compare the characteristics of workers in different skill groups to see if groups with higher
cyclical responses are more likely to be employed in occupations and industries with higher layoff rates.

The remainder of the paper is as follows. Section 2 provides a summary of the existing literature
on the impact of local labor markets on employment, earnings, and income. Section 3 describes the data.

Section 4 presents the trends in individual and family outcomes over time by skill group. Section 5
describes the empirical approach. Section 6 provides a preliminary graphical analysis of differences in

responsiveness to cycles across skill groups. The main regression results are presented in section 7.
Section 8 concludes.

2. Previous Literature
This study has connections to many different areas of research including the literature on wage,
earnings, and income inequality; trends in employment and earnings for women; determinants of labor

market outcomes and differences between groups; and worker displacement. It is not feasible, nor

3

desirable to provide a comprehensive review of the literature here. Instead, this review will focus
explicitly on those studies that examine the effect of local labor market conditions (or other measures of
business cycles) on employment and income.
The applications that are the most relevant to this analysis include those that examine the effect
of business cycles and local labor markets on employment outcomes (Bartik 1991, 1993a, 1993b, and
1996, Blanchard

Solon et

and Katz 1992, Holzer 1991), real wages (Bils 1985,

al 1994), racial

Blank 1990, Keane et al 1988,

differences in labor market outcomes (Bound and Holzer 1993 and 1995), labor

market outcomes of disadvantaged youths (Acs and Wissoker 1991, Bound and Freeman 1992, Cain and
Finnie 1990, Freeman 1982, 1991a, 1991b), and family income, poverty and income inequality (Bartik
1994, Blank 1989, Blank 1993, Blank

and Blinder 1986, Blank and Card 1993, Cutler and Katz 1991).

These studies almost universally find an important role for local

For the
variables

labor market conditions.

purposes of this analysis, I will focus three features of these studies. The first is the

used to control for the characteristics of the area labor market. The second is the outcome

measures. The third is the degree to which differences across groups is explored.
The studies of disadvantaged youths relate labor market outcomes to local (typically

Metropolitan Statistical Area or MSA) unemployment rates. That literature has consistently found that
higher local unemployment rates lead to reductions in employment and earnings (Acs and Wissoker
1991, Bound and Freeman 1992, Cain and Finnie 1990, Freeman 1982, 1991a, 1991b), with larger effects
for blacks, younger workers, and less educated workers (Acs and Wissoker 1991, and Freeman 199 ib).
The studies of family income and poverty have typically used either national (Blank 1989, Blank
1993, and Blinder 1986, Cutler and Katz 1991) or regional (Blank and Card 1993) variation in

unemployment rates or GNP. The studies have found a consistent negative relationship between
unemployment rates and inequality and poverty. Of particular interest is Blank (1989) who disaggregates
household income into many components and examines the relative cyclicality of the components. She

4

finds earnings and capital income to be pro-cyclical and some transfer income to be counter-cyclical.
Overall, she finds greater variation over the cycle for those that are young, male, and nonwhite.
The literature that is most relevant for this study is the literature that uses variation across MSAs
in labor market conditions to examine labor market outcomes across different demographic groups

(Bartik 1991, 1993a, 1993b, 1994 and 1996, and Bound and Holzer 1993 and 1995). The studies by
Bartik use growth in employment, changes in the manufacturing share of employment, and changes in the

average wage premium implied by the area's industry mix. Bound and Holzer (1993, 1995) use skill
group specific measures of employment growth, using as weights the skill group's participation in each

industry at the begiiming of the period. The results differ somewhat across the studies, but they generally
show that changes in labor demand lead to larger changes for blacks, younger persons, and those with

lower education levels. The patterns seem to hold for men and women
Distinct from the literature on labor market outcomes, above, is the literature that uses panel data

to examine the cyclicality of real wages. The literature uses primarily aggregate measures of business
cycles (national unemployment rates of GNP growth) and asks the question to what degree are aggregate

wage fluctuations over the cycle due to changes in the composition of the work force. The results vary
somewhat across the studies but generally find that the composition effect alone leads to counter cyclical

wage patterns. Accounting for this composition effect, wages are found to be pro-cyclical with greater
fluctuations for those who are male, young, and working in private sector.
Overall, these studies raise several possible explanations for the differences across groups in the

sensitivity to business cycles. An often cited explanation is variation across demographic groups in
mobility rates. The larger the long run supply elasticity for the demographic group, the lower the

expected effect of a demand shift on wages and employment. Those with slower rates of population

mobility will have larger effects. A second explanation is that different demographic groups tend to be
employed in difference sectors and occupations that may be associated with greater or lesser risks of

5

layoff.

3. Data
The study uses the Outgoing Rotation Group (ORG) and March Aimual Demographic File

(ADF) data from the Current Population Survey (CPS). The CPS Outgoing Rotation Group (ORG) data,
which pools monthly survey observations, has sample sizes about three times as large as the ADF, but the

labor market outcomes included in the survey are limited. I use indicators for employment last week,
full-time employment last week, and earnings last week, where full-time includes those working at least
35 hours per week. The data covers 1979-1993 with about 325,000 observations per year.1
The ADF (or March CPS) is an aimual demographic file that includes labor market and income

information for the previous year, at the individual and family level. Many different individual and
family outcome measures are considered including work at all, work full-time full-year, number of weeks
worked, average hourly earnings, aimual hours, annual earnings, family earnings (head and spouse),

family transfer income, and total family income. All measures are aimual and correspond to the calendar
year previous to the survey. Full-time is defined as those working at least 35 hours per week last year,
and full-year is defined as those working 50 or more weeks last year. The ADF data is available
begiiming with the 1964 survey year. Because of major changes in the survey begiiming in 1976, this

study uses the 1976-1998 surveys covering years 19751997.2 The sample size is approximately
150,000 persons per year.

The earnings data is topcoded in both surveys. In the ORG data, weekly earnings are topcoded at

'The data is available through 1995. However 1994 and 1995 data were dropped because the variables
identifjing MSAs appear to be incorrect
2Prior to the 1976 survey year, weeks worked last year was a categorical variable and usual hours worked
per week last year was not available. Hours worked last week was available, but is a noisy measure of hours worked
last year.

6

$999 through 1988, and $1923 from 1989 on. In the ADF data, aimual earnings are topcoded at $50,000

through 1981, $75,000 from 1982-1984, $100,000 from 1985-1988, and about $200,000 from 1989 on.
Following Katz
are

and Murphy (1992) and more recently Blau (1998), the earnings of topcoded individuals

adjusted to be 1.45 times the topcoded value. Begiiming in 1996, instead of giving each topcoded

observation the value of the topcode, the CPS assigns the mean among the sample of topcodes (by

demographic group). The earnings figures can be as high as $600,000 in this period. I make no
adjustment for topcoding in these years. There is no apparent topcoding of family earnings or family
income. Real earnings and income are constructed using the CPT-U-X1 deflator.
For most of the analysis, the micro-data is collapsed into cells defined by MSA, year, and skill

group. Skill groups are defined by education (<12, 12, 13-15, 16+ or

12,

>12) , race (white, nonwhite),

and sex. The nonwhite group includes both blacks and white Hispanics. The ORG data identifies 44
MSAs, while the ADF data (begiiming a few years earlier) identifies 35 MSAs. In order to better
approximate labor market areas, the MSAs are combined in their consolidated MSA (CMSA) units where

applicable. Examples of CMSAs include New York, Los Angeles, and Chicago. The final sample
includes 35 MSA!CMSAs in the ORG data and 27 MSA!CMSAs in the ADF.3 For the remainder of the
paper, these geographic unites will referred to as MSAs. Based on 1990 population figures, my MSA
sample accounts for about 60 percent of the total metropolitan population or 50 percent of the total

population. The sample accounts for virtually all of the metropolitan population in 1975. The median
MSA in the ORG data contains about 200 observations per year, compared to about 75 observations per

year in the ADF. Once the cells are further refined to skill groups, some cells get very small. When
possible, data are combined into two year periods to reduce the problem of small skill group-MSA-year

3Considerable effort was made to insure that the MSAs were comparable units over time. For example, It is
relatively common for an MSA to split into two. The split off MSAs were combined making the series comparable
over time. However, some MSAs grow over time as additional areas are added to an existing MSA. These changes
can not be addressed. Fortunately, changes in MSA definitions occur only once per decade, following the decennial
census. These "seam years" were dropped from the analysis in sensitivity tests.

7

cells. All analyses in the paper are weighted using the person weight.
The same sample selection criteria is applied to both the ORG and ADF data. The sample
includes persons between 22 and 62 years old. I exclude the self-employed, those working without pay,

and those with positive earned income but zero hours of work. Following Katz and Murphy (1992),
individuals with real weekly earnings of less than $67 in 1982 dollars (i.e. one half of the value of the

minimum wage assuming a 40 hour work week) were excluded. The final sample has about 220,000
person observations per year in the ORG sample and 70,000 observations per year in the ADF sample.
The unit of analysis in the ORG data is the individual.

4. Trends in Labor Market Outcomes Among Skill Groups
As a starting point, this section presents simple time series trends in labor market outcomes by

education, race and sex. In the interest of space, the discussion uses only the ADF data. The analysis
introduces some of the labor market outcomes that will be used in the empirical analysis. This analysis is
a starting point for characterizing the trends in the outcomes variables and how they vary across different
groups. Using these simple figures to make comparisons across groups in their responsiveness to cycles,
however, may not be possible because of the difficulties in separating secular trends from cycles.
Therefore, these results should be viewed as only first step.

4.1 Definitions
Skill groups are defined by education, race and sex. Low skill workers are typically defined
using education level and most often include persons with less than a high school education. This
analysis uses data covering a period of three decades and is concerned with making comparisons across

groups over time and cycles. It is important for the analysis that the skill groups are defined to be
comparable over time. However, education levels have been rising over time for all demographic groups,

and this shows up most dramatically at the lowest levels of educational attainment. In the presence of

8

rising education levels, even if the distribution of earnings and income are unchanged over time, then one
would expect that the relative position of low educated persons (e.g. high school dropouts) would decline
over time. That is, over time, this group would become more and more disadvantaged.
Figure 1 presents trends in the percent of persons with various education levels in the ADF

sample, by race and sex. This figure shows that the percent of persons with less than a high school
education has fallen dramatically in this period. Between 1975 and 1997, the percent of white men with
less than a high school education declined from 25 percent to less than 10 percent. For nonwhite men,
the percent with less than a high school education declined from 50 to 30 percent. At the same time,
among whites, the percent with a high school diploma has held steady while those with greater than a

high school diploma has increased. Among nonwhites, both high school and more than high school
groups are increasing.4

In the presence of these dramatic increases in education levels over this period, the main analyses
in this paper will compare those with a high school education or less to those with more than a high

school education. Those with a high school education or less are defined to be less skilled workers.
This group will be less disadvantaged group than high school dropouts, however, and where possible I

examine outcomes across all four education groups (<12, 12, 13-15, 16+).
4.2 Trends in Employment, Earnings and Income using ADF
Figures 2a presents trends in employment to population ratios for men for 1975-1997 by race and
education. There are two definitions for the employment to population ratios. The Any- Work EPOP is
the employment to population ratio where a person is considered employed if they worked at all last year.

4Beginning in the 1992 survey, the CPS records the degree earned rather than the years of schooling
completed. As is evident in the figure, this decreases the percent with a high school diploma, and increases the
percent with greater than a high school diploma.
5An alternative approach is to define skill groups by their relative position in the earnings or wage
distribution (i.e. less than the 20th percentile). Because this analysis is not limited to workers, skill groups would
have to be assigned using predicted wages. This may be examined in future work.

9

The FTFYEPOP is the employment to population ratio where a person is considered employed if they

worked full-time (at least 35 hours) and full-year (at least 50 weeks) last year. In each page, the left two
graphs are for whites and the right two graphs are for nonwhites. The top figures present the Any-work
EPOP and the bottom row of figures presents the FTYR EPOP.

As expected, EPOP ratios are higher for those with higher education levels. Less educated
nonwhites tend to have higher EPOP ratios than whites. Among men with less than a high school
education, the Any-work EPOP is declining significantly over this period. By the mid- 1990s, fully 30

percent of men are not working at all over the year. This undoubtedly is in part due to the changing
composition of the lowest education group over this time period. More relevant for this analysis are the
cyclical trends in these ratios. The figures suggest that employments rates of those with lower education
levels and nonwhites exhibit more cyclical variation. During this period, unemployment rates peaked in
1982 and 1992. There seems to be more cyclical fluctuation in the full-time employment rates (FTYR

EPOP) than the any work employment rates (Any-work EPOP). For nonwhites with less than a high
school education, the Any-work EPOP also varies significantly over the cycle. This is striking given that
the measure is any work in the entire calender year. The high rates of non-work in trough of the
recession is consistent with the persistently high unemployment rates for this group. It should be noted
that some of the variability in the measures for nonwhites reflect small sample sizes, especially for higher
education groups.

Figure 2b presents trends in aimual hours and earnings for men. The figures have the same
format as above with whites on the left and nonwhites on the right. The top row of Figure 2b shows
mean aimual hours worked and the bottom row shows mean aimual earnings. It is important to note that
these earnings and hours figures are averages over all individuals in the race-education-sex-year group,

and includes workers and nonworkers. Therefore, the change in earnings is comprehensive and may vary
due to changes in changes in hours, weeks, hourly wages, as well as changes in the composition of the

10

work force.
In general, the pattern for annual hours worked is similar to the trends for the EPOP ratios.
These figures show that, to a greater extent than in other measures, both aimual hours and real aimual

earnings show cyclical variation for college educated white men. While the average hours and earnings
of less educated individuals also show cyclical variation, the relative variability of low versus high
education groups is less dramatic than the employment figures. Tn graphs not presented here, the
variation in aimual hours worked comes more from variation in weeks worked per year than from hours

worked per week. That may be due to measurement error in hours worked per week or it may reflect that
nature of employment reductions that firms engage in.6

Figures 3a and 3b present similar figures for women. These figures show that employment and
earnings for women are increasing secularly over this period for all groups, but at a substantially slower

rate for women with low education levels and nonwhites. These trends dominate all of the figures and it
is difficult to make any inferences about the variation over the business cycle.
Although not shown here, family earnings and family income also show cyclical variation.
Family income, and to a lesser extent family earnings, shows less variability across demographic groups

compared to the fluctuations in individual earnings. Our empirical model will explore the reasons for
this difference.

5. Empirical Model
The goal of this analysis is to estimate how individuals in different demographic groups are

affected by changes in macroeconomic conditions. One approach to estimating this effect is to take the
time-series trends presented above and regress the outcomes on a measure of the business cycle such as

6Figure 2b shows that average earnings for college educated white men increased substantially starting in
1995. This is due to the change in the topcoding in the CPS. I examine the sensitivity to dropping these years in the
subsequent analyses.

11

the unemployment rate. This approach is not taken here for two reasons. First, aggregate measures of
business cycles do not necessarily capture the relevant cycle if there is area variation in the timing or
severity of the cycle. Second, the unemployment rate (or some other aggregate measure of employment)

can be mechanically related to the dependent variable (e.g. the EPOP ratio for less skilled persons). This
reflection or endogeneity problem makes the interpretation of such estimates difficult. One approach
used in the literature is to use instruments to identify the effect (Bound and Holzer 1993, 1995). As an
alternative, this analysis treats the shock to a local area as unobserved and compares the response to the

shock among different groups. This avoids the reflection problem and has the added advantage of
differencing out an MSA effect. All of the comparisons across groups are made within MSAs which
takes advantage of the wide regional variation in the timing and severity of recessions.
For this and all remaining analyses in the paper, I start with collapsing the data into cells defined
by MSA (m), time (t), and skill group (j). Let y1, be the mean of a given labor market outcome for group

j in area m in year t.

Suppose one could observe some exogenous measure of the business cycle in the

MSA in time t, represented by ymt. Putting the variables y in logs, one could characterize the log of the

mean labor market outcome for groupj in MSAm in period tby the following equation:

ln(y1) =

÷

÷

+

Yj'11(Ymt) ÷ €jmt

(1)

The labor market outcome of groupj is a function of permanent differences across groups (a0), a skill

group specific trend (a'), permanent differences across areas (IJ'm), overall time effects (ô),and a
"cycle" measure ymt Note that the coefficient on mt varies with group so the effect of MSA fluctuations

can differ across the groups. The key parameters are the y's.
If the equation is differenced (thereby purging the permanent MSA and group effects) over some
time period t then the equation becomes:

12

Alfl(Yjmt) =

÷ U ÷ YjM11(Ymt) ÷ %mt

(2)

Now, Alfl(Ym) represents the shock to a particular MSA in time t. The problem with estimating this

equation is finding an exogenous measure of the shock Am (y). The approach used here is to treat the
shock as unobserved and estimate each of the Alfl(Vm) as parameters. I therefore estimate the following

equation:

Alfl(Yjmt) = ccj

+

Yi Pint +

(3)

The Pmt are the parameters capturing the shock to MSA m in period t. The model is identified by the

assumption that the responsiveness across skill groups y is constant across MSAs.7 The main interest of
the paper is to compare the

in order to determine the relative responsiveness across groups. The model

can be extended to look for structural changes in the intercepts (skill group trends) and slopes (skill

group responsiveness to cycles) over time and, to some extent, across space. The approach is a simple
way to allow for comparisons between multiple skill groups over multiple time periods.
The analysis will use many alterative individual and family outcomes in order to fully
characterize the impact of cycles on different groups. Accordingly, model (3) is estimated for each of the

outcomes of interest. First this estimation is done one equation at a time. In this estimation, the
parameters capturing the skill group response to the shock (y) have to be normalized to fix the scale of

the estimated shock parameters (p). We choose a "reference" skill group and normalize the y for that
group to 1. The parameters for the other skill groups are interpreted as the response relative to the

7This approach is feasible due to the use of multiple skill groups. The number of observations are J*M*T
where J is the number of skill groups, M is the number of MSAs, and T is the number of time periods. There are
M*T nuisance parameters, one for each year in each MSA. In practice I have 8 skill groups which turns out to be
more than enough to estimate the parameters precisely. Note that by estimating MSA-time specific effects, the time
effect v, drops out of the equation. These parameters may not be consistent because with each additional period T,
M (number of MSA5) additional parameters must be estimated.
13

response for the reference group. In addition, the intercept for the reference group is set to 0, so the
intercepts for the other skill groups are interpreted as the average trend for groupj relative to the trend
for reference group.
This estimation does not take account of the fact that the MSA-time "shocks" (Pmt) enter each of

the labor market outcome equations. Therefore I also estimate the models by pooling the equations and
constraining the PmttO be equal across the equations. This "pooled" model has three advantages. First,

only one normalization on the y's is necessary across all the equations. We can therefore not only
examine how the sensitivity to cycles varies across groups, but how it varies across different outcome

variables. Second, there may be efficiency gains to accounting for the common parameters across the
equations. Third, conceptually it is attractive to think of a single "shock" to an area which is then filtered
down to different outcomes (e.g. hours, earnings, income) and different groups.8

While the model in (3) in logs, in practice I examine the models using both changes in logs and

changes in levels. The change in the logs is attractive because of the interpretation as percent changes in

the variable. In practice, we do not know if the correct form for the model is in levels or logs. Because
the mean levels of the outcomes vary substantially across the groups, the estimates of the ycan be
significantly biased towards finding greater responsiveness to cycles for less skilled groups if the model
is mis-specified.9 We will investigate the sensitivity to this assumption in the estimates below.

These regressions are estimated using both the ORG and ADF data. Skill groups are defined by

8Note that even though the shocks are equivalent across equations, the parameters can not be "added up"
across equations. That is because the dependent variable is the change log of the mean within a cell. Specifically,
even if y = y1 * y2, the log of the mean of y does not equal the log of mean of y1 times the log of the mean of y2.
9To see this point, assume that the true model is linear in the changes in levels. Then (dropping the MSA
subscript) equation (3) becomes A y = + g3. Ay + . Let y1 denote the mean level ofy1 andy denote the mean

'y + g3.* (y 1y1) Ay1 /y + e 'y . Using an
+
y1A1og(y) jt ,where y = g3.*(y/yf) . So if

level ofy. Then the equation can be transformed to be A y1 'y =
approximation for the log, this implies that A 1og(y3) =

a1

groupj has a low mean of the variabley, then the estimated
pointing this out and Dave Card for helping to formalize it.

14

+

a1

1 even if (the true) g1 = 1. I thank Joe Altonji for

education, race and sex. There are a total of 8 skill groups (2 sex * 2 race * 2 education). With the
exception of average hourly earnings (which is averaged over workers) all variables are constructed as
means over the entire population in these cells using the CPS sample weights. To increase cell sizes
(which is important for nonwhites), the data are grouped into two year periods.
The variables used in the analysis include: employment rates, hours worked, earnings, average

hourly wage, as well as family measures such as head's earnings, spouse's earnings, transfer income and
other family income. Each of these variables is averaged into the cells using the characteristics of the
individual (e.g. sex, education, race). Therefore, the entire analysis is based on individuals, even though
some of the measures are "family" based measures. I do this so that I can directly compare the results for
individual and family outcomes. The alternative is to create cells using observations on families, using

the head's characteristics to define the cell. This makes it difficult to coimect the individual and family
measures. 10

The two education groups are those with a high school education and less, and those with more

than a high school education. The choice of two education groups (compared to the four groups used in
the aggregate analysis) is made for two reasons. First, and most importantly, I argued above that with
increases in education levels, the group with less than a high school education is becoming more
disadvantaged over time. This showed up quite dramatically in the simple trend graphs presented above.
By choosing somewhat broader education classes, I hope to minimize the problems with making over
time comparisons with a group whose composition is changing. The down side of this approach is that

the "low" education group is not that low, and this will probably attenuate the differences between low

and high skill groups. Second, the use of four education groups leads to very thin cells, especially with

'°In an earlier version of this paper, I used the family-based analysis to analyze the family variables.
Following Karoly (1992) and others, I create adjusted family measures by dividing by the family's poverty threshold.
This adjusts for family size using the implicit equivalency scales which account for age structure and economies of
scale. Neither of these adjustments changed fundamentally the results from what is reported here.
15

nonwhites.

6. Preliminary Analysis of Differences Across Low and High Skill Groups
As a preliminary analysis, the differences across groups are explored using graphs that plot
Alfl(Yjm) for a particular low skill groupj against the Alfl(Yrm) for a "reference group" r for a given time

period t. This approach can generate simple comparisons between the sensitivity of employment,
earnings and income of less skilled groups to high skill groups. The presentation here will be limited to
the ADF file.
In particular, I look at changes between the trough and peak a given cycle. All of the figures in
this section use the 1982 recession as the cycle, measured as the change from 1979 (previous peak) to

1982 (tough). The 1982 recession is chosen because it was the most severe recession in the period

covered in the CPS data. The reference group for all figures is high education white men (those with
greater than a high school education), chosen because they appear to be the group with the least

sensitivity to cycles. This approach is best applied to groups that are not experiencing significant trends

over time. It can be difficult to extract the cycle from the trend in this simple analysis. Consequently, in
this section, I present graphs only for men. The regression results, presented in the next section, provide
estimates for all 8 skill groups11 12

All of the graphs have the same form. First consider the top left graph of figure 4. Each point
on the graph represents a pair for an MSA. On the y-axis is the change in the log of the Any-Work EPOP

"One could in principle de-trend the data for women before plotting the data. Another possibility is to
control for the trend by using high skill women as the reference group for women. Both of these approaches were
implemented but, in part to keep this section brief, the discussion of women is postponed until the regression results.
'2As mentioned above, the CPS data is combined into two year periods to increase the number of
observations in each cell. Still, some of the nonwhite skill groups have very few observations in some of the smaller
MSAs. For the graphs, a cell is only included if there are at least 20 observations per cell. On average, this drops
about 5 MSAs on the nonwhite graphs.

16

(last year) for white men with a high school education or less (the low skill group). On the x-axis is the
change in the log of the same EPOP measure for the reference or high skill group defined as white men

with more than a high school education. The figures differ only in the choice low skill group and labor
market outcome. The top right graph compares the change in Any- Work EPOP for nonwhite men with a

high school education or less to the reference group. The bottom row of graphs presents the same
analysis for the FTYR EPOP. The points on the graph are weighted to reflect the size of the MSA. The
larger the circle, the larger the MSA.

Each graph includes a 45 degree line to make the comparison between groups easier. If the
points generally lie below the 45 degree line, than the percent change in the outcome for the less skilled

group is greater (more negative) than the change in the outcome for the high skill group. If the points
are clustered on the line, then the responses are similar. A point above the 45 degree line means a larger
response among the high skill group than the low skill group.
One advantage of this approach is that it makes use of rich variation across labor markets in the

U.S. As an illustration of this, Table 1 compares the outcomes across MSAs in the 1982 and 1992
recessions. In particular, I measure the change in the log of the male employment to population ratio for
any work (Any-work EPOP) last week based on the ORG data for each MSA from 1979-1982 and 1989-

1992. For each of the two time periods, the table presents the MSAs with largest and smallest percent

changes over the period. The 1982 recession hit the industrial Midwest hardest. For example Detroit,
Pittsburgh and Cleveland had reductions on the order of 10-15 percent while San Francisco, New York

and Boston experienced reductions of only 1-3 percent. In the 1992 recession, on the other hand,
reductions on the order of 7 to 10 percent were experienced in San Diego, Boston and New York and the
effect in the industrial Midwest was relatively mild.
Returning to Figure 4, several observations can be made. Looking at the Any-work EPOP graph
shows that white men with low education levels have fluctuations in employment rates that are fairly

17

similar to white men with high education levels. Most of the observations are clustered on the 45 degree
line. The same is not true for nonwhite men. The figures on right suggest that nonwhite men are
significantly more impacted by the negative shock in this period than the reference group. Note that
almost all of the observations lie below the 45 degree line. In many cases their percent change in the
EPOP ratio is many times larger than the rate for the reference group. Using FTYR EPOP, both white
and nonwhite low skilled men appear to be more negatively impacted by the 1982 recession than white

high skilled men. Within the low skill group, nonwhites appear to be significantly more affected than
whites. The difference between the races is particularly evident with the Any-work EPOP.
Figure 5 repeats the analysis and compares the change in the log of mean aimual hours worked

(top row) and mean aimual earnings (bottom row) for low skill to high skill men. Recall that aimual
earnings is averaged over both workers and nonworkers and thus reflects changes in employment, hours

per week, and wages. This figure shows that white and (especially) nonwhite low skill men show larger
reductions in hours and earnings than white high educated men. These patterns are similar to that found
above FTYR EPOP. In figures not shown here, family income and family earnings also show greater
responsiveness among low skilled men. The differences between groups appear, however, to be smaller
than that found for aimual earnings. This is likely to reflect the ongoing increases in employment and
earnings among married women, evidence of secondary workers entering the labor market to replace the
recession-induced lost earnings of the primary earner, or the counter cyclical pattern for transfers for low

skill groups. These patterns are explored further below.

7. Regression Results
The preliminary analysis above shows that low skill men were more impacted by the 1982

recession than high skill men. Within skill groups, nonwhites are affected more adversely than whites.
These results, while illustrative, are somewhat qualitative and may be sensitive to the presence of trends

18

for skill groups. In addition, the results speak to one particular time period, and do not take full
advantage of the differences in the timing of cycles across areas. This section extends the analysis by
providing estimates of equation (3) above using the full time periods covered in the data. This approach
uses year to year changes to take full advantage of the variation in the timing of the economic changes
across areas.

The observations for the regressions are the cells defined by skill group, MSA, and time. There
are 6 time periods and 35 MSAs in the ORG data and 10 time periods and 27 MSAs in the ADF data.13

With 8 skill groups, this yields a total of 1680 observations in the ORG and 2160 observations in the

ADF. The reference group for all regressions is high education (>12 years of education) white men. All
models are estimated using weighted nonlinear least squares using the cell's weighted count of
individuals. The precision of the estimate of the dependent variable varies with the size of the cell, and

the weights will down-weight the small cells. No cells are dropped from the analysis.

7.1 Results for Weekly Measures using ORG Data
We being by presenting estimates using the ORG data and estimate each labor market outcome

equation separately, without accounting for common MSA shock across the equations. The results for
these "single equation" estimates are in Table 2. Each column in the table corresponds to estimates for a

different equation, and they differ only in the definition of the dependent variable. The table only
reports the parameter estimates for the y's (relative impact of the shock across skill groups). Because the
MSA-time shock, Pmt, is unobserved and estimated as a parameter, some normalization must be made to

fix the scale. In these initial regressions where each equation is estimated separately, we normalize the
parameter for the impact of the cycle on the reference group to 1 (Y 1=1). The parameters for the other

'3For the analyses of both data sets, the data are combined into two year periods. The ORG data cover
1979/80 - 1991/92. 1993 was dropped because there was no year to pool it with. The ADF data cover 1975/761995/96 with 1997 dropped. After differencing the data, there are 6 time periods in the ORG (198 1/82 - 199 1/92)
and 10 time periods in the ADF (1977/78 - 1995/96). By combining two years, the resulting first differences span on
average a two year change.

19

skill groups are interpreted as the response relative to the response for high skill white men. In addition,
the intercept for the reference group is set to 0, so the intercepts for the other skill groups are interpreted
as the average trend for group j relative to the trend for high skill white men.

The ORG data describes the nature of your work last week. Table 3 shows three measures. The
Any- Work EPOP is the employment to population ratio where a person is considered employed if they

worked at all last week. The FT EPOP is the employment to population ratio where a person is
considered employed if they worked full-time (at least 35 hours) last week. Lastly, mean real weekly
earnings are used. Columns (1) and (2) present estimates where the EPOP is specified as changes in logs.

Columns (3) and (4) estimate these models using changes in levels of EPOP. Column (5) presents
estimates for changes in log weekly earnings. The statistical significance of the parameters are
determined by testing whether the coefficient is significantly different than 1 (e.g. no differences across

groups). The significance tests in all of the tables refer to that null hypothesis.
The results in columns (1) and (2) show that there are sizeable and statistically significant

differences in the responses to cycles across skill groups. The results in column one show that, for a
given shock, the fluctuation in the Any-work EPOP is 1.4 times greater for low skill white men and

almost 4 times greater for low skill nonwhite men than the response for high skill white men. The results
for FTEPOP (column 2) are generally similar the Any-work EPOP. The results for women show that the
employment and earnings of high skill white women show significantly less cyclical fluctuation than all

groups, including high skill white men. That may be due to differences in the industries and occupations
that men and women are working in. Alternatively, it may also reflect the fact that women may act as
"added workers" who enter the labor force in recessions to make up for lost earnings of the principle

earner. These issues will be explored at more length below. Low skilled nonwhite women are the most
severely impacted by cycles. The results in columns one and two show that, for a given shock, their
employment rates fluctuate 5 times as much as high skill white men.

20

These large parameters for low educated women are attenuated somewhat when the models are

estimated in levels instead of logs. These estimates are shown in columns (3) and (4). As discussed
earlier, if the level model is correct, then the low mean employment rate among these groups (e.g. FTYR

EPOP rates for less educated women are 0.42 for whites and 0.37 for nonwhites) will lead to larger

parameters for those groups. Some of these impacts are significant. The most extreme example is
coefficient for low skill nonwhite women which, in the Any-work EPOP is reduced to 1.44 from 5.42.
For the remainder of the paper, I rely on the more conservative level equations for EPOP regressions.14

The results in column 5 show that the differences across skill groups are smaller when using real

weekly earnings. In a given period, the percent change in real weekly earnings of white low skill men is
1.2 times as large and the change for nonwhite low skill men is about 2 times as large as that experienced

by white high skill men. This may reflect greater rigidities in wages for low skill workers. For example,
if equilibrium wages rates are driven down in recessions, to the extent that the minimum wage creates an
wage floor for low skill workers, the reduction in earnings for low wage workers will be smaller, relative

to high skill workers, than their reduction in employment. Alternatively, this may reflect how the
composition of workers changes over the business cycle and how this compares across skill groups.
This point has been discussed in the empirical literature on cyclical behavior of real wages (for example
see the recent paper by Solon et al, 1994).

The estimates from pooling the three equations for the ORG data are presented in Table 3. The

top portion of the table presents the y parameters along with their standard errors for each skill group.
Note that only one normalization is needed to identify the model. Here we normalize the coefficient for
high skill white men to 1 in the Any-work EPOP equation. All of the coefficients are now relative to that

group's outcome. Looking across the columns one can see how the fluctuation of one measure compares

'4The results for changes in levels of earnings generated similar results to changes in logs (not shown here).
The changes in logs will be used for the rest of the study.

21

to another. Overall mean weekly earnings vary the most across the cycle for all groups, followed by the
FT EPOP and then the Any-work EPOP. For example, for low educated nonwhite women, the response
in mean earnings is three times as large as the response for employment rates. In order to better compare
the results to the "single equation" estimates in Table 2, the bottom portion of the table divides each

parameter by the estimated y for the reference group in that equation. The statistical significance refers
to testing whether these parameters (in the bottom portion of the table) are significantly different from 1.
Comparing the estimates in the bottom portion of Table 3 to the estimates in Table 2, very

similar patterns emerge. Nonwhites and less educated workers experience fluctuations larger than other
groups. Even within education groups, nonwhites fare worse than whites, possibly reflecting their more
disadvantaged status. White women in both high and low education groups experience less cyclical
variation than all other groups. Nonwhite less educated women exhibit more fluctuation, but less than
their male counterparts.

All remaining regression models will be estimated using the "pooled model". This does not
change the qualitative results significantly.
7.2 Results for Aimual Measures using ADF Data

The ADF data allows for two important extensions to the analysis of the ORG data. First, I
examine more comprehensive measures of employment cone sponding to activities over the past year

thereby getting at changes in the duration and intensity of employment. Second, I can examine family
measures in addition to individual measures. The family is the key economic unit and, for policy
purposes, an analysis limited to individuals would be incomplete. An analysis of families may differ
from one of individuals in that families contain varying numbers of potential workers with differences in
propensities for intra-family substitution of labor market activity.

The results for the ADF are presented in two tables. Table 4 presents the results for individual
labor market outcomes (FTYR EPOP, annual hours, aimual earnings, and hourly wages) and table 5

22

presents the results for the family outcomes (head's earnings, spouse's earnings, other family income,
and family earnings and income).15 In each table, a "pooled model" is estimated and the parameter for

the reference group in one equation is normalized to one. The format of the tables are identical to Table
3, with estimated parameters and standard errors in the top portion of the table, and adjusted parameters
along with tests for statistical significance (different from 1) in the bottom portion of the table.
Looking at the top portion of Table 4, the magnitude of changes in aimual earnings are larger

than aimual hours or employment rates. This is not surprising as aimual earnings captures changes in
employment and hours worked. Average hourly wages (averaged over workers) are, along with the other

measures, pro-cyclical. This is consistent with the more recent real wage studies. The bottom portion
of Table 4 provides estimates of the relative responsiveness across groups. This shows similar patterns
to those with the ORG data. The responsiveness to a shock is higher for those with lower education

levels and nonwhites, and lower for high educated white women. The results are particularly striking
when you compare white and nonwhite low educated groups. For both men and women, nonwhites are
significantly more impacted by business cycles than whites. For example, the equation for mean aimual
hours worked shows that white low skilled men are 1.3 times more affected than high skill white men,
while nonwhite low skill men are more than 3 times more affected.16

Similar to the ORG, the results for earnings show smaller differences across groups than the

employment measures. Again, this may reflect differences across groups in the types of workers who
experience unemployment (or reductions in hours) or differences in wage rigidities between high and low

skill workers. This can be examined more directly by looking at the estimates for the equation for the

'5For the purposes of this analysis, the "head" is defined as either the head of the CPS family or subfamily
(if the person is part of a family), or the individual themselves if they are an unrelated person of secondary
individual. In married couples, the man is always assigned to be the head. If there is no spouse in the family, a value
of 0 is used.
'6We also estimated models with Any-work EPOP. Those estimates show large but no statistically
significant differences across groups.

23

average hourly wages (column 4). Most of the parameters are less than one and imply that the cyclical
fluctuations in the wages of high skill white men are larger than that found for nonwhites, women and

less skilled workers. This dampens the differences across groups in aimual earnings.
The estimates for the pooled models of family outcomes are presented in Table 5. Family

income is disaggregated into head's earnings, spouse's earnings, and other family income. Other family
income includes transfers, capital income, and earnings of other family members. The table also includes
summary measures for family earnings and family income. Individual aimual earnings are also included
to provide some reference to the earlier tables on individual outcomes. 17 Examining the top portion of

Table 5 shows that the earnings of heads is less variable than overall earnings. Comparing head's

earnings (column 1) to family earnings (column 5) shows that in the most disadvantaged groups
(nonwhite or less educated) there is little evidence of labor substitution among family member as family

earnings fluctuates more than head's earnings. Among more skilled families (high educated whites)
family earnings fluctuates less than head's earnings. That can be seem more directly by the small
coefficient on spouse's earnings for high educated, white groups. Transfers tend to reduce the size of the
shock, which can be seen by comparing the estimates for family earnings and family income.
By examining the bottom portion of the table, with parameters normalized to 1 for the reference
group in each equation, one can compare how the different family measures impact groups differentially.

In general, these figures match the general pattern of findings thus far. Those with lower education
levels and nonwhites show greater responsiveness to cycles than the high skill and white groups. The
most striking results exist for spouse's earnings, with much greater fluctuations for low educated
nonwhite, and to a lesser extent white, individuals. This is in part due to lower marriage rates in these
groups, but may also reflect differences in the propensity for women to be "added workers".

'7Note that the parameter estimates for individual earnings in Table 5 do not match exactly the parameters
in Table 4. That is because different equations were estimated, which generates somewhat different estimated MSA
shocks. The coefficients are quite comparable.

24

Including non-labor income has a significant impact on the differences in cyclical responses

across skill groups. In general, the gaps between groups narrow when considering family income

(column 6). This pattern was also found by Blank (1989) and Blank and Card (1993). The reduction in
volatility is especially evident for nonwhite less skilled individuals. For example, family earnings of less
educated nonwhite women fluctuate three times as much as the reference group, but their family income
fluctuates only 2.5 times as much as the income of the reference group. This is a 15 percent reduction.
In analyses not shown here, the reduction in the impact of cycles on low skill families comes from receipt
of counter-cyclical government transfers such as welfare and unemployment assistance.18

7.3 Discussion
The results from the analysis of the ORG and ADF data show consistently that, relative to high
skill white men, nonwhites and those with low education levels have greater fluctuation in cycles.
Highly educated white women are the only group that consistently shows lower responsiveness compared

to the reference group. Here we explore why. First, some groups may be less tied to the labor market
and may rely on government transfers or the labor earnings of other family members. Another hypothesis
is that the jobs held by individuals in these groups vary in ways that would lead to expected differences

in employment fluctuations. It is fairly well established that jobs in construction and manufacturing,
laborers, younger workers, and those in non-union employment experience more employment
fluctuations, while jobs in the public and FIRE (finance, insurance, and real estate) sectors, managerial

jobs, and union jobs experience less employment fluctuations.
These possibilities are explored in Table 6, which presents means of some of these variables for

each of the skill groups used in the analysis. The patterns in the table match in many ways the patterns
found in the regressions. For example, highly educated white women, the least responsive group, are

18J explored estimating models with more dissaggregated measures of family income such as various
transfers. In practice, few families receive these transfers and most of the parameters were not statistically
significant.

25

least likely to be in construction and manufacturing and are much more likely to be in retail trade, FIRE,

and public sector jobs. They are also more likely to be in managerial and professional jobs, and less
likely to be in operator/laborer positions. Nonwhite less educated men, on the other hand, are the most
represented in construction, manufacturing, laborer positions, and have the lowest union participation
rates. This simple analysis gives mixed evidence for nonwhite less skilled women, found to be the most
responsive group. On the one hand, they have the highest rates of nonattachment to the labor market and
highest welfare reliance which would smaller cyclical fluctuations. On the other hand, those that are
employed are more likely to be in manufacturing and in laborer positions, which would lead to higher

rates of cyclical fluctuation.
7.4 Extensions
All of the regression results hold the skill group responsiveness to be fixed over the entire time

period. The two maj or business cycles covered in the data, the 1982 and 1992 recessions, differed a
great deal in which industries and occupations were most impacted. Farber (1997), using data from the
Displaced Worker Surveys, shows that in the early 1990s displacement rates among higher educated

workers increased relative to those with lower education levels. The impacts of changes over time in the
relative responsiveness is explored in this section using the ADF data. First, graphs comparing high and
low educated men are presented for the 1989-1992 period which can be compared to the earlier graphs

for 1979-1982. Second, the regressions are estimated allowing for different skill group parameters for
the years 1975-1988 versus 1990-1996.
Figure 6

presents changes in the log of mean aimual hours and earnings for low skill men

compared to the reference group, high skill white men. Comparing this to Figure 5,the comparable
figure for 1979-1982, several important differences emerge. First, the effect of the downturn on the low
skill group is much closer to the effect on high skill group. The MSA observations are clustered much
closer to the 45 degree line (the line of equal effects). Second, this feature is found for both whites and

26

nonwhites, although more so for whites.

This is explored further in Table 7. The table reports results for equations for individual
earnings, family earnings and family income and uses the same pooled model as above. The only
difference is the addition of a set of skill group specific cycle parameters that apply to the post-1988

period:

1T1(Yjmt) =

a. + (y. +

* Post88) Pmt + jmt

(4)

The coefficients ' i represent the change in the responsiveness between the early and later periods. 1988
is chosen as the break year because it is the end of the recovery from the 1982 recession. The top portion
of the table presents the cyclical responsiveness parameters for the overall period (y) and the bottom
portion presents the parameters for the difference between pre and post 1988 period (y& There are two
normalizations in the pooled model, one for the overall period and one for post 1988 period. As above,
the coefficient for high skill white men in the overall period is normalized to 1. In addition, the
parameter capturing differences between pre and post 1988 period is set to 0 for this group. In the
bottom of the table, I also include renormalize all of the coefficients by subtracting the value for the

reference group. These are in italics. The statistical significance tests are that the top panel figures are
different from 1 and the bottom panel figures are different than 0.
These results fairly consistently show that the relative responsiveness of cycles by the low skill

groups has declined relative to high skill white men over this time period. That is, all coefficients are
negative in the bottom of the table. This is consistent with Farber (1997). 19 The largest reducitons occur

for the most disadvantaged groups. For example, referring to the results for aimual earnings, the relative
responsiveness of low skill nonwhite men fell by -0.81. The relative responsiveness of family income

'9Bartik (1995) finds no evidence of changes over time. Bartik's sample, however, ends in 1987 which is
likely to be before the changes started taking place.

27

fell by -1.08 for low education nonwhite men from an overall level of 2.09. The table indicates that
many of these reductions are statistically significantly different from zero. The reductions for low skilled
nonwhite women were not as large. Overall, these results show that the 1992 recession was much more
skill-group neutral than the 1982 recession.

Several sensitivity tests were performed for these models. In all cases, specific parameters
changed somewhat but the qualitative results were the same. Changing the defmition of race from
white/noithispanic and black/hispanic to white and black, led to larger racial differences. Hispanic men
appear to be more like whites in that they have relatively high employment rates and relatively less

cyclical variation. They also have relatively low education levels so they are a sizeable fraction of the
low educated nonwhite group. Expanding the skill groups by considering four education groups led to
larger differences between education levels. However, the precision of the estimates declined somewhat
and many of the differences were not statistically significant.2°

7. Conclusion
This paper uses data from the Current Population Survey covering the period 1975-1997 to
examine how business cycles impact the employment, earnings, and income of low skill groups relative

to high skill groups. The results consistently show that those with lower education levels, nonwhites, and

low skilled nonwhite women, are more impacted by cycles than high skill white men. The analysis of
family income shows that there is evidence that government transfers are effective at narrowing the
differences in impacts across demographic groups.

20Other specification tests included (1) limiting the MSA sample to the largest 15-20 MSAs, (2) dropping
"seam" years when the MSA boundaries change, and (3) dropping the 1995 and 1996 ADF years when the topcode
on earnings increased significantly. The results were not sensitive to changing the MSA sample or dropping the
seam years. Dropping the most recent ADF years did lead to modest increases in the relative responsiveness of the
earnings and income of low skill groups. Looking back at Figure 2b, the earnings of high educated white men
increased significantly with the increase in topcodes in 1995. Given that this was in a recovery, dropping those years
leads to larger differences in the cyclical variation skill groups.

28

The results also suggest that the 1992 recession and subsequent recovery had differential impacts

compared to the 1982 recession and recovery. In particular, in the 1989-1996 period, the sensitivity to
cyclical variation of less skilled groups was still larger than high skill groups, but the differences

narrowed. This may be in part due to the fact that the less skilled groups had somewhat low employment
rates going in to the 1992 recession. It also may reflect differences in the industries that were affected in

the 1992 versus 1982 recessions. Tdentifing the sources of this change is important and should be
examined in future work.

29

References
Acs, Gregory and Douglas Wissoker. 1991. "The Impact of Local Labor Markets on the Employment
Patterns of Young Timer-City Males." Mimeo, Urban Institute.
Bartik, Timothy J. 1991. Who Benefits from State and Local Economic Development Policies? W.E.
Upj olm Institute for Employment Research. Kalamazoo Michigan.
1 993a "The Effects of Local Labor Markets on Individual Labor Market Outcomes for
Different Demographic Groups and the Poor." W.E. Upjohn Institute Working Paper 93-23.

____________

___________ 1 993b "Economic Development and Black Economic Success." Upj olm Institute
Tecimical Report No. 93-00 1.
___________ 1994 "The Effects of Metropolitan Job Growth on the Size Distribution of Family
Income." Journal of Regional Science 34(4):483-501.
____________ 1996. "The Distributional Effects of Local Labor Demand and Industrial Mix: Estimates

Using Individual Panel Data." Journal of Urban Economics 40(2): 150-178.

Bils, Mark. 1985. "Real Wages over the Business Cycle: Evidence from Panel Data." Journal of
Political Economy 93(4) pp. 666-689.
Blanchard, Olivier J. and Lawrence F. Katz. 1992. "Regional Evolutions." Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity 1:1992.
Blank, Rebecca. 1989. "Disaggregating the Effect of the Business Cycle on the Distribution of Income."

Economica 56: 141-163.

Blank, Rebecca.

1990 "Why are Wages Cyclical in the 1970s?" Journal

of Labor Economics 8(1): 16-47.

Blank, Rebecca. 1993. "Why Were Poverty Rates So High in the 1980s?" In Poverty and Prosperity in
the Late Twentieth Century, ed. Dimitri Papadimitriou and Edward Wolff. New York: St.
Martin's Press.
Blank,

Rebecca and Alan Blinder. 1986. "Macroeconomics, Income Distribution, and Poverty." In
Fighting Poverty: What Works and What Doesn 't, ed. Sheldon Danziger and Daniel Weinberg.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Blank, Rebecca and David Card. 1993. "Poverty, Income Distribution and Growth: Are They Still
Related?" Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2:1993.

Blank, Rebecca, David Card, and Philip Robins. 1998. "Financial Incentives for Increasing Work and
Income Among Low-Income Families." Paper prepared for the Joint Center for Poverty
Research conference on "Labor Markets and Less Skilled Workers".

Blau, Francine. 1998. "Trends in the Well-Being of American Women, 1970-1995." Journal of

30

Economic Literature 36(1): 112-165.

Bound, Joim and Richard Freeman. 1992. "What Went Wrong? The Erosion of Relative Earnings and
Employment Among Young Black men in the 1 980s" The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
107:201-232.

Bound, Joim and Hany Holzer. 1993. "Industrial Shifts, Skill Levels, and the Labor Market for White
and Black Males". The Review of Economics and Statistics, August.
___________ 1995. "Structural Changes, Employment Outcomes, and Population Adjustments Among
Whites and Blacks: 1980-1990." Institute for Research on Poverty Discussion Paper #1057-95.
Cain, Glen and Ross Fiimie. 1990. "The Black-White Difference in Youth Employment: Evidence from
Demand Side Factors." Journal of Labor Economics 8:S364-95.

Card, David. 1995. "The Wage Curve: A Review." Journal of Economic Literature 33:785-799.
Cutler, David and Lawrence Katz. 1991. "Macroeconomic Performance and the Disadvantaged."
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2:1991.

Farber, Hemy. 1997. "The Changing Face of Job Loss in the United States, 1981-1995." Mimeo,
Princeton University.
Freeman, Richard. 1982. "Economic Determinants of Geographic and Individual Variation in the Labor
Market Position of Young Persons." In The Youth Labor Market Problem: Its Nature, Causes,
and Consequences, ed. R Freeman and D. Wise. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
___________ 1991 a. "Labour Market Tightness and the Mismatch Between Demand and Supply of
Less-Educated Young Men in the United States in the 1 980s." In Mismatch and Labour
Mobility, ed. P. Schioppa. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
___________ 199 lb. "Employment and Earnings of Disadvantaged Young Men in a Labor Shortage
Economy." In The Urban Underclass, ed. C. Jencks and Peterson. Washington DC: Brookings
Institution Press.
Holzer, Hany J. 1991. "Employment, Unemployment, and Demand Shifts in Local Labor Markets." The
Review of Economics and Statistics.
Karoly, Lynn. 1992. "The Trend in Inequality Among Families, Individuals and Workers in the United
States." In Uneven Tides: Rising Inequality in America, ed. Sheldon Danziger and Peter
Gottschalk. New York: The Russell Sage Foundation.
Katz, Lawrence and Kevin Murphy. 1992. "Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987: Supply and
Demand Factors." The Quarterly Journal ofEconomics, 107:35-78.
Keane, Michael, Robert Moffitt and David Runkle. 1988. "Real Wages over the Business cycles:
Estimating the Impact of Heterogeneity with Micro Data." Journal of Political Economy

31

96:1232-1266.

Solon, Gary, Robert Barsky and Jonathan Parker. 1994. "Measuring the Cyclicality of Real Wages: How
Important is Composition Bias?" Quarterly Journal of Economics 109(1): 1-26.

32

o Less than HS
More than HS

1975

A HS only

2: ______________________
1985

1995

1975

Year of sample

1985

1995

Year of sample

Nonwhite men

White men

2:
1975

1985

Year of sample

1995

1975

White women

1985
Year of sample

1995

Nonwhite women

Annual demographic file, 1975-1997

Percent Distribution of Persons by Education, by Race and Sex
Figure 1

33

O Less then HS

Some college

/ HS only

College or more

1
0

>

.9

.9

0

.8

.8

uJ

.7

.7

1975

1985

Whites

1995

1

1

>-

.8

.8

0

.6

H
U-

1975

1985
Nonwhites

1995

1975

1985
Nonwhites

1995

uJ

.4

1975

1985

1995

Whites

Annual Demographic File, 1975-1997

Annual Employment Outcomes, by Race and Education, Men
Figure 2a

34

o Less then HS
Some college

A HS only
College or more

2100

2100

1800

1800

1500

1500

1200 _______________________________
1975
1985
1995

1200
1975

Whites

c
a)

1985

Nonwhites

1995

60000

60000

50000

50000

40000

40000

30000

30000

20000

20000

10000 _______________________________
1975
1985
1995
Whites

10000 _______________________________
1975
1985
1995
Nonwhites

Annual Demographic File, 1975-1997

Annual Hours and Earnings, by Race and Education, Men
Figure 2b

35

.4__
o Less then HS
Some college

1975

A HS only
College or more

1985

1995

1975

1985
Nonwhites

1995

1975

1985
Nonwhites

1995

Whites

.8

.8

.6

.6

1975

1985

1995

Whites

Annual Demographic File, 1975-1 997

Annual Emp. Outcomes, by Race and Education, Women
Figure 3a

36

o Less then HS
Some college

A HS only
College or more

2000

2000

1500

1500

1000

1000

500 ____________________________________
1975
1985
1995

500 ____________________________________
1975

Whites

1995

30000

30000

t :::::

1985
Nonwhites

==== :::: ===

0 ___________________
1975

1985
Whites

1995

0 ___________________
1975

Annual Demographic File, 1975-1 997

1985
Nonwhites

1995

Annual Hours and Earnings, by Race and Education, Women
Figure 3b

37

Whites

0
0
0
w

C
a)

Nonwhites

.5 -

.5

.25 -

.25

0-

0

-.25 -

-.25

0)
C

0
0
0
0
w

-.5-

-.5
-.5

-.25

Ô

High Skill

.25

.5

.5 -

.5

.25 -

.25

0-

0

-.25 -

-.25

-.5

-.25

-.5

-.25

Ô

High Skill

.25

.5

.25

.5

>-E
c—i
a)

0)
C

0

0

-.5- ____________________________
-.5
-.25
0
.25
.5
High Skill

00

-.5

1978/79 - 1982/83, Annual demographic file

0

High Skill

Change in Log Annual E/POP, by MSA, Men
Figure 4

38

Whites

Nonwhites

.5-

.5

.25-

.25

0-

0

0

a)

-.25

0)
C

0

-.25

-.5- _________________________
-.5

0)
C

-.25

a)

-

a)0

-.5. _________________________
-.5

.5

-.25

0

High Skill

.25

.5

.5

.25-

.25

0

C=

C
C

High Skill

.25

.5-

C

C

0

0

0

0
-.25-

-.25

a)

0)
C

0

-.5- _________________________
-.5

-.25

0

High Skill

.25

.5

-.5. _________________________
-.5

-.25

1978/79 - 1982/83, Annual demographic file

0

High Skill

.25

Change in Log Ann. Hours and Earnings, by MSA, Men
Figure 5

39

.5

Whites

Nonwhites

.5

.5

.25

.25

0

0

0)

-.25

-.25

0

-.5

0

a)

C

0)
C

C

-5

-.5

-.5

High Skill

.25

.5

High Skill

.5

.5

.25

.25

0

a)

-

C=
C

a)0
C
C

0

0

0

0

0

-.25

G

-.25

Qo C

a)

0)
C

0

-.5

0
0

-.5
-.5

-.25

o

High Skill

.25

.5

-.5

-.25

1988/89 - 1992/93, Annual demographic file

o

High Skill

.25

Change in Log Ann. Hours and Earnings, by MSA, Men
Figure 6

40

.5

Table 1
Change in the Log of Male Employment to Population Ratio in Selected MSAs,
1979-1982 and 1989-1992

Change in the Log of Male Any-work EPOP between 1979 and 1982

Small Reduction

Large Reduction

Detroit

-0.14

Denver

-0.05

Pittsburgh

-0.13

Washington DC

-0.03

Columbus, OH

-0.12

San Francisco

-0.03

Milwaukee

-0.11

New York

-0.02

Cleveland

-0.10

Boston

-0.01

Change in the Log of Male Any-work EPOP between 1989 and 1992

Small Reduction

Large Reduction
New Orleans

-0.15

Miami

0.00

San Diego

-0.09

Kansas City

0.00

Boston

-0.08

Detroit

0.01

New York

-0.07

Cleveland

0.02

San Francisco

-0.07

Houston

0.02

Notes: Author's tabulations of CPS Outgoing Rotation Group Data. EPOP is defined as the weighted number of men working
last year over the weighted male population in the MSA. The sample includes all men who are between the ages of 22 and 62.
We exclude those working without pay, the self employed, and those with weekly earnings less than $67 in 1982 dollars. For
more detail on sample selection, see text.

41

Table 2
Regression Results Using CPS Outgoing Rotation Group
Coefficients on MSA Shock
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Mean
Any-work

Any-work

Weekly

E/POP

FTE/POP

E/POP

FTE/POP

Earnings

(log)

(log)

(level)

(level)

(log)

1

1

1

1

1

1.28

1.73

(0.47)
0.56 *

(0.51)

(0.19)
1.21

(0.44)

(0.47)

Skill Group:

High educ (>12) white men
High educ (>12) non-white men
High ed (>12) white women

Highed(>12)non-whitewomen
Low ed (12) white men

Lowed(12)nonwhitemen
Low ed (12) white women

Lowed(12)nonwhitewomen

1.36

(0.28)
3.88**
(0.69)
1.53

(0.29)
5.42**
(0.91)

1.30
(0.28)
0.57 **

1.34
(0.25)
0.52 **

(0.23)

(0.11)

(0.10)

1.61

1.09
(0.26)
1.29
(0.17)

1.10
(0.23)
1.35 *

0.90

1.45

(0.31)
3.51 **
(0.66)
2.38 **
(0.44)

449**

2.95**
(0.35)
0.82
(0.13)

1.44*

(0.16)

2.77**
(0.30)
0.63 **

1.46
(0.24)

0.85
(0.11)
1.01

(0.21)
1.22
(0.14)

1.99**

(0.11)

(0.22)
0.94
(0.12)

1.49**

(0.81)

(0.22)

1.12
(0.18)

(0.18)

N

1680

1680

1680

1680

1680

R2

0.39

0.38

0.40

0.39

0.47

Notes: Each column is a separate regression where the dependent variable is the change in the log or level of the labor market
outcome evaluated at the mean for the cell defined by MSA, year, and skill group. The parameter estimates reported in the table
are the coefficients on the MSA-time shock for each skill group. The regression also includes intercepts for each skill group
capturing average growth rates in the labor market outcome for each skill group. The regression is estimated using nonlinear
weighted least squares, using the cell's population as the weight. The sample is from the CPS ORG data and covers 1979-1993.
The data are grouped into two year periods to increase cell sizes. All labor market outcome variables correspond to the week
preceding the interview. For details on sample selection and variable construction, see the text. Standard errors are in
parentheses. A ** [*] indicates the parameter is significantly different from 1 at the 1% [5%] level.

42

Table 3
Pooled Regression Results Using CPS Outgoing Rotation Group
Coefficients on MSA Shock

(1)

(2)

(3)

Any-work E/POP

FT E/POP

Earnings

(level)

(level)

(log)

1.31 (0.20)
1.88 (0.38)
0.72 (0.15)
1.11 (0.32)
1.64 (0.24)
3.22 (0.43)
0.82 (0.16)
1.53 (0.26)

2.96 (0.42)
4.36 (0.80)
2.47 (0.39)
3.18 (0.68)
3.79 (0.52)
6.34 (0.85)
2.82 (0.41)
4.56 (0.66)

Mean Weekly

Coefficients on MSA Shock, by Skill Group:

High educ (>12), white men
High educ (>12), non-white men
High educ (>12), white women
High educ (>12), non-white women

Loweduc(12),whitemen
Low educ ( 12), nonwhite men
Loweduc(12),whitewomen
Low educ (12), nonwhite women

1

1.63 (0.34)
0.60 (0.14)
1.26 (0.30)
1.37 (0.21)
2.92 (0.39)
0.80 (0.15)
1.52 (0.25)

Coefficients on MSA Shock Relative to Skill Group 1:

High educ (>12), white men

1

1

1

High educ (>12), non-white men

1.63
0.60 **

1.44

1.47 *

0.55 **

0.83

1.26

0.84

Low educ (12), white men

1.37

1.25

1.07
1.28 *

Loweduc(12),nonwhitemen
Low educ (12), white women

2.92**

2.46**

2.14**

0.80

0.63 **

0.95

Low educ (12), nonwhite women

1.52 *

1.20

1.54 **

N

1680

1680

1680

0.33

0.33

0.46

High educ (>12), white women
High educ (>12), non-white women

presents estimates of an equation where the dependent variable is the change in the log or level of the labor
market outcome evaluated at the mean for the cell defined by MSA, year, and skill group. The equations are estimated jointly
with the MSA shocks common to each equation. The parameter estimates reported in the table are the coefficients on the MSAtime shock for each skill group. The regression also includes intercepts for each skill group capturing average growth rates in the
labor market outcome for each skill group. The regression is estimated using nonlinear weighted least squares, using the cell's
population as the weight. The sample is from the CPS ORG data and covers 1979-1993. The data are grouped into two year
periods to increase cell sizes. All labor market outcome variables correspond to the week preceding the interview. For details on
sample selection and variable construction, see the text. Standard errors are in parentheses. A ** [*] indicates the parameter is
significantly different from 1 at the 1% [5%] level.
Notes: Each column

43

Table 4
Pooled Regression Results Using Individual Measures from CPS Annual Demographic File (ADF)
Coefficients on MSA Shock

(1)

(2)

FTYR E/POP

Annual Hours
(log)

(3)

(4)

Annual

(level)

Earnings

(log)

Hourly Wage
(log)

Coefficients on MSA Shock, by Skill Group:

1.21 (0.28)
2.76 (0.67)
0.11 (0.21)
1.38 (0.51)
1.60 (0.33)
3.97 (0.70)
1.48 (0.30)
4.69 (0.78)

3.24 (0.56)
5.03 (1.03)
1.10 (0.33)
2.52 (0.74)
3.38 (0.59)
6.15 (1.05)
2.86 (0.51)
7.66 (1.23)

1

1

1

2.26 **

2.28 *

1.55

High educ (>12), white women

0.02 **

0.09 **

0.34 **

0.36 **

High educ (>12), non-white women

0.96

1.14

0.78

0.27 **

Loweduc(12),whitemen
Low educ (12), nonwhite men
Low educ (12), white women
Low educ (12), nonwhite women

1.38

1.32

1.04

0.72

2.82 **

3.28 **

1.90 **

0.74

0.58 **

1.22

0.88

0.66

2.04 **

3.88 **

2.36 **

1.42

2160

2160

2160

2160

0.16

0.17

0.29

0.09

Higheduc(>12),whitemen

1

High educ (>12), non-white men

2.26 (0.50)
0.02 (0.26)
0.96 (0.36)
1.38 (0.26)
2.82 (0.49)

Higheduc(>12),whitewomen
High educ (>12), non-white women

Loweduc(12),whitemen
Loweduc(12),nonwhitemen
Loweduc(12),whitewomen
Loweduc(12),nonwhitewomen

0.58

(0.17)

2.04 (0.39)

2.83 (0.54)
2.70 (0.94)
1.02 (0.37)
0.77 (0.76)
2.06 (0.49)
2.10 (0.69)
1.88

(0.44)

4.01 (0.82)

Coefficients on MSA Shock Relative to Skill Group 1:

High educ (>12), white men
High educ (>12), non-white men

N

1

*

0.95

Notes: Each column presents estimates of an equation where the dependent variable is the change in the log or level of the labor
market outcome evaluated at the mean for the cell defined by MSA, year, and skill group. The equations are estimated jointly
with the MSA shocks common to each equation. The parameter estimates reported in the table are the coefficients on the MSAtime shock for each skill group. The regression also includes intercepts for each skill group capturing average growth rates in the
labor market outcome for each skill group. The regression is estimated using nonlinear weighted least squares, using the cell's
population as the weight. The sample is from the CPS ADF and covers 1975-1996. The data are grouped into two year periods
to increase cell sizes. All labor market outcome variables correspond to the week preceding the interview. For details on sample
selection and variable construction, see the text. Standard errors are in parentheses. A ** [*] indicates the parameter is
significantly different from 1 at the 1% [5%] level.

44

Table 5
Pooled Regression Results Using Family Measures from CPS Annual Demographic File (ADF)
Coefficients on MSA Shock
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Own

Earnings

Head's
Earnings

Spouse's
Earnings

Family
Earnings

(log)

(log)

(log)

Family
Income
(log)

(log)

Family
Income
(log)

0.81(0.12)

0.81 (0.11)

1.32 (0.24)

1.17 (0.22)

(6)

(5)

Other

Total

Total

Coefficients on MSA Shock, by Skill Group:

High edwhite men

1

0.94(0.14)

0.54(0.19)

High ednon-white men

1.35 (0.28)

1.26 (0.28)

1.77 (0.49)

1.00(0.23)
0.59 (0.53)

High edwhite women

0.34 (0.10)

0.86 (0.13)

0.23 (0.18)

1.23 (0.24)

0.72(0.11)

0.75 (0.10)

High ednon-white women

0.84 (0.24)

0.97 (0.24)

1.85 (0.45)

1.44 (0.49)

1.33 (0.23)

1.25 (0.21)

Lowedwhitemen

0.94(0.15)

0.92(0.14)

0.92(0.22)

0.57(0.24)

0.92(0.13)

0.82(0.12)

Low ed nonwhite men

1.50 (0.23)

1.35 (0.22)

2.51 (0.41)

1.36 (0.40)

1.74 (0.23)

1.48 (0.20)

Low ed white women

0.83 (0.13)

0.87 (0.13)

1.22 (0.22)

0.87 (0.23)

0.98 (0.13)

0.91 (0.12)

Low ed nonwhite women

2.18 (0.27)

1.88 (0.25)

3.91 (0.49)

1.50 (0.38)

2.49 (0.28)

1.99 (0.22)

1

1

1

1

1.44

Coefficients on MSA Shock Relative to Skill Group 1:

High ed white men

1

1

1.34

3.28 *

0.59

High ed white women

1.35
0.34 **

1.63 *

0.91

1.23

0.84

1.03

1.44

0.88
1.64 *

0.93

High ed non-white women

0.43
3.42 **

Lowedwhitemen
Lowednonwhitemen

0.94

0.98

1.70

0.57

1.14

1.01

1.50**

1.44*

4.64**

1.36

2.15**

1.83**

Low ed white women

0.83
2.18 **

0.93

2.26 **

0.87

1.21

1.12

2.00 **

7.24 **

1.50

3.07 **

2.46 **

High ednon-white men

Low ed nonwhite women

N

1.54

2160

2160

2160

2160

2160

2160

0.22

0.31

0.31

0.19

0.13

0.03

Notes: Each column presents estimates of an equation where the dependent variable is the change in the log of the labor market
outcome evaluated at the mean for the cell defined by MSA, year, and skill group. The equations are estimated jointly with the
MSA shocks common to each equation. The parameter estimates reported in the table are the coefficients on the MSA-time
shock for each skill group. The regression also includes intercepts for each skill group capturing average growth rates in the
labor market outcome for each skill group. The regression is estimated using nonlinear weighted least squares, using the cell's
population as the weight. The sample is from the CPS ADF and covers 1975-1996. The data are grouped into two year periods
to increase cell sizes. All labor market outcome variables correspond to the week preceding the interview. For details on sample
selection and variable construction, see the text. Standard errors are in parentheses. A ** [*] indicates the parameter is
significantly different from 1 at the 1% [5%] level.

45

Table 6
Means of Selected Characteristics by Skill Group, 1998 CPS Annual Demographic File (ADF)
Low education ( 12)

High education (>12)
Men
Women
White

Nonwhite

White

Men

Nonwhite

White

Women

Nonwhite

White

Nonwhite

Age
Read Earnings / Family Income (%)

43.7

38.7

43.3

37.9

43.3

37.3

47.9

40.7

66%

63%

60%

60%

59%

59%

54%

54%

Spouse Earnings / Family Income (%)
Welfare Income / Family Income (%)

17%

17%

19%

17%

17%

14%

16%

11%

0%

0%

0%

2%

0%

2%

2%

7%

Other Transfers / Family Income (%)

7%

9%

11%

13%

11%

16%

15%

0.82

0.82

0.86

0.80

0.67

0.58

Any WorkE/POP
FTYRE/POP

0.93

9%
0.89

0.77

0.82

0.53

0.58

0.68

0.61

0.42

0.37

Union (%)

42%

30%

40%

35%

38%

27%

40%

30%

6.1%

5.2%

1.2%

0.6%

15.2%

12.9%

1.3%

0.8%

19.0%

16.4%

7.7%

7.3%

23.2%

22.2%

13.2%

18.2%

12.6%

13.6%

13.7%

14.1%

19.6%

20.6%

28.9%

22.5%

6.7%

5.3%

8.8%

9.5%

2.3%

2.4%

7.8%

7.3%

9.7%

5.1%

7.3%

2.9%

2.0%

3.4%

4.9%
3.2%

%Managerial/Professional

43.8%

30.6%

46.7%

35.8%

7.8%

3.9%

11.5%

6.5%

%Technical/Sales/Administrative

23.5%

24.2%

38.7

44.5%

15.6%

11.9%

48.0%

34.2%

%Service Occupations

22.2%

28.0%

12.0%

15.1%

45.4%

48.5%

29.1%

40.1%

%Operators/Laborers

10.4%

17.2%

2.7%

4.6%

31.3%

35.6%

11.5%

19.3%

Industrial Composition: 1/
Construction(%)

Manufacturing (%)
Retail Trade (%)

FIRE (%)
Public Administration. (%)
Occupational Composition: 1/

Number of Observations

15207

2937

17398

1/Means apply to the sample of persons working as of the survey week.

46

4020

15855

7378

19048

8452

Table 7
Pooled Regression Results Using Family Measures from CPS Annual Demographic File (ADF)
Allowing For Changes in Parameters Over Time
(2)

(1)

Own
Annual Earnings
(log)

(3)

Total

Total

Family Earnings
(log)

Family Income
(log)

Coefficients on MSA Shock, by Skill Group: All Years
High educ (>12), white men

1

0.80 (0.18)

0.76 (0.16)

High educ (>12), non-white

**
2.02 (0.51)

1.90 (0.45) **

1.70

0.77 (0.18)
1.69 (0.40) *

0.76 (0.17)

Loweduc(12),whitemen
Low educ (12), nonwhite men

0.85 (0.20)
1.61 (0.44)
1.25 (0.25)
2.14 (0.42) **

1.10 (0.21)
2.38 (0.42) **

0.93 (0.18)
1.97 (0.36) **

Loweduc(12),whitewomen
Low educ (12), nonwhite women

1.06 (0.21)
2.39 (0.43) **

1.12 (0.21)

0.94 (0.18)

2.60 (0.44) **

2.09 (0.36) **

men

Higheduc(>12),whitewomen
High educ (>12), non-white women

0

-0.03 (0.21)
0.00

High educ (>12), non-white men

High educ
High educ

(>12), white women

(>12), non-white women

Low educ ( 12), white men

Low educ
Low educ
Low educ

(12), nonwhite men

(12), white women

( 12), nonwhite women

(0.38) **

1.67

Post 1988

Coefficients on MSA Shock by Skill Group:

High educ (>12), white menO

(0.40) **

-0.96 (0.56)
-0.69 (0.22) **

-1.28 (0.48) **

-0.30 (0.29)

-0.81 (0.46)

-0.49 (0.24)

-0.58

(0.49)

-0.04 (0.19)
0.00

-1.15 (0.48) **

-1.09

-1.12

-1.05

-0.09

(0.20)

(0.43) **

-0.12 (0.19)

-0.06

-0.08

-0.83 (0.44)
-0.80

-0.92 (0.40) *

-0.28 (0.25)

-0.23 (0.21)

-0.24

-0.19

-1.25

(0.45) **

-0.88

-1.12 (0.38) **

-1.22

-1.08

-0.24 (0.24)
-0.21

-0.13 (0.21)

-0.48 (0.50)
-0.44

-0.09
-0.46 (0.41)

-0.42

N

2160

2160

2160

R2

0.30

0.37

0.34

Notes: Each column presents estimates of an equation where the dependent variable is the change in the log of the labor market
outcome evaluated at the mean for the cell defined by MSA, year, and skill group. The equations are estimated jointly with the
MSA shocks common to each equation. This specification allows the effects of MSA shocks to differ over the period. The top
panel presents estimates corresponding to the full period and the bottom presents estimates for the post 1988 period. The
numbers in italics in the bottom panel represent the changes in the skill group coefficient in the post-88 period relative to the
change for skill group 1. Standard errors are in parentheses. In the top panel, a ** [*] indicates the parameter is significantly
different from 1 at the 1% [5%] level. In the bottom panel, a ** [*] indicates that the parameter is significantly different from 0
at the 1% [5%] level.

47

