NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EDUCATION FOR GROWTH
IN SWEDEN AND THE WORLD
Alan B. Krueger
Mikael Lindahi

Working Paper 7190
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7 190

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
°June 1999

We thank Robert Barro, Anders Björklund, AngusDeaton, Richard Freeman, Zvi Griliches, Gene Grossman,
John Hassler, Bertil Holmiund, Larry Katz, Kjetil Storesletten, and seminar participants at the London School
of Economics for helpful discussions, and Peter Skogman, Mark Spiegel, and Bob Topel for providing data.
Alan Krueger Thanks the Princeton University Industrial Relations Section for financial support; Mikael
Lindahi thanks the Swedish Council for Research in the Humanities and Social Science for financial support.
This paper draws heavily on Krueger and Lindahl (1998), which provides a more technical presentation of
many of the results. All opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

© 1999 by Alan B. Krueger and Mikael Lindahi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permissionprovided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Education for Growth in Sweden and the World
Alan B. Krueger and Mikael Lindahi
NBER Working Paper No. 7190
June 1999

ABSTRACT
This paper tries to reconcile evidence on the effect of schooling on income and on GDP
growth from the microeconometric and empirical macro growth literatures. Much microeconometric
evidence suggests that education is an important causal determinant of income for individuals within

countries as diverse as Sweden and the United States. At a national level, however, recent studies
have found that increases in educational attainment are unrelated to economic growth. This finding
is shown to be a spurious result of the extremely high rate of measurement error in first-differenced

cross-country education data. After accounting for measurement error, the effect of changes in

educational attainment on income growth in cross-country data is at least as great as
microeconometric estimates of the rate of return to years of schooling. We also investigate another
finding of the macro growth literature -- that economic growth depends positively on the initial stock

of human capital. We find that the effect of the initial level of education on growth is sensitive to
the econometric assumptions that are imposed on the data (e.g., constant-coefficient assumption),
as well as to the other covariates included in the model. Perhaps most importantly, we find that the

initial level of education does not appear to have a significant effect on economic growth among
OECD countries. The conclusion comments on policy implications for Sweden based on the human

capital literature.

Alan B. Krueger
Economics Department
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08540
and NBER
akrueger@pucc.princeton.edu

Mikael Lindahl
Economics Department
Stockholm University
S-106 91 Stockholm
Sweden
Mikael.Lindahl@sofi.su.se

[W]hat was rather jarring is the repeatedfinding, in these international data, that
changes in the estimated levels of schooling or human capital do not contribute
positively to growth, at least measured over the 1965 -85 period.
Zvi Griliches, 1997

Research on the economic effects of education

was marked by two contradictory sets of

fmdings in the 1 990s. On the one hand, the micro labor

literature produced several new

estimates of the monetary return to schooling that exploit natural experiments in which
variability in workers' schooling attainment was generated by some exogenous and
random force, such as quirks in compulsory schooling laws or students' proximity to

arguably

a college.

These studies tended to find that education is an important determinant of income. On the other

hand, the macro growth literature has found that changes in average schooling levels across
countries are unrelated to the speed of economic growth, although the initial level of schooling is

related to the countries' subsequent GDP growth rate. This paper tries to reconcile these two
disparate but obviously related lines of research.

The next section reviews the theoretical and empirical foundations of the Mincerian
human capital earnings function. Our survey of the literature indicates that Mincer's (1974)
formulation of the log-linear earnings-education

relationship fits the data rather well. Each

additional year of schooling appears to raise earnings by 5 to 15 percent, depending
on the
country, with the United States on the high end and Sweden on the low end of the distribution.
The rate of return to education varies over time as well as across countries. Perhaps

there is little evidence that unobserved variables

surprisingly,

(e.g., inherent ability) that might be correlated

with earnings and education cause simple OLS estimates of wage equations to
significantly
overstate the return to education in most countries. Indeed, consistent with Griliches's (1977)
conclusion, much of the modem literature finds that the upward "ability bias" is of about the

same order of magnitude as the downward bias caused by measurement error in educational

3

attainment. Evidence on possible differences in the payoff to investments in human capital
across subgroups of the work force is also discussed.

Section 2 considers the empirical macro growth literature. First, we relate the Mincerian

wage equation to the macro growth model. The Mincer model implies that the change in a
country's average level of schooling should be the key determinant of income growth. The
growth as a function of the initial level of
macro growth literature, by contrast, typically specifies
education, not the change in education. Moreover, we show that if the return to education

changes over time (e.g., because of exogenous skill-biased technological change), the macro
the
growth models are unidentified. Much of the empirical growth literature has eschewed
Mincer model because studies such as Benhabib and Spiegel (1994) find that the change in
education is not a determinant of economic growth. We show, however, that Benhabib and
Spiegel's finding that the growth in education is unrelated to economic growth results because
there is virtually no signal in their education data conditional on the growth of capital.

The macro growth literature has devoted only passing attention to problems caused by
measurement errors (that is, mistakes) in estimated average education. Despite their aggregate
nature, available data on average schooling levels across countries are poorly measured, in large

The reliability of
part because they must often be derived from school enrollment flows.
country-level education data is no higher than the reliability of individual-level education data.
For example, the correlation between Barro and Lee's (1991) and Kyriacou's (1991) measure of
the change in
average education across 68 countries in 1985 is 0.86, and the correlation between
schooling between 1965 and 1985 from these two sources is only 0.34. Additional estimates of
data
the reliability of coimtry-level education data based on our analysis of comparable micro
from the World Values Survey for 34 countries suggests that measurement error is particularly

in
prevalent for years of secondary and higher schooling. We find that measurement errors
education severely attenuate estimates of the effect of the change in schooling on GDP growth.
Nonetheless, we conclude that measurement errors in schooling are unlikely to cause a spurious
4

across countries,
positive association between the initial level of schooling and GDP growth
both the
conditional on the change in education. Thus, like Topel (1998), we conclude that
change and the initial level ofeducation are positively correlated with

economic growth.

Finally, we explore the robustness of the impact of the initial level of schooling on
variable-coefficient model that allows the coefficient on
economic growth. First, we estimate a
Second, we relax
the stock of education to vary across countries, as is found in the micro data.
of controlling for
the linearity assumption of the initial level of education, and explore the effect
of OECD
additional explanatory variables. Third, we estimate growth equations for the subset

countries. These extensions show that the positive effect of the initial level

of education on

economic growth is sensitive to econometric restrictions that are often rejected by the

data.
is

Our main conclusion is that while support for the micro Mincerian wage equation
growth rate is
strong, the evidence of a positive effect of the stock of education on a country's
the coefficient on
less robust. Moreover, if one accepts the assumptions necessary to interpret
the initial level of education in cross-country growth regressions as identifying

externalities from

education, the results most likely do not apply to the OECD countries.

1. The MicroeconOmicS of the Private Return to Education

and
The difference between the most dissimilar characters, between a philosopheras
seems to arise not so much from nature,
a common street porter, for example,
from habit, custom and education.
Adam Smith, 1776

and other environmental factors were more

Adam Smith suspected that education

their natural ability. Since at
important determinants of economic success for individuals than
have sought to estimate
least the beginning of the century, economists and other social scientists
the economic rewards individuals receive from completing more
'Early references are Gorseline (1932), Walsh (1935), Miller (955), and Wolfie
5

schooling.1 It has long been
and Smith (1956).

recognized that workers who attended school longer may possess inherent abilities that would

lead them to earn higher wages irrespective of their level of education. If these other
characteristics are not accounted for, then simple comparisons of earnings across individuals
with different levels of schooling would overstate the rate of return to education. Early attempts
to control for this "ability bias" included the analysis of data on siblings and twins to differenceout unobserved family characteristics (e.g., Gorseline, 1932 and Taubman, 1976), and regression

analyses which included as control variables observed characteristics such as IQ and parental

education (e.g., Griliches and Mason). By now this literature has been amply surveyed in
Griliches (1977), Rosen (1977), Willis (1986), and Card (1998). Below we briefly review
evidence on the Mincerian earnings equation, emphasizing recent studies that use exogenous
variation in education to estimate the Mincerian earnings equation.

1.1 The Mincerian wage equation
Mincer (1974) showed that if the only cost of attending school an additional year is the

opportunity cost of students' time, and if the proportional increase in earnings caused by this

additional schooling is constant over the lifetime, then the log of earnings would be linearly
related to individuals' years of schooling, with the slope equal to the rate of return to investment
in education.2 He augmented this model to include a quadratic term in work experience to allow
for returns to on-the-job training, yielding the familiar Mincerian wage equation:

(1) lnW1= p0+
where

5+ f32X1+ 33X12+ ,

in W is the natural log of the wage for individual i, S. is years of schooling, X, is

experience (usually measured as age minus education minus 6), X12 is experience squared, and

is a disturbance term. With Mincer's assumptions, the coefficient on schooling, 13, equals the

discount rate, because schooling decisions are made by equating two present value earnings
streams: one with a higher levei of schooling and one with a lower level. An attractive feature of
2This insight is also in Becker (1964) and Becker and Chiswick (1966), who specify the cost of investment in
human capital as a fraction of earnings that would have been received if the investment were not made.
6

Mincer's model is that time spent in school (as opposed to degrees) is the key determinant of
earnings, so data on years of schooling can be used to estimate a comparable return to education
in countries with very different educational systems.

There are, of course, other theoretical models that could yield a log-linear

earnings-

schooling relationship. For example, if the underlying production function between human
capital and earnings is log-linear, and individuals randomly choose their schooling level (e.g.,
optimization errors), then the coefficient from equation (1) would uncover the educational

production function. The slope of the earnings-education gradient would then vary with the
quality of education (see Behrman and Birdsall, 1986 and Card and Krueger, 1996).

The Mincerian earnings function is one of the great success stories of empirical
economics. Equation (1) has been estimated for most countries of the world by OLS, and the
results generally yield estimates of

ranging from .05 to .15, with slightly larger estimates for

women than men (see Psacharopoulos, 1995). A coefficient of .05, for example, should be
interpreted as meaning that acquiring an additional year of education is associated with 5 percent

higher earnings, other things being equal. The log-linear relationship also provides a good fit to
the data, as is illustrated by the plots for the U.S., Sweden, West Germany, and East Germany in

Figure i? These figures display the coefficient on dummy variables indicating each

year of

schooling, controlling for experience and gender, as well as the OLS estimate of the Mincerian
return. It is apparent that the semi-log specification provides a good description of the data even
in countries with dramatically different

economic and educational systems.4 Notice also that in

3The German figures are from Krueger and Pischke (1995). The American and Swedish figures are based on the
authors' calculations using the 1991 March Current Population Survey and 1991 Swedish Level of Living Survey.
The regressions also include controls for a quadratic in experience and sex.
4Evaluatirig micro data for states over time in the U.S., Card and Krueger (1992) fmd that the earnings-schooling
relationship is flat until the education level reached by the 2nd percentile of the education distribution, and then
becomes log-linear. There is also some evidence of sheep-skin effects around college and high school completion
(e.g., Park, 1994). Although statistical tests often reject the log-linear relationship for a large sample, the figures
clearly show that the log-linear relationship provides a good approximation to the functional form. It should also be

noted that Murphy and Welch (1990) find that a quartic in experience provides a better fit to the data than a
quadratic.

7

Sweden the slope of the relationship between earnings and education is relatively flat, probably a
result of institutional forces that compress wage dispersion in Sweden.

Much research has addressed the question of how to interpret the slope of the education

variable in equation (1). Does it reflect unobserved ability and other characteristics that are
correlated with education, or the true reward that the labor market places on education? Is
education rewarded because it is a signal of ability (Spence, 1973), or does the labor market
value education because it increases productive capabilities? Is the social return to education

higher or lower than the coefficient on education in the Mincerian wage equation? Would all
individuals reap the same proportionate increase in their earnings from attending school an extra

year, or does the return to education vary systematically with individual characteristics?
Definitive answers to these questions are not available, although the weight of the evidence
clearly suggests that education is not merely a proxy for unobserved ability. For example,
Griliches (1977) concludes that instead of finding the expected positive ability bias in the return
to education, "The implied net bias is either nil or negative" once measurement error in education

is taken into account. The more recent evidence from natural experiments also supports this
conclusion.
Table 1 summarizes estimates of the return to education based on natural experiments. A

hallmark of these studies is that the variations in educational attainment used to identify the
return to education stem from a known and arguably exogenous source. For example, Angrist
and Krueger (1991) observe that the combined effect ofschool start age cutoffs and compulsory

schooling laws produces a natural experiment, in which individuals who are born on different

days of the year start school at different ages, and then reach the compulsory schooling age at

different grade levels. If the date of the year individuals are born is unrelated to their inherent
abilities, then, in essence, variations in schooling associated with date of birth provide a natural

experiment for estimating the benefit of obtaining extra schooling in response to compulsory
schooling laws.
8

Using a sample of nearly one million observations from the U.S. Censuses, Angrist and
Krueger find that men born in the beginning of the calendar year, who start school at
older age and can dropout in a lower grade, tend to obtain less schooling. This

a relatively

pattern only holds

for those with a high school education or less, consistent with the view that
compulsory
schooling is responsible for the pattern. They further find that the pattern of education
by

quarter-of-birth is mirrored by the pattern of earnings by quarter-of-birth: in particular,
individuals who are born early in the year tend to earn less, on average.5 Instrumental variables

(IV) estimates that are identified by variability in schooling associated with

quarter-of-birth

suggest that the payoff to education is slightly higher than the OLS estimate.6 Angrist and
Krueger conclude that the upward bias in the return to schooling is about the same order of
magnitude as the downward bias due to measurement error in schooling.

The other studies listed in Table 1 use a variety of other sources of variability in
schooling. Harmon and Walker (1995), for example, more directly examine the effect of
compulsory schooling by studying the effect of changes in the compulsory schooling age in the

United Kingdom, while Card (1995a) exploits variations in schooling attainment

owing to

families' proximity to a college in the U.S. The evidence summarized in the table is drawn from
several countries, and generally supports the conclusion that the private return to education is

at

least as great as simple OLS estimates would suggest.
The evidence specifically for Sweden is more limited, but suggests that the private payoff

to education in Sweden is positive but lower than in most of the rest of the world. For example,
Kjellstrom (1997) uses register earnings data to estimate the payoff to years of schooling in 1991

for men. Controlling for family background, experience, school grades, and test

scores at age 12-

5Again, no such pattern holds for college graduates.

Bound, Jaeger and Baker (1995) argue that Angrist andKrueger's IV estimates are biased toward the OLS estimates
because of weak instruments. However, Staiger and Stock
(1997), Donald and Newey (1997), Angrist, Imbens and
Krueger (1998), and Chamberlain and Imbens (1996) show that weak instruments do not account for the central
conclusion of Angrist and Krueger (1991).
9

13, he finds that the return to a year of education varies between .037 and .05 1, depending

on the

birth cohort. Using register data on earnings for identical twins in 1987,
1990, and 1993,
Isacsson (1999) finds that the cross-twin OLS estimate of the return to education is

.046, and that

the within-twin estimate is .022. When he adjusts the within-twin estimate for
measurement
error in education, however, the return rises to .042, suggesting little downward ability bias.
Similar to the U.S. literature, Ottersten, et al. (1996) find that the return to education in
Sweden
falls by about 10 percent when they estimate
a parametric sample selection model. Meghir and
Palme (1999) find that the return to years of education stemming from increases in

compulsory

schooling is about the same order of magnitude as the cross-sectional estimate of the return to
schooling in Sweden (see the last row of Table 1). They also find evidence that men with higher

ability tend to earn higher returns to education. Using cross-sections from the Swedish Level of

Living Surveys (LNU), Palme and Wright (1999) find that the payoff to education fell for both
men and women from .08 in 1968 to .03-.04 in 1981, and stayed roughly constant between 1981

and 1991. Edin and Holmlund (1995) also find that the college-high school

wage differential

(both before, and especially after, tax) fell considerably between 1968 and 1984, and then rose
gradually rose between 1984 and 1991. In sum, these studies paint a picture of education in

Sweden that is broadly similar to the rest of the world: the OLS estimate of the
return to
education does not appear to be severely affected by ability bias, although the payoff workers
gain from attaining additional education in Sweden is lower than in most other countries that
have been carefully studied.

1.2 Differences in the payoff to human capital across groups
The studies listed in Table 1 typically find somewhat higher estimates of the return to
schooling when variability in schooling from exogenous circumstances is used to estimate the

return than when all variability is used. Although the difference between the OLS and IV
estimates is not statistically significant in most of these studies, there is at least a hint that
10

students who complete more schooling than they would ordinarily choose earn a higher return for

that schooling than others do from the years they voluntarily selected. Ashenfelter, Harmon and
Oosterbeek (1998) assemble estimates from many of the studies in the literature, and find that the
average conventional OLS return to schooling is .065, whereas theaverage IV estimate is .086.
One possible explanation for the tendency of IV estimates to exceed OLS estimates is that

IV estimates are more likely to be published when they obtain statistically significant, positive
coefficients, since there is a presumption that the return to schooling should be positive. Because

the IV studies tend to have relatively imprecise estimates, there may be a selection process at

work which leads to an over-representation of IV studies with relatively large returns to
education in the literature: a larger coefficient is required to have a significant t-ratio the larger
the standard error. Ashenfelter, Harmon and Oosterbeek (1998) provide some evidence for this
type of selection by showing that the return to education from various IV estimates is positively
related to the standard error of the estimates; absent some form of selection, there is no reason to

expect the true return to education to be correlated with its standard error. Once they adjust for
this form of selection bias, however, they still find that thereturn to education is higher in the IV
estimates on average than in the OLS estimates (.080 versus .065).

We tentatively conclude from this evidence that the return to an additional year of
education obtained for reasons like compulsory schooling is more likely to be greater than, than

less than, the conventionally estimated return to schooling. Because the schooling levels of
individuals who are from more disadvantaged backgrounds tend to be those who are most
affected by the interventions examined in Table 1, Card (1995b) and others have concluded that
the return to an additional year of schooling would be higher for individuals from disadvantaged
families than for those from advantaged families.
Other related evidence for the U.S. suggests the payoff to investments in education might

be higher for more disadvantaged youth. First, while studies of the effect of school resources on
student outcomes yield mixed results, there is a tendency to find more beneficial effects of school
11

resources on more disadvantaged students (see, for example, Summers and Wolfe, 1977,
Krueger, 1998 and Rivkin, Hanushek and Kain, 1998). Second, evidence
suggests that preschool programs have particularly large, long-term effects for disadvantaged children
reducing crime and welfare dependence, and

in terms of

raising incomes (see, Barnett, 1992). Third, several

studies have found that students from

advantaged and disadvantaged backgrounds make
equivalent gains on standardized tests during the school year, but children from disadvantaged
backgrounds fall behind during the summer while children from advantaged backgrounds

move

ahead (see Entwisle, Alexander, and Olson, 1997). And fourth, recent evidence
suggests that
college students from more disadvantaged families benefit
more from attending elite colleges
than students from advantaged families (see Dale and Krueger, 1998).

Another finding from the U.S. that may have some bearing on Sweden concerns adult

education and training. Studies of job training programs utilizing randomized

design have

typically found modest payoffs for disadvantaged adult males, and larger payoffs for
disadvantaged women (see, e.g., LaLonde, 1995). Evidence on formal adult education is less
extensive, but also suggests normal rates of return to adults who return to school after

being

displaced. For example, Jacobson, LaLonde and Sullivan (1997) study the experience of workers

in Pennsylvania and Washington who lost a job that they held for three or more

years, and then

entered a community college. Typically, workers completed 8 months to a year of education.
They found that the trainees' earnings increased by 2-5 percent more than other workers who did

not enter a community college, but the payoff was substantially higher for those who
for jobs in certain technical fields and the health

find that the increase in earnings

prepared

professions. Angrist and Newey (1991) also

experienced by young men who returned to school after

entering the labor market is about as large as conventional estimates of the payoff to education.

It is unclear whether the evidence of a higher return to human capital for disadvantaged
youth applies outside the U.S. But in all regions of the world, Psacharopolous (1995) concludes
7Evidence on training effects for Sweden is consistent
with the U.S. experience; see, for example, Forsiund and
Krueger (1997).
12

that there is a higher return to primary schooling than to secondary or

tertiary schooling, which

also suggests disadvantaged children benefit most from additional human capital investments.
1.3 Theoretical reasons for a higher return for investments in

disadvantaged groups
If one tentatively accepts the finding that the return to investments in human
capital is

higher for less advantaged individuals, what might explain such a phenomenon? Card

(1995b)
and Lang (1993) present models in which individuals from lower income households have
higher

discount rates. Since individuals select their level of schooling by
equating the payoff to
schooling to the discount rate, individuals from low-income

households naturally have higher

returns to schooling in these models.

We would propose a complementary explanation, which can also encompass the related
facts about the return to human

capital for disadvantaged groups mentioned above. In particular,

recognize that children acquire human capital from

many sources, including parents, teachers and

classmates. To some extent, the human capital from these sources may be substitutable. If
an
individual from a high-income family, for

example, receives poor reading instruction at school,

the family may compensate by providing tutoring. Low-income families have less
scope to
substitute home resources for schooling resources, and have home environments that
are less
conducive to learning, which might explain why pre-school programs are successful for these

students. It might also be the case that the educational production function is
concave, so
students who are at the low end of the ability distribution because of their endowments benefit
more from additional human capital than students at thehigh end.

Inherently, both these explanations rely on some form of imperfect capital markets
because, if families were not constrained, they would invest in human capital until the point at
which the marginal benefit equals the (universal and constant) marginal cost. But there are
reasons to doubt that the supply of funds for investing in human capital is infinitely elastic at the
market rate for all families. Many authors have noted that future human capital caimot be used
13

to

collateralize loans because of moral hazard problems.

Perhaps more importantly, poorly

endowed families may underestimate the value of education -- after all, education is purchased to

improve information and decision making, and those with a low level of education may be
particularly susceptible to making suboptimal decisions.

1.4 Social versus Private Returns to Education
Thus far, the discussion has focused on the private return to education. The social return

can be higher or lower than the private return. The social return can be higher because of
externalities from education, which could occur, for example, if higher education leads to
technological progress that is not captured in the private return to that education, or if more
education produces positive externalities, such as a reduction in crime and welfare participation,

or more informed political decisions. The former is more likely if human capital is expanded at

higher levels of education while the latter is more likely if it is expanded at lower levels of
education. It is also possible that the social return to education is less than the private return.
For example, Spence (1973) and Machlup (1970) note that education could just be a credential,

which does not raise individuals' productivities. It is also possible that in some developing
countries, where higher education has been associated with a greater incidence of unemployment

(e.g., Blaug, Layard and Woodhall, 1969) and the return to physical capital may exceed the
return to human capital (e.g., Harberger, 1965), increased levels of education may reduce total
output.

Most of the micro human capital literature focuses on the private rather than social return
to education, but the finding of little ability bias in the Mincerian wage equation casts doubt on at

least some forms of credentialling arguments. The possibility of externalities to education
motivates much of the macro growth literature, to which we now turn.

2. Macro growth equations
14

Now, feducation produces not only differences in individual capacities but also
new knowledge resulting in continuous technological, managerial andorganizational
improvements, the growth in national product due to these improvements can
reasonably be regarded as an additional contribution of education.

Fritz Machlup, 1970

If, as Griliches (1977) observed, the micro human capital earnings function spawned "a

vast river of econometric studies threatening to engulf us all," then it could be argued that the

new macro growth literature has generated a Tsunami of cross-country regression studies
threatening to wash us all away. The literature is voluminous. We do not attempt an exhaustive

review here.

Instead, we summarize the main findings and explore the impact of several

econometric issues.
The macro growth literature yields three principally different conclusions from the micro

literature. First, the initial stock of human capital matters, not the change in human capital.
Second, secondary and post-secondary education matter more for growth thanprimary education.
Third, female education has an insignificant and sometimes negative effecton economic growth.

2.1 The Mincer Model and the Macro Growth Model

The typical macro growth model estimated in the literature is motivated by the
convergence literature. This leads to interest in estimating parameters of an underlying model

such as Ay =

-

+ ji, where Ay denotes the annualized change in log GDP per

capita in country j between t-1 and t, a denotes country j's steady-state growth rate, y1 is the
log of initial GDP per-capita, y* is steady-state log GDP per capita, and 3 measures the speed of

convergence to steady-state income. The intuition for this equation is straightforward: countries

that are below their steady-state income level should grow quickly, and those that are above it
should grow slowly. A prototypical estimating equation is:

(2) Ay =

f30

+ f31y + 132SJI +

+

15

where y is the change in log GDP per capita from year t-1 to t, S1 is average years of schooling

in the population in the initial year, Yti is the log of initial GDP per capita, and 4 includes
variables such as inflation, capital, or the "rule of law index.'8 Sometimes equation (2) also
includes an interaction between years of schooling and initial log GDP, to allow the rate of
convergence to vary across countries with different education levels. Also note that schooling is

sometimes specified in logarithmic units in equation (2). Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1995),
Benhabib and Spiegel (1994), and others conclude that the change in schooling has an
insignificant effect if it is included in a GDP growth equation, even though this variable is
predicted to matter in the Mincer model and in some endogenous economic growth models (e.g.,

Lucas, 1988). Equation (2) is typically estimated with data for a cross-section or pooled sample
of countries spanning a 5, 10, or 20 year period.

The Mincer model in equation (1) can be aggregated to the country level, yielding what

Heckman and Klenow (1997) call the "macro Mincer model." The dependent variable of the

macro Mincer model is the log of the geometric mean of earnings, and the key explanatory
variable is mean years of schooling (taken over all levels) for the workforce. If this equation
holds in year t and t- 1, differences over time can be taken for each country, and the countries can

be pooled together. The first-differenced macro-Mincer equation differs from the macro growth
equation typically estimated in the literature in several respects. First, the macro growth models

use the change in log GDP per capita as the dependent variable, rather than the change in the
mean of log earnings. If income has a log normal distribution with a constant variance over time,

and if labor's share is also constant, then aggregating GDP in this way would not matter.9
Second, and probably more importantly, the macro growth literature typically omits the change

in schooling. Third, because the macro models are motivated by issues of convergence they
8Henceforth we use the terms GDP per capita and GDP interchangeably.

9Heckman and Klenow (1997) also point out that half the variance of log income will be added to the GDP equation
if income is log normal. See Heckman and Klenow (1997) for cross-sectional evidence.
16

include the initial level of GDP, capital, and correlates for steady-state income. Indeed, a
primary motivation for including human capital variables at all in theseequations is to control for
y*.

There are at least six ways to interpret the coefficient on the initial level of schooling in
equation (2).b0 First, schooling may be a proxy for steady-state income. Countries with higher

levels of schooling conditional on their initial GDP would be expected to have higher steady-

state income (perhaps because physical capital is easier to obtain than human capital), so we
would expect countries with higher average education levels to grow more (132>0).

If this were

the case, more schooling would not change the steady-state growth rate, although it would raise

steady-state income. Second, schooling could change the steady-state growth rate by enabling
the work force to develop, implement and adopt new technologies (see Nelson and Phelps, 1966
Welch, 1970 and Romer, 1990), again leading to the prediction 132>0. Third, countries with low

initial stocks of human capital could have greater opportunities to grow by implementing
technology developed abroad. In this case, one would expect 132<0. Fourth, a positive (or
negative) coefficient on initial schooling may simply reflect an exogenous, worldwide increase
(or decrease) in the return to schooling (see Krueger and Lindahl, 1998); in this case, countries

with a high initial level of schooling will naturally grow faster (slower). Fifth, anticipated
increases in future economic growth could cause schooling to rise (i.e., reverse causality), as
argued by Bils and Klenow (1998). Sixth, the schooling variable may "pick up" the effect of the

change in education, which is omitted from the equation. Sorting through these explanations is

difficult. Indeed, Topel (1998) argues that "little can be learned" from macro growth equations
because either a positive or negative coefficient on initial human capital is "consistent with the
idea that human capital is a boon to growth and development."

'°The first three of these interpretations are adapted from Topel (1998). Barro (this volume) emphasizes the first
two explanations.
17

2.2 Basic Results and Effect of Measurement Error

Table 2 replicates and extends the "growth accounting" and "endogenous growth"
regressions in Benhabib and Spiegel's influential paper." Their analysis is based on Kyriacou's
(1991) measure of average years of schooling for the work force in 1965 and 1985, Summers and

Heston's GDP and labor force data, and a measure ofphysical capital derived from investment

flows. Following Benhabib and Spiegel, the regression in column (1) relates the aimualized
growth rate of GDP to the log change in years of schooling. From this model, Benhabib and
Spiegel conclude, "Our findings shed some doubt on the traditional role given to human capital

in the development process as a separate factor of production." Instead, they conclude that the
stock of schooling matters for growth (see column 2 and 5) by enabling countries to adopt and
innovate technology faster.

Topel argues that Benhabib and Spiegel's finding of an insignificant and wrong-signed
effect of schooling changes on GDP growth is due to their log specification of education. The
log-log specification follows if one assumes that schooling enters an aggregate Cobb-Douglas
production function linearly. Given the success of the Mincer model, however, we would agree
it is more natural to specify human capital as an exponential function of schooling in a Cobb-

Douglas production function, so the change in years of schooling would enter the growth
equation linearly. In any event, the logarithmic specification of schooling does not fully explain
the perverse effect of educational improvements on growth in Benhabib and Spiegel's analysis.'2

Results of estimating a linear education specification in column 4 still show a statistically
insignificant (though positive) effect of the linear change in schoolingon economic growth.
"We were not able to exactly replicate Benhabib and Spiegel's results because we use a revised version of Summers
and Heston's GDP data. Nonetheless, our estimates are very close to theirs. For example, Benhabib and Spiegel
report coefficients of -.059 for the change in log education and .545 for the change in log capital when they estimate
the model in column 1 of Table 1; our estimates are -.072 and .523. Some of the other coefficients differ because of
scaling; for comparability with later results, we divided the dependent variable and variables measured in changes
by 20.
'2The log specification is part of the explanation, however, because if the model in column (3) is estimated without
the initial level of schooling, the change in log schooling has a negative and statistically significant effect, whereas
the change in the level of schooling has a positive and statistically significant effect if it isincluded as a regressor in
this model instead.
18

Columns 3 and 6 show that controlling for capital is key to Benhabib and Spiegel's
finding of an insignificant effect of the change in schooling variable. When physical capital is

excluded from the growth equation, the change in schooling has a statistically significant and

positive effect in either the linear or log schooling specification. Why does controlling for
capital have such a large effect on education? As shown below, it appears that the insignificant
effect of the change in education is a result of the extraordinarily low signal in the education

change variable. Indeed, conditional on the other variables that Benhabib and Spiegel hold
constant (especially capital), the change in schooling conveys virtually no signal. If the observed

changes in schooling in these data consist purely of random mistakes due to imprecise measures
of education, then one would not expect countries who mistakenly appear to have increased their
schooling levels to grow any faster as a result of the increased measured schooling.

Notice also that the coefficient on capital is high in Table 2, around .50 with a t-ratio
close to 10. In a competitive, Cobb-Douglas economy, the coefficient on capital growth in a
GDP growth regression should equal capital's share of national income. Gollin (1998) estimates
that labor's share ranges from .65 to .80 in most countries, after allocating labor's portion of self-

employment and proprietors' income. Consequently, capital's share is probably no higher than

.20 to .35. Since measured capital is derived from investment flows, and GDP is
a direct
function of investment, errors in the investment data will mechanically bias the coefficient on the

growth in capital upwards; this might explain why capital has such a large and significant
coefficient in the growth equations. If the coefficient on capital growth in column (5) of Table 2

is constrained to equal .20 or .35 -- a plausible range for capital's share -- the coefficient on the
schooling change rises to .09 or .06, and becomes statistically significant.

2.2.1 The Extent of Measurement Error in International Education Data
Random measurement errors in the education data have the same impact on regression
estimates as static does on radio reception — they make it harder to detect the message that is
19

being transmitted in the data. Measurement error in the education data used for cross-country
regressions arises because years of schooling are an imperfect measure of human capital, and
because available cross-country data on average years of schooling are measured with error. We
focus on the latter problem, although the former may also be significant. Benhabib and Spiegel's

measure of average years of schooling for the work force was derived by Kyriacou (1991) as
follows. First, survey-based estimates of average years of schooling for 42 countries in the mid
1 970s were regressed on the countries' primary, secondary and tertiary school enrollment rates.

Coefficient estimates from this model were then used to predict years of schooling from
enrollment rates for countries in other years. This method is likely to generate substantial noise
since the fitted regression may not hold for all countries arid time periods, and enrollment rates

are frequently mismeasured. Changes in education derived from this measure are likely to be
particularly noisy. Benhabib and Spiegel use Kyriacou's education data for 1965, as well as the
change between 1965 and 1985.

The widely-used Barro and Lee (1993) data set is an alternative source of education data.

For 40 percent of country-year cells, Barro and Lee measure average years of schooling by
survey and census-based estimates reported by UNESCO. The remaining observations were
derived from historical enrollment flow data using a "perpetual inventory method." The Barro-

Lee measure is undoubtedly an advance over existing international measures of educational
attainment, but errors in measurement are inevitable because the UNESCO enrollment rates are

of doubtful quality in many countries (see Behrman and Rosensweig, 1994). Additionally,
students educated abroad are miscounted in the flow data, which is probably a larger problem for

higher education. More fundamentally, secondary and tertiary schooling is defined differently

across countries, so the data for secondary and higher schooling are likely to be noisier than
overall schooling. Notice also that because errors cumulate over time in Barro and Lee's stockflow calculations, the errors in education will bepositively correlated over time.

20

Even developed countries' data are sometimes measured with error in the available data

sets. For example, as illustrated in Figure 2, the Barro-Lee data set indicates that average
educational attainment declined by 0.2 years in Sweden between 1980 and 1990. This finding
conflicts with other Swedish data, which show rising educational attainment and enrollment in
this period. Between 1980 and 1990, for example, the Swedish Level of Living Survey (LNU)
indicates that the average number of years of education for those age 18 to 75 increased by just

over one year. The different education trends (as well as different mean education levels)
displayed in Figure 2 may reflect the fact that 8.7 percent of Swedes reported completing a major

part of their education abroad according to the 1991 LNU survey, as well as the recent emphasis
on increasing the educational attainment of adults in Sweden.

We can estimate the reliability of the Barro-Lee and Kyriacou data if we treat the two
variables as independent estimates of educational attainment. The so called "reliability ratio"
gives an estimate of the "attenuation bias" in the estimated education coefficient from a bivariate
regression (see Griliches, 1986, and Angrist and Krueger, 1999). The education data are likely to

be much less reliable when they are expressed in changes rather than in levels because much
more of the signal than noise in the data is likely to cancel out when differences are taken. Table

3 presents estimates of the reliability ratio of the Kyriacou and Barro-Lee education data. The

reliability ratios were derived by regressing one measure of years of schooling on the other.13
The cross-sectional data have considerable signal, with the reliability ratio ranging from .77 to
.85 in the Barro-Lee data, and exceeding .96 in the Kyriacou data. The reliability ratios fall by

10 to 30 percent if we condition on the log of 1965 GDP per capita, which is a common
covariate. More disconcerting, when the data are measured in changes over the 20 year period,

the reliability ratio for the data used by Benhabib and Spiegel falls to less than 20 percent, and
'3Barro and Lee (1993) compare their education measure with alternative series by reporting correlation
coefficients. For example, they report a correlation of .89 with Kyriacous education data and .93 with
Psacharopolous's. Our cross-sectional correlations are not very different. They do not report correlations for
changes in education.
21

to 58 percent in the Barro and Lee data. By way of comparison, note that Ashenfelter and
Krueger (1994) find that the reliability of self-reported years of education is .90 in micro data on

workers, and that the reliability of self-reported differences in education between identical twins
is .57.

These results suggest that if there were no other controls, the estimated effect of
schooling changes in Benhabib and Spiegel's results would be biased downward by 80 percent.
But the bias is likely to be even greater because their regressions include additional explanatory

variables that "soak up" some of the true changes in schooling. Indeed, we estimate that none of

the observed changes in education represent true changes in education once capital growth is
held constant. Instead of rejecting the traditional Mincerian role of education on growth, a more

plausible interpretation is that Benhabib and Spiegel's results shed no light on the role of
education changes on growth because the data contain no signal.

The Barro and Lee data convey more signal than Kyriacous data when expressed in
changes. Indeed, nearly 60 percent of the variability in observed changes in years of education in

the Barro-Lee data represent true changes. This makes the Barro-Lee data preferable to use to
estimate the effect of educational improvements. Despite the greater reliability of the Barro-Lee

data, there is still little signal left over in these data conditional on the other variables in the
models in Table 2. Conditional on capital growth, population growth, and initial schooling and
GDP, only about 40 percent of the remaining variability in schooling changes in the Barro-Lee
data is due to true signal.

Using data on average education for 34 countries from the World Values Survey (WYS),

in Krueger and Lindahl (1998) we find that all years of education in the Barro-Lee data are
measured more accurately than secondary and higher education. Since countries use different

definitions of secondary schooling in the UNESCO data, this finding is not surprising. But it

does suggest that more accurate results will be obtained if all years of schooling are used to
measure human capital.
22

2.3 Additional Growth Models

Measurement errors aside, one could question whether physical capital should be
included in a GDP growth equation because it is potentially an endogenous variable. Fast
growing countries have more access to investment (see Blomström, Lipsey and Zejan, 1993).

Additionally, considerations of the low signal in schooling changes conditional on capital
growth, and the mechanical correlation between measured capital and GDP (since capital is
typically derived from investment), lead us to prefer parsimonious models that omit capital.
Barro (1997) also excludes capital, so there is some precedent for a parsimonious specification in

the growth literature. We first report models without controlling for capital, and then focus on

the effect of capital in long-difference models in Section 2.5. We return to the effect of
controlling for additional explanatory variables in Section 3.2.

Table 4 reports "stylized" macro growth models without controlling for physical capital
for samples spanning 5, 10 or 20 year periods. The dependent variable is the annualized change

in the log of real GDP per capita per year based on Summers and Heston's (1991) Penn World
Tables, Mark 5:6. Results are generally similar if GDP per worker is used instead. We use GDP

per capita because it reflects labor force participation decisions and because it has beenthe focus
of much of the previous literature. The schooling variable is Barro and Le&s measure of average
years of schooling for the population age 25 and older. When the change in average schooling is

included as a regressor in these models, we divide it by the number of years in the time span so
the coefficients are comparable across columns, and comparable to Table 2. The equations were

estimated by OLS, but the standard errors reported in the table allow for a country-specific
component in the error term. We initially exclude other variables (such as the fertility rate and
rule of law index) that are sometimes included in macro growth models to focus on education,

and because those other variables are probably influenced themselves by education. Perhaps
more importantly, measurement error problems are exacerbated by including covariates. For
23

example, the correlation between the log fertility rate and education is -.85 in the Barro-Lee data
set, which implies that the relative signal of average schooling falls to only one third if fertility is
held constant.'4

Our findings parallel Topel's. The change in schooling has little effect on GDP growth
when the growth equation is estimated with high frequency changes (i.e., 5 years). However,

increases in average years of schooling have a positive and statistically significant effect on

economic growth over periods of 10 or 20 years. As discussed below, the magnitude of the
coefficient estimates on both the change and initial level of schooling are large, probably too
large to represent the causal effects of schooling.

The finding that the time span matters so much for the change in education also suggests

that measurement error in schooling plays a major role in these estimates. Over short time
periods, there is little change in a nation's true schooling level, so the transitory component of
measurement error in schooling would be large relative to variability in the true change. Over
longer periods, true education levels are more likely to change, increasing the signal relative to
the noise in measured changes.

Measurement error bias appears to be greater over the 5 and 10 year horizons, but it is

still substantial over 20 years. Since the change in schooling and initial level of GDP are
essentially uncorrelated, the coefficient on the 20-year change in schooling in column 8 is biased
downward by a factor of 1

which is around 40 percent according to Table 3. Thus, adjusting

for measurement error would lead the coefficient on the change in education to increase from .18

to .30 = .18/(l-.4). This is an enormous return to investment in schooling, equal to three or four
times the private return to schooling estimated within most countries. Moreover, even if labor
only captures two-thirds of the rise in GDP associated with an increase in human capital, as is

sometimes assumed, the net payoff to labor based on this coefficient is at least double the
conventional return to schooling.

'

We arrive at this estimate by assuming that R5 is .81 in the Barro-Lee cross-country schooling data. Using the
formula in footnote 15, conditional on the log fertility rate the reliability of schooling is (.8l.852 )I(1.852) = .32.

24

Like Benhabib and Spiegel, Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1995) conclude that
contemporaneous changes in schooling do not contribute to economic growth, although they note

that measurement error in schooling could bias their results. There are four reasons to suspect
that measurement error has a particularly acute effect on their estimates. First, Barro and Sala-i-

Martin analyze a mixed sample that combines changes over both 5-year (1985-90) and 10-year
(1965-75 and 1975-85) periods; examining changes over such short periods tends to exacerbate

the downward bias due to measurement errors. Second, they examine changes in average years

of secondary and higher schooling. As was shown in Table 3, the reliability of secondary and
higher schooling is lower than the reliability of all years of schooling, and the changes are likely
to be less reliable as well. Third, they include separate variables for changes in male and female

years of secondary and higher schooling. These two variables are highly correlated (r.85),
which would exacerbate measurement error problems if the signal in the variables is more highly

correlated than the noise. If average years of secondary and higher schooling for men and
women combined, or years of secondary and higher schooling for either men or women, is used
instead of all years of schooling in the 10-year change model in column 6 of Table 4, the change

in education has a sizable, statistically significant effect. Fourth, they estimate a restricted
Seemingly Unrelated Regression (SUR) system, which exacerbates measurement error bias
because asymptotically this estimator is equivalent to a weighted average of an OLS and fixed-

effects estimator, and it is well known that a fixed-effects estimator exacerbates measurement
error bias.

Because Barro (1997) stresses male, secondary and higher education as a key determinant

of growth, we have also explored the sensitivity of our results to using different measures of
education, namely primary versus higher education, and male versus female education. We have

a preference for measuring schooling by the average of all years of education, however, because

this is the variable specified by the Mincer model, and because primary schooling is a pre-

25

requisite for secondary and higher schooling.'5 Focusing only on secondary and higher education

is analogous to measuring office capital by only counting the number of stories of buildings
above the tenth floor. In any event, when we test for different effects of years of primary and
secondary and higher schooling in the model in column 6 of Table 4, we cannot reject that all
years of schooling have the same effect on GDP growth (p-value equals .40 for initial levels and

.12 for changes). We also find insignificant differences between primary and secondary
schooling if we just use male schooling. We do find significant differences if we further
disaggregate schooling levels by gender, however. The initial level of primary schooling has a
positive effect for women and a negative effect for men, the initial level of secondary school has
a negative effect for women and a positive effect for men, the change in primary schooling has a

positive effect for women and a negative effect for men, and the change in secondary schooling

has a negative effect for women and a positive effect for men. Because schooling levels are
highly correlated for men and women, one needs to be cautious interpreting regressions that
include disaggregated education variables.

Barro (this volume) offers an intriguing explanation for his estimated negative effect of

female education on growth: because of gender discrimination, female labor may not be
efficiently utilized in the labor market in many countries. In the extreme, women may be
educated but discouraged from joining the labor force, so their human capital does not directly
contribute economic output. To test this hypothesis, we used data from the ILO on labor force
participation by gender, and included interactions between gender-specific schooling and genderspecific labor force participation rates in the specification in column 5 ofTable 4, as well as main
effects of the variables.16 These results yielded partial support for the discrimination hypothesis.

The interaction between female labor force participation and schooling is positive and

'

The macro Mincer model would suggest that average years education of all workers is the appropriate explanatory
variable. Because the Barro-Lee data set does not contain schooling just for workers, we use average schoolingfor
the population age 25 and older.
16
The labor force data are from "Economically Active Population 1950-2010," Bureau of Labor Statistics,
International Labour Office, Geneva, 1997.
26

statistically significant, suggesting that there is less of a negative effect of female education on
growth in countries that have relatively more women in the labor force. But, even for a country

with a 100 % female labor force participation rate, female education is predicted to have a very
small, positive effect on growth that is virtually indistinguishable from no effect.

2.4 Effect of Measurement Error on Initial Level of Education
The positive effect of the initial level of education on growth is often interpreted as
evidence of large externalities from the stock of a nation's human capital on economic growth.
Topel (1998), however, argues that "the magnitude of the effect of education on growth is vastly

too large to be interpreted as a causal force." Indeed, Topel calculates that thepresent value of a
one percentage point faster growth rate from an additional year of schooling would be about four

times the cost, with a 5 percent real discount rate. He concludes that externalities from schooling
may exist, but they are unlikely to be so large.

One possibility is that the level of schooling is spuriously reflecting the effect of the
change in schooling on growth, which could account for its large impact on growth. Countries
with higher initial levels of schooling also tended to have larger increases in schooling over the
next 10 or 20 years in Barro and Lee's data, which is remarkable given that measurement error in

schooling induces a negative covariance between the change and initial level of schooling. We

initially suspected that the initial level of schooling spuriously picks up the effect of schooling
increases, either because schooling changes are excluded from the growth equation or because

the included variable is noisy. In Krueger and Lindahl (1998; section 2.4), however, we show
that this is most unlikely. In particular, we show that if education is measured equally reliably
each period, and if first and second period education are included in the growth regression, then

the sum of the two coefficients on the education variables will be biased toward zero. Since a

test of whether the initial level of education influences economic growth conditional on the
change in education turns on whether the sum of the coefficients on current and lagged education
27

is positive, measurement error in education would tend to produce a bias against finding that the
initial level of education influences growth.

2.5 Controlling for Physical Capital
The level and growth rate of capital are natural control variables to include in the GDP
growth regressions. First, initial log GDP can be substituted for capital in a Solow growth model
only if capital's share is constant over time and across countries (e.g., a Cobb-Douglas production

function). Second, and more importantly for our purposes, capital-skill complementaritywould

imply that some of the increased output attributed to higher education in Table 4 should be
attributed to increased capital (see, e.g., Goldin and Katz, 1997). As mentioned earlier, however,
systematic correlation between measurement errors in capital and GDP, as well as endogeneity of

capital, are reasons to be wary about including the growth of capital in a GDP equation.
Nonetheless, here we examine the robustness of our results to controlling for physical capital.

Column (1) of Table 5 reports an estimate of the same 20-year growth model as in
column 9 of Table 4, augmented to include the growth of capital per worker. We use Klenow

and Rodriguez-Clare's (1997) capital data because they appear to have more signal than
Benhabib and Spiegel's capital data.'7 The coefficient on the change in education falls by more

than 50 percent when capital growth is included, although it remains barely statistically
significant at the .10 level. In colunm (2) we add the initial log capital per worker, and in column

(3) exclude the initial log GDP from the column (2) specification. Including initial log capital

drives the coefficient on the change in schooling to close to zero. Notice also that the log of
initial capital per worker has little effect in column (3).18 The growth of capital per worker has
'7A regression of Benhabib and Spiegel's change in log capital on the corresponding variable from Klenow and
Rodriguez-Clare yields a regression coefficient (and standard error) of .95 (.065). The reverse regression yields a
coefficient of .69 (.05). These estimates could be biased toward one because of correlated measurement errors in
the two variables, since both depend on investment.
'81f the change in log capital per work is dropped from the model in column (3), then initial log capital perworker
does have a statistically significant, negative effect, and the schooling coefficients aresimilar to those in column 9
of Table 4.
28

an enormous effect on GDP growth, greatly exceeding capital's share in most countries. This
finding is consistent with the errors in capital being systematically related to GDP, since both are

functions of investment. To explore the sensitivity of the results, in column (4) we constrain the

coefficient on the growth in capital to equal 0.35, which is on the high end of the distribution of

non-labor's share around the world. These results indicate that both the change and initial level
of schooling are associated with economic growth. Moreover, as Heckman and Kienow (1997)

find in cross-sectional data, the coefficient on the change in education is similar to
microeconometric estimates.

As mentioned earlier, including capital could exacerbate the measurement error in
schooling. Indeed, we find that the reliability of Barro-Lee's 20-year change in schooling data
falls from .58 to .46 once we condition on the change in capital, suggesting that the coefficient on

the change in schooling in Table 5 should be roughly doubled. In column (5), to try to overcome

measurement error we estimate the growth equation by instrumental variables, using Kyriacou's

schooling data as excluded instruments for the change and level of schooling. This is the same
estimation strategy previously used by Pritchett (1998), but we employ different schooling data

as instruments, and use a different measure of capital. Unfortunately, because there is so little
signal in education conditional on capital, the IV results yield a huge standard error (.167) for the

effect of the change in education. Pritchett similarly finds a large standard errors from his IV
estimates, although his point estimates are negative.'9 One final point on these estimates is that,
to be comparable to the Mincerian return to schooling, the coefficient on the change in education

should be scaled up by a factor equal to one over labor's share if the aggregate production
function is Cobb-Douglas and human capital is an exponential function of schooling.20 This
would raise the cross-country estimate of the benefit of schooling increases even further.

'9Aside from the different data sources, the difference between our IV results and Pritchett's appears to result from
his use of log schooling changes. If we use log schooling changes, we also find negative point estimates.
20 We are grateful to Kjetil Storesletten for pointing this out to us.
29

We draw four main lessons from this investigation of the role of capital. First, the change

in capital has an enormous effect in a GDP growth equation, probably because of a mechanical

relationship between the errors in measuring capital and GDP or because of reverse causality.
Second, the impact of both the level and change in schooling on economic growth is sensitive to

whether the change in capital is included in the growth equation and allowed to have a
coefficient that greatly exceeds capital's share. Third, controlling for capital exacerbates
measurement error problems in schooling. Instrumental variables estimates designed to correct
for measurement error in schooling yield such a large standard error on the change in schooling
that the results are consistent with schooling changes having no effect on growth or a large effect

on growth; in other words, these results are uninformative. Fourth, when the coefficient on

capital growth is constrained to equal a plausible value, changes in years of schooling are
positively related to economic growth. Unless measurement error problems in schooling and
capital can be overcome, we do not think the cross-country growth equations that control for
capital growth will be very informative insofar as the benefit of education is concerned.

In all, we think the results in this section fairly consistently point to an association
between GDP growth and contemporaneous education changes, once measurement error in

education is taken into account. Although this relationship could come about for spurious
reasons (e.g., fast growing countries could choose to spend more of their resources on education),
the growth equations do not reject a "traditional role" for human capital.

3. Robustness of the Effect of Initial Level of Education on Growth
[lJt is not possible to draw a simple straight line relating secondary education
to economic growth.
W. Arthur Lewis, 1964

30

The macro growth equations impose the restriction that all countries have the same
relationship between growth and initial education, and that the relationship is linear. The first
assumption is particularly worrisome because the micro evidence clearly indicates that the return

to schooling varies considerably across countries, and even across regions within countries. For
example, institutional factors that compress the wage structure in some countries result in lower

returns to schooling in those countries (see, e.g., the essays in Freeman and Katz, 1995). If the
private return to education varies across countries, externalities from the stock of education may

vary as well. Thus, we first allow the effect of the level of education on growth to vary by
country. Next, we examine the effect of relaxing the linearity assumption and controlling for
additional variables. Both of these extensions to the standard growth specification suggest that
the constrained specification estimated in the literature shouldbe viewed with caution.

3.1 Heterogeneous Country Education Effects
The specifications previously estimated in the empirical growth literature constrain the
initial level of education to have the same effect in each country. A more general model would
allow the initial level of education to have a different effect in different countries. Since there is

more than one observation per country in the 5- and 10-year growth models, this easily can be
accomplished by interacting a set of dummy variables indicating each country with the base year

education level for those countries. The average of the country-specific-education slopes
provides an informative measure of the effect of initial education on growth for the average
the
country. It is instructive to note that the coefficient on initial education estimated from
restricted, single-coefficient OLS model can be decomposed as a weighted average of the more
general country-specific slopes, where the weights are the country-specific contributions to the
overall variance in schooling.2' This result is important because it indicates that the source of
1998. If country fixed effects are
21This results requires that there are no other covariates; see Krueger and Lindahi,
a
weighted
average of the countryincluded in the model, the OLS constant coefficient can still be decomposed as
But
we
exclude
country
fixed
effects
so that these estimates
specific coefficients even if there are other covariates.
fixed
effects
would
exacerbate
measurement
error bias.
are comparable to the earlier ones, and because including
31

variation in the single-coefficient regression and average of the variable coefficients model is the
same, but the country-specific slopes are aggregated differently in the two estimates.
Of course, if the assumptions of the constant-coefficient model hold (and the other Gauss-

Markov assumptions hold), the OLS weights are the most efficient weights. But if a variablecoefficient model is more appropriate, there is no a priori reason to prefer the OLS weights over

other weights. Indeed, it is rather odd to weight the country-specific slopes by the OLS weights
if the slopes differ across countries. The unweighted-average coefficient is probably a more
relevant summary statistic because it represents the expected value of the education coefficient
for a random country in the world.

In Krueger and Lindahl (1998; Table 6) we estimated variable-coefficient models using

of

5-year and 10-year changes in GDP; we summarize the results here. First, consider results
assumption in the models in colunm 1 and 5 of
relaxing the homogenouseduCatiOflc0effiC1t
Table 4. The constant education slope assumption is overwhelmingly rejected by the data for
than doubles when the
each time period (p-value < 0.000 1). Indeed, the R2 of the equations more
education slopes are unconstrained. Of more consequence, the average slope coefficient on the

initial level of education is negative, though not
coefficient models (see Krueger and Lindahi, 1998,

statistically significant, in the variableTable 6). These results cast doubt on the

the
interpretation of initial education in the constrained macro growth equation common in
literature.

We also estimated variable-coefficient models using the average years of secondary and
higher schooling for males instead of the average years of all education for the adult population.

This variable has been emphasized as a key determinant of economic growth in Barros

work.

than
Again, however, the results of the constant-coefficient model are qualitatively different

those of the variable-coefficient model. Indeed, for the average country in the sample, a greater
coefficients is still informative when there are
We would also point out that the average of the country-specific
of the
covariates, even if the single coefficient estimate can not be decomposed as a simple weighted average
country-specific coefficients.
32

initial level of secondary and higher education has a statistically significant, negative association
with economic growth over the ensuing 10 years.22

3.2 Exploring the Linearity Assumption and Additional Explanatory Variables
It is common in the empirical growth literature to assume that initial education has a
linear effect on subsequent GDP growth. Although Mincer (1974) provides conditions under
which education has a linear relationship with log earnings, these conditions do not necessarily

imply that the level of initial education has a linear relationship with income growth. To
examine the linearity assumption, we included initial education and its square in the 10-year
change model in column 4 of Table 4. These results are reported in the first column of Table 6.
The data seem to prefer the quadratic specification, as the squared education term is statistically

significant. More importantly, the relationship is inverted-U shaped, with a peak at 7.5 years of

education. Since the mean education level for OECD countries in 1990 was 8.4 years in Barro
and Lee's data, the average OECD country is on the downward-sloping segment of the education-

growth profile. If we also include the square of log GDP per capita, the initial level of education

continues to have a nonlinear effect that peaks below the average education level of OECD
countries; see column 2. We also find an inverted-U shaped relationship between education and
GDP growth that peaks below the level of education of developed countries when we examine 5and 20-year changes in GDP.

The results in columns 3 and 4 of Table 6 indicate that the effect of the initial level of
education is sensitive to including other covariates in the model. These models hold constant
several additional explanatory variables that are often controlled for in the literature, including

the log of the fertility rate, log life expectancy, and investment and government spending as
22CasselIi, Esquivel and Lefort (1996, Table 4) also find that the coefficient on male secondary and higher education

has a negative effect on growth when they use a generalized method of moments model to estimate a firstdifferenced specification of the growth equation. It should be noted that our random coefficient approach uses the
same cross-section variation in education to identif' the coefficient on education as our OLS results in Table 4.
33

shares of GDP.23 Although one could question whether these variables are appropriate
of the initial
exogenous regressors to include in a growth equation, it is clear that the significance
level of education in either the linear and quadratic specification is greatly diminished when

these variables are controlled for. Indeed, the initial level of schooling becomes statistically
insignificant if just the log of the fertility rate is included in the equation. Average years of
secondary and higher schooling solely for men has a more robust association with economic

growth than the broader education measure used in Table 6 if it is included in the growth
equation instead of the average schooling level of the entire population. But, as we discussed
previously, we believe there are strong reasons for preferring the broader measure of education.

3.3 Estimates for OECD Countries
In view of the sensitivity of the effect of the initial education level on economic growth to

the econometric assumptions investigated above,

it is worth exploring whether the results hold

for the sample of OECD countries. Table 7 presents estimates of the effect of initial education
20 year
on growth for the subset of OECD countries, measuring GDP growth over 5, 10 or
and small
periods. In each case, the initial level of education had a statistically insignificant
effect on economic growth. We similarly find that the initial level of secondary and higher
education for men has a statistically insignificant effect if it is included in the growth equation
in
for OECD countries instead of the broader schooling measure. These results are not surprising
light of the earlier finding that the average OECD country is on the downward-sloping segment
of the education-growth curve estimated in Table 6.

Together, the results in this section cast doubt on the likelihood that there are large

in the less
growth externalities from the initial level of education. The pattern of results
restrictive (i.e., nonlinear and variable coefficient) specifications, and models with more
extensive covariates, cast doubt on the view that the initial level of education exerts a strong
23

These data

were derived from http://www.nber.Org/PUbThafb
34

influence on growth, especially in high education countries. Most notably, the initial level of

education appears to be unrelated to subsequent growth in OECD countries even in the
parsimonious model.

4. Conclusion and Policy Implications
And the preservation of the means of knowledge, among the lowest ranks, is of
more importance to the public, than all the property of the richmen in the
country. It is even of more consequence to the rich themselves, and to
their posterity.
John Q. Adams, 1765

The micro and macro literatures both emphasize the role of education for raising income,

and income growth. An accumulation of research using individual-level education and income
data since the beginning of the 20th century provides robust evidence of a substantial payoff to
investment in education, especially for those who traditionally complete low levels of schooling.
From the micro evidence, it is unclear whether the social return to schooling exceeds the private

return, although available U.S. evidence suggests that positive externalities in the form of
reduced crime and reduced welfare participation are more likely to be reaped from investments in

disadvantaged than advantaged groups. The macroeconomic evidence ofexternalities in terms of

technological progress from investments in higher education seems to us to be more fragile.

Externalities from the initial stock of human capital appear particularly unlikely to apply to
OECD countries.

Our findings help resolve an important inconsistency between the micro and macro
literatures on education: Contrary to Benhabib and Spiegel's (1994) and Barro and Sala-iMartin's (1995) conclusions, the cross-country regressions indicate that the change in education
is positively associated with economic growth once measurement error in education is accounted

for. Griliches (1997) conjectured that the "jarring" finding of no relationship between education

changes and GDP growth was due to either measurement error in education or a tendency for
35

more highly educated workers to enter sectors of

the economy whose contribution to GDP are

systematically under measured. Measurement error in education appears sufficient to

the insignificant effect of education changes. Indeed, after adjusting for

change in average years of schooling often has a greater effect in the

account for

measurement error, the

cross-country regressions

than in the within-country micro

regressions. Controlling for capital growth reduces the effect of
education changes, but the magnitude of the effect in the cross-country data is still

at least as

great as the micro return to education oncemeasurement error is taken into account.

The large return to schooling changes found in the cross-country models
suggests that
reverse causality or omitted variables create problems at the country level of analysis,
or that
increases in average educational attainment generate nationwide externalities. Although the
microeconometrjc evidence in several countries suggests that within countries the causal effect of

education on earnings can be estimated reasonably well by taking education as
does not follow that cross-country differences in education can be taken as a

exogenous, it

cause of income as

opposed to a result of current income or

anticipated income growth. Moreover, countries that
improve their educational systems are likely to concurrently change other policies that enhance

growth, producing a different source of omitted-variable bias in cross-country analyses.
Education, in the eloquent description of Harbison and Myers (1965), "is both the seed and the

flower of economic development." It is difficult to separate the causal effect of education from
the positive income demand for education in cross-country data. For this reason, Mankiw (1997)

describes the presumed exogeneity of school enrollment as the "weak link" in the

empirical

growth literature. In our opinion, this link is unlikely to be strengthened unless the

cross-country
literature can identify natural experiments in schooling attainment similar to those that have been
exploited in the microeconometrjc literature, and unless measurement errors in the cross-country
data are explicitly taken into account in the econometric modelling.

For policy makers, the obvious prescription to enhance growth is that, on the margin,
funds should be invested in the components of the education system that generate the highest
36

social returns. But the micro and macro evidence suggest that the returns to

investing in different

educational levels are likely to differ across countries, depending on the
country's state of
development, distribution of income, and structure of the education system. There
are unlikely
to be universal answers. In the United States, there is much support for the view that
in young, disadvantaged children have the highest returns, and that it is

investments

very difficult to improve

the economic circumstances of adolescent high school dropouts with short-term
job training
(e.g., Heckman, 1998). This view implicitly underlies the recent increased
support for Head
Start and smaller primary school classes, and the shift in JTPA funds
away from job training for
out-of-school youth. But the circumstances inthe U.S. may be unique.
Optimal education policy for Sweden may be quite different than for the U.S. Heckman

(1998) argues that investment in very young children in America pays a high return because

"early learning begets later learning." In the U.S., 22 percent of children under
age 6 live in
families that fall below the poverty line, and an incredible 59 percent of children under
6 who
live with single mothers are in
poverty (U.S. Census Bureau, 1998). High rates of childhood
poverty, coupled with a patchwork system of childcare arrangements, may lead to particularly
high payoffs to investments in young children in the U.S. Moreover, the lagging development of

many American children, and high existing subsidies to colleges (see Winston and Yen, 1995),
may reduce the return on investments at older ages. Sweden has a much more equal distribution

of income, and a more extensive and universal system of childcare. As
may be in a situation where investments in education for older

a consequence, Sweden

students pay a higher return than

investments in programs for very young children. But one must also be concerned that the U.S.

evidence vis-à-vis age may reflect the fact that there are critical stages of

development during

childhood that condition the payoff to investments at various ages, and that these stages in

large

part determine the payoff to investing in certain age groups irrespective of economic and social
circumstances.

37

Another overriding factor in Sweden involves the compression of the wage structure,
which depresses the private return to acquiring skills compared to the U.S. and most countries of

the world. Edin and Holmiund (1995) and Fredriksson (1997) find that college enrollment in
Sweden is quite responsive to the private payoff to education prevailing at the time students
make their enrollment decisions. Although Sweden has a high level of
post-secondary
educational attainment by world standards, it is nonetheless likely that the level of educational

attainment is distorted by the depressed private payoff to education and skills. This
consideration may militate in favor of a policy of increasing education at higher levels in
Sweden. How this is best accomplished is unclear, however. The current thrust of subsidizing

dislocated workers to return to school has benefits and costs. For example, older workers will

enter the workforce more quickly than, say, pre-school children, so the gestation period for

investments in older workers' human capital is much shorter. On the other hand, the U.S.
experience has been one of rather ordinary returns to investments in education for dislocated

workers. Moreover, in Sweden some observers are concerned that subsidizing unemployed
workers to return to school may create a disincentive in which some workers intentionally delay
completing their education, find ajob only to become unemployed, and then spend a long period
in school while collecting unemployment insurance benefits.

38

References
Angrist, J., Imbens, G. and Krueger, A. (1998), Jackknife Instrumental Variables Estimation,
forthcoming in Journal of Applied Econometrics.

Angrist, J. and Krueger, A. (1991), Does Compulsory School Attendance Affect Schooling and
Earnings?, Quarterly Journal of Economics 106, 979-1014.
Angrist, J. and Krueger, A. (1999), Empirical Strategies in LaborEconomics, forthcoming in:
0. Ashenfelter and D. Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, (North Holland, Amsterdam).
Angrist, J., and Newey, W. (1991), Over-Identification Tests inEarnings Functions with Fixed
Effects, Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 9, 317-323.

Ashenfelter, 0., Harmon, C. and Oosterbeek, H. (1998), Empirical Estimation of the
Schooling/Earnings Relationship - A Review, mimeo.
Ashenfelter, 0. and Krueger, A. (1994), Estimates of the Economic Return to Schooling from a
New Sample of Twins, American Economic Review 84, 1157-1173.
Barnett, W. (1992), Benefits of Compensatory Preschool Education, Journal of Human
Resources 27, 279-3 12.
Barro, R. (1997), Determinants of Economic Growth: A Cross-Country Empirical Study, Lionel
Robbins Lectures, (MIT Press, Cambridge).
Barro, R. arid Lee, J.-W. (1993), International Comparisons of Educational Attainment, Journal
of Monetary Economics 32, 363-394.

Barro, R. and Sala-i-Martjn, X. (1995), Economic Growth (McGraw-Hill, New York).
Becker, G. (1964), Human Capital (Columbia University Press, NewYork).
Becker, G. and Chiswick, B. (1966), Education and the Distribution ofEarnings, American
Economic Review 56, 358-369.
Behrmari, J. and Birdsall, N. (1983), The Quality of Schooling: Quantity Alone Is Misleading,
American Economic Review 73, 928-946.
Behrman, J. and Rosensweig, M. (1994), Caveat Emptor: Cross-country Data on Education and
the Labor Force, Journal of Development Economics 44, 147-172.

39

Benhabjb, J. and Spiegel, M. (1994), The Role of Human Capital in Economic
Development:
Evidence from Aggregate
Cross-Country Data, Journal of Monetary Economics 34, 143-174.
Bus, M. and Klenow, P. (1998), Does Schooling Cause Growth or the Other
Way Around?,
National Bureau of Economic
Research, Working Paper 6393, Cambridge.
Blaug, M., Layard, R. and Woodhall, M. (1969), The Causes of Graduate
Unemployment in
India, (Allen Lane, Penguin Press, London).
Blomström, M., Lipsey, R. and Zejan, M (1993), Is Fixed Investment the Key to
Economic
Growth, National Bureau of Economic
Research, Working Paper No. 4436, Cambridge.
Bound, J., Jaeger, D. and Baker, R. (1995), Problems with Instrumental Variables
Estimation
When the Correlation Between the Instruments and the Endogenous
Explanatory
Variable
is
Weak, Journal of the American Statistical
Association 90, 443-450.
Butcher, K. and Case, A. (1994), The Effect of Sibling Composition on Women's Education
and
Earnings, Quarterly Journal of Economics 109, 531-563.
Card, D. (1 995a), Using Geographic Variation in College Proximity to Estimate
Schooling, in: L. Christofides et al., eds., Aspects of Labor Market Behaviour: the Returns to
Essays in Honour
of John Vanderkamp
(University of Toronto Press, Toronto), 201-222.

Card, D. (1995b), Earnings, Schooling and Ability Revisited, in: S. Polachek, ed., Research
in
Labor Economics. (JAI Press, Greenwich).

Card, D. (1998), The Causal Effect of
Schooling on Earnings, forthcoming in: 0. Ashenfelter
and D. Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics (North Holland,
Amsterdam).
Card, D. and Krueger, A. (1992), Does School Quality Matter? Returns to Education and the
Characteristics of Public Schools in the United States, Journal of Political Economy 100, 1-40.

Card, D. and Krueger, A. (1996), Labor Market Effects of School Quality: Theory and
Evidence,
in: G. Burtless, ed., The Link Between
Schools, Student Achievement, and Adult Success
(Brookings Institution, Washington).
Casselli, F., Esquivel, G. and Lefort, F.
(1996), Reopening the Convergence Debate: A New
Look at Cross-Country Growth Empirics, Journal of Economic Growth 1, 363-389.
Chamberlain, G. and Imbens, G. (1996), Hierarchical Bayes Models with Many Instrumental
Variables, mimeo., Harvard University.

Conneely, K. and Uusitalo, R. (1998),
Estimating Heterogeneous Treatment Effects in the
Becker Schooling Model, mimeo., University of Helsinki.
40

Dale, S. and Krueger, A. (1998),
Estimating the Payoff to Attending an Elite College: An
Application of Selection on Observables and
Unobservables, mimeo., Princeton University.
Donald, S. and Newey, W. (1997), Choosing the Number of Instruments,
mimeo., MIT.

Duflo, E. (1998), Evaluating the Schooling and Labor Market Consequences of
a School
Construction Program: An Analysis of the Indonesian Experience, mimeo., MIT.
Edin, P.A., and Hoimlund, B. (1995), The Swedish Wage Structure: The Rise
and Fall of
Solidarity Wage Policy?, in: R. Freeman and L. Katz, eds., Differences and Changes in
Wage
Structures. (University of Chicago Press, Chicago), 307-344.
Entwisle, D., Alexander, K., Olson, L. (1997), Children, Schools and Inequality
(Westview
Press, Boulder).
Forsiund, A. and Krueger, A. (1997), An Evaluation of the Swedish Active Labor
Market Policy:
New and Received Wisdom, in: R. Freeman, B. Swedenborg, and R. Topel,
eds.,
The
Welfare
State in Transition (University of
Chicago Press, Chicago), 267-298.
Fredriksson, P. (1997), Economic Incentives and the Demand for Higher Education,
Scandinavian Journal of Economics 99, 129-142.
Freeman, R. and Katz, L., eds. (1995), Differences
and changes in wage structures (University of
Chicago Press, Chicago), 25-66.

Goldin, C. and Katz, L., The Origins of
Technology-Skill Complementarity National Bureau of
Economic Research, Working Paper No. 5657, Cambridge.
Gollin, D. (1998), Getting Income Shares Right: Self Employment, Unincorporated
Enterprise,
And the Cobb-Douglas Hypothesis, mimeo., Williams College.

Gorseline, D. (1932), The Effect of Schooling Upon Income (University of Indiana
Press,
Bloomington).
Griliches, Z. and Mason, W. (1972),
Education, Income, and Ability, Journal of Political
Economy 80, Part II, S74-S 103.
Griliches, Z. (1977), Estimating the Returns to Schooling: Some Econometric Problems,
Econometrjca 45, 1-22.
Griliches, Z. (1986), Economic Data Issues, in: Z. Griliches and M. Intriligator, eds., Handbook
of Econometrics (North-Holland,
Amsterdam).
41

Griliches, Z. (1997), Education, Human Capital, and Growth: A Personal Perspective, Journal of
Labor Economics 15, S330-342.
Hall, R. and Jones, I. (1998), Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More Output per
Worker than Others?, Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
Harberger, A. (1965), Investment in Men Versus Investment in Machines: The Case of India, in
C. Anderson and M. Bowman, eds., Education and Economic Development (Aldine Publishing,
Chicago), 11-50.
Harbison, F. and Myers, C., eds. (1965), Manpower and Education (McGraw-Hill, New York),
xi.

Harmon, C. and Walker, I. (1995), Estimates of the Economic return to Schooling for the United
Kingdom, American Economic Review 85, 1278-1286.
Heckman, J. (1998), Rethinking Myths About Education and Training; Understanding The
Sources of Skill Formation In A Modern Economy, mimeo., David Kinley Lecture and
Presidential Address, Midwest Economics Association.
Heckman, J. and Klenow, P. (1977), Human Capital Policy, mimeo., University of Chicago.
Ichino, A. and Winter-Ebmer, R. (1988), The Long-Run Educational Cost of World War II,
mimeo., European University Institute.
Isacsson, G. (1999), Estimates of the Return to Schooling in Sweden from a Large Sample of
Swedish Twins, forthcoming in Labour Economics.
Jacobson, L., LaLonde, R., and Sullivan, D. (1997), The Returns from Community College
Schooling for Displaced Workers, mimeo., Westat, Inc.
Kane, T. and Rouse, C. (1995), Labor Market Returns to Two- and Four-Year College,
American Economic Review 85, 600-614.

Kjellstrom, C. (1997), Omitted Variable Bias and the Wage Premium for Schooling: New
Swedish Evidence, Working Paper 2/1997, Swedish Institute for Social Research.
Klenow, P. and Rodriguez-Clare, A. (1997), The Neoclassical Revival in Growth Economics:
Has it Gone Too Far?, in: B. Bernanke and J. Rotemberg, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual
(MIT Press, Cambridge), 73-103.
Krueger, A. (1998), Experimental Estimates of Education Production Functions, Quarterly
Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
42

Krueger, A. and M. Lindahi (1998), Education for Growth: Why and For Whom?, mimeo.,
Princeton University.

Krueger, A. and Pischke, J.-S. (1995), A Comparative Analysis of East and West GermanLabor
Markets: Before and After Unification, in: R. Freeman and L. Katz, eds., Differences and
Changes in Wage Structures. (University of Chicago Press, Chicago), 405-445.
Kyriacou, G. (1991), Level and Growth Effects of Human Capital, C.V. Starr Center, Working
Paper, New York University.
Lang, K. (1993), Ability Bias, Discount Rate Bias and the Return to Education, mimeo.,Boston
University, Department of Economics.
Lemieux, T. and Card, D. (1998), Education, Earnings, and the 'Canadian G.I. Bill', mimeo.,
University of Montreal.
Lewis, W. (1964), Secondary Education and Economic Structure, Social and Economic Studies
10, 219-232. Reprinted in M. Gersovitz, ed., (1983). Selected Economic Writings of W. Arthur
Lewis (New York University Press, New York), 509-522.
Lucas, R. (1988), On the Mechanics of Economic Development, Journal of MonetaryEconomics
22, 3-42.
Machiup, F. (1970), Education and Economic Growth (University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln).

Maluccio, J. (1997), Endogeneity of Schooling in the Wage Function, mimeo., Yale University,
Department of Economics.
Mankiw, N. (1977), Comment, in: B. Bernanke and J. Rotemberg, eds., NBER Macroeconomics
Annual (MIT Press, Cambridge), 103-106.
Meghir, C., and Palme, M. (1999), Assessing the Effect of Schooling on Earnings Using aSocial
Experiment, mimeo., Stockholm School of Economics.
Miller, H. (1955), Income of the American People (United States Government Printing Office,
Washington).
Mincer, J. (1974), Schooling, Earnings, and Experience (Columbia University Press, New York).

Murphy, K. and Welch, F. (1990), Empirical Age-Earnings Profiles,Journal of Labor Economics
8, 202-229.
Nelson, R. and Phelps, E. (1966), Investment in Humans, Technological Diffusion, and
Economic Growth, American Economic Review 56, 69-75.
43

Ottersten, K, Mellander, E., Meyerson, E., and Nilson, J (1996), The Measurement of the Return
to Education Revisited, mimeo., The Industrial Institute of Economic and Social Research (JUT),
Stockholm.

Palme, M. and Wright, R. (1999), Changes in the Rate of Return to Education in Sweden: 19681991, forthcoming in Applied Economics.
Park, J. (1994), Returns to Schooling: A Peculiar Deviation from Linearity, Princeton University,
Industrial Relations Section Working Paper No. 335, Princeton.

Pritchett, L. (1997), Where Has All the Education Gone?, The World Bank, Policy Research
Working Paper No. 1581, Washington.
Psacharopoulos, G. (1994), Returns to Investment in Education: A Global Update, World
Development 22, 1325-1343.
Rivkin, S., Hanushek, E., and Kain, J. (1998), Teachers, Schools and Academic Achievement,
mimeo., University of Rochester.

Romer, P. (1990), Endogenous Technological Change, Journal of Political Economy 89, S71Si 02.
Rosen, S. (1977), Human Capital: A Survey of Empirical Research, in: R. Ehrenberg, ed.,
Research in Labor Economics, (JAI Press, Greenwich).
Smith, J. (1998), Healthy Bodies and Thick Wallets: The Dual Relation Between Health and
SES, Journal of Economic Perspectives, forthcoming.
Spence, A. (1973), Job Market Signaling, Quarterly Journal of Economics 87, 355-374.
Staiger, D. and Stock, J. (1997), Instrumental Variables Regressions with Weak Instruments,
Econometrica 65, 557-586.

Summers, R. and Heston, A. (1991), The Penn World Table (Mark 5): An Expanded Set of
International Comparisons, 1950-1988, Quarterly Journal of Economics 106, 327-368.
Summers, A. and Wolfe, B. (1977), Do Schools Make a Difference?, American Economic
Review 67, 63 9-652.

Taubman, P. (1976), Earnings, education, Genetics, and Environment, Journal of Human
Resources 11, 447-461.

44

Topel, R. (1998), Labor Markets and Economic Growth, forthcoming in: 0. Ashenfelter and D.
Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, (North Holland, Amsterdam).
UNESCO. (1967), Statistical Yearbook, 1967 (UNESCO, Paris).
United States Census Bureau (1998), Poverty in the United States: 1997, P60-20 1 (Washington,
D.C., Department of Commerce).
Walsh, J. (1935), Capital Concept Applied to Man, Quarterly Journal of Economics XLIX, 255285.

Welch, F. (1970), Education in Production, Journal of Political Economy 78, 35-59.
Willis, R. (1986), Wage Determinants: A Survey and Reinterpretation of Human Capital
Earnings Functions, in: 0. Ashenfelter and R. Layard, eds. Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol.
1 (North Holland, Amsterdam).
Winston, G. and Yen, I. (1995), Costs, Prices, Subsidies, and Aid in U.S. Higher Education,
Working Paper DP-32, Williams College.
Wolfe, D. and Smith, J. (1956), The Occupational Value of Education for Superior High-School
Graduates, Journal of Higher Education 27, 20 1-232.

45

</ref_section>

B. Sweden

A. United States

10

()

a
0

3.5

a.!

a

0

11

2

13

14

15

16

17

19

10

19

12

11

13

14

15

15

17

Ia

19

Years of Schooling

Years of Schooling

C. ElM G.n,..ry

C. W..( Q..mwy

a

a
a

a

-

:

7.5

7

lo i

-

i

I
14

15

Years of Schooling

16

17

II

15

I

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

IE

19

Years of Schooling

Figure 1: Unrestricted Schooling-Log Wage Relationship and Mincer Earnings
Specification for the United States, Sweden, West Germany and East Germany

Figure 2: Average Years of Schooling in Sweden,
Barro-Lee versus Other Survey Data
11
105

-iNU/HUS
Barro-Lee

1
1980

Year
Notes: Barro-Lee data are for population age 15 and older; 1980 and 1991 survey data are
from Swedish Level of Living Survey (LNU), and 1984 survey data are from Household
Market and Nonmarket Survey (HUS). Both LNU and HUS pertain to population age 18-75.

Table 1: OLS and IV Estimates of the Return to Education with Instruments Based on Natural Experiments

Study

1. Angrist and
Krueger (1991)

2. Kane and
Rouse (1993)

3. Card (1995a)

4, Conneely and
Uusitalo (1997)

5. Maluccio (1997)

6. Harmon and
Walker (1995)

Sample,
Strategy, and Instruments

OLS

IV

(p-value)

1970 and 1980 Census Data. Men.
Instruments are quarter of birth
interacted with year of birth.
Controls include quadratic in age
and indicators for race, marital
status, urban residence.

1920-29 cohort in 1970

0.070
(0.000)

0.101
(0.033)

1930-39 cohort in 1980

0.063
(0.000)

0.060
(0.030)

0.920

cohort in 1980

0.052
(0.000)

0.078
(0.030)

0.386

NLS Class of 1972, Women.
Instruments are tuition at 2 and 4year state colleges and distance to
nearest college. Controls include
race, part-time status, experience,
Schooling measured in units of
college credit equivalents.

Models without test score
or parental education

0.080
(0.005)

0.091
(0.033)

0.736

Models with test scores
and parental education

0.063

0.094
(0.042)

0.457

(0.005)

NLS Young Men (1966 Cohort)
Instrument is an indicator for a
nearby 4-year college in 1966, or
the interaction of this var. with
parental education. Controls
include race, experience (treated
as education), region, and parental
education.

Models that use college
proximity as instrument
(1976 earnings)

0.073
(0.004)

0.132
(0.049)

0.227

--

0.097
(0.048)

0.616

Finnish men who served in the
army in 1982, and were working
full time in civilian jobs in 1994.
Administrative earnings and
education data. Instrument is
dummy for living in university
town in 1980. Controls include
quadratic in experience and
parental education and earnings.

Models that exclude
parental education and
earnings

0.085
(0.001)

0.110
(0.024)

0.297

Models that include
parental education and
earnings

0.083
(0.001)

0.098
(0.035)

0.668

Bicol Multipurpose Survey (rural
Philippines). Male and female
wage earners age 20-44 in 1994,
whose families were interviewed in
1978. Instruments are distance to
nearest high school and indicator
for local private high school.
Controls include quadratic in age
and indicators for gender and
residence in a rural community.

Models that do not
control for selection of
employment status or
location

0.073
(0.011)

0.145
(0.041)

0.068

Models with selection
correction for location
and employment status

0.063
(0.006)

0.113
(0.033)

0.123

0.061
(0.001)

0.153
(0.015)

0.000

Models that use college
proximity X family
background as instrument

British Family Expenditure Survey
1978-86. Men. Instruments are
indicators for changes in the
minimum school leaving age in
1947 and 1973. Controls include
quadratic in age, survey year, and
region.

46

Table 1: Continued

Author

7. Ichino and
Winter-Ebmer
(1998)

Sample Identification
Strategy and Instruments
German Socioeconomic Panel
1986. Men. Instrument is indicator
for cohort born 1930-35 and/or
whether father served in World

10. Duflo (1998)

0.148
(0.211)

0.721

0.182

0.113

Models that use cohort
1930-35 and father in
World War II as
instruments

—

born after 1946. Instrument is
indicator for cohort born 1930-35.
Controls include age and
unemployment rate at age 14.

1930-35 as instrument.

(0.004)

(0.086)

1971 and 1981 Canadian Census.
1973 Job Mobility survey. Men,
World War II veterans from
Quebec (French speaking) and
Ontario (English speaking).
Instruments are potential eligibility
for World War II educational
assistance program or an
interaction between this and

1971 Canadian Census.
Models that use potential
program eligibility as
instrument.

0.070
(0.002)

0.141
(0.048)

0.139

0.062

0.055
(0.016)

0.661

0.410

fathers education. Controls
include quadratic in potential
experience and dummy for Quebec
(row 1 and 2) or quadratic in
actual experience, dummy for
Quebec, served in World War II
and fathers education (row 3).
Case (1994)

0.072
(0.008)

—

status and self-employed status.
Returns were calculated based on
assumption of 4 years of high
school.

9. Butcher and

Models that use cohort
1930-35 as instrument

Hausman
Test

Models that use father in
World War II as
instiiiment

War II. Controls include a
quadratic in age, unemployment
rate at age 14 and indicators for
fathers education, socioeconomic

8. Lemieux and
Card (1998)

Schooling Coefficients
OLS
IV

U.S. PSID. White women age 2465 in 1985. Instruments are
indicators for the presence of
sisters, or sisters indicator and
quadratic in number of siblings.
Controls include a cubic in age,
indicators for Catholic, oldest
child, poor household and parental
education,

(0.070)
0.177

0.131

(0.070)

11

1981 Canadian Census.
Models that use potential
program eligibility as
instrument.

(0.001)

1973 Job Mobility

Survey. Models that
use potential program

0.065

0.140

eligibility interacted with
fathers education as
instrument.

(0.003)

(0.091)

Models that
indicator for presence of
sister as instrument

0.091
(0.007)

0.184
(0.113)

0.410

Models that use
indicator for presence of
sister and quadratic in
number of siblings as
instruments

--

0.182
(0.055)

0.095

0.062
(0.001)

0.097
(0.034)

1995 Intercensal Survey of
Model that uses number of
Indonesia. Men born between
schools per child built in
1950-72. Instruments are interactions 1973-78 as a measure of
between indicators for age in 1974
program intensity.
and some measure of the program
intensity in region born, capturing
the effect of a large scale governmental
primary school program. Controls
include indicators for year and region
of birth and indicators for year of birth,
interacted with no. of children and with
enrollment rate in 1971.

47

Table 1: Continued

11. Meghir and
Palme (1999)

1991 Swedish Level of Living
Model that uses compulsory 0.028
Survey. 427 men born between
schooling differences across (0.007)
1945-55. Instrument is an indicator
areas and cohorts to
of whether the individual was born
identi the return to
in a municipality which implemented schooling.
a compulsory schooling increase for
that cohort. Controls include father's
education, cohort and region dummies.

0.036
(0.021)

0.72

Notes: Rows 1-6 are adapted from Card (1998); rows 7-10 are authors' summaries. The estimates and standard errors in row
7 are divided by 4 to approximate the yearly returns to schooling. Hausman tests of the equality of OLS and
IV estimates are
based on authors' calculations; test in row 10 is only approximate because the models are not identical.

48

Table 2: Replication and Extension of Benhabib and Spiegel (1994)
Dependent Variable: Annualized Change in Log GDP, 1965-85

(1)

ALogS
Log S65

AS

S65

LogY65

A Log Capital

A Log Work Force
R2

Linear Schooling

Log Schooling

Variable

(2)

(3)

-.072

.178

(.058)

(.112)

-------

-.009
(.002)

(4)
.614

(6)

(5)

---

---

---

---

---

---

.012

.039

.151

(.023)

(.024)

(.034)

(.162)

.010

.026

(.004)

(.005)

---

---

---

---

-.012
(.002)

-.015
(.003)
---

.523

.461

(.048)

(.052)

.175
(.164)

.232
(.160)

---

.694

.720

.291

---

.003

.004

(.001)

(.001)

-.008
(.002)

-.014
(.002)

.521

.465
(.052)

-.014
(.004)
---

(.051)
.110
(.160)

(.167)

.688

.726

.335

--.271

Notes: All change variables were divided by 20, including the dependent variable. Sample size
is 78 countries. Standard errors are in parentheses. All equations also include an intercept.
S65 is Kyriacou's measure of schooling in 1965; A Log S is the change in log schooling
between 1965 and 1985, divided by 20; and Y65 is GDP per capita in 1965. Mean of
dependent variable is .039; standard deviation of dependent variable is .020.

49

Table 3. Reliability of Various Measures of Years of Schooling
Estimated Reliability Ratios for Barro-Lee and Kyriacou Data
Reliability of
Barro-Lee Data
Average yeass of
Schooling, 1965

Reliability of
Kyriacou Data

.851

.964
(.055)

(.049)

Average years of
Schooling, 1985

(.055)

Change in years of
Schooling, 1965-85

.577
(.199)

.773

.966
(.069)
.195

(.067)

Notes: The estimated reliability ratios are the slope coefficients from a bivariate regression
of one measure of schooling on the other. For example, the .851 entry in the first row is the
slope coefficient from a regression in which the dependent variable is Kyriacou's schooling
variable and the independent variable is Barro-Lee's. Sample size is 68 countries. Standard
errors are reported in parentheses.

50

.197

607

R2

N

.031

607

.161

.004
(.002)

(.015)

607

.207

-.006
(.003)

.039
(.014)

292

.242

-.003
(.003)

---

.003
(.001)

(5)

292

.229

.004
(.001)

.075
(.026)

---

(6)

10-year changes

292

.284

-.005
(.003)

.086
(.024)

.004
(.001)

(6)

97

.184

-.010
(.003)

---

.005
(.001)

(7)

97

.103

-.001
(.002)

.184
(.057)

---

(8)

20-year changes

97

.281

-.013
(.003)

.182
(.051)

.005
(.001)

(9)

51

Notes: First six columns include time dummies. Equations were estimated
by OLS. The standard errors in the first six columns allow
for correlated errors for the same country in different time
Maximum
numberof countries is 110. Columns 1-3 consist of
periods.
changes for 1960-65, 1965-70, 1970-75, 1975-80, 1980-85, 1985-90. Columns 4-6 consist of
changes for 1960-70, 1970-80, 1980-90.
Columns 7-9 consist of changes for 1965-85. Log Y1 and S1 are the log GDP
per capita and level of schooling in the initial year of
each period. AS is the change in schooling between t-1 and t divided by the number of
years in the period. Data are from Summers
and Heston and Barro and Lee. Mean (and standard deviation) of annualized
per capitaGDP growth is .021 (.033) for columns 1-3,
.022 (.026) for columns 4-6, and .022 (.020) for columns 7-9.

-.005
(.003)

---

.004
(.001)

---

.004
(.001)

Log

S

st_I

(4)

(2)

(1)

5-year changes

Table 4: The Effect of Schooling on Economic Growth
Dependent Variable: Annualized Change in Log GDP per Capita

Table 5: The Effect of Schooling and Capital on Economic Growth
Dependent Variable: Annualized Change in Log GDP per Capita,
1965-85

OLS
(1)
AS

S6

LogY65

A Log Capital
per Worker

IV

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

.066

.017
(.032)

.015
(.042)

.083

(.039)

(.043)

.069
(.167)

.004

.0013

-.001

(.0008)

.0005
(.0010)

.002

(.001)

(.001)

(.002)

-.009
(.003)

-.026
(.003)

.598

.795

.597

(.058)

.648
(.073)

35*

(.062)

.016
(.002)

.002
(.002)

-.002
(.002)

(.004)

Log Capital per
Worker 1960

(.119)
.001

R2

.63

.76

.58

.12

.55

Sample Size

92

92

92

92

66

Notes: Change variables have been divided by the number ofyears spanned by the
change (20 years for schooling and log GDP, 25 years for capital). Schooling data
used in the regressions are from Barro and Lee. The instrumentalvariables model in
column 6 uses Kyriacous schooling data as excluded instruments for the level and
change in Barro-Le&s schooling variables. Capital data are from Kienow and
Rodriguez-Glare (1997), and pertain to 1960-85.
*The coefficient on the change in log capital in column 4 is constrained to equal .35,
which is roughly capitalTs share.

52

Table 6: Analysis of Inipact of Controlling for Additional Explanatory
Variables and Quadratic Specification
on the Initial Schooling Effect
Dependent

Variable: Annualized 10-Year Change in Log GDP per Capita

Explanatory
Variable
Initial Schooling
Initial Schooling Squared
Initial Log GDP

(1)

(2)

.oio

.010

(.002)

(.002)

—.0007
(.0002)

-. 0007
(.0002)

—.005

—.005

(.003)

(.022)

Initial Log GDP Squared

.003

(Divided by 100)

(.146)

Log Fertility Rate
Log Life Expectancy

(3)

.002
(.002)

(.0001)

.030
(.025)

.035
(.025)

-.303

—.338

(.163)

(.162)

—.025

—.025

(.005)

(.005)

.008
(.016)

(.015)

.105
(.040)
.001
(.002)

Democracy Index Squared

-.076

(/10,000)

(.039)

Investment Relative to GDP
Government Consumption
Relative to GDP

Peak of Schooling
Quadratic
P—value for F—test of
schooling terms

7.46
.000

.284

7.57

.000

.104
(.044)
.002
(.002)
—. 083
(.038)

.0008

.0008
(.0002)

080

(.031)

.284

.013

(.0002)
-.

Inflation Rate

.000
(.001)

—.0002

Terms of Trade
Democracy Index

(4)

-.080
(.031)

—.026

—.026

(.005)

(.004)

.527

.526

5.80
.582

Notes: Sample size is 292 for all columns.
Observations with
missing values of some variables were assigned the mean value for
those variables. Schooling and GDP per capita are initial values
(i.e., values at the beginning of the 10-year period.)
The
inflation rate is measured from the beginning
to the end of the
10-year period. The terms of trade variable is the growth rate
over each period of the ratio of export to import prices. All
other variables are averages over the 10—year periods.

Table 7: The Effect of Schooling on Economic
Growth in the OECD
Dependent Variable: Annualized Change in
Log GDP per Capita, Various Time Periods
5-year

Variable

10-year 20-year

Growth Growth Growth
(1)

(2)

(3)

Initial Schooling

-.000
(.001)

-.000
(.001)

.000
(.001)

InitialLogGDP

-.015
(.008)

-.015
(.006)

-.011
(.005)

R2

.43

.55

.35

Sample Size

138

69

23

Notes: The dependent variable has been divided by the
number of years spanned by the change. Columns 1
and 2 also includes time dummies.

54

