INTRODUCTION

   It is well established in the economics literature that annuities ought to be of substantial value to

life-cycle consumers who face an uncertain date of death. Yaari (1965) proved that a life-cycle

consumer with an uncertain lifetime and no bequest motives would find 100% annuitization the

optimal investment. More recent work has quantified the potential utility gains to such a life cycle

consumer. For example, a 65 year old male life cycle consumer would be willing to give up nearly

one-third of his wealth to gain access to an actuarially fair market for annuities (Mitchell, Poterba,

Warshawsky & Brown, 1999).

   Buying a life insurance contract is analogous to selling an annuity. Life insurance is generally

viewed as an appropriate product for working age individuals who seek to protect their family

against the loss of future labor earnings (Lewis, 1989). However, it appears to serve little purpose

in the portfolio of a retired life-cycle consumer who is concerned only with self-financing

retirement out of his or her accumulated wealth. With no labor earnings to insure, an elderly

individual should be purchasing annuities in order to provide a certain consumption stream in

retirement, not selling annuities through the purchase of life insurance. Even if the individual

wishes to leave a portion of wealth to his or her heirs in the form of gifts or bequests, this can be

achieved by investing this portion of wealth in ordinary bonds or other non-annuitized assets. In

fact, if life insurance premiums were higher than actuarially fair, holding riskless bonds would

strictly dominate life insurance as a form of wealth transfer.

   Yet elderly households in the United States overwhelmingly hold life insurance, while only a

small fraction hold privately purchased annuity contracts. In the AHEAD survey, which consists of

households age 70+, privately purchased annuity contracts (excluding private pensions) are held by

fewer than 8% of couples, while 78% of age 70+ couples own a life insurance policy on at least one
member. According to the Life Insurance Ownership study (LIMRA, 1992), ownership of

individual (non-group) life insurance policies is actually higher among the age 65+ group than any

other age cohort. While this difference is offset by much lower coverage by group (usually

employer-based) policies, the overall incidence of coverage among the elderly is quite high by any

measure.

   Two major alternative hypotheses have been explored in the literature to explain the patterns of

life insurance coverage among the elderly. Auerbach & Kotlikoff (1987, 1989) explored the idea

that married couples were using life insurance to reallocate annuity streams across survival states of

the couple. However, they found virtually no support for the notion that older households were

using life insurance to protect potential widows against severe drops in living standards upon the

death of the other spouse.

   The second hypothesis, suggested by Bernheim (1991), is that life insurance is being held by

elderly households to offset an excessive level of mandated annuitization in the form of Social

Security. He estimates that 25% of elderly households have too much of their wealth annuitized

and that they are using term life insurance to sell these annuities in order to leave a bequest. To the

extent that this “annuity offset model” is true, it has at least two important implications. First, this

would be indicative of very strong bequest motives, which is an issue of perennial controversy in

the economics literature (e.g., Kotlikoff & Summers 1981, Modigliani 1988, Hurd 1987, Laitner &

Juster 1996). Second, if individuals are over-annuitized due to these strong bequest motives, this

would indicate a potential welfare gain from lessening the extent of the extent of mandated

annuitization. This is potentially important in the debate about whether individuals would be

required to annuitize individual account accumulations as part of a reformed Social Security system.
If a significant fraction of households are over-annuitized, allowing individuals some discretion

over the disposition of the assets in their individual account could be welfare enhancing.

   This paper re-examines the annuity offset model using more recent and better data than was

available for the original empirical tests. The four empirical implications of the model that this

paper tests are: (i) no individual would hold both term life insurance and private annuities, (ii) the

level of Social Security benefits and term life insurance ownership should be negatively correlated,

(iii) term life insurance should behave as an inferior good because it is a negative annuity and

annuities are normal goods, and (iv) individuals who hold term life insurance must have a Social

Security benefit in excess of desired retirement consumption. These implications will be explained

in more detail in the next section. This paper presents results that are inconsistent with all four of

these empirical implications, and thus concludes that life insurance coverage is not a good indicator

of the extent of over-annuitization.

   This paper proceeds as follows: Section 1 summarizes the annuity offset model as posited by

Bernheim (1991), and outlines the empirical implications of the model to be tested. Section 2

presents and critiques the empirical results from the previous literature, with particular attention on

the distinction between types of life insurance. Section 3 discusses the data used in this paper, from

the AHEAD study. Section 4 presents empirical results. Section 5 discusses some alternative

explanations for life insurance holdings among the elderly. Section 6 concludes.



1. The Annuity Offset Model of Life Insurance Demand

   The basic insight behind of the annuity offset model of life insurance demand is that individuals

can purchase term life insurance in order to sell a government-mandated annuity. Bernheim

suggests a simple two-period model that demonstrates this point. Assume that an individual
possesses total wealth W0, which he is able to divide between two types of investments. It is

assumed that the investment decision is taking place after consumption in period 0 has already

occurred. The first type of asset, A, is a life contingent annuity contract which yields a return of α

in period 1 if the individual is alive, and $0 otherwise. The second type of asset, B, is a traditional

(bequeathable) financial asset which yields a return of β in period 1 regardless of whether the

individual is alive or not. If the individual lives, his period 1 resources are W1 = αA + βB. If he

dies, his heirs receive βB. Because actuarially fair annuities pay a “mortality premium” equal to the

probability of dying, α>β. Utility of the individual is assumed to be a function of total resources

and bequeathable resources in period 1, U = U(B,W1). Call A* and B* the quantities of the two

assets that correspond to the optimal division of total wealth, subject to the constraint that W0 =

A+B.

    Now suppose the government confiscates Ag in period 0 and returns αAg in period 1,

conditional on the individual’s survival. In other words, the government mandates a minimum level

of annuitization. If Ag < A*, then the individual simply decreases his private purchase of annuities

by an amount equal to Ag, or alternatively, he buys private annuities in the amount of A*-Ag. If

Ag>A*, then the individual wishes to sell annuities. This can be done through the purchase of a

term life insurance contract. When markets for annuities and life insurance are actuarially fair, then

the government mandate has no effect on the individual’s division of wealth between A and B.

Private insurance contracts offset the government annuity dollar-for-dollar. If insurance is not

actuarially fair, then the offset is less than dollar-for-dollar, but the basic story is unchanged.

Individuals who wish to hold more annuities than the government mandates will own private

annuity contracts. Individuals who wish to hold less in annuities will own private life insurance

contracts. No individual will hold both private annuities and life insurance, since they are offsetting
transactions, each with a positive load factor. Some individuals will hold neither, if Ag is

sufficiently close to A*.

   There are four major empirical implications that must hold if the annuity offset model is the

reason that the elderly hold life insurance. These are:

   (1) No individual will hold both private annuities and private term life insurance contracts.

        Given the existence of significant load factors in annuity markets (Mitchell et. al., 1999), no

        one would rationally purchase annuities above the actuarial cost only to sell them back

        below the actuarial cost.

   (2) An increase in the level of the mandated annuity will increase the demand for term life

        insurance. Recall that an individual will hold term life insurance in the amount of max{0,

        Ag-A*}. Holding W0 fixed, an increase in Ag will increase the total amount of life

        insurance coverage among those who already hold it. It will also cause some individuals

        who did not hold life insurance before to purchase it.

   (3) Term life insurance will behave as an inferior good. If B and W1 are normal goods, then an

        increase in the individual’s total resources will increase the demand for annuities. This is

        because a person with more resources will wish to buy more annuities in order to increase

        retirement consumption. Since term life insurance is a negative annuity, an increase in the

        demand for annuities corresponds to a decrease in the demand for term life insurance.

        Therefore, term life insurance will decline with total resources, and thus behave as an

        inferior good.

   (4) The Social Security annuity income flow must exceed consumption. If an individual is

        over-annuitized due to bequest motives, it must be because his desired consumption is less

        than the annuity income from Social Security. So long as optimal consumption exceeds the
        level of the Social Security benefit, there is no need to offset Social Security. Rather, one

        would want to supplement Social Security through the purchase of private annuities. An

        equivalent way to state this implication is that an individual who purchase life insurance to

        offset an annuity will not consume out of their non-Social Security resources. They will

        save these resources for bequests, and will in fact supplement this bequest with the term life

        insurance.

   It should be noted that there are reasons an individual might be “over-annuitized” that have

nothing to do with bequest motives. Hurd (1987) points out that when an individual’s optimal

consumption path is constrained by an exogenously given annuity stream, they may be willing to

give up annuitization at an actuarially fair rate in order to loosen this “liquidity constraint.” This is

especially likely if the individual has little non-annuitized wealth. However, over-annuitization in

this case is driven by a desire to re-allocate consumption across one’s lifetime, not to re-allocate

between consumption and bequests. Another example is the case in which an individual wishes to

hold a buffer stock of assets to cover unforeseen expenditure shocks (e.g., health expenditures). In

such a situation, they may wish to hold some of their wealth in a non-annuitized form. Once again,

the role of the non-annuitized wealth in this case is still to provide for own consumption, not to

leave a bequest to one’s heirs. In this case, the way to “undo” the excessive annuitization, however,

is not to purchase life insurance, since these proceeds will be unavailable for future consumption.

Rather, the individual would wish to purchase insurance against the risky future event (e.g., health

insurance) or alter their savings behavior in order to provide for a buffer stock. The tests that I

propose in this paper are meant to test for over-annuitization that derives from bequest motives, not

these other factors.
2. Discussion of Previous Empirical Results & Data Contamination

   Bernheim tested the first three implications of the annuity offset model using the 1975 cross-

section of the Retirement History Survey (RHS), and found support for two of them. The most

robust finding was that higher Social Security benefits were correlated both with a higher

probability of owning life insurance, and with the amount of coverage conditional on owning a

policy. His interpretation of this finding is that individuals are using the life insurance to offset

excessive levels of Social Security. He also found some evidence to suggest that life insurance

coverage was a decreasing function of lifetime resources, which is consistent with the “inferior

good” implication, though this finding was not robust across specifications.

   The first implication, that no person would hold both life insurance and annuities, was clearly at

odds with the data, as 36% of the RHS sample reported both in-force life insurance holdings and the

receipt of pension annuities. He attributes this latter result to data contamination, namely the fact

that there is no way in the RHS to distinguish whole from term life insurance. Because much of

Bernheim’s analysis was focused on trying to overcome this data handicap, it is useful to discuss the

relevance of the life insurance typology in more detail.

2.1 Term Versus Whole Life Insurance

   The distinction between term and whole life insurance is quite important to the annuity offset

model. The difference between the two policy types is quite simple, but has important economic

implications. Term life insurance contracts provide insurance protection for a specified limited

period. The face amount of the policy is payable to the beneficiaries only if the insured dies within

the term specified. Common term periods include 1-year, 5-year, 10-year, and 20-year. Most term

policies have options allowing an individual to guarantee renewability at the end of the term

specified. This means that an individual is not at risk for losing coverage if she is diagnosed with a
serious health problem, so long as she pays the contract premium. Because the price of a term

insurance contract is a function of the probability of the individual dying during that term,

premiums are an increasing function of the insured’s age.

   Whole life policies, on the other hand, are not limited in duration, but rather protect “the whole

of life.” (Graves, 1994) Unlike term insurance contracts, which represent pure insurance, the

typical whole life contract is a combination of insurance and tax-deferred savings. The typical

“ordinary life” product has fixed (nominal) level premiums and a fixed (nominal) death benefit or

face value. As demonstrated in Figure 1, the cash values of these policies rise over time, while the

pure insurance component declines. The standard practice among life insurers is for the cash value

to equal the face value by age 95 or age 100 (Graves 1994). According to the 1995 Survey of

Consumer Finances, the median whole life insurance policy held by individuals age 70+ had a cash

value that was 67% of the face value. This means that only 1/3 of the reported face value of whole

life policies represents insurance. Most whole life policies have provisions that enable individuals

to borrow against the cash value of the policies, and as such provide some degree of liquidity.

Importantly for the annuity offset model, the cash value of a policy is not a negative annuity, but

rather represents a non-annuitized financial asset, much like a savings account. While it is true that

the cash value of a life insurance policy may be left to one’s heirs as a bequest, a large cash value

policy would not be indicative of over-annuitization any more than would the holding of a large

savings account.

   As important as this distinction may be between term and whole life insurance, previous

empirical work on the elderly was unable to distinguish between them. The Retirement History

Survey provided data only on the total face value of all life insurance policies. Thus, to the extent

that ownership of whole life more closely resembles tax-deferred savings than insurance, previous
researchers were unable to disentangle these two potentially different effects. For example, suppose

high income individuals are more likely to purchase whole life insurance as a form of tax-deferred

savings. Because these individuals are high income, they also receive a higher Social Security

benefit at retirement. This could lead to a spurious correlation between total life insurance holdings

and the level of the Social Security benefits. As we shall see, this co-mingling of insurance and tax

deferred savings has an important impact on the results.

2.2 Group Versus Individual Coverage

    Another relevant distinction between types of life insurance that may be important to this model

is between “group” and “individual” coverage. Group life insurance policies are commonly

provided through employers or unions. An example of a typical group life policy is one that insures

an employee for a fixed multiple of their salary. Individual contracts, on the other hand, are

purchased directly from the insurance company, most often through an insurance agent or broker.

    The primary distinction between these policies is that individual life coverage is clearly a

“choice” variable, whereas group coverage is often automatic with employment. While in many

instances group coverage simply substitutes for individual coverage that would have been

purchased anyway, it will also cover some individuals who may have chosen to hold no life

insurance if not covered through their employer. Another reason this distinction is relevant is that

since group coverage is usually tied to employment, its purpose is often to protect an employee’s

family from the loss of future earnings. This purpose for holding life insurance is distinctly

different from using life insurance to offset a retirement annuity.

    Group coverage is less common among retired elderly households, since most group coverage

is tied to employment. Neither the RHS, nor the AHEAD data used in this study, allow for this

distinction between group and individual coverage. However, by making use of information about
the current employment status of an individual, it is possible to extract some information about the

effects of this difference.

2.3 Previous Empirical Results

    Previous empirical support of the annuity offset model rests on two key results. The first is that

there exists a strong positive correlation in a cross section of households between the level of Social

Security benefits, and the holdings of life insurance. Bernheim estimates that approximately 25%

of households own term life insurance, and based on his findings, are therefore over-annuitized.

His central results indicate that they are using term insurance to offset Social Security by roughly 20

cents on the dollar.

    Second, Bernheim finds mixed evidence to suggest that a portion of the total life insurance

holdings are negatively correlated with total lifetime resources, and thus represents an inferior good.

Importantly, in his most direct specifications, he finds that life insurance coverage is actually

increasing with resources for married couples with children. Only when he imposes more structure

on the problem to overcome problems of data contamination does he find a consistently negative

and significant resource effect. However, this approach is unable to directly identify the effect of

resources on term life insurance, and instead relies on modeling total holdings as the sum of two

separate processes (one representing term and one representing whole, but each unidentified in

advance) and testing the sign of various coefficient combinations.

     The difficulty with these results is that the potential for bias is quite high due to the inability to

directly identify the term insurance component of total life insurance holdings. Suppose that

individuals purchase insurance during their working lives in order to protect their spouse and

children from the loss of their human capital in the event of an early death. Individuals can choose

between term and whole life insurance to meet this insurance need. The annual premium on a
whole life contract is higher than the premium on a term life contract because some of the additional

premium essentially goes into a savings account that benefits from tax-deferred inside buildup.

Because of this, the whole life contract is more attractive, all else equal, to an individual in a higher

marginal tax bracket. Therefore, high earners (who therefore face higher marginal rates) have the

most to gain from purchasing whole life contracts. High earners will also be paying more in Social

Security payroll taxes, and will thus have a higher benefit upon retirement. Thus, to the extent that

whole life contracts held by the elderly represent “residue” from decisions made early in life to

protect human capital, this would induce a spurious positive relationship between SSB and whole

life insurance coverage.

   Two pieces of evidence suggest that this scenario is a strong possibility. First, according to a

life insurance ownership study conducted by LIMRA, the median age of the oldest life insurance

policy held by individuals age 70+ was 42 years, suggesting that most policies were in fact

purchased during one’s working life. Second, there is a clear positive relationship between

ownership of whole life insurance and income during one’s working life. For example, if we focus

on working age individuals (age 22-65) in the 1995 Survey of Consumer Finances, we find that only

20% of individuals with incomes under $30,000 own a whole life insurance policy. Of those with

annual incomes between $30,000 and $60,000, 33% own a whole life policy. Nearly half (48%) of

those earning over $60,000 per year own a whole life policy. This relationship is not biased by the

age-earnings profile, as a nearly identical trend emerges when one examines ownership patterns

conditional on age. Thus, whole life insurance ownership during one’s working life is clearly

correlated with income, and thus with OASDI contributions. If individuals continue to hold these

policies after retirement, this will lead to a positive correlation between the level of Social Security

benefits and whole life insurance ownership. Newly available data allows for a separation of total
life insurance into whole versus term life policies, and as such provides a more direct test of the

model.

   A second potential source of spurious correlation is that some individuals in the Bernheim study

were still in the work force. His 1975 RHS sample was comprised of individuals age 65-69.

According to Department of Labor statistics, in that year the labor force participation rate of

individuals age 65-69 was 31.7%. High labor force participation can lead to bias in the annuity

offset test for two reasons. First, individuals still in the workforce still have positive human capital

to protect, and may hold life insurance for this reason. If these individuals also have higher Social

Security benefits due to their strong attachment to the labor force, this could induce a positive

correlation between benefits and insurance coverage. Second, employed workers are more likely to

be automatically covered by group insurance plans. Therefore, even if the person has no demand

for insurance, he or she may be insured. If employed workers are more likely to have higher Social

Security benefits, a spurious positive correlation would result.



3. Data & Methodology

   This paper uses data on elderly households from the first wave of the Asset and Health

Dynamics of the Oldest Old (AHEAD) survey. Fielded in 1993/94, this survey collected detailed

financial and demographic data on community based individuals born 1923 or earlier, so they are

age 70 and above at the date of the survey. The questionnaire collects detailed information on

economic and demographic variables, health, work status, and importantly for this study, life

insurance coverage.

   There are several advantages to the use of this data over the earlier work completed using the

Retirement History Survey. First, it allows for the important distinction between term life and
whole life insurance coverage. While it still does not permit the decomposition of whole life into its

cash versus insurance value, the fact that we can distinguish between pure term policies and whole

policies none-the-less represents an important improvement over the total face value of all

insurance. Second, because the data consists of individuals age 70+, nearly all of them are retired.

This is important both because this means that the individuals no longer carry life insurance to

protect against the loss of human capital, and because it is significantly less likely that the

individual will be covered by a group life insurance plan through the employer. Therefore, a test of

the annuity offset hypothesis will not be contaminated by work-related reasons for insurance

coverage. Third, the data is much more recent than the RHS, which is potentially important due to

the clear long-term decline in the life insurance coverage of households over the past three decades

(LIMRA, 1992). Fourth, because of the advanced age of the cohorts, there are large enough

samples to investigate the behavior of widows and couples separately. This may be an important

distinction because at least one alternative to the annuity offset hypothesis is relevant to couples but

not to widows. This is the notion that elderly couples may use life insurance to re-allocate wealth

across states of spousal survival.

   The primary disadvantage of the AHEAD data is the fact that it does not currently contain

information on the earnings histories of respondents. As a result, it will not be possible to exactly

replicate the specification of lifetime resources as used in Bernheim’s work on this subject.

However, the information on current income from Social Security and pension plans is quite

detailed, and along with information on financial assets it is possible to construct a very good

measure of resources available to the household from the date of the survey forward.

   This analysis will focus on two subsets of households in the AHEAD data set. The first is

married couples in which both spouses were interviewed, and for which we therefore have complete
information about important characteristics of both spouses. The second set consists of male

widowers and female widows (hereafter often referred to collectively as widows), i.e., formerly

married individuals who lost their spouse to death. Excluded from this analysis are “never married”

individuals, both because of small sample sizes and because they are less likely to have children or

grandchildren to which they may wish to bequeath. Also excluded are single divorcees, due to

small sample sizes and the fact that the survey lacks important information about their former

spouse. The resulting sample size for married couples ranges from 1750 to 1950 households, and

from 2600 to 2800 widows and widowers. The “range” of households arises from missing data for

some versions of the dependent variable. For example, an individual may state that they do not own

a whole life policy, but that they do own a term life policy with an unknown face value. My

decision rule was to include the maximum number of households possible, so this person would be

included in the whole life regressions, but excluded from the term life and total life regressions due

to missing data. I have conducted extensive checks to ensure that the results were not sensitive to

this selection process, and found that the basic results are unchanged.

   In order to test for the effect of Social Security benefits and total resources on the holdings of

life insurance, I use the following econometric specification:



               LIi = Max{0, β0 + β1 SSBi + β2 LRi+ β3 Xi + εi}                         (1)


   LI is the face value of life insurance. In some specifications, this will represent total face value,

while in others I will limit it to term life or whole life only, in order to account for the cash value

bias discussed earlier. SSB represents the annual flow of benefits from Social Security. LR is a

vector of characteristics that attempts to capture components of lifetime resources. It includes the

variable PVR, which equals the expected discounted present value of resources, including net
worth, social security wealth, and pension wealth. Because life-time earnings records are not yet

available in the data set that I use, the LR vector also includes a number of variables which proxy

for the effect of lifetime earnings. These include nine occupation indicators and four educational

attainment indicators. For specifications involving couples, these indicator variables are all

included separately for each spouse. X is a vector of other relevant demographic characteristics,

including age, gender, race, and whether the respondents have any living children.

    I will show results using two different estimation procedures. For comparability with

Bernheim’s study, I will first assume the normality of ε and report results from a Tobit

specification. One might be concerned about the possibility of heteroskedasticity in the

unobservables in the demand for life isnurance, which would render the Tobit results inconsistent.

Therefore, I will also report results using simple OLS regressions with White corrected standard

errors. As the results will indicate, to the extent that heteroskedasiticy biases the Tobit results, it

appears to do so in a direction that favors the annuity offset model. Further specification checks

using a censored LAD estimator, or modeling the heteroskedasticity in a multiplicative form,

similarly indicate that any such biases tend to work in favor of the annuity offset model. This

phenomenon is captured by the OLS estimates, so I limit reported results to Tobit and OLS.

    Equation (1) closely approximates the main specification used by Bernheim in his test of the

annuity offset model in the Retirement History Survey, with three primary differences. The first is

that Bernheim was restricted to using total face value of all life insurance as his dependent variable,

whereas the current study can examine whole and term separately. The second difference is in the

construction of the measure of total resources. The definition used here, PVR, is net worth plus the

present value of future income from Social Security and pensions, and thus represents resources

available from today forward. Bernheim’s measure was the present value of lifetime earnings plus
the present value of Social Security and pensions, and thus represented total lifetime resources. The

third difference is that the current study examines behavior of widows and couples in separate

regressions. Bernheim ran his model on all households, with appropriate indicators for marital

status, but excluded individuals who had been widowed more than 6 years.



4. Results

   Table 1 presents summary statistics on life insurance ownership among age 70+ households in

the AHEAD data. Several features of the data are worth noting. First, men are more likely to hold

all types of life insurance than are women. Nearly 62% of widowed men own a life insurance

policy, versus only 49% of widowed women. Among currently married couples, 72% of men are

covered by at least one policy, versus only 55% of married women. Looking at term and whole life

ownership separately, the same basic pattern emerges, in that men are always more likely to hold

insurance than women. In addition, men always hold more insurance conditional on owning, than

do women.

   A second feature of the data is that most policies tend to be quite small, though the distribution

is fairly skewed. The median married household owns a total of $10,756 of life insurance, a figure

that includes all types of life insurance on both spouses. Among widowed households, it is even

smaller, with a median value of $5000 for men, and $2500 for women. However, the means are

roughly two to three times larger than the medians, which is driven by the fact that a small fraction

of households own very large policies. For example, the 95th percentile of total household coverage

among married couples (conditional on owning) is $113,000. The 95th percentile of coverage for

male widowers is $50,000.
   The third broad pattern to recognize is that marital status is an important margin along which

insurance coverage differs. Married individuals are much more likely to own life insurance than are

widows or widowers of the same gender, and hold more of it conditional on owning. There are

many reasons why this could be true, including reasons that might bear upon the relative importance

of using life insurance to protect a spouse versus providing a bequest. However, a large part of

these differences are undoubtedly attributable to differences in the financial status of married and

versus widowed households, which is not captured in these simple tabulations.

4.1 Test of Implication #1: “No simultaneous holdings”

   The first implication of the annuity offset model, and the one easiest to test in the data, is the

notion no individual would choose to simultaneously hold life insurance and annuities. This is

because they are offsetting transactions, each of which may cause the individual to incur

transactions costs or “loads” to the fact that private insurance markets are not actuarially fair.

   This assumption is clearly violated by the data in Table 2. This is particularly notable if one

follows the Bernheim approach of treating annuities from pension plans as voluntarily purchased.

Of all married households, 50% own both a private pension and some form of life insurance.

Among widows and widowers, 21% own both private pension annuities and life insurance. There

are reasons to suspect that private pensions are not strictly “voluntary,” especially among those age

70+ who were likely covered for most of their careers in traditional defined benefit plans.

However, even if we restrict ourselves to privately purchased, non-pension annuities, 6.6% of

married couples own both. Since only 7.7% of the sample own such an annuity, however, this

means that 86% of those married households who have purchased a private, non-pension annuity

also own life insurance.
   These numbers are not surprising, since in Bernheim’s own sample 36% of households, which

included both married and widowed individuals, owned both pensions and life insurance. He

attributed this finding to data contamination, namely the fact that he was unable to distinguish

between term and whole life insurance. If the 36% of people holding both were really holding

whole life policies with cash values approaching their face values (i.e., they contained very little

insurance), then this finding would not be inconsistent with the annuity offset model. However,

using the AHEAD data, we can see that this is not the explanation. Roughly one third of married

households own both straight term life insurance policies and a private pension, as do 13% of

widows. Perhaps the “purest” test of the model is to use term life insurance and non-pension

annuities. In this case, 3.8% of couples hold both. Importantly, one half of all married households

that own a non-pension annuity also have life insurance coverage. This is clearly inconsistent with

the annuity offset model.

4.2 Test of Implication 2: Positive Correlation between Insurance and Social Security

   The second, and arguably the most important, implication of the annuity offset hypothesis is that

there should exist a positive correlation between term life insurance coverage and the level of Social

Security benefits. The heart of this hypothesis, as outlined in Section 1, is that when individuals

have higher Social Security benefits, they want to buy fewer private annuities and more life

insurance.

   Table 3 reports Tobit results for equation (1) in the combined sample of widows and widowers.

Column(1) reports Tobit coefficients for the case in which total face value of all life insurance

holdings (term plus whole) is the dependent variable. Column (2) reports coefficients for the OLS

specification. Columns (3) and (4) repeat this analysis with the dependent variable limited to term
life insurance, and columns (5) and (6) limit the dependent variable to the face value of whole life

insurance.

   The coefficient on SSB (annual Social Security Benefit) is the coefficient of interest for testing

this implication of the model. If the annuity offset model is correct, the coefficient should be

significantly positive. Looking first at column 1, we can see that this relationship does hold for total

life insurance coverage in the Tobit specification, with a coefficient of 0.48 that is highly

significant. Using the well-known approximation that the marginal effect can obtained by scaling

the parameters by the probability in the uncensored region yields a marginal effect of another dollar

of Social Security benefits of approximately $0.22 of life insurance coverage. Column (2) repeats

the analysis using OLS, and finds a nearly identical effect of 0.22, though the large (White-

corrected) standard errors render this coefficient insignificant.

   We can translate the life insurance face value into an annuity flow by dividing by the

appropriate annuity factor, i.e., the actuarial present value of a $1 annuity flow. Using a real

interest rate of 3%, this factor is approximately 10 for the average individual in the AHEAD

sample. Therefore, we find that life insurance is offsetting the flow of Social Security benefits on

the margin by approximately 2.2 cents on the dollar. This offset is much lower than the 10-20 cent

offset that Bernheim found because the current sample is of widows and widowers only, while

Bernheim’s results were for a mixed sample. Results for couples, discussed below, show a

somewhat larger offset that falls in the lower end of the Bernheim offset range.

   Columns (3) through (6) of table 3 makes the important distinction between term and whole life

insurance. Columns (3) and (4) report the results for the case in which only Term life insurance is

treated as the dependent variable. Relative to the results for columns (1) and (2), the difference is

striking. The Tobit coefficient falls to 0.04, and is statistically no different from zero. The Tobit
coefficient for SSB in the whole life insurance specification in column (5), on the other hand, is

large and significant -- the Tobit coefficient on SSB is 1.22 and is highly significant. The OLS

results are again similar to the marginal effects that arise out of the Tobit coefficients, but are not

significant. It therefore appears, at least in the sample of widows and widowers, that the central

implication that Social Security benefits will be positively correlated with term life insurance

coverage does not hold. While there is a significant positive relationship found between total life

insurance coverage and Social Security in the Tobit specifications, this relationship appears to be

driven more by whole life insurance than term coverage, and even this relationship is not always

significant in the OLS case.

   As discussed by Bernheim and earlier in this paper, the annuity offset model is really a model

about term life insurance. Yet the primary implication of this model, that term life insurance

ownership will be an increasing function of the level of Social Security benefits, is clearly rejected

by the data. The relationship between whole life insur1ance and Social Security, on the other hand,

is much stronger but subject to numerous sources of bias. As discussed, by age 70, whole life

insurance primarily consists of tax-advantaged savings, and therefore does not serve to “undo”

annuitization any more than holding other financial assets. Since the individuals who have the most

to gain from the inside build-up associated with whole life policies are people who were in higher

tax brackets while younger (and who therefore are also likely to have higher Social Security

earnings), the observed relationship may be driven more by tax consequences than by a desire to

offset a government annuity.

   Table 4 repeat the analysis for the male widowers only, and finds a similar pattern. In the

specification using total life insurance as the dependent variable, there is a significant positive effect
of SSB in the Tobit specification, and it is much larger in magnitude. Once again, however, when

we decompose total life insurance holdings into the two types, we find that the positive relationship

is being driven entirely by whole life policies. The OLS results again show similar, though

insignificant, marginal effects. Table 5 repeats the same analysis for female widows. In this case,

the coefficient on SSB in the total life insurance regression falls short of significance, and is smaller

in magnitude than for males. More importantly, the coefficient on SSB in the term life insurance

specifications continues to be small and insignificant. The only specification in which the SSB

coefficient is significant is for the Tobit specification in the whole life insurance regression.

   Table 6 presents results for married couples. Focusing on column (1), we again see that the

coefficient on SSB in the “total life insurance” specification is a positive and significant 0.91. This

offset is similar to what Bernheim found, though at the lower end of his range. Once again,

however, the split of total insurance into its two types yields dramatically different results. The

coefficient for Term insurance in column (2) is only 0.27, and is not significant at the 95% level.

The coefficient on SSB in the Whole insurance specification (column (3)), on the other hand, is a

significant 1.46. Repeating the analysis with OLS regressions, we again find no significant

correlation between SSB and life insurance ownership. As in the case with widows and widowers,

the significant Tobit results appear to be driven primarily by a whole life insurance, not the term

insurance that the model is meant to represent.

   Table 7 repeats the analysis on the sub-sample of married couples in which neither spouse is

currently in the workforce. This distinction is quite important, as even the Tobit coefficient on total

life insurance is no longer significant. There are two important reasons to think that working

couples may differ from non-working. First, an employed individual still has some (albeit small)

human capital to protect, just as a younger working age individual does. Second, a worker is more
likely to be covered by a group insurance plan through the employer. In either case, if workers also

have higher Social Security benefits because of a stronger attachment to the labor force, this will

induce a positive correlation between SSB and life insurance, even in the absence of a desire to

undo annuitization.

   Table 8 reports results similar to table 6, except that the dependent variable is life insurance

coverage on the husband only. The pattern of coefficients on SSB is similar to those found in table

6. Again, any positive correlation is limited to the total or whole life specifications, and is

significant only in the Tobit specifications. Table 9 shows the results for the sample of married

women, and again we see the familiar pattern of coefficients.

   In short, there is no evidence to suggest that term life insurance ownership among retired elderly

households exhibits the correlation with Social Security benefit levels that the annuity offset model

demands.

4.3 Test of Implication #3: Term Insurance as an Inferior Good

   The third implication of the annuity offset model is that term life insurance will behave as an

inferior good with respect to life-time resources. This is simply because retirement consumption is

viewed as a normal good, and therefore the demand for annuities should be an increasing function

of resources. Since term insurance is to behave as a negative annuity, this means that the demand

for term insurance should be declining with total lifetime resources.

   I am unable to exactly replicate Bernheim’s measure of lifetime resources because access to

Social Security earnings records is unavailable. However, we do observe other components of

resources, including the actuarial present value of pensions, Social Security, housing wealth, and

financial net worth. I construct the variable PVR (Present Value of Resources) to be the sum of
these resource variables. In addition, I am able to use indicator variables for education and

occupation to proxy for lifetime earning effects.

   Using a measure of lifetime resources that included lifetime earnings and the present value of

pensions and Social Security, Bernheim found mixed results in his test of this implication.

Specifically, in his basic Tobit results, he found that the lifetime resource effect was negative for

the average childless couple, but positive and insignificant for couples with children. He finds

better support for the notion that at least some portion of total life insurance demand behaves as an

inferior good by conducting “refined estimates” which model total life insurance holdings as the

sum of two distinct, but separately unidentified, processes. Based on these refined estimates, he

concludes that the term part of total life insurance ownership is the component that is behaving like

an inferior good.

   Looking at the coefficient on PVR among widows and widowers (tables 3, 4 and 5) and among

married couples (tables 6 through 9), we find no significant relationship between PVR and term life

insurance. While the sign of the coefficient is negative in some of the term life insurance

specifications, it is not even approaching significance at any standard level of confidence. The

coefficient on PVR in the whole life insurance specifications, and as a result in some of the total life

insurance specifications, is strongly positive. This latter finding is consistent with Bernheim’s

conclusion that term and whole life insurance respond rather differently to variation in total

resources. In the AHEAD data, however, there is no evidence that term insurance is behaving like

an inferior good.

4.4 Test of Implication #4: Term Insurance Owners Consume Less than Social Security Income

   The fourth and final empirical implication of the annuity offset model derives from the

definition of being “over-annuitized” by Social Security. The basic notion behind this model is that
household bequest motives are sufficiently strong that their desired consumption level is less than

the annuity provided by Social Security, and that they would therefore prefer to keep some of their

wealth un-annuitized in order to leave it to their heirs.

   Conceptually, this is a straightforward implication to test, since it requires the simple

comparison of consumption to the income provided by Social Security. If a household is

consuming more than the Social Security benefit, then they are not over-annuitized. However, this

implication is difficult to test directly in the AHEAD data due to the fact that a good measure of

consumption is difficult to construct with currently available data. Therefore, I will rely on less

direct methods to infer the extent to which households wish to consume less than their Social

Security income.

   It is useful to first consider a household’s dynamic budget constraint:

                       Wt+1 = (Wt – Ct + SSBt + Yt)(1+r)                          (2)

   where Wt represents financial wealth at period t, Ct is consumption in period t, SSBt is the

income flow from Social Security, and Yt is the income flow from other (non-Social Security)

sources. If it is true that individuals are over-annuitized by Social Security, it must be the case that

SSBt ≥ Ct. If not, then the constraint of the mandated Social Security annuity is non-binding, and

needs not be offset by life insurance. Since we do not directly observe consumption in the AHEAD

survey, this test must necessarily be indirect. To be over-annuitized by Social Security requires

SSBt - Ct ≥ 0. This implies:

                                           Wt+1 – Wt (1+r) ≥ Yt           (3)

   In other words, we need the amount of net saving done by a household to exceed the level of

non-Social Security income that they receive during the period. That is, they must be saving some

fraction of their Social Security payment in addition to all non-Social Security income. According
to the annuity offset model, households that own term life insurance should be saving all non-Social

Security income, and then supplementing this bequeathable savings with life insurance.

    One simple way to test for this is to make use of a question asked in the first wave of the

AHEAD survey:

                 “Not counting any money or assets that you may have given
                children or others, did you [and your (husband/ wife/ partner]
                use up any of your investments or savings during (1992/1993)
                to pay for expenses?

    If households are spending down their existing non-annuitized assets in order to pay for current

consumption expenses, then they must be consuming at least as much as their current total income,

and therefore at least as much as their Social Security income. Therefore, these individuals would

have no reason to hold life insurance.

    Table 10 shows that approximately one quarter of all households spend down assets in 1992/93.

Importantly, the overwhelming majority of these households own life insurance, and in particular,

term life insurance. In fact, the proportion of those owning term life insurance who spend down

assets does not appear to be very different from the proportion of those not owning term insurance

who spend down assets, for both widows and couples. Specifically, 24% of widows and 25% of

couples who own term life insurance engaged in a spend-down of financial assets. This test clearly

understates the proportion of term life insurance owners who are consuming more than their Social

Security benefit level, as it does not account for consumption out of non-Social Security income. If

a person also has pension or investment income, for example, the individual may consume in excess

of Social Security, and yet still be a net saver.

4.5 Summary of Annuity Offset Tests

    All four of the major implications of the annuity offset model fail empirical testing in the

AHEAD data. As a result, it seems clear that this model does not explain life insurance behavior of
elderly households. This leads to the obvious next question of “what is the alternative hypothesis?”

This is the subject of the next section.

5. Alternative Explanations

   There are a number of plausible alternative hypotheses that could explain why elderly

individuals and couples hold life insurance. These alternatives share the common feature that none

of them rely on the four empirical implications of the annuity offset model. That is, these

hypotheses are still quite plausible even knowing the results of Section 4. It is not the goal of this

paper to conduct a definitive test to select from among these alternative hypotheses. I will,

however, present some suggestive evidence to provide direction for further research. The four

alternative hypotheses I discuss below include:

   (i)     “Couple Protection”: Elderly couples use life insurance to insure against loss of pension

           or Social Security benefits upon the death of the first spouse.

   (ii)    “Inertia”: Life insurance holdings are simply “residue” from attempts earlier in life to

           insure human capital.

   (iii)   “Estate Tax Planning”: Life insurance is used to assist with estate tax planning in

           wealthier households, such as to provide liquidity.

   (iv)    “Funeral Expenses”: Many elderly view life insurance as their burial money.

5.1 Couple Protection:

   The first of these alternatives, the couple protection model, assumes that married couples are

purchasing life insurance in order to re-allocate life-contingent income. For example, suppose a

husband has a pension plan which is being paid out as a “joint and 50% contingent” annuity. This

type of annuity treats the spouses asymmetrically. If the wife dies first, the husband continues to

receive the full benefit. If the husband dies first, on the other hand, the pension income paid to the
wife drops by 50%. If the couple decides that they would like to re-allocate income from the

“husband only” state to the “wife only” state, one way to do this is to purchase a term life insurance

policy on the husband.

   The evidence on this alternative is mixed. First, it cannot explain the fact that 62% of widowers

and 49% of widows hold life insurance policies. Second, Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1987, 1989)

tested this model of couples using several data sets, including the RHS, and found little support for

the model’s implications. Specifically, they calculated the decline in resources that a married

individual would face upon the death of their spouse, and used this variable as a predictor of life

insurance ownership on the spouse. They found that most households do not adequately insure

spouses against the potential resource loss associated with widowhood.

   On the other hand, 95% of husbands in the AHEAD sample who own term life insurance name

their spouse as the policy beneficiary. If the insurance was truly being held to leave as a bequest to

children, there is no obvious reason to leave the policy to the surviving spouse instead. Further

exploration of this alternative hypothesis using the AHEAD data is being conducted in a separate

paper.

5.2 Inertia

   The second alternative hypothesis is that the elderly hold life insurance while old only because

they held it when they were young. This could reflect rational or irrational behavior on their part,

such as the case when an individual rationally keeps a policy because it represents a good value

from here on. This could be because the policy is already paid up, or because someone else is

paying for the policy (e.g., a child or a former employer). For example, roughly 40% of the

individuals in the AHEAD data who are covered by a term life insurance policy are currently

paying no premiums. Alternatively, may have had a multi-year term policy with flat or level
premiums, and therefore the policy is better than actuarially fair deal from this time forward

because the individual has essentially pre-paid.

   There are also non-rational reasons that one might hold onto a policy that was bought earlier in

life. Samuelson & Zeckhauser (1988) provide evidence of status quo bias in decision making.

They point out that most decisions, such as an elderly individual’s decision about how much life

insurance to hold, has a status quo alternative of “doing nothing” or “maintaining one’s current or

previous decision.” Using evidence from a series of experiments, as well as data on retirement plan

choice, they show that individuals have a strong propensity to stick with the status quo. They

attribute this to the presence of “transition costs or uncertainty, cognitive misperceptions, or a

psychological commitment stemming from misperceived sunk costs, regret avoidance, or a drive for

consistency.”

   There are several pieces of evidence that suggest inertia may hold affect a significant fraction of

the sample. First, data from the 1992 Life Insurance Ownership Study from the Life Insurance

Market Research Association indicates that most policies held by the elderly are quite old. When

asked the age of the newest life insurance policy held, the median response among those age 70+

was 32 years. The median age of the oldest policy was 42 years. Fully 30% of these elderly

individuals bought their newest insurance policy before the age of 30, and have not purchased any

additional insurance since that time. Half of those owning insurance have not bought a policy since

the age of 43. It thus appears that the majority of policy owners have not purchased any insurance

for many decades, at least raising the possibility that their continued ownership is due to a failure to

cancel.

   On the other hand, 17% of those who own life insurance bought their most recent policy since

the age of 65. According to a LIMRA Buyer’s Study (1996), only 8% of all life insurance policies
sold by agents to individuals age 65+ were term policies. Most of the rest were whole life policies,

which are commonly used for estate planning purposes. The average size of the policies sold to

those ages 65+ was $92,800, with an annual premium of $4,698. These are quite large policies

compared to the average policy size found in the AHEAD data, indicating that these individuals are

likely to be wealthier than average and more concerned with estate planning. While these

households may well be concerned about bequests, it is highly unlikely that they would be

purchasing large cash value policies in order to offset Social Security.

5.3 Estate Tax Planning

   The third alternative hypothesis is that individuals hold life insurance to aid in estate planning.

There are several reasons why a wealthy household that would be subject to estate taxation upon

death would use life insurance as part of an estate planning strategy. First, owners of family

business may wish to provide heirs with sufficient liquidity to pay for the estate taxes associated

with the value of the business operation, in order to avoid the need to liquidate business assets.

Holtz-Eakin, Phillips, and Rosen (1999) explore this point in detail. They find that, other things

being the same, business owners purchase more life insurance than other individuals.

   While it is undoubtedly true that some high wealth households use life insurance as an effective

estate planning tool, this simply cannot explain more than a small fraction of households in the

AHEAD data. Fewer than 5% of households in the data have a combined net worth and life

insurance face value in excess of $600,000, which was the point at which the estate tax becomes an

issue for households at the survey date.

5.4 Funeral Expenses

   The fourth alternative hypothesis is that elderly individuals view life insurance policies as their

“burial money.” This could be due to a mental accounting approach to portfolio choice (Thaler,
1985), or as a rational way to circumvent the probate process. Either way, this “burial money”

notion may explain the preponderance of small face value policies in the sample, since according to

the National Funeral Directors Association, the average cost of a funeral in 1997 was $4,782. Hurd

and Smith (this volume) show that total out-of-pocket death expenses, which includes out-of-pocket

medical and funeral expenses, for decedents in the Ahead data average $8,934. For comparison, the

median amount of total life insurance coverage is $5000 among male widowers, $2500 among

female widows, $3000 among married women, and $9000 among married men. It seems reasonable

to suspect that many of these small policies are held for the purpose of paying for final death-related

expenses. This notion is present in popular financial planning books as well. The author of one

such book tells the story of a conversation with a widow who asked him to review her finances.

She was financially well off, with over $600,000 in net worth, and annual living expenses of only

$30,000. When he asked her why she was carrying a term life insurance policy that was costing her

several hundred dollars a month in premiums, she replied “that is to bury me” (Gardiner, 1997).

   A study conducted by the Life Insurance Market Research Association confirms that life

insurance is frequently purchased with the intention of using the proceeds to pay for one’s burial.

83% of widows report using life insurance proceeds of their deceased spouse primarily to pay for

death-related expenses. LIMRA also reports that paying for death-related expenses is the most

commonly cited reason that consumers give for purchasing life insurance.

       One reason that life insurance is a popular device for paying for death expenses is that it

avoids probate if paid to a named beneficiary (Graves, 1994). Probate proceedings can “tie-up”

ordinary assets for many months, so that family members are unable to use these assets to pay for

funeral or other death related expenses. The proceeds from a small life insurance policy, because it
avoids the probate proceedings, can provide the decedent’s family with timely access to funds with

which to pay for these expenses.

5.5 Putting It All Together

    Once we account for all the behavior that is directly inconsistent with the annuity offset model

and/or potentially explained by alternative hypotheses, what fraction of households exhibit behavior

that can be explained only by the desire to offset annuities? A simple running tabulation presented

in Table 11 shows that it is likely to be a trivial fraction of the population – far less than the 25%

figure resulting from earlier analyses.

    Table 11 starts with the full population of widows and widowers in the left column, and married

men in the right. As the chart shows, approximately half of all widows and 71% of married men

own a life insurance policy. However, the annuity offset model is really a model of term life

insurance, which means we are really concerned about the 31.5% of widows and the 41.6% of

married men who own a term policy. Next we can subtract off those households which purchase a

life-annuity, since these households would clearly not purchase life insurance to offset Social

Security, only to turn around and annuitize additional resources. If we follow Bernheim’s lead in

treating life-contingent pension annuities as a choice variable, we can further reduce the sample to

only 17.7% of widows and 14.5% of married men.

    Next, we can eliminate those households who are spending down their financial assets for

consumption, since these individuals are also clearly not constrained by the Social Security income

floor. At this point, we have 13.9% of widows and 10.7% of married men still in the pool. Now let

us account for individuals whose term life insurance coverage costs them nothing. The reasoning

here is that if an individual can receive a policy at zero marginal cost, then it is perfectly rational for

them to keep it regardless of whether they have bequest motives or not. In any case, since they do
not have to use the Social Security benefits to pay for the premium, they are not offsetting the

annuity in any direct way. This leaves us with 9.2% of widows and 8.6% of married men. Using

similar logic, we can eliminate those for whom the term premium is an actuarially advantageous

deal. Specifically, I exclude those whose term premium is less than half of the actuarially fair term

premium of a 70-year old in 1993.

   For married couples, I eliminate those who name their spouse as the beneficiary, since this

means the policy may be held more for spousal protection than for bequest purposes. Finally, let us

take the funeral expense notion seriously, and assume that any policy with a face value of under

$5000 is essentially the individual’s “burial money.” This reduces the sample to 2% of widows and

0.5% of married men.

   The calculations in Table 11 are meant to be illustrative only, and one can certainly quibble with

any one of the above exclusion restrictions. These figures demonstrate, however, that one can

“explain away” the finding that individuals use life insurance to offset Social Security. In short,

with a few simple assumptions one can show that only a small fraction of households may over-

annuitized by Social Security because they have strong bequest motives.



6. Summary & Future Directions

   This paper has presented substantial evidence that the reason the elderly hold life insurance is

not to offset mandated annuitization in the form of Social Security in order to leave a bequest. Four

empirical implications of the annuity offset model were developed and tested, and all four were

found to be inconsistent with the behavior of elderly households in the AHEAD data set.

   This finding is relevant to the current debate over the future of the Social Security system

because it bears upon the question of whether or not mandatory annuitization is desirable. Were it
the case that a substantial fraction of elderly households were over-annuitized by the existing Social

Security system due to the existence of strong bequest motives, this would be evidence in favor of

allowing choice over the annuitization decision. The results of this paper suggest that households

are not over-annuitized by Social Security for bequest reasons. Therefore, the simple fact that many

elderly households own term life insurance is not a sufficient reason to argue against mandatory

annuitization of retirement resources.   This finding is consistent with the idea that annuities are of

substantial value in the retirement portfolios of elderly individuals (Mitchell, et al 1999, Brown

1999, Friedman & Warshawsky 1988). As a result, mandatory annuitization may be desirable to

overcome adverse selection in the annuity market. However, this conclusion should be tempered by

the acknowledgement that individuals can be over-annuitized for reasons other than bequest

motives, as suggested in work by Hurd (1987 & 1989).

   This paper then suggests several alternative hypotheses for explaining the large fraction of

elderly households that own life insurance. While these alternatives were not subjected to formal

empirical testing in this paper, informal evidence suggests that some of these alternatives may be

relevant. For example, the fact that the vast majority of policies have been held for several decades

suggests that many holdings may be due to inertia from insurance decisions earlier in life. This

would be consistent with the “status quo bias” in decision making that has been documented by

Samuelson and Zeckhauser (1988) among others. It may also be the case that many small policies

are held as a method of pre-paying death expenses, such as funerals.

   It has also been found that the majority of policies held by married individuals name their

spouse as the beneficiary of the life insurance policy rather than their children. This is at least

suggestive that the purpose of these policies may be to provide an adequate consumption stream for

a widowed spouse. While this hypothesis found little support in earlier empirical work by
Auerbach & Kotlikoff, they suggested that this might in part be due to the poor quality of their data.

This hypothesis is being re-examined using the AHEAD data as part of a separate research project.
                                         REFERENCES

American Council of Life Insurance, 1996, Life Insurance Factbook, Washington, DC.

Auerbach, A.J. and L.J. Kotlikoff, 1987, “Life Insurance of the Elderly: Its Adequacy and

       Determinants.” In Work, Health, and Income Among the Elderly, edited by Gary Burtless.

       Washington: Brookings Institution.

Auerbach, A.J. and L.J. Kotlikoff, 1989, “How Rational is the Purchase of Life Insurance,” NBER

       Working Paper # 3063.

Bernheim, B.D., 1991, “How Strong Are Bequest Motives? Evidence Based on Estimates of the

       Demand for Life Insurance and Annuities,” Journal of Political Economy 99, 899-927.

Biggs, J.H., 1987, “Do Social Security Survivor Benefits Crowd Out Private Life Insurance?,”

       Center for the Study of American Business Working Paper # 115, Washington University,

       St. Louis.

Brown, J.R. 1999, “Private Pensions, Mortality Risk and the Decision to Annuitize” MIT Mimeo

Broverman, S., 1986, “The Rate of Return on Life Insurance and Annuities,” The Journal of Risk

       and Insurance 53, 419 – 434.

Diamond, P.A., 1997, “Macroeconomic Aspects of Social Security Reform,” Brookings Papers on

       Economic Activity, 1-66.

Friedman, B.M and M.J. Warshawsky, 1988, “Annuity Prices and Saving Behavior in the United

       States,” In Pensions and the U.S. Economy, edited by Z. Bodie, J. Shoven, and D. Wise,

       Chicago: Univ. Chicago Press (for NBER).

Gandolfi, A.S., and L. Miners, 1996, “Gender-Based Differences in Life Insurance Ownership,”

       The Journal of Risk and Insurance 63, 683 – 693.

Gardiner, R.M., 1997, Dean Witter Guide to Personal Investing, New York: Penguin Books.
Goldsmith, A., 1983, “Household Life Cycle Protection: Human Capital Versus Life Insurance,”

       The Journal of Risk and Insurance 50(2), 33 – 43.

Graves, E., editor, 1994, McGill’s Life Insurance, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania: The American

       College.

Holtz-Eakin, D., J. Phillips, and H. Rosen, “Estate Taxes, Life Insurance, and Small Business,”

       mimeo, 1999.

Hurd, M.D., 1987, “Savings of the Elderly and Desired Bequests,” American Economic Review 77,

       298 – 312.

Hurd, M.D., 1989, “Mortality Risk and Bequests,” Econometrica 57(4), 779-813.

Hurd, M.D., and J.P. Smith, “Anticipated and Actual Bequests,” This volume.

Hurd, M.D. & D.A. Wise, 1988, “The Wealth & Poverty of Widows: Assets Before and After the

       Husband’s Death.” The Economics of Aging, NBER, University of Chicago Press, 177-

       200.

Kotlikoff, L. & A. Spivak, 1981, “The Family as an Incomplete Annuities Market,” Journal of

       Political Economy 89, 372-391.

Laitner, J. & T. Juster, 1996, “New Evidence on Altruism: A Study of TIAA-CREF Retirees,”

       American Economic Review 86(4), 893-908.

Lewis, F.D., 1989, “Dependents and the Demand for Life Insurance,” The American Economic

       Review 79,452 – 467.

LIMRA International, 1996, “The 1995 Buyer Study: A Market Study of New Insureds and the

       Ordinary Life Insurance Purchased.”

LIMRA International, 1993, “Profiles in Coverage: The Widening Gap in U.S. Life Insurance

       Ownership.”
Modigliani, F., “The Role of Intergenerational Transfers and Life Cycle Savings in the

       Accumulation of Wealth,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 2(2).

Mitchell, O., J.M. Poterba, M.J. Warshawsky, and J.R. Brown, 1999, “New Evidence on the

       Money’s Worth of Individual Annuities,” American Economic Review, forthcoming.

National Funeral Directors Association, 1998, “Funeral Price Information from the NFDA 1997

       General Price List Survey,” http://www.nfda.org.

Samuelson, W. and R. Zeckhauser, 1988, “Status Quo Bias in Decision Making,” Journal of Risk

       and Uncertainty 1, 7-59.

Showers, V.E., and J.A. Shotick, 1994, “The Effects of Household Characteristics on the Demand

       for Insurance: A Tobit Analysis,” The Journal of Risk and Insurance 61, 492 – 502.

Thaler, R.H., 1985, “Mental Accounting and Consumer Choice,” Marketing Science 4, 199 – 214.

Warshawsky, M.J., 1988, “Private Annuity Markets in the United States,” Journal of Risk and

       Insurance, 55(3), 518-528.

Yaari, M., 1965, Uncertain Lifetime, Life Insurance, and the Theory of the Consumer, Review of

       Economic Studies 32, 137-150.
</ref_section>
                                                       Table 1

                          Life Insurance Coverage in the AHEAD Data

====================================================
                              Widows / Widowers                         Married Couples

                                Men        Women                Men        Women Household
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Pr(Owns Any LI)                  0.6184 0.4868                   0.7176 0.5540 0.7791

Amount | Own Any

          Median                $ 5,000 $ 2,500                 $ 9,000 $ 3,000 $10,756

          Mean                  $14,280 $ 5,250                 $25,481 $10,718 $31,541

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Pr(Owns Term LI)                 0.3730 0.3310                   0.4174 0.3014 0.4958

Amount | Own Term

          Median                $ 5,000 $ 2,000                 $ 5,000 $ 3,000 $ 7,000

          Mean                  $ 9,028 $ 3,841                 $12,238 $ 7,564 $15,313

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Pr(Owns Whole LI)                0.2749 0.1505                   0.4940 0.2577 0.5659

Amount | Own Whole

          Median                $ 6,000 $ 3,000                 $10,000 $ 4,500 $14,000

          Mean                  $18,297 $ 7,189                 $33,503 $13,221 $36,119

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Author’s tabulations from AHEAD survey, using household weights

Notes: Pr(Owning LI) is the fraction reporting ownership of that life insurance contract type.

          Amount | Own LI is the mean or median policy size conditional on ownership.
                                    Table 2
            Cross Ownership Patterns for Life Insurance and Annuities

                      Proportion of Population Holding Both Products
                       Married Couples: Total Household Coverage

====================================================
                       Owns Private Pension            Owns Private Annuity
                                                        (Excludes pensions)
                          Yes      No                        Yes      No
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Owns Any LI
       Yes                .501     .278                       .066     .713
       No                 .093     .128                       .011     .210

Owns Term LI
       Yes                .332     .164                       .038     .458
       No                 .260     .244                       .038     .466

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Author’s tabulations from AHEAD survey, using household weights




                      Proportion of Population Holding Both Products
                                  Widows and Widowers

====================================================
                       Owns Private Pension            Owns Private Annuity
                                                        (Excludes pensions)
                          Yes      No                        Yes      No
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Owns Any LI
       Yes                .211     .298                       .030     .479
       No                 .137     .354                       .026     .465

Owns Term LI
       Yes                .133     .192                       .039     .309
       No                 .216     .460                       .017     .636

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Author’s tabulations from AHEAD survey, using household weights
                                Table 3
               Tobit & OLS Results for Widows & Widowers

             (1)          (2)       (3)         (4)       (5)          (6)
Dep. Var.   TOTAL       TOTAL       TERM        TERM      WHOLE       WHOLE
Model       TOBIT        OLS        TOBIT        OLS      TOBIT        OLS




SSB          0.4751*     0.2163      0.0440     0.0285     1.2214*     0.1680
            (0.1530)    (0.1621)    (0.1028)   (0.0324)   (0.3020)    (0.1433)

PVR          0.0093*     0.0078**   -0.0012     0.0000     0.0122*     0.0068
            (0.0019)    (0.0037)    (0.0013)   (0.0003)   (0.0032)    (0.0035)

Working      2178.6      1363.0     -147.37    -114.88     3936.3      1155.5
            (1855.6)    (1427.4)    (1250.3)   (446.70)   (3527.2)    (1315.2)

Age         -441.40*    -99.683**   -310.39*   -80.387*   -448.34*    -16.375
             (78.97)    (49.534)    (52.850)   (19.030)   (162.02)    (43.593)

Female      -8181.7*    -4836.5*    -3257.7*   -1898.3*   -12538.7*   -2738.1*
            (1366.8)    (1056.9)    (917.73)   (532.95)    (2635.1)   (837.44)

Nonwhite     1640.2      644.77      1184.1     167.22    -3500.7      140.78
            (1302.9)    (619.89)    (848.02)   (245.36)   (2778.8)    (521.08)

Kids         3078.4**    653.55      1616.1     311.77     3076.3      158.92
            (1401.5)    (685.74)    (932.16)   (309.70)   (2858.7)    (565.06)


No. Obs.    2605        2605        2738        2738       2811         2811


Notes:      Standard errors in parentheses (OLS std. errors are White corrected)
            * Denotes significance at .01 level
            ** Denotes significance at .05 level

Specifications also include indicator variables for occupation and education.
                                Table 4
              Tobit & OLS Results for Male Widowers Only

             (1)         (2)       (3)         (4)         (5)        (6)
Dep. Var.   TOTAL       TOTAL      TERM        TERM        WHOLE      WHOLE
Model       TOBIT        OLS       TOBIT        OLS        TOBIT       OLS



SSB          1.1216*     0.7016    -0.0905      0.0536      2.4462*    0.6040
            (0.4331)    (0.5906)   (0.3289)    (0.0823)    (0.6940)   (0.5502)

PVR          0.0159*     0.0136     0.0006     -0.0001      0.0155*    0.0109
            (0.0044)    (0.0092)   (0.0027)    (0.0007)    (0.0060)   (0.0085)

Working     -7381.7     -5561.8    -13058**    -4333.8**   -824.04    -2672.8
            (6359.4)    (3414.7)   (5232.0)    (2107.5)    (9310.5)   (2982.9)

Age         -612.18**   -186.26    -727.18*    -242.08*    -290.26     58.199
            (265.73)    (228.62)   (204.82)    (82.403)    (417.16)   (195.12)

Nonwhite    -2853.6     -495.99    -3212.2     -1170.1     -12367     -983.99
            (4496.5)    (1382.7)   (3319.4)    (780.10)    (7414.0)   (1012.2)

Kids         8625.4      3201.0     9285.2**    1754.8*    -2253.6    -13.368
            (4473.3)    (2460.2)   (3647.9)    (594.73)    (6728.3)   (2357.1)



No. Obs.    453         453         472         472          487       487


Notes:      Standard errors in parentheses (OLS std. errors are White corrected)
            * Denotes significance at .01 level
            ** Denotes significance at .05 level

Specifications also include indicator variables for occupation and education.
                                Table 5
              Tobit & OLS Results for Female Widows Only

             (1)         (2)       (3)         (4)        (5)         (6)
Dep. Var.   TOTAL       TOTAL      TERM        TERM       WHOLE       WHOLE
Model       TOBIT        OLS       TOBIT        OLS       TOBIT        OLS



SSB          0.2402      0.0543     0.0778      0.0139     0.6842**    0.0339
            (0.1434)    (0.0963)   (0.0961)    (0.0342)   (0.3100)    (0.0748)

PVR          0.0036      0.0037    -0.0034     -0.0001     0.0081**    0.0035
            (0.0021)    (0.0027)   (0.0019)    (0.0002)   (0.0039)    (0.0024)

Working      3848.9**    2589.0     1642.4      706.83     5025.3      1869.2
            (1631.9)    (1573.8)   (1074.3)    (427.54)   (3413.0)    (1467.9)

Age         -381.36*    -96.511*   -213.34*    -46.397*   -480.66*    -42.135**
            (69.716)    (26.810)   (45.934)    (15.778)   (158.66)    (19.736)

Nonwhite     2289.5**    964.84     1675.1**    474.24    -932.74      454.24
            (1138.2)    (697.72)   (729.73)    (257.79)   (2668.6)    (608.16)

Kids         2033.6      287.91     471.99     -31.699     4630.9      294.18
            (1247.0)    (553.19)   (802.27)    (352.60)   (2888.5)    (387.59)



No. Obs.    2152        2152       2266        2266        2324        2324


Notes:      Standard errors in parentheses (OLS std. errors are White corrected)
            * Denotes significance at .01 level
            ** Denotes significance at .05 level

Specifications also include indicator variables for occupation and education.
                                    Table 6
                   Tobit & OLS Results for Married Couples
                           Total Household Coverage

             (1)          (2)       (3)          (4)       (5)         (6)
Dep. Var.   TOTAL        TOTAL      TERM         TERM      WHOLE      WHOLE
Model       TOBIT         OLS       TOBIT         OLS      TOBIT       OLS



SSB          0.9087*     0.5744      0.2668      0.1036     1.4557*    0.4745
            (0.3225)    (0.3768)    (0.1644)    (0.1459)   (0.4526)   (0.2910)

PVR          0.0289*     0.0255*     0.0001      0.0014     0.0327*    0.0209*
            (0.0038)    (0.0082)    (0.0017)    (0.0013)   (0.0051)   (0.0071)

Working      6502.8      6889.3     -1602.4      956.93     9439.2     4744.8
  Husband   (4646.6)    (4739.7)    (2468.6)    (1583.4)   (6478.5)   (4016.6)

Working      9676.4      6512.9      5635.4**    2984.2     2217.8     3270.9
  Wife      (5537.6)    (7429.9)    (2868.0)    (1922.0)   (7905.2)   (6234.8)

Age of      -1035.9*    -294.27     -750.98*    -284.04*   -559.88     5.7910
  Husband   (349.25)    (249.98)    (180.27)    (76.812)   (528.26)   (217.85)

Age of      -257.55     -309.40      66.711     -10.409    -501.19    -277.42
  Wife      (312.22)    (295.41)    (162.37)    (79.747)   (467.29)   (268.06)

Nonwhite    -7728.8     -3864.2**    1244.8     -269.17    -50519*    -4134.2*
            (5774.9)    (1758.1)    (2868.3)    (715.50)   (10364)    (1378.5)

Kids         7910.6      6200.2*     1091.7      819.06     7681.5     5065.3*
            (5976.5)    (2268.0)    (3128.3)    (1033.0)   (8835.8)   (1848.8)



No. Obs.    1751         1751       1893         1893       1937        1937


Notes:      Standard errors in parentheses (OLS std. errors are White corrected)
            * Denotes significance at .01 level
            ** Denotes significance at .05 level

Specifications also include indicator variables for occupation and education.
                                    Table 7
                   Tobit & OLS Results for Married Couples
                           Total Household Coverage
                            Non-Working Sample Only

             (1)          (2)      (3)         (4)        (5)         (6)
Dep. Var.   TOTAL        TOTAL     TERM        TERM      WHOLE       WHOLE
Model       TOBIT         OLS      TOBIT        OLS      TOBIT        OLS



SSB          0.0514     -0.1214     0.0850    -0.0426     0.4301    -0.0359
            (0.3146)    (0.3152)   (0.1722)   (0.1103)   (0.4412)   (0.2594)

PVR          0.0245*     0.0216*    0.0001     0.0017     0.0308*    0.0190**
            (0.0038)    (0.0083)   (0.0023)   (0.0013)   (0.0052)   (0.0078)

Age of      -1029.7*    -348.94    -704.88*   -277.62*   -500.96    -1.4535
  Husband   (331.78)    (277.59)   (184.08)   (76.702)   (502.45)   (249.83)

Age of      -481.67     -533.43     3.0825    -36.418    -724.23    -484.06
  Wife      (300.29)    (284.52)   (166.94)   (71.699)   (451.59)   (259.29)

Nonwhite    -10281      -5453.6*   -170.96    -835.96    -48199*    -5221.2*
            (5301.6)    (1773.4)   (2799.5)   (732.26)   (9721.2)   (1389.7)

Kids         3042.9      3961.5    -1374.8    -317.32     2415.4     3593.9**
            (5466.9)    (2307.3)   (3035.8)   (1148.5)   (8135.7)   (1679.1)


No. Obs.    1393         1393      1505        1505        1536        1536


Notes:      Standard errors in parentheses (OLS std. errors are White corrected)
            * Denotes significance at .01 level
            ** Denotes significance at .05 level

Specifications also include indicator variables for occupation and education.
                                  Table 8
                    Tobit & OLS Results for Married Men

             (1)          (2)      (3)         (4)        (5)         (6)
Dep. Var.   TOTAL       TOTAL      TERM        TERM      WHOLE       WHOLE
Model       TOBIT        OLS       TOBIT        OLS      TOBIT        OLS



SSB          0.7851*     0.4080     0.1934     0.0370     1.4209*    0.3889
            (0.2640)    (0.2674)   (0.1448)   (0.0960)   (0.4154)   (0.2221)

PVR          0.0208*     0.0181*   -0.0006     0.0009     0.0259*    0.0154*
            (0.0031)    (0.0061)   (0.0016)   (0.0009)   (0.0046)   (0.0057)

Working      7700.2**    7240.7     168.17     1259.7     11689**    5092.5
  Husband   (3827.4)    (4047.6)   (2171.6)   (1235.7)   (5883.0)   (3582.7)

Working     -3929.9     -1769.2     2128.6     975.72    -11394     -2225.4
  Wife      (4593.4)    (4318.2)   (2543.2)   (1197.2)   (7368.1)   (3810.9)

Age of      -1041.5*    -270.94    -744.40*   -252.96*   -791.92     0.8571
  Husband   (294.07)    (210.71)   (161.99)   (63.281)   (492.02)   (189.65)

Age of      -184.67     -236.69     252.68     89.866    -547.23    -324.11
  Wife      (260.38)    (246.53)   (145.05)   (50.504)   (432.07)   (229.46)

Nonwhite    -10877**    -3678.9*    454.91    -568.51    -50921*     -3155.0*
            (4798.9)    (1236.4)   (2504.2)   (471.63)   (10142)     (1042.6)

Kids         6575.6      5123.3*    877.24     831.61     6074.2     4188.6*
            (4997.1)    (1676.8)   (2762.8)   (848.74)   (8231.1)   (1402.9)



No. Obs.    1841        1841       1946        1946        1979        1979


Notes:      Standard errors in parentheses (OLS std. errors are White corrected)
            * Denotes significance at .01 level
            ** Denotes significance at .05 level

Specifications also include indicator variables for occupation and education.
                                  Table 9
                   Tobit & OLS Results for Married Women

             (1)         (2)       (3)         (4)        (5)          (6)
Dep. Var.   TOTAL       TOTAL      TERM        TERM       WHOLE       WHOLE
Model       TOBIT        OLS       TOBIT        OLS       TOBIT        OLS



SSB          0.3202     0.2037     0.0562      0.0619      0.6058**    0.1420
            (0.1687)   (0.1552)   (0.1173)    (0.0654)    (0.2771)    (0.1163)

PVR          0.0045*    0.0035     0.0000      0.0004      0.0060*     0.0030
            (0.0016)   (0.0022)   (0.0013)    (0.0005)    (0.0023)    (0.0018)

Working      1373.4     828.63    -2215.4     -251.48      4510.9      973.33
  Husband   (2503.8)   (1497.5)   (1794.2)    (683.79)    (3959.9)    (1229.1)

Working      9016.2*    5942.7     4203.2**    1730.3      9043.8      3937.9
  Wife      (2896.4)   (3335.7)   (1988.4)    (1038.0)    (4719.6)    (2924.3)

Age of      -365.95    -12.422    -237.89     -23.745     -296.10      18.801
  Husband   (188.88)   (84.895)   (128.56)    (31.576)    (321.91)    (74.479)

Age of      -232.24    -143.55    -160.91     -98.718**   -112.64     -33.212
  Wife      (170.72)   (113.04)   (115.72)    (46.716)    (291.01)    (98.039)

Nonwhite    -1548.3    -1170.1     3330.4      284.84     -25548*     -1426.5*
            (2983.3)   (688.73)   (1898.2)    (378.71)    (6410.8)    (516.74)

Kids         2183.6     1302.6     364.61      133.78     -1333.0      1012.2
            (3199.7)   (865.54)   (2207.3)    (406.76)    (5295.1)    (670.07)



No. Obs.    1896        1896       1982        1982        2008         2008


Notes:      Standard errors in parentheses (OLS std. errors are White corrected)
            * Denotes significance at .01 level
            ** Denotes significance at .05 level

Specifications also include indicator variables for occupation and education.
                        Table 10
    Asset Spend-down Versus Life Insurance Ownership


                       WIDOWS/WIDOWERS
                     Fraction of Population

              Own Any LI?           Own Term LI?
               No   Yes              No   Yes
Spend Down?
     No       .383 .383             .516 .250
     Yes      .105 .128             .157 .078



                       MARRIED COUPLES
                     Fraction of Population

              Own Any LI?           Own Term LI?
               No   Yes              No   Yes
Spend Down?
     No       .173 .590             .389 .371
     Yes      .047 .190             .115 .125
                                   Table 11
                   Determining Fraction of Sample Subject
                    to Over-Annuitization Due to Bequests


                        Widows/Widowers        Married Men

FULL SAMPLE:                 100%                100%

  Fraction
  Holding Any                49.9%               70.7%
  Insurance

  Fraction
  Holding Term               31.5%               41.6%
  Insurance

  Minus Those
  Purchasing                 29.9%               39.3%
  Private Annuity

  Minus Those
  With Private               17.7%               14.5%
  Pension Annuity

  Minus Those
  Spending Down              13.9%               10.7%
  Financial Assets

  Minus Those
  With Zero                   9.2%                8.6%
  Term Premium

  Minus Those
  With Term                   8.9%                7.7%
  Premium < .5
  Act. Fair

  Minus Those
  Naming Spouse               ---%                0.8%
  as Beneficiary

  Minus Policies
  Under $5000                  2.0%               0.5%
