The effects of globalization — on the United States and more generally — is the topic of
the day. Officials, academics and market participants all sense that the integration of national
economies and the development of international markets have gone further than ever before. The
extent of integration in turn creates a growing sense of helplessness about the ability of nations to
control their destinies in the face of global markets. Does the growth of global markets pose a
threat to distinctive national social systems? Does a world characterized by high levels of trade
and large international capital flows jeopardize social cohesion and economic and financial
stability and therefore require the strengthening of national safety nets and international
institutions, perhaps including a world financial regulator and an international lender of last resort,
or can private markets develop mechanisms for containing these risks? And, failing this, will
governments retreat toward financial autarchy and succumb to populist pressures for trade
protectionism?
The idea that globalization today is unprecedented (if not necessarily the preceding
paragraph’s pessimistic vision) is implicit in publications like Lawrence, Bressand and Ito (1996)
and much informed policy discussion. But there is also an undercurrent which recognizes that
there existed a previous period of globally-integrated markets. A hundred years ago, it is
suggested, prior to the disruptions of two world wars and the collapse of commodity and financial
markets in a global depression, markets were every bit as internationalized as today. If we have
just gone “back to the future,” simply matching the degree of economic integration experienced a
century ago, globalization may not be so unprecedented after all.

2
This view has been expressed by several prominent economists. Zevin (1992, p. 43), for
example, believes that “while financial markets have certainly tended toward greater openness
since the end of the Second World War, they have reached a degree of integration that is neither
dramatic nor unprecedented in the larger historical context of several centuries.” Sachs and
Warner (1995, p. 5) argue that “the reemergence of a global, capitalist market economy since
1950, and especially since the mid-1980s, in an important sense reestablishes the global market
economy that had existed one hundred years earlier.” Rodrik (1998, p. 2) concludes that “in
many ways, today’s world falls far short of the level of economic integration reached at the height
of the gold standard.”
For those willing to pursue it, these observations lead to the question of why globalization
a century ago did not create the same dilemmas as now. Was the difference the greater insulation
policy makers enjoyed, in an era of limited democratization, from rent seeking and political
pressure? Was it, as George Soros (1998) — and Charles Kindleberger before him — would
have it, that there existed a great power (Britain) willing to provide open markets for the exports
of the developing world, a stable monetary framework (the gold standard) to prevent currency
fluctuations at the center from destabilizing conditions at the periphery, and an ideological
consensus (faith in reason, respect for science, Judeo-Christian ethics) to create a basis for
international collaboration?
Or was the difference that markets were not in fact as profoundly integrated a hundred
years ago, freeing governments of some of the dilemmas that now confront them? This is our
conclusion in a previous paper on the globalization of finance (Bordo, Eichengreen and Kim
1998). While financial markets were significantly integrated a hundred years ago, the breadth of

3
that integration, we posited, paled in comparison with today. If this view is correct, then
differences between the late-nineteenth century and the late-twentieth century reflect not merely
differences in the institutional framework but also very real differences in the extent of
integration.1
Or was it that the dilemmas of globalization were not in fact absent? Much of the recent
literature invoking the comparison with the late-19th century asserts that trade conflicts and
financial crises were less disruptive than today. It is worth asking whether this is an appropriate
presumption. That the first age of globalization ultimately collapsed in a great depression in
which trade warfare and a global financial crisis played prominent parts suggests that we should
not take this presumption for granted.
This paper pursues the comparison of economic integration now and then for trade as well
as finance, primarily for the United States but with reference to the wider world. We establish the
outlines of international integration a century ago and analyze the institutional and informational
impediments that prevented the late nineteenth century world from achieving the same degree of
integration as today. We conclude that our world is different: commercial and financial
integration before World War I was more limited. Globalization today raises new issues of
governance not just because it is conjoined with a political system which gives a louder voice to
special interests, but because the economic phenomenon itself is different: integration is deeper

1

We are not the only authors who subscribe to this seemingly iconoclastic view. See, for
example, Bairoch and Kozul-Wright (1996), Wheeler and Pozo (1997), and (from a different
perspective) Baldwin and Martin (1999).

4
and broader than a hundred years ago.2
Section 1 analyzes international trade in goods and services. We show that while
production of tradeable merchandise constituted a larger share of overall economic activity a
century ago, trade played a much smaller role in that production than today. Furthermore, trade
and direct investments have opened up what a century ago were “non-traded” sectors, such as
services, retail trade, and public utilities, to international competition. In both senses, then, trade
is more important today. In Section 2 we seek to account for the more limited extent of
commercial intercourse a hundred years ago by describing changes in transportation costs,
government trade barriers, and information asymmetries that previously served as obstacles to
deeper integration. In Section 3 we describe trade tensions in the late 19th century, establishing
that they were as prevalent as today.
Sections 4 through 6 reconsider financial integration. Long-term capital flows, we show
in Section 4, were large in volume but — just as in the case of trade — limited to narrow sectors
of the economy, while short-term flows remained very much lower relative to the size of the
world economy. Section 5 attempts to account for these lower levels of financial integration a
hundred years ago by describing the information, contracting, and macroeconomic obstacles to
deeper integration and the institutions and arrangements that grew up to surmount them. This
discussion sheds light on what has changed over the intervening century and what remains to be
2

As we shall see, the questions that flow from this finding are important. Can countries
accommodate the pressures of globalization without engendering a backlash against the open
international trade and financial system whose origins date from the end of World War II? Are
international institutions such as the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and World Trade
Organization (WTO) well designed to accommodate the stresses on the system? And are domestic
institutions well configured to ensure ongoing political support for a liberal international trade and
financial regime?

5
changed to create a system of stable, efficiently-operating international markets.3
What tariff wars are for trade, banking and currency crises are for finance. In Section 6
we ask whether crises were as prevalent and devastating a hundred years ago when financial
markets were last well integrated internationally. The most serious episodes combined banking
with currency crises and were centered in the emerging markets of the era. But while the crisis
problem is not new, the drop in output following the typical pre-1914 crisis was somewhat less
severe than today. On the other hand, we find that post-crisis recovery is faster today, with the
notable exception of pure currency crises, where the gold-standard “resumption rule” had an
important stabilizing effect.
What is surprising, in a sense, given that integration is even deeper than a hundred years
ago, is that the trade tensions and financial instability of our day have not been worse. In the
conclusion we point to the institutional innovations that have taken place in the interim as an
explanation for this pattern. This in turn suggests the way forward for national governments and
multilaterals.

1. Commercial Integration Then and Now
The simplest measure of the importance of trade is its share in GDP. Figure 1 shows U.S.
merchandise exports and imports as a share of GNP or GDP from 1869 to 1997. This figure has
been interpreted either as showing that trade is roughly as important now as it was a century ago,

3

Our framework is quite similar to that developed independently by Hermalin and Rose
(1999), who emphasize the role of asymmetric information and imperfect contract enforcement in
segmenting international markets even today. Hence the emphasis in the text not only on “what
has changed” over the intervening century but also on “what remains to be changed.”

6
or as showing that trade is more important now than it was a century ago. The first interpretation
points out that merchandise exports stood at about seven percent of GNP in the late nineteenth
century and are about eight percent now, hardly a dramatic difference. The second notes that the
trade ratio has been rising since the mid-1980s and now exceeds any level achieved in the late
nineteenth or early twentieth century. Krugman (1995, p. 331) presents a balanced interpretation
of such figures when he writes: “the general picture of world integration that did not exceed earlytwentieth century levels until sometime well into the 1970s is thus broadly confirmed. In the last
decade or so, the share of trade in world output has finally reached a level that is noticeably above
its former peak. Nonetheless, it would be hard to argue that the sheer volume of trade is now at a
level that marks a qualitative difference from previous experience.”
In our view, trade today is strikingly more important than a century ago. Three indicators
sustain this view: (a) a higher share of trade in tradeables production, (b) the growth of trade in
services, and (c) the rise of production and trade by multinational firms.
Trade in Goods. When the broad merchandise trade figures just mentioned are probed
further, they reveal that trade is substantially more important now than a century ago for those
sectors engaged in trade. The GDP denominator is typically disaggregated into the following
sectors: agriculture, forestry, and fisheries; mining; construction; manufacturing; transportation
and public utilities; wholesale and retail trade; finance, insurance, and real estate; other services;
and government. Only agriculture, mining, and manufacturing are significant producers of goods
that enter into standard merchandise trade statistics. And the sectoral composition of U.S. GDP

7
has shifted away from the production of merchandise goods toward the production of services.4
Broadly speaking, the share of tradeable goods in national income has been sliced in half over the
past century. In both 1899-1903 and 1950, agriculture, mining, and manufacturing comprised
about 40 percent of GNP; the comparable figure for 1997 was 20 percent.5 While the
merchandise trade to GDP ratio a century ago was roughly comparable to what it is today, trade
is now much larger as a share of tradeable goods production. In a sense, this means that trade is
potentially less important than a century ago because non-traded goods loom larger in national
production and consumer demand. (In the next subsection, however, we discuss how previously
non-traded services have become increasingly tradeable and subject to international competition.)
At the same time, however, the relatively constant share of merchandise trade to GDP masks the
increasing importance of trade within the traded-goods sector.
Figure 2 illustrates the dramatic difference between the merchandise trade to GDP ratio
and merchandise trade to merchandise output (value added) ratio. The modest change in the ratio
of exports to GDP misses the post-war surge in merchandise exports as a share of merchandise
production. While the ratio of exports to tradeables production was never much more than 20
percent in the late nineteenth century, it is now more than 40 percent. Feenstra (1998) shows that
this same trend is evident in many other OECD countries as well.6

4

The more rapid productivity growth in goods-producing sectors, a shift in demand
toward services (such as health care), and the rise of government spending have all contributed to
this result.
5

U.S. Bureau of the Census (1975), series F250-254, F130-134. Council of Economic
Advisers (1999), Table B-12.
6

The export figures are measured on the basis of gross value, while the production data
(for agriculture, mining, and manufacturing) from the national income accounts are based on value

8
Examining particular commodities reveals the same phenomena. Table 1 compares
exports as a share of domestic shipments (output) and imports as a share of total supply (domestic
output plus imports) for selected commodities in 1909 and 1993.7 Taking either the share of
domestic production shipped overseas or the fraction of imports to domestic demand as indicating
the importance of trade, its economic role is much more prominent in 1993 than in 1909. This is
especially true for manufactured goods, such as machinery and transportation equipment, which a
century ago scarcely entered into trade. Even for the bulk-traded staple products of a century
ago, such as corn, wheat, coal, and tobacco, international commerce is much larger today as a
share of production. Similarly, imports of such products as wool, leather, and manufactured
goods are currently more substantial than a century ago.
On the basis of the sheer volume of goods leaving and entering the country, therefore, the
United States engages in significantly more international trade today. Before accepting these
figures as demonstrating the greater importance of trade today, however, one caveat should be
noted: the volume of goods exchanged between different markets may not reflect the degree of
market integration. O’Rourke and Williamson (1999) suggest that “it is the cost of moving goods
between markets that counts” and that therefore price differentials between markets should be

added data. It would be therefore incorrect to say that over 40 percent of U.S. merchandise
production was exported in 1997. The value of trade relative to production may be inflated if
intermediate products cross international borders multiple times in the production process.
Hummels, Rapoport, and Yi (1998) examine the increasing trade in intermediate products and
components (“vertical specialization”) and conclude that it accounts for only a part of the recent
growth in trade.
7

The years 1909 and 1993 have been chosen because 1909 was when the last Census of
Manufactures was conducted prior to World War I, and 1993 marks the most recent publication
of the Bureau of the Census publication U.S. Commodity Exports and Imports as Related to
Output.

9
examined.8 Doing this for the late-nineteenth century Atlantic economy, they find dramatic
convergence in the prices of many commodities. In 1870, for example, the Liverpool price of
wheat exceeded that in Chicago by about 60 percent; by about 1912, that Liverpool/Chicago price
gap had fallen to about 15 percent. The same convergence in goods prices occurred for many
other tradeable commodities and manufactures.
Today, basic agricultural commodities and raw materials such as wheat and petroleum are
exchanged on organized global markets. The question is not whether there has been price
convergence in recent years, but how closely the strictest test of market integration, namely the
law of one price, holds. Goodwin (1992) examines wheat prices at five major markets — the
United States Gulf export price, Canada’s Pacific Coast export price, at the Netherland’s
Rotterdam exchange, Australia’s export price, and Japan’s import price — and finds that, after
accounting for freight rates, the law of one price holds. Local market prices, of course, may differ
due to import tariffs, domestic price supports, or transportation charges, but well-integrated
international markets establish a base reference price (often in dollars) for such commodities. In
manufactured goods, such price comparisons are difficult to undertake due to the difficulty of
uncovering data on like goods.9
Trade in Services. The previous section noted that the U.S. economy has shifted toward

8

They (p. 31) argue that the volume of trade is an unsatisfactory index of commodity
market integration because “trade volumes can increase for reasons completely unrelated to
commodity market integration and they can decline for reasons completely unrelated to
commodity market disintegration.”
9

Goldberg and Verboven (1999) examine the European car market and find that price
discrimination is rampant and has not diminished over the 1980-1993 time period. They
anticipate, however, that the Euro will diminish intra-European car price differentials.

10
producing more services. Once considered largely non-tradeable, services have of course become
an increasingly important component of U.S. trade. The value of U.S. service exports (excluded
from the merchandise trade figures considered above) now amount to about 40 percent of the
value of merchandise exports. The addition of trade in services raises our view of the economic
importance of trade: in 1997, the broader figure of exports of goods and services as a percent of
GDP stood at 11.9 percent, of which merchandise exports were 8.5 percent and service exports
were 3.4 percent. In the 1960s, by contrast, service exports were just 1.0 percent of GNP and
amounted to about 30 percent of merchandise exports.
There are no comparable figures for trade in services for the pre-World War I period, in
part because such trade was significantly smaller than today. In 1900, shipping and tourism
receipts amounted to just 3 percent of U.S. merchandise exports, according to balance of
payments data from Simon (1960, pp. 704-5), compared to about 16 percent of merchandise
exports today. Shipping and tourism remain the two largest categories of U.S. service exports,
accounting for over 40 percent of such exports. Data on other service exports are not readily
available for the pre-1913 period, but those exports were probably minuscule. The other major
service exports today are royalties and fees (receipts from intellectual property rights, such as
trademarks, patents, and copyrights) and military transfers, categories which were probably not
important around the turn of the century. “Other private services,” including education, finance,
insurance, telecommunications, and business, professional, and technical services, are the most
rapidly growing category of U.S. service exports, but they too had no substantial counterpart a
century ago.
We can also trace the rise of service exports as a share of services production, as we did in

11
the case of tradeable merchandise. In 1960, the ratio of service exports to services value-added
was 1.7 percent. By 1997, that ratio had risen to 5.1 percent. While low in comparison to the
merchandise “tradeables” sector, this ratio has been rising rapidly and portends even greater trade
in services in the future.
The Role of Multinational Trade and Production. Production and exchange by
multinational firms has been a force in global trade since the days of the East India Company.
There has been a quantum leap, however, in the importance of multinationals from the pre-World
War I era.
While there were sizeable capital flows between countries in the pre-1913 world, as we
discuss below, most of the flows were portfolio investment and not trade- or production-related
direct investments. Multinational enterprises existed in the late nineteenth century, but they were
exceptional. As Wilkins (1970, p. 207) concludes: “The skeptic’s claim that for major U.S.
enterprises of the pre-World War I years foreign business was simply peripheral to domestic
investment seems to be supported by the evidence. It does seem that with the exception of
Standard Oil of New Jersey, Singer Sewing Machine, International Harvester, New York Life,
and perhaps a handful of other large companies, foreign activities did not make a substantial
contribution to the profits of U.S. enterprises. In 1914 the vast majority of American
corporations were not multinational (this is true today [1970] as well).”
This situation has changed dramatically. The value of direct investments has soared since
the early-1980s and is now a quantum leap above a century ago. Table 2 presents the value of
direct investments, both by the United States in other countries and by other countries in the
United States, as a share of U.S. GNP. U.S. direct investment abroad was remarkably similar in

12
1914, 1929, and 1960 at about 6 percent of GNP, but since then has jumped by a factor of three.
Similarly, foreign direct investment in the United States, although larger in 1914 than in 1929 or
1960, rose dramatically by the mid-1990s.
Direct investment can, in principle, complement or substitute for trade in goods. Collins,
O’Rourke, and Williamson (1997) find that trade and capital flows were rarely substitutes and
frequently complements in the late nineteenth century. Goldberg and Klein (1997) reach a similar
finding for the present day. One reason is that multinationals are conduits for trade. A sizeable
fraction of U.S. trade is intra-firm trade conducted by multinationals. In 1994, about 36 percent
of U.S. exports were intra-multinational transactions (sales to affiliates abroad), as were about 43
percent of U.S. imports (see Zeile 1997). These figures have not changed much since the first
government survey in 1977. Multinationals’ share of U.S. trade has fallen in recent years,
however, and this masks an intensification of those multinationals in intra-firm transactions (i.e.,
an increasing share of their exports and imports are intra-firm). As we speculate below,
multinational corporations mitigate informational barriers to exchange and thus serve to expand
international trade.
Direct investments have increasingly exposed services to international competition. U.S.
firms can deliver their services to foreign customers either through cross-border transactions
(service exports) or through sales by their foreign affiliates. To the extent that certain services
cannot be directly traded across borders, direct investments enable U.S. and foreign service
providers to enter into each others’ market and add an element of international competition to this
“non-traded” sector. According to the Census Bureau, service exports, until recently, had been
higher than affiliate sales. Higher affiliate sales reflect the fact that about 50 percent of U.S. direct

13
investment abroad is now in services sectors, notably banking, finance, insurance, wholesale and
retail trade, and other services. U.S. investment has particularly increased in foreign utilities,
particularly energy and telecommunications providers.
The shift in U.S. direct investments toward services marks another big difference from a
century ago. Back then, the bulk of U.S. investment abroad went into the development of natural
resources and raw materials in other parts of the world. In 1914, over 40 percent of U.S. direct
investment abroad was in the mining and petroleum sectors, and manufacturing and services
(mainly railroads and utilities) each accounted for roughly 20 percent of U.S. direct investment.
Today, about half of U.S. direct investments are in services and another 35 percent in
manufacturing.
Thus, international direct investments serve as a powerful force for integration that was
largely absent (or mainly confined to raw materials development) a century ago. Such
investments not only facilitate trade but bring about greater international competition in precisely
those sectors whose services are difficult to exchange across borders.
Competing Perspectives. In a 1995 Brookings Paper, Paul Krugman (1995) also
considered the features of trade today that distinguish it from a century ago. Krugman wrote that,
“while the overall volume of trade has not increased as much as might be expected, the aggregates
conceal several novel features of modern international trade,” and that “it is possible to identify at
least four new aspects of modern world trade — new in the sense that they did not have
counterparts in the previous golden age of the global economy.” These are the (a) rise of intraindustry trade, (b) ability of producers to break production geographically, (c) emergence of
countries with high trade-GDP ratios, (d) large exports of manufactured goods from low- to high-

14
wage countries.
Under closer scrutiny, several of these factors do not appear to be distinctive attributes of
international trade today. The rise of intra-industry trade is not simply a post-World War II
phenomena. In 1997, about 80-85 percent of U.S. exports and imports were classified as
manufactured goods. But in 1909, 60 percent of U.S. exports and over 50 percent of U.S.
imports were also considered manufactured or semi-manufactured goods.10 Thus, both then and
now the United States experienced substantial two-way trade in manufactured goods. While the
share of manufactures in U.S. trade rose between 1909 and 1995, manufactured exports and
imports appear roughly matched at comparable magnitudes in both periods.
We are not aware of any analysis of the relative importance of intra-industry trade over
such a long time horizon, so using data from 1909 and 1995 we calculate the standard GrubelLloyd measure of intra-industry trade:
1 - 3*Xi - Mi*/3(Xi + Mi),
where Xi and Mi are exports and imports at some level of disaggregation.11 This formula takes the
value of 1 if all trade is intra-industry trade and the value of 0 if all trade is inter-industry trade.
Adjusting the index for aggregate trade imbalances, we find a Grubel-Lloyd measure of 0.78 for
1995 and 0.53 for 1909. While this is not a statistical test, so we do not know how “close” the

10

U.S. Bureau of the Census (1975), series U213-224. As previously noted, in comparing
trade today with that roughly a century ago, we will often use the 1909 year as a basis of
comparison. Census data on output are available for this year, the last year such a census was
held before World War I.
11

The 1996 Statistical Abstract of the United States presents data on U.S. exports and
imports at the 2-digit SIC level for manufactures for 1995, which we matched that to data
presented in the 1913 Statistical Abstract for 1909, yielding roughly 15 comparable sectors.

15
1909 figure is to the 1995 one, it would appear that we now experience somewhat more intraindustry trade, although the contrast is not as stark as sometimes supposed.12
The contention that the United States is more engaged in trade with low-wage developing
countries now than a century ago is also not obviously true. Then and now, most of U.S. trade is
conducted with developed countries. In 1909, 55.9 percent of U.S. imports in 1909 came from
developed countries, taken to be Canada and Europe. In 1995 that figure (now including Japan)
was 61.2 percent. Thus, about 40 percent of U.S. imports both now and a century ago comes
from developing countries.13 Krugman is correct, however, in that the commodity composition of
that trade has changed significantly. A century ago U.S. trade with Latin American and Asian
economies consisted of agricultural commodities that the United States did not produce in
quantity, such as sugar, coffee, tea, etc. Today the U.S. is more likely to be importing
manufactured goods from those countries. A classic instance is Mexico: currently over 80
percent of U.S. imports from Mexico are manufactured goods; a century ago the figure was less
than ten percent.
Krugman also identifies the emergence of small states with high trade/GDP ratios as
distinctive of current day globalization. The data required to assess this point is difficult to come
by, but the rise of a few large entrepôt economies with extraordinary trade to GDP ratios, such as
Singapore and Hong Kong, probably does not constitute a defining difference between global

12

Becuwe and Messerlin (1986) examine late nineteenth century French intra-industry
trade and find that such trade grew until the 1880s and then leveled off.
13

The pattern of U.S. exports has shifted toward developed countries. In 1909, 59.7
percent of U.S. exports were destined for Canada, Europe, and Japan; in 1995, just over 80
percent were.

16
trade today and a century ago. A century ago, Carribean, Chinese, and African ports were open
for trade and served as flourishing entrepôts, largely transshipping goods produced elsewhere.
This is also true today. The WTO, for example, lists Hong Kong as the world 10th largest
exporter in 1997 with exports of $188 billion, but of this only $27 billion were domestic exports.

2. Why is Commercial Integration Greater Today?
Why is trade relative to the production of merchandise goods so much greater than a
century ago? The simple answer is the barriers that inhibit trade and prevent exchange from
taking place are lower today than a century ago. Late nineteenth century integration was
propelled by a rapid decline in transportation costs. These costs have remained low, and in the
post-war period have been supplemented by policy measures to reduce tariff and non-tariff
barriers to trade.
Transport Costs. In the second half of the nineteenth century, transportation costs fell
significantly and were a major force for integrating world markets. O’Rourke and Williamson
(1994) note that, between 1870 and 1913, the freight rate index on U.S. export routes fell by
more than 40 percent when deflated by the general U.S. price index. A wheat-specific freight
index fell over 50 percent over the same period. An equally large reduction in land transport
costs took place due to railroads, which reduced interior-to-seaboard prices as much if not more
than overseas routes. These transport cost declines set the stage for the convergence in tradedgoods prices discussed above.
Transportation costs have not reversed course but have continued to fall. There is some
dispute, however, about whether the postwar period has seen a reduction in transportation costs

17
comparable to that a century ago. Lundgren (1996, p. 7) maintains that the post-war period has
seen a sharp reduction in shipping costs. “During the last 30 years merchant shipping has actually
undergone a revolution comparable to what happened in the late nineteenth century.”
Containerization, bulk shipping, and other innovations have cut loading times and resulted in
efficiencies that have propelled these cost reductions. Hummels (1999) disputes this conclusion.
He finds that there has been little decline in shipping costs (perhaps even an increase), certainly
not enough to have played a major role in accelerating international trade.
Air transport, however, has been displacing shipping as the means of moving goods in
international trade. The share of U.S. imports that arrives via air has risen from 8.8 percent in
1974 to 19.0 percent in 1996. Similarly, nearly a third of U.S. exports (including aircraft) leave
via air. Shipping via air has been largely a post-war phenomena and has seen substantial cost
reductions. Hummels (1999) finds that air cargo rates on long distant routes have declined by
about 15-20 percent (when deflated by U.S. import price index) over the 1975-93 period.
Even if transport costs have not fallen as dramatically as they did in the late 19th century,
they have remained low. In addition, technological changes have expanded the array of delivery
mechanisms and cut the time to delivery in ways that have brought an ever increasing variety of
goods (cut flowers from Central America, lobsters from Maine) into world commerce.
Trade Barriers. Evidence on tariff barriers indicates that these have been dramatically
reduced. Table 3 presents measures of average tariffs on manufactured goods for selected
countries and years over the past century. Between 1875 and 1913, average tariffs crept up in
most European countries, with the notable exception of that bastion of free trade, Great Britain.
Germany imposed the 1879 “Bismark” tariff on manufactured goods, and such tariffs ratcheted up

18
elsewhere as well. Tariffs on agricultural goods also rose across Europe as a result of the
railroad-induced “great grain invasion” of the 1870s. By the outbreak of World War I, average
tariffs were in the 20 percent range across many countries. As O’Rourke and Williamson (1999,
p. 29) note, “all the commodity market integration in the Atlantic economy after the 1860s was
due to the fall in transport costs between markets, and none was due to more liberal trade policy.”
In 1950 these barriers were still in the 20 percent range, but had been supplemented by
quantitative restrictions, exchange controls, and currency restrictions that had their origin in the
interwar period. Multilateral trade negotiations, conduced under the auspices of the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), helped to reduce average tariffs to under 5 percent.
Import quotas and exchange controls that persisted into the early post-war period were also
phased out or eliminated. Furthermore, whole geographic areas have become, if not pure freetrade zones, at least zero tariff areas. The European Economic Community, founded in 1958,
eliminated tariffs on member countries’ trade and formed a customs union which has sought even
closer economic ties as the European Union (EU). The North American Free Trade Agreement
(NAFTA) expanded the U.S.-Canada Free Trade Agreement to include Mexico and, it is
contemplated, other countries in central and south America. Though the merits of regional and
preferential trade agreements vis-a-vis multilateral trade negotiations is controversial, both in
terms of potential welfare effects and trade liberalization strategy, political efforts to eliminate
trade barriers have undoubtedly contributed to deeper economic integration than experienced a
century ago.
As is well known, however, even as tariffs have fallen, other measures have been adopted
to protect domestic producers from import competition. Antidumping actions, voluntary restraint

19
agreements, and other forms of protectionism persist and are not adequately reflected in these
tariff measures. (Being selective and elastic in their implementation, these forms of protection can
at times be worse than set tariffs.) In addition, large pockets of international trade, notably
agricultural goods and textiles and apparel, have evaded efforts toward trade liberalization (at
least until the Uruguay Round). These caveats prevent us from making definitive statements
about the comparability of trade barriers now and a century ago. But they do not prevent us from
suggesting that, broadly speaking, trade barriers have fallen substantially in the post-war period
and today are quite likely lower than a century ago.
Informational Barriers to Exchange. In addition to transportation costs and trade
barriers, informational barriers to exchange can limit the extent of market integration. Consumers
are likely to have better information about the attributes of goods produced locally, while
producers are likely to have better information about local tastes and demands. A century ago,
before the age of mass communications, the difficulty of transmitting and receiving information
about these attributes was plausibly greater than today.
To an extent, of course, these informational barriers to exchange could be overcome
through network mechanisms. The high level of migration, including reverse and seasonal
migration, that characterized the late 19th century was an important channel for the flow of such
information. Italian workers who traveled to the New World for a few years, or even just for the
planting and harvest seasons, before returning to their home town in Italy formed an obvious
network for information about supplies and demands in the Americas.14 Multinational
14

Rauch and Casella (1998) distinguish between homogenous commodity goods in which
organized exchanges (markets) set international reference prices and differentiated manufactured
goods in which information networks appear to be important. Rauch (1999) presents evidence

20
corporations similarly established (in their case, proprietary) networks for conveying such
information across borders.15 But the presence of these mitigating factors does not change the
conclusion that information relevant to product-market outcomes was more difficult to transmit
and receive from abroad prior to 1913.16
Since multinationals were not as prevalent a century ago, their recent rise has acted to
overcome reputational and informational barriers to trade. This points up an important contrast
with a century ago. As alluded to in our introduction, recent observers have recalled the late
nineteenth century as being a time of common values and institutions. Colonialization forced
other countries in the world to adopt legal systems and commercial codes that, in some sense,

that search barriers to trade are higher for differentiated than for homogeneous products. He
finds that proximity, a common language, and colonial ties are more important for matching
international buyers and sellers and promoting trade in differentiated products than for goods
traded on organized exchanges. This evidence is consistent with extra-market informational
advantages or long-standing ties as being an important component of trade.
15

Rangan and Lawrence (1999) argue that multinationals that pursue cross-border
exchanges have advantages regarding the informationally-intensive activities of search (identifying
potential exchange partners) and deliberation (assessing their reliability and trustworthiness).
They find that the response of multinationals to real exchange rate changes is larger and more
rapid than by non-multinationals. This result is consistent with the informational advantage view
of such entities, and is inconsistent with the view that intra-firm transactions are less sensitive to
market changes because of hierarchy or command issues.
16

Of course, cross-border transactions can be impeded not just by informational problems
but by (non-trade) policy-based reasons as well. Anderson and Marcouiller (1999) use survey
measures of the security of economic transactions to determine the extent to which these factors
impinge on international trade. They find that bilateral trade is significantly higher between
countries whose government economic policies are impartial and transparent and whose legal
systems are effective in enforcing commercial contracts. Indeed, they conclude that the
insufficiency of these domestic institutions pose a greater constraint to international trade than
tariff barriers, perhaps explaining the “home bias” in trade patterns. Developed countries may
trade largely with one another because they have a comparable institutional base that secures
property rights and commercial transactions.

21
provided for harmonized economic policies across countries; indeed Rauch (1999), among
others, has found that countries with colonial ties continue to trade unusually highly with one
another long after independence has been established. As former colonies have regained their
sovereignty, they have chosen to implement their own systems, which may account for their
attenuated commercial links to developed countries.
The globalization of production has not forced such a convergence of domestic policies
and institutions, but it has promoted greater integration. Could this intimacy potentially breed
friction and conflict rather than accord and harmony?

3. Containing Trade Tensions
As trade expanded in the years leading up to World War I, aggrieved interests sought
redress. Jeffrey Williamson (1998) argues that this “globalization backlash” manifested itself in
increased political pressure to raise trade barriers, halt immigration, and stifle capital flows.
Could the current wave of globalization generate similar pressures to retreat from the global
economy? Or do we now have institutional safeguards that can relieve such anti-globalization
pressures and preserve political support for an open world economy?
While the extent of the globalization backlash prior to 1913 should not be exaggerated,
there was continual pressure in the United States to restrict immigration starting in the 1880s, and
protectionist pressure throughout the industrializing world, especially in the period 1880-1895.
By no stretch of the imagination was the open international system on the verge of collapsing
upon itself by 1914, but pressure to restrict trade and immigration was more intense than today.
We suggest three reasons why trade tensions were greater despite the fact that the extent of

22
product-market integration was, if anything, less.
Macroeconomic Performance. First, macroeconomic performance -- both growth and
stability -- is important to maintaining support for an open trade regime, and cyclical instability
was, by most measures, more of a problem. Up to the outbreak of World War I, protectionist
pressures were most pronounced during the “Great Depression” of the 1870s when cheap grain
from the United States and Russia caused distress among European farmers and slower growth
prompted manufacturers (even in Britain) to demand higher tariffs. This was well before greater
integration that had emerged by the end of the century. Indeed, in the 15 years or so preceding
the outbreak of war, there was little resurgence of protectionism. One factor that contributed to
this outcome was the worldwide economic boom from the mid-1890s up to World War I.
For the developed economies in general, the postwar period has been one of economic
expansion and cyclical stability. Such an environment is conducive to efforts at trade
liberalization. The lesson is trite but true: while global integration undoubtedly creates sectoral
pressures, those pressures are muted in an environment of steady economic growth and low
unemployment. This explains why Congress, the focal point for constituent trade policy
complaints, has been relatively quiet in the mid- and late-1990s compared with its trade activism
of the early 1980s, when the United States experienced the deepest recession since the 1930s and
the current account deficit began to soar. Indeed, Pat Buchanan’s presidential candidacy based on
“economic nationalism” resonated with voters in 1992 as memories of the early 1990s recession
lingered, but fizzled in 1996 and (one expects) in 2000.
Social Insurance. Second, there were few forms of social insurance in place a century
ago to mitigate the effects of surges in import competition. Unemployment insurance and

23
adjustment assistance did not exist. Workers seeking compensation from foreign competition thus
had no choice but to lobby Congress for higher tariffs. Congress was sympathetic to such pleas,
although it could not always accommodate them quickly due to the political coordination costs of
passing tariff legislation.17
To be sure, limited insurance mechanisms did exist. As Feldman (1993) notes, many late
nineteenth century U.S. tariffs (particularly for iron and steel products and textiles and apparel)
were set higher than necessary to ensure effective autarky (a phenomena known as “putting water
in the tariff”). Redundant tariffs arise not for insurance reasons in Feldman’s particular
framework, but the insurance motive clearly could play a role in creating demands for high tariffs
in the absence of other institutional mechanisms to provide temporary protection in the face of
negative import price shocks.18
Moreover, the particular tariff form adopted, namely specific duties, provided another
form of insurance. The ad valorem equivalent of specific duties — a particular dollar amount
charged per imported quantity — is inversely related to the price of imports. Thus, if import
prices fell as a result of some technological innovation (railroads bringing new sources of supply
into the market, for example) or other development, the ad valorem tariff equivalent would
automatically rise without requiring government action. This insured domestic producers and the

17

Congress revised the tariff code only every seven years or so, on average, during the
1869-1913 period. Such legislation was only enacted when the House, Senate, and Executive
were controlled by the same political party. Only on rare occasions would a tariff be passed on
individual items in the absence of general legislation.
18

In the context of an endogenous political economy model, Feldman shows that even riskneutral producers will seek redundant tariffs if import prices are stochastic.

24
political system against pressure for higher tariffs in the face of trade-related distress.19
When the United States shifted away from this system, an even more extensive insurance
mechanism was created to provide a safety valve for distressed industries. The Reciprocal Trade
Agreements Act of 1934, which delegated tariff negotiating powers to the president, also included
provisions for an “escape clause” from any obligation to have lower tariffs. This escape clause
was not something that emerged gradually in response to increasing foreign competition but was
instituted at the outset. The RTAA stated that the negotiated tariff reductions should not bring
undue harm to domestic producers. The implicit provision to avoid injury to domestic producers
was made explicit in the 1942 trade agreement with Mexico and formalized shortly thereafter in
the events leading up to U.S. participation in the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
(GATT). When protectionist elements in the Republican party sought to halt the Geneva GATT
negotiations in early 1947, the Truman administration issued an executive order requiring an
escape clause to be included in all future trade agreements. It allowed the United States to
withdraw or modify tariff concessions “if, as a result of unforseen developments and of the
concession granted by the United States on any article in the trade agreement, such article is being
imported in such increased quantities and under such conditions as to cause, or threaten, serious
injury to domestic producers of like or similar product...”
The executive order placated Congressional concerns and allowed the United States to
complete the GATT negotiations. And at U.S. insistence, the escape clause was included as
Article XIX of the GATT. Congress later feared that the escape clause was not being effectively
19

An alternative explanation for the use of specific duties is that, with stable prices under
the gold standard, there was no need to bother with the extra complexity of ad valorem tariffs,
which also encouraged under invoicing.

25
enforced and made a statutory provision for it in the Trade Agreements Extension Act of 1951.
The escape clause was supplemented with trade adjustment assistance to displaced workers in
1962. The Article XIX escape clause in the original GATT 1947 has continued without change in
the GATT 1994 text with the end of the Uruguay Round and the establishment of the World
Trade Organization.
While the leading interpretation of the escape clause is that it is a necessary political
compromise to obtain greater support for trade agreements, others have thought that these are
merely protectionist “loopholes.” Expressing skepticism about the “safety valve” hypothesis,
Sykes (1991, p. 273-4) argues that the “likelihood of direct protectionist legislation also decreases
if such legislation violates international obligations and results in international sanction” and that
“the ability of Congress to resist special interest pressures for protection, therefore, would likely
be greater in the absence of Article XIX.” The counter argument is that of Dam (1970, p. 99),
who suggests that “the presence [of Article XIX] encourages cautious countries to enter into a
greater number of tariff bindings than would otherwise be the case.”20

20

Hoekman and Kostecki (1995, p. 161) write that “Safeguard provisions are often critical
to the existence and operation of trade-liberalizing agreements, as they function as both insurance
mechanisms and safety-valves. The provide governments with the means to renege on specific
liberalization commitments — subject to certain conditions — should the need for this arise
(safety valve). Without them governments may refrain from signing an agreement that reduces
protection substantially (insurance motive).” There is also Sykes’s claim that the escape clause is
protectionist because “the administrative route simply affords a device for some groups that lack
the ability to mobilize the legislature to obtain protection . . . . any interest group with the political
muscle to obtain protection through the legislative route seem unlikely to settle for a lesser level
of protection through the administrative route.” In the late 1950s, for example, the U.S. cotton
textile industry did not bother with the escape clause procedure because it had the political clout
to obtain a negotiated voluntary restraint agreement. Conversely, the automobile industry sought
and obtained a voluntary export restraint with Japan in the early 1980s after having been denied
escape clause remedies in 1979.

26
Clearly, the challenge for policymakers operating in an era of greater economic integration
is one of balance — making safeguards available, but without compromising open markets. As
Lawrence and Litan (1986, p. 79) point out, “if the standards for obtaining import-related
remedies are too restrictive, the escape clause mechanism cannot serve as an effective shock
absorber for protectionist pressures. On the other hand, if the eligibility criteria are too weak, any
domestic industry that faces import competition may become eligible for temporary protection.”
They called for adjusting the escape clause and trade adjustment assistance policies as a result of
the trade frictions of the early 1980s, and their proposals may need to be dusted off in the future if
globalization leads to a resurgence of such pressures.
Thus, the existence of escape clause provisions have been necessary to maintain political
support for an open world trading system. The experience of the 1980s demonstrates that such
measures, including voluntary restraint agreements in autos and steel, can in fact be temporary
and may help to deflect protectionist measures that, under different institutional circumstances,
could leave a more permanent imprint. Fischer and Prusa (1999) show that the combination of
low general tariffs accompanied by the availability of safeguards is superior to uniform tariffs (the
nineteenth century method) as insurance mechanisms. These exceptions are an integral part of the
liberal trading system today. If macroeconomic stability can be sustained, then globalization and
current methods of channeling protectionist pressures may be able to coexist.
The Growth of Countervailing Interests. Finally, while increased integration can
threaten the economic interests of certain aggrieved groups, it also creates countervailing groups
whose interests are enhanced. As noted above, much of the increased trade in recent years has
been in intermediate goods. While domestic intermediate goods producers may be harmed by

27
lower import prices, the competitive position of other domestic producers may depend upon those
lower prices. In recent years, steel-using firms have successfully fought off efforts by the
integrated steel producers to obtain extended protection, and semiconductor-using firms have
successfully fought off efforts by semiconductor producers to obtain protection. Direct
investments and international diversification by domestic producers in such sectors as automobiles
has also muted national pressures for protection against foreign competition.
Given the greater trade integration that exists today compared to a century ago, one might
have anticipated that much stronger protectionist pressures would be evident. That they are not
suggests that stable macroeconomic management, the existence of escape clauses, and the rise of
pro-trade economic interests have been capable of sustaining political support for an open trading
system.

4. Financial Integration Then and Now
The typical “back to the future” story about capital markets before 1913 emphasizes the
magnitude of net flows from the core countries of Western Europe to peripheral Europe and the
overseas regions of recent European settlement.21 These flows were large relative to GDP —
indeed, larger than today — suggesting high levels of financial integration a hundred years ago.
At the same time, the range of sectors and activities to which this foreign investment was directed
was narrower than today. For investment as for trade, the volume was large but the range of
21

Financial integration was no new phenomenon, of course. Neal (1990) documents the
extent of financial integration within Europe itself over the two preceding centuries. Breizas
(1995) argues that foreign lending played an important role in financing the British industrial
revolution, while Zevin (1992) emphasizes the growth of lending by Europe to the United States,
Latin American and the British colonies in the first half of the 19th century.

28
affected activities was small.
The net capital outflow ranged as high as 9 per cent of GDP on an annual average basis
for Britain and scaled comparable peaks, at least briefly, in France, Germany and the
Netherlands.22 Current account deficits exceeded 10 per cent of GDP in Australia, Canada and
Argentina for significant portions of the three decades preceding 1913 and sometimes exceeded 5
per cent of GDP in Finland, Norway and Sweden. (For comparison, recall that Thailand’s
“dangerously large” current account deficit in 1996 was eight per cent of GDP.) Regressionbased studies on a larger sample of countries, designed to deal with sample-selection bias, find
lower savings-investment correlations before 1945 than today, reinforcing the conclusion that
capital flows were large relative to savings, investment and GNP.23 Current account surpluses
and deficits were also more persistent prior to 1914 than in recent decades.24
Fishlow (1985) summarizes the conventional wisdom on this subject as follows. In the
overseas regions of recent settlement to which the bulk of European lending flowed, external
resources were invested in infrastructure projects which enhanced the borrowing country’s
capacity to export. Foreign funds were used to construct port facilities, railway networks and
other “internal improvements.” At the same time, the lending countries (particularly Britain)
provided open markets for the raw materials and agricultural commodities produced and exported

22

See Bairoch and Kozul-Wright (1996) for estimates for these and other countries. For
comparison, note that Japan and Germany’s current account surpluses in the 1980s never
exceeded five per cent of GDP.
23

See for example Bayoumi (1990), Eichengreen (1990) and Taylor (1996). Price-based
studies paint the same picture.
24

As measured by the Phillips-Perron Z statistic. This is true for surplus and deficit
countries alike.

29
by these newly settled regions.25 In this way, foreign borrowing generated a stream of export
revenues sufficient to service and repay the borrowed funds.
Upon scrutinizing it more closely, one discovers several blemishes on this smoothlycomplexioned history. For one thing, infrastructure investment was not always productive, a
point that any observer of the Thai economy in the 1990s would be quick to appreciate. For more
than a few countries, the story of railway investment in the late-19th century was a story of fraud,
bankruptcy and debt default.26 Nor were railway enterprises and other companies supplying
infrastructure services the only borrowers. Governments too had voracious appetites for external
finance. A non-negligible share of public spending took the form of subsidies for the construction
of railways and infrastructure projects, but governments which borrowed abroad typically did so,
as Fishlow emphasizes, not to finance public investment but to underwrite public consumption.27
And financial crises and sharp reversals in the direction of capital flows, culminating in debt
default, were anything but rare, as we describe below.
What is clear is that foreign borrowing meant almost exclusively borrowing by railways
and borrowing by governments. Consider the composition of pre-1914 portfolio investment by

25

Note that even for the United States, the most industrialized of the regions of recent
overseas European settlement, commodity exports (gold, silver and agricultural commodities, and
later petroleum) were the dominant source of export revenues throughout this period (Wright
1990).

mind.

26

Some of these tales are told in Eichengreen (1996).

27

The Egyptian government’s spending on the services of “ballet dancers, etc.” springs to

30
Great Britain, the leading creditor country of the period.28 Early estimates suggest that fully 40
per cent of British overseas investments in quoted securities were in railways, 30 per cent were in
the issues of governments (national, state and municipal), 10 per cent were in resource-extracting
industries (mainly mining), and 5 per cent were in public utilities.29 Note that portfolio investment
in commercial, industrial and financial activities is absent from this list. Six out of every seven
pounds sterling of portfolio investment was in securities of debtors with relatively tangible,
transparent assets (the ability to tax in the case of governments, trunk and branch lines and rolling
stock with a well-defined revenue-raising capacity in the case of railways, mineral reserves in the
case of mining companies). Davis and Gallman (1999), focusing on the “19th century emerging
markets,” finding that nine of every ten pounds of British investment in Argentina, Australia,
Canada and U.S. between 1865 and 1890 went into railroads and government bonds.30
Data for portfolio capital flows to emerging markets in the 1990s paint a different picture.
We have tabulated these by recipient sector for both bank lending and bonds from Capital Data’s

28

British investors held approximately 40 per cent of the stock of long-term foreign
investments outstanding in 1913, and there is no reason to think that the composition of British
investment is unrepresentative in terms of its concentration in the railway and public sectors.
Fishlow (1995) suggests that French and German foreign investment may have been more heavily
directed toward governments and less toward railways, but this does not undermine our central
point.
29

30

See e.g. Royal Institute for International Affairs 1937.

According to their estimates, the fraction ranges from 86 per cent in Australia to 92 per
cent in Canada (Davis and Gallman, 1999, p.7). Davis and Huttenback (1986) provide
comparisons with domestic investment in quoted securities. Their Chart 2.8 confirms the picture
of a pattern of overseas portfolio investment concentrated in agricultural and extractive activities
(especially in the Empire), in transportation, and in public utilities. Domestic portfolio investment,
in contrast, was disproportionately concentrated in manufacturing and in the commercial and
financial sectors.

31
Bankware and Bondware, respectively. Admittedly, one way of reading these figures is “the more
things change, the more they remain the same.” But to many readers they will suggest the
growing importance of lending to the financial-services sector (banks, etc.), to enterprises
producing commercial services, and to manufacturing. The kind of statement made by Madden
(1985, p.73) with reference to the late 19th century, that “British investment in [U.S.] banks...and
industry was of little importance in this period,” would scarcely be made of portfolio investment
in emerging markets today.
Less information exists on the volume of short-term capital flows prior to 1914, but
everything we know points to a lower level than today, even adjusting for the smaller size of the
world economy. Bloomfield’s (1963) discussion suggests that short-term flows were significantly
smaller than long-term flows, in sharp contrast to today: Bank for International Settlements data
on turnover in foreign exchange markets suggest that gross flows are in the range of $1.25 trillion
a day, or more than $250 trillion a year, much larger than corresponding figures for long-term
capital flows.

5. Why is Financial Integration Greater Today?
These differences in the scope of market integration were consequences of information
asymmetries, contracting problems, and macroeconomic risks that limited the extent of capital and
commodity flows prior to 1913 and that continue to limit them, albeit to a lesser extent, today.
By information problems we mean the difficulty of determining product, project, and borrower
quality. By contracting problems we mean difficulties of detecting fraud and of attaching
collateral. By macroeconomic risks we mean mainly exchange risk. We now characterize the

32
nature of these information, contracting and macroeconomic limits to market integration and
describe how they were attenuated over time. Of particular interest is our discussion of whether
market discipline sufficed to remedy these obstacles to the development of smoothly-functioning
international markets, or whether official intervention was also required. As noted above, the
focus is on capital flows from Britain to the United States.
Information Problems. Any discussion of information flows must start with the
communications technology of the day. The transatlantic cable was laid in the 1860s, coming into
operation in 1866. Prior to its opening, it could take as long as three weeks for information to
travel from New York to London.31 With the inauguration of the cable, this delay dropped to one
day. By 1914 the time for cable transmission was down to less than a minute. Garbade and Silber
(1978) compare the London and New York prices of US bonds four months before and four
months after the cable and find a significant decline in the mean absolute difference. There is
every reason to think that the cable had a comparable impact on other markets.32
The radio telephone was the next breakthrough. Like the telegraph, it first linked the
national financial center (London or New York) to the hinterlands and regional exchanges before
linking up those centers internationally (linking Europe with North America by 1900).
It should be apparent why this information and communications technology translated into
a smaller volume of short-term capital flows. Today currency traders respond almost
instantaneously to minute-to-minute changes in currency values. Prior to 1870, when it might
take weeks for this information to cross the Atlantic, and even after the advent of the cable and

31

Garbade and Silber (1978), p.826.

32

The cable reached Buenos Aires in 1878 and Tokyo in 1900.

33
the radio telephone, news arrived at longer intervals.
Long-term lending to manufacturing, commercial and financial concerns was deterred not
so much by the limitations of the communications technology as by the difficulty of assembling
and evaluating the information to be communicated. Lenders were reluctant to lend because of
the difficulty of distinguishing good and bad credit risks. This information asymmetry created
adverse selection (where the average credit quality of the pool of borrowers declines with
increases in the interest rate) and therefore credit rationing. Overseas investors were further
deterred by the difficulty of monitoring and controlling management’s actions ex post — of
detecting malfeasance and rent dissipation and preventing owner-managers whose downside risk
was truncated by limited liability from devoting borrowed funds to riskier projects.
We now offer some evidence about the structure of late-19th century financial markets
consistent with this emphasis on asymmetric information as a barrier to more broadly-based
foreign investment.33 Several already-noted characteristics of late-19th century international
capital markets are explicable in terms of obstacles to information flows. For example,
asymmetric information can explain the disproportionate share of railway bonds in foreign
investment portfolios. To be sure, information asymmetries were not the only factor contributing
to disproportionate importance of railway securities. America’s transcontinental railways were
built only once, in this period. Private as well as social returns on railway investment were
attractive (Fogel 1964). But the manufacturing, financial and commercial sectors of the economy
were growing every bit as fast as transportation, and foreign investment in these sectors was less;
information asymmetries explain this fact. It was relatively easy to monitor the actions of a
33

We then go on to account for this impacted information environment itself.

34
railway company’s management: investors could verify how much track had been laid, where it
had been laid, and how much traffic it carried more easily than they could verify and evaluate the
investment decisions of managers of concerns in these other sectors.34 These considerations
explain the particular preference of British investors for “coal roads,” that is, railways whose
traffic was disproportionately comprised of coal haulage, since this made it relatively
straightforward to forecast operating revenues.
Obstacles to the flow of information can also explain the disproportionate importance of
debt as opposed to equity in foreign investment portfolios (Baskin 1988), since debt reduces the
risk to investors when imperfect information creates agency problems. The pattern persists today
(see e.g. Eichengreen and Mody, 1998), but a century ago it was if anything more pronounced.35
Information asymmetries can explain the disproportionate importance of family groups
(the foreign branches of the Rothschild and Morgan families, for example) and of the merchant
and investment banks that grew out of them, which underwrote foreign bond issues and served as
conduits for foreign investment, acting as delegated monitors and emitting signals of borrower
credit worthiness.36 They can explain the well-known “Kuznets cycle pattern” in which

34

This is not to say that there were not other important problems, as we shall see below, of
evaluating management’s actions even in the railway sector.
35

The 1997 issue of the World Bank’s Global Development Finance suggests that stocks
and bonds are now of roughly equal importance in international portfolio capital flows to
emerging markets, after a long period in which debt instruments (bonds and bank loans)
dominated purchases of equities.
36

The dependence of information flows on group and family ties raises the same issues in
capital as well as commodity markets. As Rauch and Casella (1998) emphasize, and we explain in
Section 2 above, such ties can give rise to “trade diversion” as well as “trade creation,” and
whether they result in a more or less efficient global allocation of resources is an open question.

35
immigration and financial capital tended to flow in the same direction (what Hatton and
Williamson 1992 refer to as the tendency for capital to chase after labor), as the migrants
provided the European sending countries with valuable information about local conditions. They
can explain the “sovereign credit rating departments” established by intermediaries like Credit
Lyonnais (Flandreau 1998). They can explain the development of investment trusts (the 19th
century analog of modern mutual funds), to whom investors delegated information-gathering and
analysis functions. They can explain the explosive growth of insurance companies, investments in
which were attractive to households partly because they could offer an attractive rate of return as
a result of their comparative advantage in gathering information from far-flung regions (Snowden
1995). They can explain the popularity of specialized publications like The Investor’s Monthly
Manual, Burdett’s Stock Exchange Official Intelligence, Poor’s Manual of Railroads, and
Herapath’s Railway Journal. They can explain the practice by established railroads of
guaranteeing the bonds of feeder lines.
Finally, information asymmetries can explain the surprisingly limited importance of FDI
prior to 1914 and the importance of the free standing company as the vehicle for foreign direct
investment. A considerable majority of foreign investment prior to 1914 took the form of
portfolio investment, whereas direct investment and portfolio investment are of roughly equal
importance today.37 And whereas 19th century FDI was undertaken mainly by free-standing
companies (companies incorporated in Britain, France, Belgium and other Western European
countries for the sole purpose of investing and doing business in an emerging market), it takes
place today through the agency of multinational enterprises that establish foreign branches and
37

Bloomfield (1968), pp.3-4.

36
foreign subsidiaries.38 Free standing companies, in the words of Wilkins (1998, p.13), “were
structured to solve the problem posed earlier; business abroad was risky; it was hard to obtain
adequate and reliable information about firms in distant lands; returns were unpredictable; but
there were clearly opportunities abroad; a company organized within the source-of-capital
country, with a responsible board of directors, under source-of-capital country law, to mobilize
capital(and other assets) and to conduct the business in foreign countries could take advantage of
the opportunities, while reducing the transaction costs by providing a familiar conduit.”
In part, these information problems can be understood in terms of sheer physical and
cultural distance. The anecdote about the dinner in London at which a British investor,
encountering an American guest, inquired whether Cincinnati or Ohio was the larger city may be
apocryphal but the story has a point: lack of familiarity with the regions that the railways were
penetrating was an impediment to capital flows. Madden (1985, p.317) notes that while some
two-thirds of all American railroad bonds issued publicly between 1860 and 1880 were for what
he calls “developing” and “underdeveloped” (as opposed to already developed) parts of the
country, only one-third of those purchased by British investors were for those regions.39
Contracting Problems. Information problems were, in our view, the key explanation for
the relatively limited scope of late-19th century capital flows. But they were not the entire story.

38

See Wilkins (1998). Free standing companies became increasingly important as British
investors gradually diversified beyond investments in railroads and government bonds into
farming, ranching, mining and brewing and they sought to surmount the agency problems
associated with the attempt to control far-distant American management. See below.
39

Madden’s developed regions were New England and the North East, his developing
regions the East Central and South, and his underdeveloped regions the North Central, Central
and Far West.

37
Beyond the immediate problem of geographical ignorance, distance made for problems of control.
It was hard to monitor actions taken by management thousands of miles away when round-trip
communication could take a month. The case of the Atlantic & Great Western Railway, which
filed for bankruptcy in 1867, illustrates the consequences. Its filing revealed that management had
issued an additional $75 million of securities to continue operating in the face of mounting losses,
thereby diluting the claims of existing creditors without the knowledge of the latter.40 It is said
that this experience had a significant effect in discouraging British investors from taking positions
in other American railroads.
Foreign investors were also deterred by the uncertain legal security of their claims.
Because the United States was a federation, corporations were chartered by the states, not the
federal government, and governed by the laws of the state in question. Madden (1985, p.231)
reports that many of these laws “allowed railroad managers far more latitude in issuing securities
and disposing of railroad earnings than did British law.” States prohibited foreigners from serving
as directors of the corporations chartered there. In response, some British investors hired
American citizens to represent them on the board, but this extra layer between ownership and
control had the predictable effect of adding principal-agent slack.
Foreign investors also had reason to fear that they would not be treated fairly under
American bankruptcy law. They worried that companies might be wound up and their assets sold
off to other claimants to the detriment of foreign investors.41 Thus, America’s experience before
1914 points up the importance for emerging markets seeking to attract foreign investment of

40

Oberholtzer (1907), vol 2, p.104.

41

For details, again see Madden (1985), p.231 and chapter 4.

38
transparent and equitable bankruptcy laws. This of course was the attraction of investing in the
colonies, where bankruptcy law was familiar and creditor rights were relatively secure. Direct
investment through free standing companies was another solution. Wilkins, in the preceding
quote, emphasizes not only the difficulty of obtaining “adequate and reliable information” but also
the advantages of establishing the country doing business abroad under “source-of-capital country
law” to minimize contracting problems. British shareholders could be confident of their rights
because the free standing company was subject to British law.
Macroeconomic Risks. A number of observers emphasize exchange risk, unstable and
uncertain monetary and fiscal policies, and political risk as factors limiting pre-1913 international
investment flows. Madden (1985, p.255) emphasizes the importance of a stable standard of
value, stating that it is “of course common knowledge” that British investors viewed securities
issued by countries not on the gold standard as riskier than those of countries that were. Many
foreign securities issued in London were denominated in sterling and specified that principal and
interest were payable in sterling (or in foreign currency convertible into sterling at a fixed rate of
exchange), but in this case exchange rate fluctuations created credit risk instead of currency risk.
(Currency depreciation might push the borrower into bankruptcy by raising the value of his debt
service payments relative to his income stream.42) In the case of government bonds, the fear was
that governments off gold would succumb to the temptation to live beyond their means. For
example, Baring’s had unusual difficulty in placing U.S. government bonds in the second half of

42

This phenomenon will be familiar to observers of the Asian crisis. There, banks which
were prohibited from maintaining open foreign positions and which therefore offset their foreigncurrency liabilities by making foreign-currency loans to domestic corporations simply substituted
credit risk for currency risk.

39
the 1860s, since investors feared that profligacy of the government operating under a fiat money
regime would precipitate a financial crisis and force it to repudiate the debt. The Bland Bill of
1877, which raised the specter of large-scale silver coinage, similarly caused British investors to
liquidate their U.S. government securities in favor of colonial bonds with interest and principal
guaranteed in sterling. Again in the early 1890s, the possibility of free silver coinage led foreign
investors to liquidate their holdings of U.S. securities and to a rise in the premia on U.S. bonds
and foreign exchange. Bordo and Rockoff (1996) find that the effect was general: loans to
countries with a fluctuating standard of value commanded significantly higher interest rates.
The Absence of Adequate Accounting Standards. While difficulties of contract
enforcement and macroeconomic risks were significant deterrents to foreign investment, we have
argued that asymmetric information was the overwhelming important obstacle to international
capital flows. And these information problems were compounded by the inadequacy of prevailing
auditing and accounting standards. The point then-Deputy Treasury Secretary Lawrence
Summers has made about US domestic financial transactions -- “If one were writing a history of
the American capital market I would suggest to you that the single most important innovation
shaping that capital market was the idea of generally accepted accounting principles” — applies
to the country’s international financial transactions as well.43 In particular, British investors were
deterred from investing in the United States by the underdevelopment of American accounting
practices.
Summers’s suggestion begs the question of why those accounting practices remained
underdeveloped for so long and what led to the emergence of “generally accepted accounting
43

Summers (1999), p.7.

40
principles.” Was it market discipline — the reluctance of markets to lend to a country where such
principles were not followed? Or was regulatory intervention required to overcome free-rider and
lemons problems and to ensure that appropriate practices were followed?
In fact, both market discipline and regulatory intervention were needed for the adoption of
generally-accepted accounting principles. Market discipline was applied by British investors, who
insisted on the transfer to the United States of accounting practices accepted in Britain. (Their
preferred agent for the transfer, as we shall see, was the British chartered accountancy firm.)
Another source of market discipline was the New York Stock Exchange, which from the turn of
the century required the publication of standardized balance sheets by all entities whose securities
were accepted for listing.
But market discipline was not enough. In addition there was the need for regulatory
intervention, starting with the Interstate Commerce Commission, which required the railroads it
regulated to provide information using standardized accounting practices from the 1880s, and
culminating in the regulations imposed by the Securities and Exchange Commission in 1933.
Standardized accounting practices emerged first in Britain because the industrial
revolution started there. Prior to industrialization, “public accountancy in Britain had been
considered a marginal occupation not ranking in status with medicine, law or theology.”44
Accountants also audited, the distinction between the auditor’s inspective function and the
accountant’s analytical function only emerging in the 20th century. While a commercial
partnership might employ an accountant to post and adjust a ledger, search for fraud and
defalcation, and prepare a rudimentary financial statement, only with the emergence of limited
44

Miranti (1990), p.30.

41
liability and large-scale manufacturing did there develop a demand for more systematic accounting
services. The emergence of the capital-intensive manufacturing enterprise required management
to develop information control systems to effectively oversee the company’s various operations
and monitor the flow of funds (Chandler 1990).45 The adoption of modern financial accounting
methods was a way, in other words, of securing a competitive advantage.
The use of auditing and accounting principles and the employment of individuals
specializing in their use first became prominent in the railways, where scale was exceptional and
scheduling, coordination, and delegation were of the essence. Not incidentally, Chandler
characterizes the railways as the first enterprises to make use of extensive managerial hierarchies
and the multidivisional form. The consolidation of separate manufacturing concerns by figures
like Andrew Carnegie in the 1870s and 1880s and the merger movement of the 1890s accelerated
the spread of information management and control systems from the transportation to the

45

In addition, in Britain, as in the U.S. (see below), public policy played a role. The
Companies Acts of 1844, 1856 and 1862 required concerns selling shares to the public to provide
certain information to shareholders, which in turn encouraged management to hire accountants to
discharge this obligation. They required dividends to be paid out of earnings, not out of capital,
prompting boards of directors to engage accountants to vouch for their adherence to this
distinction. The Companies Act of 1844, adopted in response to the financial frauds of the early
19th century, originated the modern concepts of mandatory corporate and prospectus disclosure.
It required registered companies to issue an annual report containing a balanced sheet audited by
an independent auditor responsible to the shareholder. To be sure, these provisions did not work
perfectly. They did not specify, for example, how recent the balance sheet information had to be,
leading some firms to publish the same information year after year. Nor did the 1844 Act specify
the duties of the auditor. Only toward the end of the century were these loopholes finally
eliminated. Nonetheless, better securities-market regulation is plausibly the best explanation for
Britain’s rapid overtaking of the US in terms of the depth, breadth and sophistication of its
securities markets.

42
manufacturing sector.46 Interestingly, many contemporaries predicted that the large corporations
created in this period would fail because “no one person or board of directors could successfully
master such large organizations...”47 The use of modern auditing, accounting and information
systems was to prove them wrong.48
But this is to get ahead of the story. The accounting practices of most 19th century
enterprises were rudimentary. Even relatively sophisticated enterprises like the Remington Arms
Company did not account for depreciation in their financial statements. Indeed, the concept was
unknown: companies generally treated outlays on plant and equipment as current rather than
depreciable expenses.
As noted, the railroads played a key role in transforming this state of affairs. They were
the first enterprises to make systematic use of the concepts of working capital and flow of funds.
While their operation was relatively transparent to foreign investors, they also provided strikingly
little information to their shareholders. Many railroads provided no annual reports until the
1890s.49 The exceptions generally did so on a voluntary and unaudited basis. As the Railroad

46

In America, the modern integrated industrial concerned developed out of the post-Civil
War railroad merger movement, which demonstrated the ability of larger concerns to provide
goods and services at lower prices. Railroads, followed by oil, steel, tobacco, sugar and coal
companies, were organized as trusts. That is, a separate corporation would be established in each
state in which it operated, and the trust would serve as the corporation of corporations. (The
term “money trust” is indicative of the spread of this corporate form to the financial-services
sector.) See Lamoreaux (1985).
47

Previts and Merino (1998), p.128.

48

Thus, Carnegie employed a large staff in his cost department and attributed his financial
success partly to his ability to keep track of his various enterprises’ expenditures.
49

In response to a query from the New York Stock Exchange, the Delaware, Lackawana
and Western Railroad wrote that it “makes no report [and] publishes no statements” (Sobel, 1965,

43
Gazette put it in 1893, “The annual report of a railroad is often a very blind document and the
average shareholder taking one of these reports generally gives up before he begins.”50
British investors, burned by unethical promoters, increasingly demanded as a condition for
lending that railways issue regular financial statements prepared by British chartered accountants.
British accountants set up practice in America from the mid-19th century, as British accounting
firms found it less expensive to hire resident British accountants than to send London-based
accountants on short-term visits. These firms gradually hired additional staff of British-born
naturalized Americans and -- horrors -- even native-born Americans. These British accountants in
turn played a key role in the formation of the American Association of Public Accountants, which
promoted the adoption of standardized methods and accountancy training.
What was standard practice for railways gradually became standard practice in other
sectors. The role of British accountants is evident in the “brewers boom” of the 1880s, for
example, when British capital was attracted to newly-established breweries in such far-flung
locations as St. Louis, Milwaukee, Denver and San Francisco. Since distance complicated the
tasks of monitoring management and ascertaining local market conditions, British investors
demanded financial statements prepared by British chartered accountants. British accounting
firms responded by opening regional offices to provide information on American companies in
these fast-expanding regions. Price Waterhouse and Company opened offices in Chicago in 1891,
Broads, Patterson in 1894. Investment banking firms such as J.P. Morgan and Company and
Kuhn Loeb and Company selected these British accountancy firms to audit the financial

p.85).
50

Quoted in Previts and Merino (1979), p.81.

44
statements included in the prospectuses for securities floated on the London market.51
Thus, foreign investors played a key role in the transfer of British accounting principles to
the emerging markets of North America, and international accounting firms were key agents in
transferring the technology. In the same way that emerging markets today can import
internationally-accepted auditing and accounting standards by contracting with internationallyrecognized auditing and accounting firms, U.S. companies issuing foreign securities in the late 19th
century imported those standards by contracting for the services of British chartered accounting
firms. None of this guaranteed financial transparency or uniform auditing and accounting
standards, but it created pressure in that direction.
Market self-regulation in the form of the disclosure requirements of the New York Stock
Exchange created pressure to move in the same direction. From the 1860s the Exchange
attempted to require disclosure and reporting by companies listing shares for trading. These
provisions were strengthened in 1899. But enforceability remained a chronic problem. The U.S.
equity market was too decentralized; there existed too many regional exchanges for the New
York Exchange to run the risk of eroding its market position by delisting powerful clients. As
Sylla and Smith (1995, p.197) put it, “when companies demurred from observing the Exchange’s
requirements or flouted them, the rules were bent to keep them from going away.”
Thus, market discipline alone does not appear to have sufficed to deliver standardized
accounting practices. In addition, there was a role for government. The “Populist revolt” of the
1880s centered on railroad freight rates and on whether the railways were colluding to the

51

As Miranti (1990, p.34) observes, “The certificate of a well-known accounting firm was
thought to improve the marketability of American securities among European investors.”

45
detriment of farmers dependent on their services. It led in 1887 to the creation of the Interstate
Commerce Commission (ICC) to regulate rates. One of the key provisions of the Interstate
Commerce Act required carriers to submit regular reports, on which the ICC based its
determinations. But whether freight rates were disproportionate to the railroads’ operating costs
was an accounting question, and different railways accounted for costs in different ways. The
lack of a uniform accounting standard thus impeded the ICC’s early operation. A key step was
thus when the commission established a uniform accounting standard for railroads in 1894. Since
the ICC released the financial reports submitted by the railroads to the public, its standard became
a focal point for investors seeking to encourage the establishment of uniform practices.
A second important step was when New York State intervened in a dispute between two
rival practitioner groups, the American Association of Public Accountants and the New York
Institute of Accountants. Throughout the 1880s, the AAPA and NYIA had competed to control
the new profession, promoting rival accounting standards. They had submitted a series of rival
bills to the New York State Senate in the 1890s proposing a uniform state examination and a
three-man examining board for certifying professional competency and limiting the use of the title
“certified public accountant.” The NYIA’s version was adopted in 1896. State certification thus
did much to accelerate the emergence of a uniform accounting standard.
By 1905 eight other states had followed New York in establishing state licensing laws
which required candidates for certification to pass a written exam or appear before an examining
board. It remained to transform these state standards into a uniform national accountancy
standard. This was facilitated by inclusion in the 1903 Illinois licensing law of a reciprocity clause
which granted licenses to practitioners licensed in other jurisdictions provided that their home

46
states extended the same privilege to Illinois practitioners. Other states followed suit.52
Two interwar developments sealed the emergence of standardized accounting principles.
One was the advent of the corporate and individual income tax. For obvious reasons, the
corporate tax did much to encourage the acceptance of accounting practices like depreciation.
Those practices were standardized in the 1920s, when the Internal Revenue Service demanded
and obtained the prompt resolution by the courts of accounting issues affecting its operations.
The other catalytic event was the collapse of the stock market in 1929. The Crash, thought by
some to have been precipitated by the collapse of Krueger and Toll, whose head Ivar Krueger had
deceived the public about his companies’ financial condition, convinced many observers that
inadequate public information was a factor in the volatility of asset markets.53 New Deal
legislation signed into law on May 27, 1933 therefore required all companies issuing publiclytraded securities to file financial statements certified by independent public accountants. The
Securities Act of 1934 (the Securities Exchange Act) then mandated the filing of annual audited
financial statements for all companies whose investment securities had been previously issued to
the public. Reaching agreement between federal authorities and certified public accountants on
what constituted acceptable accounting practice would take time, but the SEC legislation
provided strong impetus for the development of a uniform standard.

52

In addition, the Federation of State Societies of Pubic Accounts, established in 1902,
promoted the harmonization of CPA licensing across states.
53

It will be recalled that Berle and Means’ influential book on the separation of ownership
and control in the modern corporation stressed the need for more objective financial information
to ensure the efficient functioning of financial markets (Berle and Means 1932). Miranti (1990)
argues that this book had an important influence on the public-policy debate leading ultimately to
the creation of the Securities and Exchange Commission.

47
Thus, the United States’ own experience suggests that the development of a uniform,
transparent accounting standard is no mean task. It suggests that market discipline and
government intervention are both needed to yield the desired result. International investors can be
an important source of that market discipline, and international accounting firms can be efficient
agents of technology transfer. But until that transfer is effected, the integration of the domestic
financial markets with their foreign counterparts will necessarily remain incomplete.

Section 6. Financial Crises
The Victorian age of capital flows to emerging economies, like our era, was marred by
banking and currency problems and abrupt reversals of capital flows. The important questions are
what caused these events and how serious their economic consequences were.
Background. The classic pattern with resonance for today is Latin America’s experience
of three lending booms and busts between 1820 and 1914.54 The first wave of British capital
flows to the new states of the region to finance infrastructure and gold and silver mines ended
with the crisis of 1825. British investors had purchased Latin American stocks and bonds, some
of which were in nonexistent companies and even countries, with gay abandon (Neal 1992). The
boom ended with a stock market crash and a banking panic. The new countries defaulted on their
debts and were barred from international capital markets for several decades until they
renegotiated terms and began paying into arrears (Cole, Dow and English 1995).
54

See Marichal (1989). A fourth wave occurred in the 1920’s after the mantle of
leadership in international financial affairs shifted from London to New York. (Bordo, Edelstein
and Rockoff 1999). It ended at the end of the decade with the collapse of commodity prices and
the Great Depression. Virtually all countries, with the principal exception of Argentina, defaulted
on their debt. Private capital did not return to the region for four decades.

48
The second wave was in the 1850’s and 1860’s to finance Latin American railroads and
ended with the 1873 financial crisis in Europe. Again faced with deteriorating terms of trade,
many countries defaulted on their debts. The third wave in the 1880’s involved massive flows
from Britain and European generally to finance the interior development of Argentina and
Uruguay; it ended with a crash in 1890 and the insolvency of Barings, the famous London
merchant bank. Argentine state bonds went into default, a moratorium was declared, and capital
flows to the region dried up for half a decade.
Although Latin experience is the classic, the United States was also the subject of lending
booms. The first wave of British capital in the 1820’s and 1830’s went to finance canals and the
cotton boom. It ended in the depression of 1837-1843 with the defaults by eight states, and
British investors shunned the U.S. for the rest of the decade. The second wave followed the Civil
War and was used to finance westward expansion. The threat that the U.S. would abandon gold
for silver precipitated capital flight in the mid-1890’s but unlike the Latin case the crisis of 1895
did not lead to the suspension of convertibility or to an extended reversal of capital flows.55
Financial crises in this period were precipitated by events in both lending and the
borrowing countries. A number of crises began in Europe due to the real shocks of harvest
failures. On several such occasions (1837, 1847, 1857) the Bank of England, in response to an
“external drain” which depleted its gold reserves, raised its discount rate. This tightened

55

Australia, the third of the four big recipients of British capital, the fourth being Canada,
also went through a significant boom-bust cycle. A land boom in the 1880’s, partly financed by
British capital turned to bust with a turnaround in the terms of trade in 1890. This led to massive
bank insolvencies in 1893, because the Australian banks, unlike their counterparts in Canada,
ignored their “real bills” statutes and lent on the collateral of land. British depositors, burned by
their losses, remained wary of Australia for more than a decade (Davis and Gallman 1999).

49
conditions in the domestic money market, sometimes causing bank failures, and had serious
consequences for capital flows to the New World. Thus, the 1837 crisis spread to North America
via British intermediaries that had been financing the export of cotton from New Orleans to
Liverpool, leading to the suspension of specie convertibility and to widespread bank failures in the
United States.
Not all crises originated in the Old World. In Latin America they were often precipitated
by supply shocks which made it impossible for commodity-exporting countries to service their
debts and by the expansionary monetary and fiscal policies adopted in an effort to protect the
economy from the consequences. They could also be triggered by banking instability, especially
in the U.S., a country hobbled by a fragile unit banking system and the absence of a lender of last
resort.
Crises in the periphery spread to the European core and back through the linkages
described in Section 4. Classic examples are the Baring Crisis of 1890, the 1893 crisis in the U.S.,
Italy and Australia, and the 1907 crisis in the United States and Europe (Goodhart and DeLargy
1999).
While there are similarities between the “emerging-market crises” of the Victorian Age
and recent events, a key difference is the monetary regime. The earlier crises occurred under the
fixed exchange rates of the gold standard, while the recent crises occurred in a regime of managed
flexibility.56 This has several important consequences. First, whereas the gold standard quickly

56

To be sure, this last label covers a multitude of different exchange-rate regimes (some
would say a multitude of sins), but the essential point is that, Hong Kong and Argentina to the
contrary notwithstanding, exchange rates were less firmly pegged during the recent crisis than
they had been at the periphery of the Atlantic Economy a hundred years earlier.

50
transmitted crises between peripheral and core countries, today the advanced countries are better
insulated from shocks at the periphery. Central banks and governments in the advanced-industrial
countries now have more room for maneuver, not being constrained by a commitment to defend
the nominal price of gold. One might say that Alan Greenspan in 1998 should have been thankful
that policy makers had not bought into an earlier Alan Greenspan’s arguments favoring the gold
standard!
Second, and working in the other direction, credible adherence to the gold standard -- in
the sense that maintaining the gold parity would be the primary policy goal and, if it had to be
abandoned in the face of a war or other emergency, it would be restored at the original parity -ensured that capital flows would be stabilizing once resolution was underway (Eichengreen 1992,
Miller 1996, 1998, Bordo and Kydland 1995). This was the case for the core countries, the
advanced countries of Western Europe, the U.S. (with the exception of the free silver era in the
mid 1890’s) and the British Dominions, but not necessarily for other peripheral countries with
poor records of fiscal probity and dubious credibility.
Another key difference affecting the resolution of crises is that the peripheral countries
neither possessed domestic lenders of last resort nor were the beneficiaries of international rescue
loans. Well before 1914 the core countries had developed reasonably effective lenders of last
resort and an ad hoc system of international financial cooperation (Bordo and Schwartz 1998,
Eichengreen 1992). But the same was not true at the periphery, and countries there suffered the
consequences. Today the problem at the periphery is different. There is a domestic safety net in
most emerging countries so that banking panics are transformed into situations where the
liabilities of an insolvent banking system are taken over by the government. This in turn can

51
convert a banking crisis into a currency crisis (Dooley 1998).
Evidence on the Severity and Longevity of Crises. To compare the severity and
longevity of crises, we examine changes in the annual rate of growth of real GDP. We calculate
the growth rate and assess its behavior before, during and after crises for 15 “emerging markets”
in the period 1880-1914.57 We then make similar calculations for 10 well-known emerging
countries (Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, Mexico, Philippines, Singapore
and Thailand) that have experienced crises in the past 25 years.
We identify currency and banking crises from a survey of the historical literature.58 For
an episode to qualify as a banking crisis, we must observe either bank runs, bank failures and the
suspension of convertibility of deposits into currency (a banking panic), or else significant
banking-sector problems (including failures) that are resolved by a fiscally-underwritten bank
restructuring.59 For an episode to qualify as a currency crisis, we must observe a forced change in
57

The countries are those used in Bordo and Schwartz (1996a): Argentina, Australia,
Brazil, Canada, Chile, Denmark, Finland, Greece, Italy, Japan, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden,
United States. Our criteria for classifying a country as emerging are (i) whether it was primarily a
recipient of capital flows and (ii) its level of per capita income. Thus, in the pre-1914 era a
number of the 20th century’s most advanced countries (the U.S., Japan, and the Scandinavians)
are classified as emerging markets. A similar comparison is made by DeLargy and Goodhart
(1999). Their empirical base is more limited, however; they concentrate on the behavior of a
number of famous crisis episodes in the pre 1914 era in 5 emerging countries: the U.S., Australia,
Argentina, Italy and Austria, with similar evidence for victims of the recent Asian crisis. An
alternative metric would measure the wealth losses associated with the resolution of the crises.
This is the approach taken by Caprio and Klingbiel (1996). By this metric the losses associated
with banking crises in the 1980’s and 1990’s is likely to be larger than before 1914 (Calomiris
1999).
58

The resulting chronology is presented in a companion paper (Bordo and Eichengreen

1999).
59

This allows us to distinguish between liquidity crises before 1914 in which lender of last
resort intervention was either absent or unsuccessful, and more recent events where a lender of

52
parity, the abandonment of a pegged exchange rate, or an international rescue. An alternative
measure of currency crises that we also use is an index of exchange market pressure (EMP),
calculated as a weighted average of the percentage change in the exchange rate with respect to
the core country (the UK before 1914, the U.S. thereafter), the change in the short-term interest
rate differential with respect to the core country, and the difference of the percentage change in
reserves of a given country and the percentage change in reserves of the core country.60 We
count an episode as a currency crisis when it shows up as positive according to either or both of
these indicators.
Table 5 presents averages for the individual country episode in the pre-1914 era and the
recent period.61 For each country we calculate the growth rate in the crisis year relative to the
five-year-average growth rate preceding the crisis; the growth rate in the crisis year relative to the
three-year-average growth rate preceding the crisis; the difference between the crisis-year growth
rate and the preceding year’s growth rate; the difference between growth the year following the
crisis and the crisis-year growth rate; the difference between the three-year-average growth rate
following the crisis and the crisis-year growth rate; and finally the difference between the fiveyear-average growth rate following the crisis and the crisis-year growth rate. Assuming that the
economy is at its trend growth rate five years before the crisis, this gives a rough measure of the

last resort or deposit insurance is in place and the main problem has been bank insolvency. In
fact, however, a number of banking crises which occurred in Europe before 1914 did not involve
panics and in this respect were not dissimilar from episodes occurring more recently.
60

This builds on the exchange-market-pressure model of Girton and Roper (1977),
following the methodology in Eichengreen, Rose and Wyplosz (1995, 1996).
61

The individual cases are tabulated and described in Bordo and Eichengreen (1999).

53
extent to which growth deviated from trend and then recovered.62
A key fact emerging from Table 5 is that while banking and financial crises with serious
recessionary effects are no new phenomena, those output effects were on average somewhat less
serious before 1914 compared to today. This holds for banking crises, currency crises and twin
crises alike. Thus, while output declined by 3 per cent relative to trend in the average post-1972
crisis, the comparable number for the pre-1914 period was only 2 per cent. The contrast is
especially sharp for crises with both banking and currency components, which have been
exceptionally disruptive since 1972 (when the average drop in output was 5 per cent) but were
less so prior to 1913 (when that drop was “only” 2 per cent).
Relative to these averages, the drop in output in the recent Asian crises was especially
steep: Korea’s growth rate declined seven percentage points below its pre-crisis five-year-average
growth rate, eight percentage points below its three year pre-crisis average and seven percentage
points from the year preceding the crisis. Indonesia’s performance was similar, while Thailand’s
was the worst (at minus 13, 13, 11% respectively).63
How does this compare with the worst of the pre-1914 era? In fact, the two most
62

To illustrate, this generates the following picture for the U.S. around the crisis of 1893.
1893. Real GDP dropped 5% in the crisis year, declined relative to the average of the preceding 5
years by 9%, declined relative to the average of the preceding 3 years by 12%, and declined
relative to the year before the crisis by 14%. In the 3 years following the crisis, growth increased
on average to 2%, so the deviation of the crisis year from the 3 year average that we calculate is
7%. Finally, in the 5 years following the crisis, growth recovered by 9% relative to the crisis.
Thus it took the U.S. five years to return to its pre-crisis growth rate.
63

In contrast to the Asian cases, real GDP declined only modestly in the Mexican crisis of
1994 with output only declining by 1% below its five year average during the crisis year, less than
1% below its three year average and 2% in the crisis year. It recovered 3% a year after the crisis
and 4% after three years.

54
infamous pre-World War I episodes, the U.S. in 1893 and Argentina in 1890, were even worse
than Asia in recent years. For the U.S., growth during the crisis years declined by nine percentage
points relative to its previous five-year average, 12 percentage points below its three-year
average, and 14 percentage points from the pre-crisis year. However, the growth rate recovered
to its pre-crisis level within 5 years. For Argentina the numbers are dramatic: minus 17%, 20%,
24%, with recovery in growth not complete after 5 years. Clearly, generalizations about the pre1914 period should be drawn cautiously, since that period appears to have featured a small
number of exceptionally severe crises along with a larger number of milder episodes.64
Generalizing about the post-crisis recovery is even more difficult. On the one hand, the
recovery from currency crises is quicker prior to 1914. Then, growth rose by 2 percentage points
between the crisis year and the three years following, whereas since 1972 there has been
essentially no post-crisis recovery until after 3 years. The recovery from currency crises both
began earlier and continued more rapidly prior to 1914. DeLargy and Goodhart find a similar
pattern and interpret it in terms of the resumption rule. Prior to 1914, countries driven off the
gold standard generally intended to restore convertibility at the previously-prevailing exchange
rate once the crisis passed. While investors who held domestic-currency-denominated assets
suffered losses when the currency collapsed, they anticipated gains as the currency recovered to

64

Another reason for caution is that the results change when we include the crises that
erupted in 1914 due to the outbreak of World War I. These are numerous; including them
increases the size of our sample by about half. They are also relatively severe, since the disruption
to international financial relations due to the outbreak of the war was extensive. Including these
episodes in the averages makes the immediate post-crisis drop in output slightly more severe prior
to 1915 than after 1972. While there is good reason to regard these wartime shocks as special
(and for therefore not including them in the comparison with our day), this is another reminder of
the difficulty of generalizing about financial stability in the last age of globalization.

55
its traditional parity. To put the point another way, there was little reason to fear that
abandonment of the currency peg would unleash uncontrolled inflation, since the authorities were
committed to reestablishing the previous rate of exchange. Hence, devaluation did not unleash
persistent capital flight. Rather, gold and capital began flowing back in at a relatively early date,
stabilizing the economy and stimulating recovery.
In contrast, the recovery from banking crises starts earlier in the modern period, in the first
post-crisis year as opposed to the second or third post-crisis year. This is true whether or not
banking crises are accompanied by currency crises. A likely explanation is the absence of an
effective lender of last resort at the periphery in the pre-1914 era to quickly restore depositor
confidence, stabilize supplies of money and credit, and sustain the provision of intermediation
services. The U.S. crises of 1893 and 1907, which were greatly aggravated by the absence of
effective last-resort lending (leading in turn to the establishment of the Fed), clearly make this
point. One can argue that regulatory forbearance and central bank bailouts have adverse longterm effects by weakening market discipline and leading to a less efficient allocation of capital.
Indeed, there is some suggestion of this in the data: while recovery from banking crises is initiated
earlier in the post-1972 period, the subsequent expansion accelerates less dramatically and is
sustained less successfully, as if market discipline and the efficiency with which credit is allocated
are less (than in comparable episodes a hundred years ago).
Automatic stabilizers were also absent prior to 1914. Some recent commentators (e.g.
Krugman 1998) have noted that the Asian crisis countries (and other emerging markets) found
their use of automatic stabilizers constrained by a lack of confidence and the existence of high
capital mobility. That may be true, but the comparison suggests that they still have been able to

56
adopt a more concerted response than their counterparts a century ago. Other commentators
have been critical of regulators for failing to force through an earlier resolution of banking
problems. Again, they have a point, but the striking fact is that recovery from banking crises has
tended to begin earlier in the recent period than in the typical crisis episode a hundred years ago.
A final point is that there were no international rescue packages available to emerging economies
prior to 1914, whereas such rescues are a prominent feature of the international financial
landscape today.65 Some would argue these international rescue operations may have themselves
contributed to the severity of recent crises by aggravating the problems of moral hazard
accompanying the provision of a safety net, but it is also possible that international efforts to
encourage the quick resolution of banking crises and to provide resources for recapitalization
have contributed to the earlier initiation of recovery from banking crises.
Thus, while the crisis problem is hardly new, there are some new and distinctive features
of recent crises. The drop in output following their outbreak is even more dramatic. And for
currency crises, the subsequent recovery is slower. In this respect as others, there are aspects of
our current age of globalization that are both unprecedented and disturbing.

Section 7. Conclusion
While presenting a good deal of detail, we have sought in this paper to emphasize a small
number of general points. First, the globalization of commodity and financial markets is
historically unprecedented. Facile comparisons with the late nineteenth century notwithstanding,
65

The Belmont-Morgan loan arranged for the U.S. Treasury in the 1890s being a
prominent exception.

57
the international integration of capital and commodity markets goes further and runs deeper than
ever before.
Second, that the advent of highly integrated commodity and financial markets has been
accompanied by trade tensions and problems of financial instability should not come as a surprise,
for the earlier period of commodity- and financial-market integration that is our basis for
comparison was also marked by trade tensions and financial instability. The surprise is that these
problems are not even more severe today, given that the extent of commodity- and financialmarket integration is so much greater.
Accounting for this surprise is the agenda for research. One possibility is the stabilizing
role of the institutions built in the interim. At the national level this means social and financial
safety nets. At the international level it means the WTO, the IMF, the Basle Committee of
Banking Supervisors. These institutions may be far from perfect, but they are better than nothing,
judging from the historical correlation between the level of integration on the one hand and the
level of trade conflict and financial instability on the other. The financial safety net may create
moral hazard, but it at least prevents financial catastrophe. Contingent protection may prevent the
full gains from trade from being realized, but it at least sustains a critical mass of political support
for open markets. Global markets without global governance may create problems, but these
multilateral institutions would appear to provide at least an imperfect substitute for some of the
functions of the latter, or so outcomes would suggest.
The other explanation for the contrast is that the simple maturation of markets over time
has made it easier to live with globalization. The development of better auditing and accounting
practices at the national level has made it easier to apply those same practices to international

58
transactions, with stabilizing consequences. The development of futures markets on which
producers can hedge their exposure to world prices has made it easier for them to live with global
markets that deliver outcomes beyond their control. These processes were already underway in
the 19th century (Williams 1986), but they have since developed considerably further.
Lest we be accused of being Panglossian, we should emphasize that current problems of
trade conflict and financial instability are real and pressing, especially for smaller, more open,
lower-income countries with the least ability to protect themselves from the consequences.
Governments seeking to make the world safe for global capitalism still have a ways to go.

59

Figure 1

U.S. Merchandise Trade as Percent of GNP
1869 - 1997
14
12

percent

10
8
6
4
2
0
1880

1900

1920
Exports

1940

1960
Imports

1980

60

Figure 2

Trade in the U.S. Economy
50

percentage

40
30
20
10
0

1879

c.1900

c.1910

1929

1939

Merchandise Exports/GDP

1950

1960

1970

1980

Merchandise Exports/Production

1990

1997

61
Table 1: Trade as a Percentage Share of Domestic Output/Consumption, 1909 and 1993
A. Exports as Share of Domestic Shipments
1909

1993

Corn

2

31

Wheat

20

63

Cotton

65

35

Coal

4

16

Raw Tobacco

29

46

Tobacco Manufactures

1

17

Chemicals

16

15

Motor Vehicles & Parts

2

15

Fabricated Metal
Products

7

9

Non-Electrical
Machinery

5

31

Electrical Machinery

3

25

Instruments
27
B. Imports as a Share of New Supply (Domestic Output and Imports)

21

1909

1993

Wool

45

73

Textiles & Apparel

7a

35

Leather

3

57

12a

9

Motor Vehicles & Parts

1

25

Fabricated Metal
Products

1

8

Non-Electrical
Machinery

<1

25

Electrical Machinery

<1

27

Chemicals

Instruments
<1
16
Sources: For 1909, Department of Commerce, Statistical Abstract of the United States, 1913. For
1993, U.S. Bureau of the Census (1995). a From Lipsey (1999).

62

Table 2: U.S. Foreign Direct Investment, Selected Years
(as percent of U.S. GNP)
U.S. Direct
Investment Abroad

Foreign Direct
Investment in the
United States

1914

.7

.3-4

1929/30

.7

.1

1960

6

1

1996
Market Value

20

16

Sources: For 1914, Wilkins (1970), p. 201 and Wilkins (1989), p. 699. For 1929/30 and 1960, series
U 26-39. For 1996, Survey of Current Business, July 1998, p. xx, available at
http://www.bea.doc.gov/bea/

63
Table 3: Average Tariffs on Imported Manufactured Goods

1875

1913

1931

1950

PreUruguay
Round

PostUruguay
Round

12-15

20

30

18

--

--

Germany

4-6

17

21

26

--

--

Italy

8-10

18

46

25

--

--

United
Kingdom

0

0

n.a.

23

--

--

European
Union

--

--

--

--

5.7

3.6

n.a.

26

n.a.

9.0

4.8

40-50

44

48

4.6

3.0

France

Canada
United States

14

Source: Bairoch (1993), and Schott (1994) for last two columns.

64

Table 4

Bank and Bond Market Lending to Emerging Markets
Functional Sectors
Central Bank
Other Government
Infrastructure Investment
oil/coal/gas
energy-utility
others
Mining
Finance (banks, etc)
Manufacturing
Service

TOTAL
Source: see text.

Number of Bonds Value of Bonds Number of Loans Amount of Loans
77
368
385
153
107
125
10
1302
415
241
3183

(in US millions)
18155.85
128080.44
67695.01
28047.07
21951.1
17623.31
664.04
161610.12
38504.02
26261.95
508592.91

147
294
879
315
233
331
87
1769
946
867
5868

(in US millions)
24897.091
39121.941
110844.658
56226.715
30414.017
24203.918
10717.272
132049.471
66996.553
76545.381
572017.017

65
Table 5
Fluctuations in Annual Growth Rates Around the Time of Crises:
Summary Statistics 1880-1998.

Part A: All Crises: means (number of crises)
1880-1913 (22)

1973-1998 (30)

Recent (7)

gcrisis-g(-5)

0.01

-0.03

-0.05

gcrisis-g(-3)

0.00

-0.03

-0.06

gcrisis-g(-1)

-0.02

-0.03

-0.06

g(+1)-gcrisis

0.00

0.02

0.01

g(+3)-gcrisis

0.01

0.02

0.04

g(+5)-gcrisis

0.01

0.03

Part B: Twin Crises: means (number of crises)
1880-1913 (9)

1973-1998 (14)

Recent (6)

gcrisis-g(-5)

-0.02

-0.05

-0.05

gcrisis-g(-3)

-0.02

-0.05

-0.06

gcrisis-g(-1)

-0.02

-0.05

-0.06

g(+1)-gcrisis

0.00

0.03

-0.01

g(+3)-gcrisis

0.01

0.05

0.04

g(+5)-gcrisis

0.02

0.05

66

Part C: Banking Crises: means (number of crises)
1880-1913 (8)

1973-1998 (5 )

gcrisis-g(-5)

-0.02

-0.03

gcrisis-g(-3)

-0.02

-0.03

gcrisis-g(-1)

-0.03

-0.02

g(+1)-gcrisis

-0.03

0.02

g(+3)-gcrisis

0.00

0.02

g(+5)-gcrisis

0.05

0.01

Recent (0)

Part D: Currency Crises: means (number of crises)
1880-1913 (5)

1973-1998 (11)

Recent (1)

gcrisis-g(-5)

0.00

-0.02

-0.05

gcrisis-g(-3)

0.03

-0.01

-0.05

gcrisis-g(-1)

-0.01

0.00

-0.04

g(+1)-gcrisis

-0.03

0.01

g(+3)-gcrisis

0.02

0.00

g(+5)-gcrisis

0.00

0.01

Note: gcrisis is the annual growth rate of real GDP at the crisis year. g(_) is the average annual growth rate
of real GDP N years before of after the crisis.
Data Sources: Bordo and Schwartz (1996a), IFS CD-ROM (1999).

67
References
Anderson, James E. and Douglas Marcouiller (1999). “Trade, Insecurity, and Home Bias: An
Empirical Investigation.” NBER Working Paper 7000 (March).
Bairoch, Paul (1993), Economics and World History, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Bairoch, Paul and Richard Kozul-Wright (1998), “Globalization Myths: Some Reflections on
Integration, Industrialization and Growth in the World Economy,” In Transnational Corporations and
the Global Economy, edited by Richard Kozul-Wright and Robert Rowthorn. New York: St.
Martin’s Press.
Baldwin, Richard E. and Philippe Martin (1999), “Two Waves of Globalization: Superficial
Similarities, Fundamental Differences,” NBER Working Paper 6904 (January).
Baskin, Jonathan B. (1988), “The Development of Corporate Financial Markets in Britain and the
United States, 1600-1914: Overcoming Asymmetric Information,” Business History Review 62,
pp.197-237.
Bayoumi, Tamim (1990), “Saving-Investment Correlations: Immobile Capital, Government Policy, or
Endogenous Behavior?” IMF Staff Papers 37, pp.360-387.
Berle, Adolf A. and Gardiner C. Means (1932), The Modern Corporation and Private Property, New
York: Commerce Clearing House.
Bloomfield, Arthur I. (1968), Patterns of Fluctuation in International Finance Before 1914, Princeton
Studies in International Finance no. 21, International Finance Section, Department of Economics,
Princeton University.
Bordo, Michael and Barry Eichengreen (1999), “Plu Ca Change: A Century of Banking and Currency
Crises,” unpublished manuscript, Rutgers University and University of California, Berkeley.
Bordo, Michael D., Barry Eichengreen and Jongwoo Kim (1998), “Was There Really an Earlier Era
of Financial Globalization Comparable to Today?” In Bank of Korea, The Implications of the
Globalization of World Financial Markets, Seoul: Bank of Korea, pp.27-83.
Bordo, Michael D., Michael Edelstein, Hugh Rockoff (1999), "Was Adherence to the Gold Standard a
'Good Housekeeping Seal of Approval' During the Inter-War Period?" unpublished manuscript,
Rutgers University (February).
Bordo, Michael D. and Hugh Rockoff (1996), “The Gold Standard as a Good Housekeeping Seal of
Approval,” Journal of Economic History 56, pp.389-428.
Bordo, Michael D. and Anna J. Schwartz (1996a), "The Operation of the Specie Standard: Evidence
for Core and Peripheral Countries, 1880-1990" in Jorge Braga de Maceda, Barry Eichengreen and
Jaime Reis (eds.), Currency Convertibility: The Gold Standard and Beyond, New York: Routledge,
pp. 11-83.

68
Bordo, Michael D. and Anna J. Schwartz (1998), “Under What Circumstances, Past and Present,
Have International Rescues of Countries in Financial Distress Been Successful?” NBER Working
Paper 6824 (December).
Breizas, Elise (1995), “Foreign Capital Flows in the Century of Britain’s Industrial Revolution: New
Estimates, Controlled Conjectures,” Economic History Review XLVIII, pp.46-67.
Calomiris, Charles (1999). “Victorian Perspectives on the Banking Collapse of the 1980's and
1990's.” Columbia University (mimeo).
Chandler, Alfred D. (1990), Scale and Scope: The Dynamics of Industrial Capitalism, Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Cole, Harold L., James Dow and William B. English (1995), “Default, Settlement, and Signaling:
Lending Resumption in a Reputational Model of Sovereign Debt,” International Economic Review
36, pp. 365-385.
Collins, William J., Kevin H. O’Rourke, and Jeffrey Williamson (1997), “Were Trade and Factor
Mobility Substitutes in History?” NBER Working Paper 6059 (June). Forthcoming in Trade and
Factor Mobility, edited by xxx, NewYork: Cambridge University Press.
Council of Economic Advisers (1999), Economic Report of the President, Washington, DC: GPO.
Dam, Kenneth (1970), The GATT: Law and the International Economic Organization, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Davis, Lance E. and Robert Gallman (1999), “Waves, Tides, and Sandcastles: The Impact of Foreign
Capital Flows on Evolving Financial Markets in the New World, 1865-1914,” unpublished manuscript,
Caltech and University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill.
Davis, Lance E. and Robert A. Huttenback (1986), Mammon and the Pursuit of Empire, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Dooley, Michael P. (1997), "A Model of Currency Crises in Emerging Countries," NBER Working
Paper.
Eichengreen, Barry (1990), “Trends and Cycles in Foreign Lending,” in Horst Siebert (ed), Capital
Flows in the World Economy, Tubingen: Mohr, pp.3-28.
Eichengreen, Barry (1992), Golden Fetters: The Gold Standard and the Great Depression, 1919-1939,
New York: Oxford University Press.
Eichengreen, Barry (1996a), Globalizing Capital: A History of the International Monetary System,
Princeton: Princeton University Press.

69
Eichengreen, Barry (1996b), “Financing Infrastructure in Developing Countries: Lessons from the
Railway Age,” in Ashoka Mody (ed.), Infrastructure Delivery: Private Initiative and the Public Good,
Washington, DC: The World Bank, pp.107-128.
Eichengreen, Barry and Ashoka Mody (1998), “What Explains the Changing Spreads on EmergingMarket Debt: Fundamentals or Market Sentiment?” NBER Working Paper No. 6408 (February).
Eichengreen, Barry, Andrew Rose and Charles Wyplosz (1995), "Exchange Market Mayhem: The
Antecedents and Aftermath of Speculative Attacks," Economic Policy 21, pp. 249-312.
Eichengreen, Barry, Andrew Rose and Charles Wyplosz (1996), "Speculative Attacks on Pegged
Exchange Rates: An Empirical Exploration with Special Reference to the European Monetary
System" in Matthew Canzoneri, Wilfred Ethier and Vittorio Grilli (eds.), The New Transatlantic
Economy, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Feenstra, Robert C. (1998) “Integration of Trade and Disintegration of Production in the Global
Economy,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 12, pp.31-50.
Feldman, David H. (1993), “Redundant Tariffs as Rational Endogenous Protection,” Economic
Inquiry 31, pp. 436-447.
Fishlow, Albert (1985), “Lessons from the Past: Capital Markets During the 19th Century and the
Interwar Period,” in Miles Kahler, The Politics of International Debt, Ithaca, NY: Cornell University
Press, pp.37-94.
Fischer, Ronald D., and Thomas J. Prusa (1999), “Contingent Protection as Better Insurance,” NBER
Working Paper 6933 (February).
Flandreau, Marc (1998), “Caveat Emptor: Coping with Country Risk without the Multilaterals, 18701914,” CEPR Discussion paper 2004 (October).
Fogel, Robert (1964), Railroads and American Economic Growth, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University Press.
Garbade, Kenneth D. and William L. Silber (1978), “Technology, Communication and the
Performance of Financial Markets, 1840-1975,” Journal of Finance 33, pp.819-832.
Girton, Lance and Donald Roper (1997), “A Monetary Model of Exchange Market Pressure Applied
to Postwar Canadian Experience,” American Economic Review 67, pp. 537-48.
Goldberg, Pinelopi K., and Frank Verboven (1998), “The Evolution of Price Discrimination in the
European Car Market,” NBER Working Paper No. 6818 (November).
Goodhart, Charles and P.J.R. DeLargy (1999), “Financial Crises: Plus ça change, plus c'est la meme
chose," LSE Financial Markets Group Special Paper No. 108.

70
Gordon, Barry K. (1992), “Multivariate Cointegration Tests and the Law of One Price in
International Wheat Markets,” Review of Agricultural Economics 14 (June), pp.117-124.
Hatton, Timothy J. and Jeffrey G. Williamson (1992), “International Migration and World
Development: A Historical Perspective,” Harvard Institute of Economic Research Discussion Paper
no. 1606 (August).
Hermalin, Benjamin E. and Andrew K. Rose (1999), “Risks to Lenders and Borrowers in International
Capital Markets,” NBER Working Paper no. 6886 (January).
Hoekman, Bernard, and Michel Kostecki (1995), The Political Economy of the World Trading
System: From GATT to WTO. New York: Oxford University Press.
Hummels, David (1999), “Transportation Costs and International Integration in Recent History,”
unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago.
Hummels, David, Dana Rapoport, and Kei-Mu Yi (1998), “Vertical Specialization and the Changing
Nature of World Trade,” Economic Policy Review, Federal Reserve Bank of New York (June),
pp.79-94.
International Monetary Fund (1998), World Economic Outlook, Washington, D.C. (May).
Irwin, Douglas A. “The United States in a New Global Economy? A Century’s Perspective,”
American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 86 (May 1996), pp. 41-46.
Kindleberger, Charles P. (1973), The World in Depression 1929-1939, Berkeley: University of
California Press.
Kindleberger, Charles P. (1989), Manias, Panics and Crashes: A History of Financial Crises, Revised
Edition, New York: Basic Books.
Krugman, Paul (1995), “Growing World Trade: Causes and Consequences,” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity 1, pp.327-362.
Lamoreaux, Naomi (1985), The Great Merger Movement in American Business, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Lawrence, Robert Z., Albert Bressand and Takatoshi Ito (1996), A Vision for the World Economy:
Openness, Diversity and Cohesion, Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution.
Lawrence, Robert Z., and Robert E. Litan (1986), Saving World Trade: A Pragmatic Approach,
Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution.
Lewis, Cleona (1938), America’s Stake in International Investments, Washington, D.C.: The
Brookings Institution.

72
Rauch, James and Alessandra Casella (1998), “Overcoming Informational Barriers to International
Resource Allocation: Prices and Group Ties,” NBER Working Paper 6628 (June).
Rodrik, Dani (1998), “The Debate Over Globalization: How to Move Forward by Looking
Backward,” unpublished manuscript, Harvard University.
Royal Institute for International Affairs (1937), The Problem of International Investment, London:
Oxford University Press.
Sachs, Jeffrey and Andrew Warner (1995), “Economic Reform and the Process of Global
Integration,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, pp.1-118.
Schott, Jeffrey J. (1994), The Uruguay Round: An Assessment, Washington, D.C.: Institute for
International Economics (November).
Schwartz, Anna (1998), “Asian Banking Crises in the 1990's: All Alike?” NBER.
Simon, Matthew (1966), “The United States Balance of Payments, 1861-1900,” Trends in the
American Economy in the Nineteenth Century, Vol. 24, Studies in Income and Wealth. Princeton:
Princeton University Press for the NBER.
Simon, Matthew (1967), “The Pattern of New British Portfolio Investment, 1865-1914,” in J.H. Adler
(ed.), Capital Movements and Economic Development, London: Macmillan, pp.**-**.
Snowden, Kenneth A. (1995), “The Evolution of Interregional Mortgage Lending Channels, 18701940: The Life Insurance-Mortgage Company Connection” in Naomi R. Lamoreaux and Daniel M.G.
Raff (eds.), Coordination and Information: Historical Perspectives on the Organization of Enterprise,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp.209-246.
Sobel, Robert (1965), The Big Board, New York: Free Press.
Soros, George (1998), The Crisis of Global Capitalism, New York: Public Affairs Books.
Summers, Lawrence H. (1998), “Reflections on Managing Global Integration,” presented to the
Annual Meeting of the Association of Government Economists, 4 January.
Sykes, Alan O. (1991), “Protectionism as a ‘Safeguard’: A Positive Analysis of the GATT ‘Escape
Clause’ with Normative Speculations,” University of Chicago Law Review 58 (Winter), pp.255-305.
Sylla, Richard and George David Smith (1995), “Information and Capital Market Regulation in
Anglo-American Finance,” in Michael D. Bordo and Richard Sylla (eds.), Anglo-American Financial
Systems, New York: Irwin, pp.170-206.
Taylor, Alan M. (1996), “International Capital Mobility in History: The Saving-Investment
Relationship,” NBER Working Paper 5743 (September).

</ref_section>

