NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

STAKES AND STARS: THE EFFECT OF
INTELLECTUAL HUMAN CAPITAL
ON THE LEVEL AND VARIABILITY
OF HIGH-TECH FIRMS' MARKET VALUES
Michael R. Darby
Qiao Liu
Lynne G. Zucker

Working Paper 7201
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7201
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 1999

This research has been supported by grants from the University of California Systemwide Biotechnology
Research and Education Program, the University of California President's Initiative for Industry-University
Cooperative Research, and the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation through the NBER Research Program on Industrial
Technology and Productivity. We are grateful to Hongbin Cai, Harold Demsetz, Philip Leslie, David Levine,
and Shijun Liu for useful suggestions. We also thank participant in various UCLA seminars, especially Marc
Junkunc and Yuan Gao for helpful comments. Andrew Jing and Marc Junkunc assisted in developing new
elements of the Zucker-Darby database for use in this paper. Any errors and omissions are our own
responsibilities. This paper is a part of the NBER's research program in Productivity. All opinions expressed
are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 1999 by Michael R. Darby, Qiao Liu, and Lynne G. Zucker. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Stakes and Stars: The Effect of Intellectual Human Capital
on the Level and Variability of High-Tech Firms’ Market Values
Michael R. Darby, Qiao Liu, and Lynne G. Zucker
NBER Working Paper No. 7201
June 1999
JEL No. O31, G12, M40
ABSTRACT
High-tech firms are built much more on the intellectual capital of key personnel than on
physical assets, and firms built around the best scientists are most likely to be successful in
commercializing breakthrough technologies. As a result, such firms are expected to have higher
market values than similar firms less well endowed. In this paper we develop and implement an
option-pricing based technique for valuing these and similar intangible assets by examining the effect
of ties to star scientists on the market value of new biotech firms. Since firms with more star ties are
likely to have a greater probability per unit time of making a commercially valurable R&D
breakthrough, we argue and confirm empirically that both the value of the firm and the likelihood of
jumps in the value are increasing in the number of star ties. These effects can be financially as well
as statistically significant: for two firms with mean values for other variables, the predicted increase
in market value of a firm with one article written by a star as or with a firm employee is 7.3% or 16
million 1984 dollars compared to a firm with no articles.

Michael R. Darby
Anderson Graduate School of Management
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
michael.r.darby@anderson.ucla.edu
Lynne G. Zucker
Institute for Social Science Research
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1551
and NBER
zucker@soc.sscnet.ucla.edu

Qiao Liu
Department of Economics
Box 951477
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
liuq@ucla.edu

STAKES AND STARS: THE EFFECT OF INTELLECTUAL HUMAN
CAPITAL ON THE LEVEL AND VARIABILITY OF HIGH-TECH
FIRMS' MAKET VALUES

Michael R. Darby, Qiao Liu, and Lynne G. Zucker

1

Introduction

or transformed as a result of scienti c breakthroughs which open new technological opportunities. During the
nascent stage of these scienti c/technological revolutions, the top scientists making the key
discoveries have a major strategic advantage in exploiting their commercial applications, particularly where need for tacit knowledge of the new techniques creates natural excludability
of scientists who have not worked at the bench level with the scientists or are incapable of
reverse-engineering their methods from the published articles. Zucker, Darby, and their associates have demonstrated the key role of star scientists who act as scientist-entrepreneurs
in determining the time and place of entry and the success of rms exploiting the biotechnology revolution. For example, in this paper we develop and implement an option-pricing
based techniques for valuing the intellectual human capital implicit in star ties to rms {
and similar intangible assets { by examining the e ect of ties to star scientists on the market
value of new biotech rms.
Biotech companies with more ties to star scientists have signi cantly more products in
development and on the market and great employment growth than do those with fewer or
none. Empirically, the depth of star scientist involvement in the rm is measured by the
number of genetic-sequence-discovery articles authored by each of the star scientists as or
with employees of the rm.
A natural extension of the Zucker-Darby ndings is the hypothesis that high-tech rms
with deep star scientist ties should be more highly valued by investors. The size of investors
stakes in the risky business of investing in high-tech rms should be determined by their
High-technology industries are frequently formed

1

2

3

stars. Speci cally, the question we address is: What is the e ect on high-tech rms' stock
market performance of its technology state? In this paper, we argue that there indeed
exists such a relationship. In high-tech industries, information about many new discoveries
is suÆciently costly to transfer due either to its complexity or tacitness that others are
e ectively excluded. At the extreme, scientists wishing to build on the new knowledge must
rst acquire hands-on experience. If scientists cannot gain access to a research team or
laboratory setting with that know-how, then working in the new area may be very diÆcult
if not impossible. Thus, we expect the following: the rms with more intellectual human
capital are more likely to make technological breakthroughs. Since the technological knowhow based on those technological innovations will not be easily grasped by other rms, the
rms with this technological know-how should enjoy higher rate of return. This type of
higher than normal rate of return will not be competed away until other rms are able to
come up with similar or more advanced technology. In the stock market, the shareholders or
the rm's potential investors also appreciate the rm's ever-increasing technological state.
This eventually will be re ected in the rm's stock price, and correspondingly, in the rm's
market valuation.
Average investors may not be sophisticated enough to tell when the rm is having technological breakthrough and how big its e ects will be. But ex ante, before they make their
investment decisions, they can observe the indicators on the rm's intellectual human capital
that may contain useful information about the rm's current technology status and potential
future development. For example, they can count the number of scientists in the rm, gure
out how many of them have Ph.D. degrees, consider where they did their graduate work, and
take into account the size of the rm's R&D expenditure. They can even measure the quality
of rm's research team by counting how many big names the rm has or how frequently the
rm's scientist are cooperating with academic gurus. This type of ex ante recognition of
the rm's potential to make technological breakthroughs will be re ected in the investors'
decision making process and consequently be re ected in the rm's stock market price. This
4

2

makes it possible for us to use stock market information to study the in uence of intellectual
human capital on the rm's overall success. This also provides a way to value the rm's
valuable technological know-how: we can calculate how much of the rm's market value
could be explained by certain type of intangible asset, and then value this type of intangible
asset based on its contribution to the rm's overall market value. This approach, therefore,
could be applied to value such intangible assets as patent citations, scienti c citations, ties
to star scientists, great ideas.
As argued in Hall (1999), using nancial market information to measure the returns of
innovative activities has the following advantages: (1) it avoids the problems of timing of
costs and revenues (confusion in determining when innovative investments occur and when
they generate income stream.) and is capable of forward-looking evaluation; (2) this method
is also potentially useful for calibrating various innovation measures, in the sense that one can
measure their economic impact using the widely available United States rm data, possibly
enabling one to validate these measures for use elsewhere as proxies for innovation value.
Following the same spirit, our paper propose a structural model to describe the relationship
between the rm's market valuation and its corresponding knowledge assets (i.e. R&D
expenditures, "Star Scientist" ties).
Since we argue that the technological innovation a ects the investors' valuation. we
expect that a certain type of discontinuity in the rm's market value will occur whenever
the rm makes frontier discoveries. We propose a endogenous jump{di usion model in
our paper to capture the "jump" nature of technological breakthrough. More speci cally,
we assume the rm's valued assets (the weighted sum of its intangible assets and tangibles
assets) follow a jump-di usion process with jump intensity endogenously related to the rm's
intellectual human capital measure. Thus, whenever the rm makes technological innovation,
this breakthrough changes the dynamics of the rm's valued assets. The jump{di usion
process is appropriate here because it not only captures the continuous change of rm's
valued assets, but also captures the discontinuity due to extreme events (frontier discovery
5

3

in our model). In our model, by relating the probability (or frequency) of a jump occurring
to a rm's intellectual human capital measures (i.e. number of ties to "star scientist"), we
are able to disentangle the e ect of intellectual human capital measures on the rm's market
valuation. Our theoretical argument is that owning precious intellectual human capital will
improve the likelihood of the rm making technological breakthrough. This, in turn, will
in uence the investors' valuation of the rm's valued assets, which eventually will be re ected
in the rm's stock price. By applying a jump{di usion model, we are able to study this e ect
in an ex ante manner, which di erentiates our approach from the "event study" approach
that has been widely used in corporate nance research. This may avoid estimation errors
due from identifying "event" and specifying "the windows of event".
The basic framework of this paper is an option-pricing model with underlying asset (valued assets in our paper) following a jump-di usion process. The basic analytical framework
of our study is similar to Black and Scholes' (1973). Cox and Ross (1976), Merton (1976)
are among the rst economists to apply jump process to option pricing models. But in their
studies, jump risks are speci ed to be unsystematic risk and jump intensity is assumed to
be exogenously constant. Bates (1996) and Bakshi, Cao and Chen (1997) study the jumpdi usion process in a more complicated environment. They, together with Heston (1993),
use the inverse characteristic function method to obtain the closed form solution for the
price of a call option. In this paper, we basically use the same method as the one used
in Bates (1996) and Bakshi, Cao and Chen (1997). One contribution of our paper is that
we assume the jump intensity to be endogenously related to the rm's intellectual human
capital measure. This is di erent from the constant jump intensity assumption made in the
models we mentioned above, which makes our modeling more complicated. By applying the
inverse characteristic function technique, we are able to overcome the complexity brought
along with the "endogenized" jump intensity assumption and obtain a closed form solution
to the price of the European call option, which is just the rm's market valuation in our
model.
4

We use the sample we construct for the biotech industry to test whether our jumpdi usion option pricing model is correctly speci ed. We compiled the biotech rms that
went public during the 1980{1992 time period. For each of those rms, we carefully calculated the links or aÆliations to star scientists. We use those "ties" to star scientists as
a measure of the biotech rm's intellectual human capital. We also retrieve the rms' accounting information from COMPUSTAT database. By using actual data from the biotech
companies, we nd that the jump{di usion option pricing model ts the actual data very
well, which implies that there actually exist discontinuities in the rms' market valuation
and this type of discontinuity originates from the rms' technological breakthroughs which
are made possible by the rms' intellectual human capital. Robustness analyses also con rm
that our model is correctly speci ed. After we estimate the implicit parameters of the jump{
di usion model, we apply this process to study the e ect on the rm's market valuation by
the rm's intellectual human capital measure | ties to star scientists. Sensitivity analyses
illustrate that the increase in the rms' intellectual human capital will lead to higher market
valuation. In a reasonable manner, the e ects depend on the size of the rm (in terms of
total assets), the R&D stock of the rm, the amount of the rm's debts and their maturities. For a typical biotech rm (a rm that has industry average values for its total asset ,
R&D stock, debt level and average maturity), the rst star scientist will generate almost $
15.73 million in the rm's market value. The contribution to the rm's market value goes
down with the increase in the intellectual human capital measure. This is consistent with
the assumption that the jump intensity is concavely related to the rm's intellectual human
capital measure.
The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. In section 2, we lay out the model and then
derive the solution to the model. We provide a detailed description of the data we used
in this study in section 3. Econometric methods and the empirical results are provided in
section 4. Section 5 further analyzes the robustness of our model and also contains the results
of sensitivity analyses. Section 6 discusses and concludes. Appendix A contains details of
6

5

the proof and Appendix B contains details about how we construct our data sets.

2

The Theoretical Framework

Exploring the e ect of intellectual human capital on the rm's market value, or in other
words, using rm market as a measure of innovation returns of the rm's intellectual human
capital, relies on the fact that publicly traded corporations are bundles of assets (both
tangible and intangible) whose values are determined every day in the nancial markets.
The typical model of market value hypothesizes that the market value of a rm is a function
of the set of assets that it comprises:
C = G(a1 ; a2 ; a3 ; :::)

(1)

where C is the rm's market value, a ; a ,... are various assets the rm invests in and G is
unknown function that describes how the assets combine to create value. If the rm follows
value-maximizing behaviors and the stock market is eÆcient, then the function G will be
the value function. In empirical study, the biggest problem associated with this approach is
that the functional form of equation (1) is unknown. It is not easy to compute it in closed
form if one assumes a realistic pro t- maximizing approach for the rm. Most empirical
study on this line of research has to fall back on fairly ad hoc functions, such as linear or
Cobb-Douglas (linear in logs).
In this paper, we aim to nd a near-structural model, which is able to capture the
technological innovation nature of high-tech rms. We think this endeavor is able to overcome
the naivete of making ad hoc assumptions about the functional form, G; it is also important
to help people precisely measure the returns of innovative activities.
In this section we lay out the basic model and then derive the general pricing equation
based on our model.
1

2

6

2.1

The Model

Considering the R&D intensive nature and the importance of intangible assets per se in
high-tech industries, we de ne a high-tech rm's valued asset as follows:
V (t) = A(t) + S (t);

(2)

where A(t) is the value of the rm's tangible assets at time t and S(t) is the value of the
rm's intangible assets (this could be proxied by the rm's discounted cumulative R&D
expenditures ) at time t. V(t) in the above equation is the value of the rm's valued assets.
It captures the total value of the rm's assets that are valued by the rm's shareholders.
A recent article shows that the correlation between a rm's share price and its book value
of equity has dropped from 0.9 in the 60s to about 0.5 in recent years. This demonstrates
that the investors not only value the rm's physical assets, but also value the rm's other
forms of assets when they make their investment decisions. we think the V(t) we de ne
above is able to capture this story. Note that in equation (2), and can be thought as the
shadow prices of the rm's tangible assets and intangible assets, respectively. They capture
the weights the investors put on the rm's assets when they value the rm. Both and in
equation (2) are structural parameters in our model, so we believe them to be stable over
time.
We follow the standard practice and specify from the outset a stochastic structure under a
risk-neutral probability measure. The existence of this measure is equivalent to the absence
of free lunches, and it allows us to value future risky payo as if the economy were riskneutral. We pre-specify that the rm's valued asset, V(t), evolves according to the following
process:
p
dV (t)
=
(
R(t) J )dt + dz (t) + J (t)dq (t);
(3)
V (t)
7

8

and

ln[1 + J (t)]  N (ln[1 + J ] 21 J ; J );
2

7

2

(4)

where:
R(t) is the time{t instantaneous spot interest rate;
 is the frequency of jumps per year (jump intensity);
 is the di usion component of the rm's return variance (conditional on no jump occurring);
z(t) is a standard Brownian motion;
J(t) is the percentage jump size (conditional on jump occurring) that is lognormally, identically, and independently distributed over time, with unconditional mean J . The standard
deviation of ln[1 + J (t)] is J ;
q(t) is a Poisson jump counter with intensity , that is, P rob[dq(t) = 1] = dt and
P rob[dq (t) = 0] = 1 dt. We also assume the probability of more than one jump is
P rob[dq (t)  2] = Æ(dt), where a function f (h) is Æ(h) if limh! f hh = 0;
Note that J also captures the dispersion of jump size.
We further assume
 =  +  X;
(5)
0

0

( )

1

where X is the rm speci c intellectual human capital measure. By making this assumption,
we relate the probability or frequency of jump occurring to the rm's intellectual human
capital measure. As we will explain in Section 3, when we estimate the implicit parameters
of the model, we de ne X to be the square root of the number of ties to star scientists (
1
X = ties 2 ). This type of concave relationship captures the decreasing e ect of the rm's
intellectual human capital on the probability of technological innovation.
An intuitive interpretation of above process is the following. Most of the time, the rm's
total valued assets evolve smoothly, but jumps occur occasionally. The frequency of a jump
occurring is endogenously determined by the rm's intellectual human capital state| X in
our model. Thus, the above model is able to capture the "technologically innovative" nature
of high-tech industries.
Since we specify our model under risk neutral probability measure,  in above model is
not the actual jump intensity. It is the jump intensity under the risk neutral probability
8

adjustment; similarly, J does not capture the actual jump size either. What it captures is
the risk adjusted jump size. It is important to realize that the exogenous valuation framework
given above can be derived from a general equilibrium in which all risks are rewarded. Bates
(1991, 1996) demonstrate how risk premiums for each factor could be derived from a general
equilibrium model.
In our model, the jump risks related to the rm's intellectual human capital have both
systematic and unsystematic components. So the risk premium for each risk factor is not
zero. We are not specifying them in our model, but they have been implicitly internalized in
the stochastic structure. The shortcoming of our approach is that the sign and magnitude
of jump intensity or jump size may be counter-intuitive, given that what they capture are
intensity and size under risk-neutral probability measure. The advantage of this approach
is that we do not need to worry about how risk factors interact with each other; So we can
just focus on whether there is a jump occurring and how the jump a ects the rm's market
value. Given the purpose of our study, the above modeling speci cations are appropriate.
As Merton (1974) and many other researchers have pointed out, a rm's equity market
value could be regarded as a European call option written on the the rm's valued assets with
strike price equal to the rm's outstanding debt level and maturity equal to the maturity of
the rm's debt. The idea is as follows. If the value of the rm's valued assets is less than the
level of debt, then the rm has to go bankrupt and the shareholders get nothing. Since the
shareholders get the di erence between the rm's valued assets and the portion that goes
to debtsholders. Therefore, the rm's equity market value has all the characteristics of a
European call option and we can value the rm's equity market value in a option-pricing
framework.
We have:
C (t;  ) = e R E (max(V (t +  ) D(t); 0);
(6)
9

10

where V (t +  ) is the value of the rm's valued assets at time t +  ,D(t)is the rm's debt
level at time t,  is the maturity of rm's debt, and C (t;  ) is the price of the European
9

option and it measures the rm's equity market value in our model. Note that in equation
(6), E is the expectations operator with respect to the risk-neutral probability measure.
Equation (2); (3); (4); (5); (6) summarize the model we use to calculate the rm's market
valuation. In the above model, the rm's market valuation is related to its intellectual
human capital state through the jump component that appears in the dynamics of the rm's
valued assets. This captures the fact that frontier discoveries in science and technology and
subsequent commercialization made possible by the rm-speci c intellectual human capital
(great scientists, great ideas, etc.) have dramatically changed the high-tech industries.
The model we propose above could be seen as a near-structural model. Even though the
functional form of G in equation (1) is still based on some assumptions, we argue that the assumptions we made in above model are appropriate in the R&D intensive and technologically
innovative environment we are studying in this paper.
2.2

The Solution to the Model

In this subsection, we provide the solution to the model.
Applying the Generalized Ito's Lemma, we know a European call option written on the
rm's valued asset with strike price D and term to expiration  could be solved through the
following Partial Di erential Equation (PDE):
@C 1 @ C @C
+ 2  @V @ RC
0 = (R J 12 ) @V
+IE[C (t; ; V (1 + J ); X ) C (t; ; V; X )];
(7)
2

2

subject to C (t;  ) = maxfV (t +  ) D(t); 0g.
Note that in equation (7), we assume that the risk{free spot interest rate, R(t), and the
volatility of the return of the rm's valued assets, , are deterministic. This will reduce the
complexity of our model dramatically and will not change the results qualitatively.
By analogy with the Black-Scholes formula, we guess a solution of the form
C (t;  ) = V (t)P1

10

D(t)e

R

P2 ;

(8)

where the rst term is the present value of the rm's valued assets upon optimal exercise,
and the second term is the present value of the strike price payment. Both terms have to
satisfy the original PDE (7).
In Appendix A, it is shown that the formula for the price of the European call option is
as follows:
C (t;  ) = V (t) (t; ; V; X ) D(t)e R  (t; ; V; X );
(9)
1

2

where the risk-neutral probabilities,  and  , are recovered from inverting the respective
characteristic functions:
i D f (t; ; V; X )
1
]d;
(10)
 (t; V; X;  ) = 21 + 1 Re[ e
i
and
i D f (t; ; V; X )
1
]d:
(11)
 (t; V; X;  ) = 21 + 1 Re[ e
i
From Appendix A, we also know:
1

11

2

Z

1

ln[

]

ln[

]

1

0

Z

2

2

0

f1 (t; ; V; X ) = expf[[0 (1 + J )[(1 + J )i e 2 (i+1)J
i

2

1]  J (i + 1)
0

+Ri + 21 i(i + 1)] + [[ (1 + J )[(1 + J )i
1

i

2

e 2 (i+1)J

1]  J (i + 1)]X + ln(V )ig
1

(12)

and
f2 (t; ; V; X ) = expf[R(i + 1) + 0 [(1 + J )i e 2 (i
i

+ 12 i(i 1)]

+ [(1 + J )ie i2 i
(

1

+ ln(V )i R g

2
1)J

2
1)J

1 J i]

1 J i]X
(13)

Equations(9){(13) provide the solution to the European call option. As discussed above,
the price of this European call option is the same as the rm's market valuation if we take
11

the rm's equity as a call option written on its valued assets with exercise price equal to its
debt level. Therefore, if we can estimate the implicit parameters ( ; ; J ; ; J ;  ;  ) in
above equations, then we are able to use this formula to estimate the rm's market value.
But rst, we use the actual data to estimate the model and to test whether our model is
correctly speci ed.
2

3

0

1

Data

This section contains the details on how we construct the data sets for our empirical
study. In this paper, we speci cally focus on the biotechnology industry. The reasons are as
follows:
 The formation and development of biotechnology industry have been largely determined by endowment of intellectual human capital speci c to biotechnology (Zucker,
Darby and Brewer (1998), Zucker, Darby and Armstrong (1998)). The biotechnology
industry is an excellent study eld for economists seeking to understand how intellectual human capital a ects high-tech industry formation and each rm within the
industry;

 As a relatively new industry, biotech has witnessed very active IPO activities. More
than 100 biotech companies have gone public during 1979{ 1992. For each public rm,
accounting and much other rm-speci c data have been archived in public databases
such as COMPUSTAT and CRSP. This equips us with a relatively complete sample
compared to other high-tech elds, especially, when we study the rm's stock market
performance. Figure 1 graphs the biotech rms' birth and IPO activities from 1979 to
1992;
12

 Numerous empirical studies about the biotech industry have established that knowledge
assets, or intellectual human capital is crucial to the rm and the industry. However,
no studies have focused on the stock market performance of biotech rms; so our
12

study will be a good complement to previous studies. Moreover, the results obtained
from our study can be compared to those from other studies, which may deepen our
understanding about the roles played by human capital in biotech industries.
Note that even though we only consider biotech industry in this study, the same approach
can be applied to studying other high-tech industries without any diÆculty. The method
proposed in this paper can be applied to industries with the following features: (1) the rms
within this industry have substantial intangible assets which have not been valued appropriately by traditional accounting procedures; (2) the rms are competing with others in an
R&D intensive and technologically innovative environment, in which frequent technological
innovations based on the rms' intellectual capital investment can generate large "jumps"
in the value of the rms' assets.
3.1

Biotechnology Firms

We use for the starting point for our rm data set the 752 rms in Zucker, Darby, and
Brewer (1998) analysis of the adaptation of biotechnology.For these rms there are extensive
data on their intellectual cpital endowment and other variables. Some of these 752 rms are
incumbents in this industry, and for these incumbents in industries to which biotechnology is
applied such as drugs and food. For these incumbents biotechnology is often a small part of
the total value of the rms. In order to focus on the in uence on the rm's stock performance
of innovations in biotechnology, we limit our sample to the 511 entrant rms that were born
after 1975, the "new biotechnology rms". Moreover, in this study, we only consider the
rms that have gone IPO. We are able to identify 156 IPOs during 1979-1992 period, but
we can only nd records for 129 of these public rms in the COMPUSTAT database. For
those 129 rms, we retrieved such data as number of outstanding shares, closing stock price,
total assets, physical assets, and debts with di erent maturities.

13

3.2

Measures of Intellectual Human Capital

Given the purpose of our study, intellectual human capital is the key explanatory variable.
In this paper, we measure a biotech rm's intellectual human capital by counting the number
of links or aÆliations a rm has to the star scientists. The Data Appendix contains the
detailed information about how Zucker, Darby, and Brewer (1998) de ned star scientist and
why we think this variable is a reasonable measure of the biotech rm's intellectual human
capital state.
After they identi ed the star scientist, they hand-collected the 4,061 articles authored
by stars and listed in GenBank and recorded the institutional aÆliations of the stars and
their co-authors on each of these articles. These co-authors are called collaborators if they
are not themselves a star. We then de ne aÆliations as the number of articles authored by
star scientists aÆliated with the rm and links as the number of articles by non-aÆliated
star scientists writing with one or more rm aÆliated collaborators as de ned above. We
use ties | the sum of aÆliations and links to star scientists as the measure for intellectual
human capital speci c to biotechnology.
In future work we will explore whether or not other measures, such as the number of
patents the rm issues, the number of patent citations, and the rm's scienti c citations,
could also capture rm speci c intellectual human capital.
13

3.3

Other Variables

In this study, we also use some other variables taken from the data sets Zucker and Darby
have constructed for their on-going project on "Intellectual Capital, Technology Transfer, and
The Organization of Leading-Edge Industries: Biotechnology". A full description of the data
and how they are organized can be found in the Data Appendix. Brie y speaking, a dummy
variable RTECH captures whether a rm uses recombinant DNA technology. Based on the
U.S. Patent OÆce biotechnology CD{ROM, we have counts of the number of patents granted
to the rm by year they are granted and by the year in which they were applied for. We call
14

them Patentg and Patenta, respectively. Also, in order to control for the e ects of technology
spillover, we count the number of top-quality universities with bioscience programs in the
same region as the rm and name it Qual1. From the Venture Economics database, we are
able to obtain how many venture capital rounds the rm has received in certain year, the
dollar amount of each injection, the stage of venture capital injection. We use NVC to denote
the number of rounds and AVC to denote the dollar amount of venture capital injection in
each year. We also have the number of research grants and dollar amount of each grant
awarded to the rm under the Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Program of the
federal government. We use Grants to denote the number of grants the rm obtain in certain
year. Table 1 and the Data Appendix contain more information about the data sources and
how they are de ned. The biotech companies' accounting and nancial information are
obtain from Standard & Poor's COMPUSTAT data base. The variables used in our study
include: the observed market value of the rm (C), the debt level (D), the maturity of the
rm's debt ( ), total book value of the assets (A), cumulative R&D expenditures (S),
and the age of the rm (Firmage). Data Appendix B details how we de ne each variable. A
full list of the variables used in our empirical study could be found in Table 1.
14

4

15

Structural Parameter Estimation and Tests of
Hypothesis

In this section, we estimate the structural parameters implicit in our model. Based on
that, we test the key hypothesis of this paper: Is the actual data from biotech industry able
to provide evidence on the discontinuities in the rms' market valuation which could be
attributed to star scientists' innovative activities?
4.1

Econometric Method

In Section 2, we explain the logic of taking the rm's equity market value as a European
15

call option written on the rm's valued assets. We also derived the pricing formula for
this call option under risk neutral probability measure. In applying option pricing models
to estimate the e ects of intellectual human capital on rm's market value, one always
encounters the diÆculties that the structural parameters are unobservable. In our model,
the spot volatility of rm's value assets (conditional on no jump), ; the jump{related
parameters ( ;  ; J ; J ), the shadow prices of the rm's tangible assets and intangible
assets, ( ; ), need to be estimated. In principle, one can use econometric methods such
as maximum likelihood method (MLE) or the generalized method of moments (GMM) to
obtain the structural parameter estimates. In this paper, we employ GMM by adapting the
following steps:
Step 1. First, we treat the
rm's market valuation as a European call option written on
its valued assets with strike price equal to the debt level. Since the rm normally issues
debts with di erent maturities, we cannot simply sum all of rm's debts and assign a date of
maturity to it. Here, we compute the rm's total debt level by calculating the present value
of the di erent types of debts. In other words, we discount the debts that will be mature
in the future by using short-run risk-free interest rate. The rm's maturity is calculated
as the McCauley Duration of the rm's debts, as we explained in Section 3. Intuitively, it
could be understood as the weighted average of the maturities of the rm's di erent types of
debts. We stack the observations. Note that with an average of only 3.9 annual observations
per rm, we do not attempt to estimate time-series e ects and treat each observation as if
an individual rm. We believe that this approach is appropriate because in our study we
only address the fundamental factors that in uence the rm's market value. The structural
parameters in our model are expected to be relatively stable over time. Also, the time-series
e ects, if there are any, may be controlled for by the instantaneous risk free interest rate,
the age of the rm, and other variables that relate to the passage of time.
In our empirical study, we intentionally drop the observations with total assets (in 1984
US dollars) less than $15 million. The main reason is that the intellectual human capital
0

1

2

16

measure used in our study is a more appropriate measure of intellectual human capital for the
large rms. We identi ed the star scientists by counting the articles published up to 1990.
Using the article counts to identify the rm's ties to star scientists provides a downward
bias for the rms that were born late, because those rms may have been formed by young
scientists who have little chance to be star scientist as de ned in our paper. Most of the
small rms dropped from our sample were born in recent years. Including them in our
sample may create noise when estimating the model. In addition, some of those small rms
have very abnormal stock market behaviors, which we attribute to the well-documented size
e ect in the empirical nance literature. One possibility is that small rms have some risks
which have not been observed by investors. In our study, since we cannot control those
unobservable risk factors, it is acceptable to drop the small rms from our sample. Another
rationale of dropping small rms is the availability of information. Larger rms are likely
to be tracked by more and better analysts. They are also more likely to be scrutinized in
the media. Thus, the value of rm-speci c knowledge assets could be incorporated into the
rm's fundemental value more eÆciently. In this sense, our model is more appropriate for
rms with larger size and longer history.
For each of the 343 observations for 90 biotech companies, we calculate the debt level,
D, and corresponding maturity  , and count the number of star scientists ties the rm has.
Based on this, we calculate the theoretical market value for the rm's equity by using equations (9){(13). In other words, we calculate Ci(t; i; Xi; Di; Vi). Let Ci be the observed
market value for observation i, calculated by multiplying the closing stock price by the number of outstanding shares. The di erence between Ci and Ci(t; i; Di; Vi) is a function of the
values taken by Xi, Ai, Si, Di, i , R(t), and by = ( ; ; J ; J ; ;  ;  ). For each i, de ne
16

17

2

i [ ] = Ci

0

Ci (t; i ; Di ; Vi ; Xi );

1

(14)

where i denotes the absolute estimation error of our model.
Step 2. We use the Generalized Methods of Moment (GMM)
to estimate the implicit
18

17

structural parameters in our model. We assume that our model is correctly speci ed, thus
we have
E [] = 0:
(15)
We assume that
E [ ] = ;

(16)

0

where is unrestricted. Suppose now for each observation, i, we observe a vector of J variables, zi , such that zi is uncorrelated with i. The assumptions imply a set of orthogonality
conditions:
E [zi i ] = 0;
(17)
which constitute the moment conditions in our study. It is straightforward that the sample
moments will be
1 z
(18)
m=
i i
n

X
i

For our model, we assume that the weighted matrix has the following form:
WGMM =

X X z z Cov[  ]
n
1 X X z z Cov[(C 
1

2

= n

0

i

j

i j

i j

0

2

i

j

i j

The minimum distance estimator will be the

i



Ci )(Cj

(19)

that minimizes

q = m(  )0 W 1 m(  )
4.2

Cj )]

(20)

Estimation and Results

When implementing above procedures, we assume the set of instrumental variables, z,
consists of the following variables:
 rm-speci c ties to star scientist, Ties;

 the rm's total assets, A;
18

 the rm's discounted cumulative R&D expenditures, S;
 the counts of granted patents by their application dates, Patenta;
 dummy variable whether the rm applies recombinant DNA technology, Rtech;
 the number of top biotech related programs in the same region as the rm, QUAL1;
 the number of venture capital rounds the rm receives, NVC;
 the years that the rm has been practicing biotechnology, Firmage;
 the number of research grants from SBIR, Grants;
 the rm's debet level, D;
 constant.
Table 2 contains sample statistics for those variables. If our model is correctly speci ed,
we expect that "Ties" captures the value of the rm's knowledge based assets. In that case,
we claim that the regressors we de ned above will be orthogonal to the error term. Note that
we have 7 unknown parameters needed to be estimated and we have 11 moment conditions.
Our objective function (20) is obviously non-linear.
We use the Davidson{Fletcher{Powell (DFP) algorithm to estimate the implicit parameter vector . There are two reasons that DFP algorithm is attractive in our study: (1). DFP
algorithm has very strong convergence ability, which is very important for our parameter
estimation; (2). When we do the iteration, we have to update the Hessian Matrix, H. In
most algorithms, this means that we need to calculate the second-order derivatives of our
objective function (20) with respect to the implicit parameters. It is a very demanding task
given the complexity of the objective function we have. Using DFP actually avoids this
problem.
We adopt the sequential optimization techniques in our estimation. We start from certain starting values and then use DFP algorithm and GMM to estimate the parameters.
19

After they converge, we use those estimated values as the starting values and repeat above
procedure. We repeat this process until we cannot improve the estimates any more. All
programs are written in MATLAB. Normally, it takes 7-18 hours to nish one convergence
on a devoted Sun workstation. The nal results of the estimates are reported in Table 3.
Panel A of Table 3reports the estimates of the unrestricted model. Obviously, all coeÆcients are signi cant. However, let us focus on jump-related parameters:  ;  ; J ; J .  is
signi cant, which implies that the probability of jump occurring is positively related to the
rm's intellectual human capital measure. Note that the estimated value of J in our model
is negative, which is counter-intuitive in sign. But consider the factor that we start our
model from a risk neutral probability framework, so J here doesn't capture the real jump
size, it only captures the adjusted jump size which already incorporates the risk premium of
jump risk.
We use the method proposed by Newy and West (1987) to test our main hypotheses:
0

1

2

1

H0 : 1 = 0;

(21)

H1 : 0 = 1 = 0:

(22)

and
First, we want to test whether there are discontinuities in biotech companies' market
value. In other words, whether our suggested model in Section 2 is correctly speci ed.
Newey and West(1987) devise a counterpart of LR test in GMM framework. By applying
the same weighted matrix, W, to both unrestricted model and restricted model, we get the
minimum distances de ned in (20) for both models. The di erence between these two should
follow a  distribution with degree of freedom equal to the number of restrictions imposed
if H holds. From Panel C of Table 3, it is easy to see that the di erence between those
two is 30.9. If H holds, it should follow a  distribution with degree of freedom equal to
4. Obviously, H should be rejected. This means that discontinuities in biotech companies'
market value actually exist.
2

1

1

2

1

20

Then, we try to gure out what cause those jumps. We attribute those jumps in the
rm's market valuation to the intellectual human capital speci c to biotechnology owned by
each rm. The argument is straightforward: with that valuable intellectual human capital,
the biotech rm is able to make frontier technological innovations more frequently and then
convert those innovations to pecuniary bene ts by commercializing them. From the investors'
perspective, they always face the possibility that the rm's future cash ows may have a
dramatic upward shift due to its intellectual human capital, which will be re ected in their
valuation of the rm's assets. This will be embodied in their market behavior. So we argue
that a rm's stock market performance should re ect investors' expectation based on the
rm's intellectual human capital as well as news about outcomes of the R&D. We use the
same method as above to test this hypothesis. As Panel B of Table 3 shows, the di erence
between the minimum distances for the unrestricted model and restricted model (under
hypothesis H ) is 16.8 . If H holds, this di erence should follow a  distribution with
degree of freedom 1. H is rejected, con rming that more intellectual capital increases the
frequency of stock price jumps.
A few other interesting results can be obtained from Table 3. From Panel A, note that
= 0:8131, which means investors value high-tech rm's R&D stock; We also nd that
> if we consider jump risk related to rm's intellectual human capital measure. This
implies that the investors, when evaluating the rm's value, put a higher weight on the
rm's tangible assets. In terms of rm's intangible assets, investors do care about them,
but more cautiously. We think the investors care more about the quality of rm intangible
assets instead of only considering the quantity. We con rm this argument by interpreting the
results from the estimation of the restricted model. Once we assume away intellectual human
capital related jump risks, we nd that the coeÆcient for intangible assets , , increases to
2.74 (from Panel C of Table 3), which exceeds the shadow price of the rm's tangible assets,
. With the explanatory power of star-scientist related jump has shifted into , which
makes intangible assets more important. We argue that di erent types of intangible assets
0

2

0

0

21

(i.e. R&D stock, ties to star scientist) play subtly di erent roles in determining the rm's
market value.
As noted in Section 3, R&D stock may be a noisy measure of the rm's intangible assets.
Some researchers have used R&D expenditures as the proxy for intangible assets. In Table 4,
we use R&D expenditures instead of R&D stock as the proxy for S in our model. The story
remains. Now, we notice that has increased to 1.87. In other words, the shadow price of
R&D expenditures has increased to 1.87. This magnitude is consistent with the results from
other research.
19

5
5.1

Further Empirical Analysis
Robustness Analysis of the Model

When applying the option pricing model to value certain assets, we should check whether
the model used is correctly speci ed. In other words, we need to check whether it misprices
the asset. Our model captures the innovative nature of high-tech companies, it also captures
the subtle role played by the rm's intellectual human capital measure. The empirical results
in Section 4 also reject the hypotheses that there are no jumps and no intellectual human
capital related jumps in the rm's market valuation.
In this subsection, we study our model's in-sample pricing t. Speci cally, for the model
we propose, we estimate its implicit parameters. We then plug those parameters into the
model to calculate the rm's model value. By comparing the observed market value and the
model market value, we are able to obtain our model's pricing error. In order to allow for
di erences in size of the rms, we use percentage price error as a more appropriate measure
of the model's pricing error. We de ne the pricing error as " Per", where
P er =

observed market value model value
:
observed market value

(23)

If our model is correctly speci ed, we should expect that the remaining pricing errors
22

of our model, Per, to be uncorrelated with the main explanatory variables in our model
estimation. Panel A of Table 5 provides the results of the correlation analysis. In Panel
A, it is easy to see that the rm's observed market value, MKV, are signi cantly correlated
with most of the explanatory variables. Especially, we observe that it is correlated with
ties to star scientists, number of patents by application dates, R&D stock, the dummy
variable for whether the rm applies rDNA technology, the years the rm has been practicing
biotechnology, number of top universities with biotech related programs in the same region
as the rm. We have used those variables as the measures of the rm's knowledge assets.
However, if our model is correctly speci ed, then the percentage price errors, Per, should be
uncorrelated with the variables we described above. Panel A con rms that the model passes
this speci cation test.
To further understand the structure of remaining pricing errors, we conduct a regression
analysis to study the association between the errors and the factors that are either marketcondition dependent or rm-speci c. Empirical studies of option pricing generally nd that
the pricing errors are related to the moneyness of the option contract. Here, moneyness is
a variable used to measure how deep in or how deep out of the money the option is. In
this paper, strike price is the debt level, D. And the underlying asset price is de ned as the
valued asset, V = A + S . We de ne DV as the moneyness in our model. Since most of
our observations are deep in the money options, we expect moneyness should explain some
of the remaining pricing errors. Also, we have assumed that the structural parameters in
our model are stable over time, but in fact they may be a ected by overall stock market
situations in di erent years. We create year dummies and expect that they should have some
explanatory power. We run this regression below for the entire sample:
P eri =

0

+

+ MONEY NESSi +
1

13

20

2

12

Y EARDUMMIES

OT HER V ARIABLESi + i ;

(24)

where OTHER VARIABLES in above regression include the natural logarithm of the rm's
total assets, the natural logarithm of the rm's R&D stock, ties to star scientist, patents
23

by application dates, dummy if the rm applies rDNA technology, the years the rm has
been doing biotechnology, number of venture capital rounds, and top universities in the
same region. Panel B of Table 5 reports the regression results based on the whole sample.
Not surprisingly, the pricing errors from our model have some systematic moneyness, and
year related components. In contrast, the percentage pricing errors are not signi cantly
related to any of the knowledge assets variables and nor to log(total assets) or log(R&D
stock). A natural implication is that our model already captures the explaining power of
those variables, so nothing is left in the remaining pricing errors.
For comparison, in Panel B of Table 5, we also include the regression results of using
log(market value) as the dependent variable. Based on the analyses reported in Table 5, we
think our model is well speci ed.
5.2

Sensitivity Analysis

Empirical evidence shows that the deviation of the rm's stock price from the book
value of its assets has increased in recent years. This change has been attributed to everincreasing important roles played by the rm's intangible assets, especially technological
know-how, in determining the rm's market value. Evidence from biotech industry, semiconductor industry and other high-tech industries already prove this point. Our empirical
study provides convincing evidence that the investors do appreciate the intellectual human
capital speci c to biotechnology owned by biotech rms. Investors' stakes as measured by
market value are signi cantly higher for rms with more star ties. A natural question is how
big is this e ect. In answering that, the approach we use in our empirical study is shown to
be a new method to value such intangible assets as technology know-how.
Table 6 reports the results from sensitivity analysis for biotech rms with di erent size.
Take a biotech rm that has no star ties but otherwise has the industry average values for
all its variables as the example. Concretely, this rm has $81.56 million in total assets.
Its R&D stock is valued at $34.36 million. The rm's overall debt level is $10.71 million,
24

and the average maturity of its debts is 1.27 years. Here, we also assume that the annual
risk-free interest rate is 6%. Based on above assumptions, we nd that this rm's market
value derived from our model will be $200.94 million. Consider the e ect of increasing the
number of its ties to star scientists, our key intellectual human capital measure. As the rm
gains access to star scientists, its estimated market value will be improved dramatically. As
shown in Table 6, the rst tied article with a star scientist will bring about a 15.73 million
1984 US dollar increase in the rm's market value, which accounts for almost 7.3% of the
rm's total market value. This result is very striking given the fact that a lot of factors are
actually a ecting the rm's market value. We think this magnitude is reasonable considering
the increased probability of technological innovation brought by this star scientist. He or
she not only is able to bring new research achievements to the rms, but also able to point
out promising directions, which other scientists of the rm can follow. Further, there is a
signi cant reputation e ect: having some big names on the list of the rm's research team
makes it easier for the rm to attract more talented scientists.
As we increase the number of ties, we nd that the rm's market value keeps on increasing
(as reported in Table 6). We also notice that the marginal increase of the market value
brought by links or aÆliations to star scientists goes down gradually as the number of star
scientist ties increases. Algebraically, this is implied by the concave relationship between
jump intensity and intellectual human capital measure we assumed in our model. Figure 2
and gure 3 demonstrate this graphically. In sum, the market value results are consistent
with declining marginal product as star ties increase and other factors held constant.
The approach used in our empirical study provides a possible way of pricing star scientists.
We can value the importance of a star scientist by considering the contribution they may
make to the rm's market value. Traditional accounting procedures fail to capture the
"tangible" value of the rm's intangible assets, especially knowledge assets. The methodology
employed in our study, however, values a rm's intangible assets by taking into account their
contribution to the rm's market value.
25

Our results have some other interesting implications. Financial economists have made
a great deal of e orts to test CAPM. Most empirical evidence runs against CAPM. It has
been gradually accepted in academic that rm's systematic risk ( ) fails to explain the crosssectional di erence in the rms' stock return (or more generally, stock market performance).
The recent literature has tried to use size, industry factors, unrecognized sources of risk, etc.
to explain the deviation from CAPM model. Our empirical study demonstrates that in hightech industries, rm-speci c intellectual human capital measures have signi cant power to
explain the rm's stock market performance. For example, in this paper, we nd ties to star
scientists increases the rm's expected market value. We believe other intellectual human
capital measures (such as patents, the citations to the rm's patents by other patents) should
also a ect the rm's changes in market value. This paper provides some insights for those
nancial economists who are struggling to gure out the "fundamental values" of the rm's
assets. Our future research will focus on these issues, especially whether there exists an
intellectual human capital index which re ects investors' valuation of the rm's knowledge
assets.

6

summary and discussion

Intellectual human capital measured by star ties has been demonstrated previously as a
crucial factor that a ects high-tech companies' entry and potential for future success. In this
paper, we propose a methodology to study whether those intellectual human capital measures
have the same e ects on rm's stock market performance. By using the data constructed
for the biotechnology industry, we are able to identify discontinuities in biotech companies'
market valuation. We attribute these discontinuities to more frequent technological advance
due to more rm-speci c intellectual human capital. Since investors know how crucial those
intellectual capital measures are for the rm's success, they include these intellectual human
capital measures in their valuation process. Our empirical study provides very convincing
evidence.
26

The approach we used in this paper can also be generalized to value other types of
intangible assets, especially when they have the same sort of "innovative" nature involved.
We believe our approach provides a method to value rm's intangible assets, an issue on
which traditional accounting theory provides little guidance.
Our empirical results also have implications for a widely argued issue: whether CAPM
holds? Our study demonstrates that at least we can identify some rm-speci c source which
can explain rm's stock market performance. Our paper doesn't tackle this issue directly,
but it provides convincing evidence that intellectual human capital measures are able to
explain some cross-sectional di erences in rms' stock market performance.
In our paper, we are not able to test whether other intellectual human capital measures
have the same e ect. Also, we only look at evidence obtained from biotechnology industry
due to the constraints of the data sets we have. Studying other intellectual human capital
measures and applying the same approach to other industries are on our future research
agenda. We want to compare how di erent measures capture investors' notice and whether
there exists some industry-speci c factors which have the same e ects as the e ects we
discovered with star scientists.
Last, but not least, in our study, we take the rm-speci c intellectual human capital
measure, ties to star scientist, as exogenously given. This is consistent with the view that they
largely measure the quality of the scientist-entrepreneurs who start the rm and determine
its technological identity. An alternative model would make star ties endogenously chosen by
rms that are trying to maximize the bene ts attached to that intellectual human capital.
In other words, the rms will also take into account the e ects of intellectual human capital
on their stock prices when they decide whether they are going to increase their investment
in obtaining more advanced technology. Our future work should address this issue.

27

References
Asea, P. and Ncube, M. (1998) Heterogeneous Information Arrival and Option Pricing,
Journal of Econometrics, Vol. 83, No. 1/2,291{323.
Bakshi, G., Cao, C. and Chen, Z. (1997) Empirical Performance of Alternative Option
Pricing Models, Journal of Finance, Vol. 52, No.5, 2003{2049.
Bates, D. (1996) Jumps and Stochastic Volatility: Exchange Rate Processes Implicit in
Deutschmark Options, Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 9, 69{108.
Bioscan, Volume 2{8, 1988{1994.
Black, F. and Scholes, M. (1973) The Pricing of Options and Corporate Liabilities, Journal
of Political Economy 81,637{659.
Cetus Corp. (1986) Biotechnology Company Data Base, printout of predecessor source for
Bioscan, Emeryville, CA: Cetus Corp.
Cockburn, Iain and Zvi Griliches (1987) Industry E ects and Appropriability Measures in
the Stock Market's Valuation of R&D and Patents, American Economic Review Vol.78,
419-423.
Cox, J., Ingersoll, J. and Ross, S. (1985a) An Intertemporal General Equilibrium Model of
Asset Prices, Econometrica, Vol. 53, 363{384.
Cox, J., Ingersoll, J. and Ross, S. (1985b) A Theory of the Term Structure of Interest Rates,
Econometrica, Vol. 53, 385{408.
Cox, J., and Ross, S. (1976) The Valuation of Options For Alternative Stochastic Processes,
Journal of Financial Economics 3, 145{166.
Demsetz, Harold (1988) The Theory of Firm Revisited,Journal of Law, Economics, and
Organization, Spring 1988, 141{161.
DuÆe, D. (1996) Dynamic Asset Pricing Theory, Princeton University Press.
Durrett, R. (1991) Probability: Theory and Examples, Brooks/Cole Publishing Company,
Wadsworth, Inc.
Durrett, R. (1996) Stochastic Calculus, CRC Press.
28

Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneeth R. French (1992) The Cross-Section of Expected Stock
Returns, Journal of Finance, Vol. XLVII, 427{465.
Friedman, A. (1975) Stochastic Di erential Equations and Applications Volume 1, Academic
Press.
Genbank, Release65.0, machine readable data base, Palo Alto, CA: IntelliGentics, Inc.,
September 1990.
Griliches, Zvi (1981) Market Value, R&D, and Patents, Economic Letter 7: 183-187.
Griliches, Zvi(1990) Patent Statistics as Economic Indicators: A Survey, Journal of Economic Literature 28, 1661{1707.
Hall, Bronwyn H. (1993) The stock Market Valuation of R&D Investment during the 1980s,
American Economic Review 83: 259-264.
Hall, Bronwyn H. (1999)Innovation and Market Value, NBER Working Paper No. 6984.
Hansen, L. (1982) Large Sample Properties of Gerneralized Method of Moments Estimators,
Econometrica, 50, 1029{1054.
Heston, S. (1993) A Closed{Form Solution for Options with Stochastic Volatility with Application to Bond and Currency Options, Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 6, 327{343.
Ja e, Adam(1986) Technological Opportunity and Spillovers of R&D: Evidence from Firms'
Patents, Pro ts, and Market Value, American Economic Review 76: 984-1001
Merton, R. (1976) Option Pricing When Underlying Stock Returns Are Discontinuous, Journal of Financial Economics, Vol.3, 125{144.
Newey, W. (1984) A Method of Moments Interpretation of Sequential Estimators, Economics
Letter, 14: 201-206.
Newey, W. and K. West (1987) Hypothesis Testing with EÆcient Method of Moments Estimation, International Economic Review, 80:777-787.
Pakes, Ariel (1985) On Patents, R&D, and the Stock Market Rate of Return, Journal of
Political Economy 93: 390-409.
Romer, Paul (1990) Endogenous Technological Change, Journal of Political Economy, S7129

S102.
Trajtenberg, Manuel (1990) A Penny for Your Quotes: Patent Citations and the Value of
Innovations, Rand Journal of Economics 21(1):172-187.
Zucker, Lynne G., and Michael R. Darby (1996) Star Scientists and Institutional Transformation: Patterns of Invention and Innovation in the Formation of the Biotechnology
Industry, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, November 12, 1996, 93(23):
12,709{12,716.
Zucker,Lynne G.,Darby, Michael, and Brewer, Marilynn (1998) Intellectual Capital and the
birth of U.S. Biotechnology Enterprises, American Economic Review, March 1998.
Zucker, Lynne G., Darby, Michael, and Armstrong, Je (1998) Intellectual Capital and
The Firm: the Technology of Geographically Localized Knowledge Spillovers, Economic
Inquiry, 1998.
Zucker, Lynne G., and Michael R. Darby (1998) Entrepreneurs, Star Scientists and Biotechnology, NBER Reporter, Fall 1998, 7{10.

30

</ref_section>

Endnotes

1. See, for example, Zucker and Darby (1996, 1998), Zucker, Darby, and Brewer (1998) and
Zucker, Darby, and Armstrong (1998).
2. As in Zucker, Darby, and Armstrong (1998), the biotech rms ties to star scientists as
indicated by aÆliateions listed on their genetic-sequence- discovery publications is used as
the measure of the rm's intellectual human capital state. The de nition of star scientists
is laid out in the Data Appendix.
3. Those stars have been very productive. Even though 327 stars are only 0.75 of one percent
of the authors in Genbank(1990), they accounted for 17.3 percent of the published articles,
almost 22 times as many articles as the average scientist.
4. As a recent article in the Wall Street Journal (February 21, 1999) argues:
: : : Market to book values are at an all time high. What are we to make of this?

Some would say the market is simply irrational. Perhaps it is. Another interpretation is that the book value shown on balance sheets doesn't re ect intangible
assets such as human capital, management information systems, software and digital distribution systems that are increasingly important in a knowledge-based
economy.
We believe that a high-tech rm's human capital plays an even more important role in explaining the rm's stock price.
5. Our paper is complementary to the strand of literature that use nancial market information to value the rm's knowledge assets. See Cockburn and Griliches (1987), Griliches
(1981), Hall (1993), Pakes (1985).
6.156 biotech rms went public during this period. However, we were only able to nd 129
rms that have records in COMPUSTAT database. Among those 129 rms, we intentionally dropped observations with total assets (in 1984 US dollars) less than $15 million. The
reasons will be explained in later section.
31

7.This, however, is a very noisy measure of the rm's intangible assets. In this paper, we
de ne di erent variables to capture intangible assets. Also, given that we have a structural
model, we are able to explore di erent roles played by di erent types of intangible assets in
our paper.
8. See " A Viking with A Compass", The Economist, June 6th, 1998.
9. Bates(1991) also shows the relationship between the actual jump components and the riskadjusted jump components. He convincingly demonstrates that the actual jump probability
normally have the same sign as the risk-adjusted jump probability, but the risk-adjusted
jump size is always downwardly biased compared to actual jump size.
10.As you will see in Section 4, in our estimates, the jump size, J , takes a negative sign. But
as shown in Bates (1991), given our parameter estimates, the jump size will take a negative
sign if we assume the investors have a preference with degree of risk aversion greater or equal
to 3. This is not an outrageous assumption at all.
11.Bates (1996), Heston (1993), Bakshi, Cao and Chen (1997) use the same approach.
12.Births are plotted 1976{1989 only because we are relying on the Zucker, Darby, and
Brewer (1998) data base for births which covers 1976{1989.
13.These variables have been validated in many studies as an appropriate proxy for a biotech
rm's intellectual human capital state. See, for example, Zucker, Darby, and Brewer (1998),
Zucker, Darby, and Armstrong (1998).
14.It is calculated as the McCauley duration of the rm's debts.
15.When we calculate the rm's cumulative R&D expenditures, we assume that the rm's
R&D investment depreciates by 15 percent annually.
16.For details about "size e ect", see Fama and French (1992), Berk (1995), Daniel and
Titman (1997).
17.A number of small rms appear to have been the short-lived results of fraudulent IPOS.
18.See Hansen (1982), Newey and West (1987)for details about GMM.
19.See Hall (1999) for a survey.
32

Appendix A: Proof of the Option Pricing Formula in Main Text

The valuation partial di erential equation (PDE) in main text can be rewritten as:
1  @ C @C RC
+
0 = (R J 12 ) @C
@L 2 @L
@
+IE[C (t; ; L + ln(1 + J ); X ) C (t; ; L; X )]
2

2

(A. 1)

where we have applied the transformation L(t) = ln V (t). Inserting the following conjectured
solution
C (t;  ) = V (t) (t; ; V; X ) De R  (t; ; V; X )
(A. 2)
1

2

into (A.1) produces the PDEs for the risk-neutralized probabilities, j , for j = 1; 2:
 + 1  @  @   
0 = (R J 12 ) @@L
J
2 @L
@
+IE[(1 + ln(1 + J )) (t; ; L + ln(1 + J ); X )  (t; ; L; X )]

(A. 3)

 + 1  @  @
0 = (R J 21 ) @@L
2 @L
@
+IE[ (t; ; L + ln(1 + J ); X )  (t; ; L; X )]

(A. 4)

2

1

1

1

1

2

1

1

and
2

2

2

2

2

2

2

Equations (A.3) and (A.4) are the Fokker-Planck forward equations for probability functions.
This implies that  and  must indeed be valid probability functions, with values bounded
between 0 and 1. These PDEs are separately solved subject to the terminal conditions
1

2

j (t + ; 0; L; X ) = 1L t

(A. 5)

ln[D];

( + )

where j = 1; 2. The corresponding characteristic functions for  and  will also satisfy
similar PDFs:
1

2

1  @ f @f  f
0 = (R J 21 ) @f
+
J
@L 2 @L
@
+IE[(1 + ln(1 + J ))f (t; L + ln(1 + J ); X;  ) f (t; L; X;  )]
2

1

1

2

1

1

1

1

33

(A. 6)

and
1  @ f @f
+
0 = (R J 12 ) @f
@L 2 @L
@
+IE[f (t; L + ln(1 + J ); X;  ) f (t; L; X;  )]
2

2

2

2

2

2

2

(A. 7)

subject to the terminal conditions
fj (t + ; 0; X ; ) = eiL(t+ ) :

(A. 8)

for j = 1; and2. Conjecture that the solutions to the PDEs (A.6) and (A.7) are respectively
given by
f (t;  ) = expfu( ) + y  ( )X (t) + i ln[V (t)]g
(A. 9)
1

and
f2 (t;  ) = expfz ( ) + yx( )X (t) + i ln[V (t)] R g

(A. 10)

with u(0) = y(0) = 0 and z(0) = yx(0) = 0. By the separation of variable technique, we
can solve the PDEs as follows:
f1 (t;  ) = expf[[0 (1 + J )[(1 + J )i e 2 (i+1)J
i

2

1]  J (i + 1)
0

+Ri + 12 i(i + 1)] + [[ (1 + J )[(1 + J )i
1

i

2

e 2 (i+1)J

1]  J (i + 1)]X + ln(V )ig
1

(A. 11)

and
f2 (t;  ) = expf[R(i + 1) + 0 [(1 + J )i e 2 (i
i

+ 12 i(i 1)]

+ [(1 + J )ie i2 i
1

(

2
1)J

+ ln(V )i R g

2
1)J

1 J i]

1 J i]X
(A. 12)

Q.E.D.
34

Appendix B: Data

In this paper, we used the data sets developed for the ongoing project on "Intellectual
Capital, Technology Transfer and the Organization of Leading-Edge Industries: The case
of Biotechnology."(Lynne G. Zucker, and Michael R. Darby, Principal Investigators). A
detailed description of the basic data sets developed for above project is presented in Zucker,
Darby and Brewer (1998). All data used in this paper will be archived upon completion of
the project in the Data Archives at the UCLA Institute for Social Science Research.

Biotechnology Firms
The starting point for our rm data set covered the industry as of April 1990 and was
purchased from NCBC(1991), a private rm which tracks the industry. An intensive e ort
was also made to supplement the NCBC data with information from Bioscan (1989 1993)
and an industry data set provided by a rm in the industry which was also the ancestor of
the Bioscan data set (Cetus Corp. 1988).
Based on above e orts, Zucker, Darby, and Brewer (1998) identi ed 752 US biotech
enterprises, of which 512 are classi ed as entrants, 150 as incumbents and another 90 could
not be classi ed clearly into either subcategory. In this study, we focus on the 512 entrants.
In other words, we only look at the rms that were born after 1975. Since our study is about
the e ects of intellectual human capital on rms' stock market performance, we thus include
in our sample only the companies that had gone IPO during 1976{1992. Thus our sample
size is reduced to 156 rms. Among these 156 rms, we can only nd 130 rms that have
entries in COMPUSTAT database. So the nal number of biotech companies in our study
is 130.

Intellectual Human Capital Measure
Given the purpose of our study, intellectual human capital is the key explanatory variable.
35

In this study, we measure a biotech rm's intellectual human capital by counting the number
of linkage or aÆliations a rm has to the "star scientist". The primary criterion for selections
of star scientists was the discovery of more than 40 genetic sequences as reported in Genbank
(1990) through April 1990. However, 22 scientists were included based on writing 20 ore more
articles each reporting one or more genetic sequence discoveries. Thus, Zucker, Darby and
Brewer (1998) identi ed a set of 327 star scientists. These 327 stars were only 3=4 of one
percent of the authors in Genbank(1990) but accounted for 17.3 percent of the published
articles, almost 22 times as many articles as the average scientist.
They hand-collected the 4,061 articles authored by stars and listed in Genbank and
recorded in institutional aÆliation of the stars and their co-authors on each of these articles.
These co-authors are called collaborators if they are not themselves a star. They then de ne
aÆliations as the number of articles authored by star scientists aÆliated with the rm and
links as the number of articles by unaÆliated star co-authoring with rm scientists. An
article with n stars is counted as a link or aÆliation for each star. In this paper, we use
the sum of aÆliations and links to star scientists ties as the measure for intellectual human
capital speci c to biotechnology.

other variables
In this paper, we also use a number of other variables. We obtained the patent data for
each biotech rm from the CD-ROM Patent Technology Sets, Capital oÆce of Electronic
Information Products and Services, US Patent and Trademark OÆce. We collected patents,
which are classi ed in the following areas of US patent Classi cation System: Class 935, all
subclasses; and class 435, subclass 172.3.
The rms' accounting information are all obtain from COMPUSTAT database, Based
on the information we retrieved from COMPUSTAT, we calculate the variables necessary
for our study. The variable list is in Table 1, in which we explain how we construct each
36

variable.
We also use some of the variables that have been used in Zucker, Darby, and Armstrong
(1998). We de ne Rtech as a dummy to capture whether the rm has recombinant DNA
technology. Also, we de ne Qual1 to capture the spillover e ects of technology. Considering
the important role played by venture capitalists in the formation and development of biotech
companies, we also use the information about the rm's venture capital nancing. It is
retrieved from Venture Economics database.

37

Table 1: Descriptions of the Variables
Section 3 in the text and the Data Appendix include detailed information about the data sources and how
we organize our sample. All nominal variables in this list have been converted into 1984 US dollars by
using CPI . When we calculated the firm’s total debt level, we also included the debt-like liabilities. This
solves the problem that some biotech companies never issue debts. When we calculated R&D stock, we
only considered the R&D expenditures since the firm went public (we don’t have R&D information before
the firm went public). So our calculation biases downwardly the size of the firm’s R&D stock. As a remedy
to this problem, we also use R&D expenditures in certain year as the proxy for intangible assets. Note also
that we choose 15% as the depreciation rate of R&D investment because most researchers think this as a
reasonable level (see Jaffe (1986)).
Variables
Descriptions
Ties

ties to star scientists: count of number of articles by star scientists who either are
affiliated with the firm or co-authored with scientists affiliated with the firm.

X

firm specific intellectual human capital measure in our study: defined as the square
root of ties to capture the concave relationship between the firm’s market value
and its intellectual human capital measure.

C

observed market value: C = closing price X number of outstanding shares.

D

the debt level: calculated as the discounted cumulative value of the firm’s debts
where the interest rate on 6-month treasury bill was used as the discount rate.
maturity: calculated as the McCauley duration of the firm’s debts.

τ
A

total assets: the book value of the total physical assets the firm owns, taken directly
from COMPUSTAT database, item 6.

R&D

firm’s R&D expenditures: taken from COMPUSTAT, item 46.

S

R&D stock: the depreciated cumulative value of the firm’s R&D expenditures with
depreciation rate assumed to be 15%.

Patenta

number of patents by application year.

Rtech

dummy variable : = 1 if the firm applies the recombinant DNA
Technology, 0 otherwise.

Firmage

the years that the firm has been practicing biotechnology: defined as year-entry year.

Grants

number of research grants by Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR).

NVC

number of venture capital rounds received by the firm in current year.

AVC

dollar amount of the venture capital injected into the firm in current year

Qual1

number of universities in the same BEA defined functional economic area as the firm
which have biotech related programs rated 4.0 or higher in the NRC 1982 survey.

R

short-run instantaneous interest rate: we use the interest rate on 6-month treasury bill.

Table 2
Characteristics of the Sample
The sample consists of 343 observations. According to our data, there are 156 biotech firms going public
during 1979-1992. For those 156 firms, only 129 have records in the COMPUSTAT database. After
dropping the observations with total assets less than $15 million (in 1984 US dollars). The sample size is 90
firms and 343 observations. Note that all nominal variables in this table are expressed in millions of 1984
US dollars.

Variable

Mean

Std.. Dev.

Minimum

Maximum

Ties to star scientist

0.638

2.816

0

28

Square root of ties ( X)

0.247

0.761

0

5.29

Observed market value

254.77

660.62

4.496

7334

Total asset

81.566

130.37

15.01

979.56

R&D stock

34.36

62.4

0.295

623.11

R&D expenditure

12.25

21.25

0

192.55

Number of patents by application dates

0.796

1.811

0

14

Number of patents by grant dates

0.900

1.89

0

13

Top universities in the same BEA

1.82

1.019

0

3

Grants from SBIR

0.096

0.411

0

5

Number of venture capital rounds

0.064

0.31

0

2

Years the firm has been doing biotechnology

7.33

2.98

0

16

Debt level

10.71

24.45

0.13

292.19

1.27

0.415

1

Maturity of the debt

Number of observations: 343 ( 90 firms observed for a total of 343 years).

3.68

Table 3: Estimation of Implicit Parameters and Tests of Hypotheses
The sample consists of 343 observations for 90 biotech public companies. We use GMM method to
estimate the implicit parameters. Panel A contains the results for the unrestricted model. After we figure
out the unrestricted estimates, we use them to calculate the weighted matrix, W. In Panel B and Panel C,
we use GMM to estimate the minimum distance estimators for the restricted models. Note that the weighted
matrix we use in Panel B and Panel C is the unrestricted matrix that is solved out in Panel A. Panel D
includes the details of our hypothesis tests. Also note that we use R&D stock as the proxy for the firm’s
intangible assets.

Panel A: Unrestricted Model
α

β

σ

λ0

λ1

Estimate

2.0134

0.8131

0.1164

0.3014

Standard Deviation

0.0000

0.0000

0.0003

0.0001 0.0001

µJ

0.2846 -0.3705

σ2J
0.0938

0.0002

0.0000

µJ

σ2J

χ2 statistic = 14.77; degree of freedom = 4.
Panel B: Restricted Model ( with λ1= 0)
α
Estimate

2.9369

Standard Deviation

0.0000

β
1.4370
0.0000

σ
0.1152
0.0017

λ0

λ1

0.2989
0.0016

-0.4321

0.1209

0.0024

0.0000

µJ

σ2J

χ2 -statistic = 31.62; degree of freedom = 5.
Panel C: Restricted Model ( with λ0 = λ1= 0)
α
Estimate

2.3400

Standard Deviation

0.0000

β
2.7400
0.0000

σ

λ0

λ1

0.1085
0.0000

χ2 -statistic = 45.69; degree of freedom = 8.
Panel D: Tests of Hypotheses
H1: λ0 = λ1= 0 . By using Newy and West (1987)’s D-test, we know that χ2(4) = 30.92, which is
significant at 1% confidence level and H1 is rejected. Jumps in the firm’s market valuation exist.
H0: λ1 = 0.
Similarly, we use the D-test. Here, we have χ2 (1) = 16.85, which is significant at 1%
confidence level, so H1 is rejected. Jumps in the firm’s market value are related to firm’s intellectual human
capital as measured by ties to star scientists.

Table 4
Estimation of Implicit Parameters Using R&D Expenditures Instead of R&D Stock
One challenge to our study is to find the appropriate proxy for the firm’s intangible assets. In Table 3, we
use R&D stock as the proxy. R&D stock may be a noisy measure of the firm’s intangible assets. Some
researchers have used R&D expenditures directly as the measure of intangible assets. In this table, we use
R&D expenditure (in 1984 US dollars) to proxy intangible assets, S.
The estimation results are reported below. The shadow price of intangible assets, β, has increased from 0.8
to 1.8. The magnitude of increase is consistent with findings of other researchers.(See Hall (1999) for a
survey.)

α

β

Estimate

2.0481*

1.8720*

0.1181*

0.3001* 0.1223* -0.3795*

0.0903*

Standard Deviation

0.0000

0.0000

0.0013

0.0004

0.0000

χ2 statistic = 13.03; degree of freedom = 4.
*

significant at 1% confidence level.

σ

λ0

λ1

0.0000

µJ

0.0006

σ2J

Table 5 Robustness Analyses of the Model
We first define the estimation error of the model as Per: the difference between the observed market value
and model value divided by observed market value. Per measures how well the model fits in the actual
data. If our model is correctly specified, we expect Per to be uncorrelated with the main explanatory
variables in our empirical study. Panel A of this table provides the correlation coefficients for Per and for
market value and the other variables. The P-values are included in the brackets. In Panel B, with Per as the
dependent variable, OLS regression shows that the estimation errors of our model are mainly explained by
the moneyness of the option (defined as debt level / firm’s valued asset) and year dummies. This confirms
that our model indeed is correctly specified and is able to capture the effects of intellectual human capital
and technological innovations on the firm’s market valuation.
Panel A: Correlation Analysis

N = 343 (Pearson Correlation Coefficients/P-values)

Variables

Observed Market value Estimation error (Per)

Ties to star scientist
0.45256 (0.0001)
0.06417 (0.2359)
Debt level
0.88806 (0.0001)
0.06271 (0.2468)
Maturity
0.01122 (0.8360)
-0.01704 (0.7532)
Total assets
0.81585 (0.0001)
0.09658 (0.0740)
R&D stock
0.66666 (0.0001)
0.07550 (0.1627)
Number of patents by application dates
0.14573 (0.0069)
0.01290 (0.8119)
Dummy if the firm applies rDNA technology
0.12671 (0.0189)
-0.01043 (0.8474)
Number of top universities in the same region as the firm 0.13342 (0.0134)
-0.01402 (0.7959)
Number of venture capital rounds
-0.04878 (0.3678)
0.07485 (0.1666)
Number of SBIR grants
-0.05285 (0.3292)
0.02499 (0.6446)
The years the firm has been doing biotechnology
0.30759 (0.0001)
-0.01307 (0.8094)
Panel B: Regression Analysis (absolute t-statistics are in parentheses)
Independent Variables
Dependent variables
-------------------------------------------------------------Log (market value)
Estimation error (Per)
Ties to star scientists
Number of patents by application dates
SBIR grants
Venture capital rounds
Top universities in the same BEA as the firm
Log (total assets)
Log (R&D stock)
The years the firm has been doing biotechnology
Dummy if the firm applies rDNA technology
Dummy if year = 1986
Dummy if year = 1989
Dummy if year = 1990
Dummy if year = 1991
Constant
Moneyness ( D/(2.0134xA+0.8131xS))

0.04693** (3.17)
-0.01584 (0.67)
-0.31367 (0.38)
0.09234 (0.83)
-0.01826 (0.51)
0.91328** (17.77)
0.11122** (2.53)
0.00510 (0.38)
-0.10000 (1.33)
-0.01384 (0.11)
-0.19923 (1.70)
-0.33940** (2.92)
0.45514** (4.78)
0.86361** (5.17)

Adjusted R2
F- Statistic
Number of observations

0.72
68.59
343

**

significant at 5% confidence level.

0.0217 (0.76)
0.0061 (0.13)
-0.1044 (0.06)
0.2244 (1.05)
-0.0937 (1.36)
0.1926 (1.89)
-0.0339 (0.38)
0.0008 (0.03)
-0.1094 (0.75)
-0.0287 (0.12)
-0.2600 (1.15)
-1.0487**(4.67)
0.5273** (2.87)
-0.6093 (1.82)
-3.2712** (2.25)
0.10
3.74
343

Table 6
Sensitivity Analysis of the effects of Ties on the Firm’s Market Valuation
In this table, we calculate the model values for firms with different sizes. We then calculate how the firm’s
model value increases with the increase of the firm-specific intellectual human capital measure, ties. We
choose the firms which are 25th percentile, 50th percentile, 75th percentile, 90th percentile and also the firm
which takes industry mean values for its total asset, R&D stock, debt level and maturity. Here, we assume
that the short run risk free interest rate is 6%. Based on our model, the contribution of star scientist to the
firm’s market value depends on the size of the firm. If the star scientists are tied to larger firms, they would
bring more value to the firms. All variables are in millions.

number of ties
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

number of ties
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

25%
------------------------model value increase
55.55
58.85
60.32
61.50
62.52
63.44
64.30
65.10
65.86
66.59

3.30
1.47
1.18
1.02
0.92
0.86
0.80
0.76
0.73

50%
-------------------------model value increase
96.61
102.73
105.48
107.67
109.58
111.31
112.91
114.42
115.85
117.23

6.12
2.75
2.19
1.91
1.73
1.60
1.51
1.43
1.38

90%
------------------------model value increase

mean
-------------------------model value increase

440.42
494.38
520.05
541.23
560.15
577.67
594.23
610.09
625.41
640.32

200.94
216.67
223.82
229.60
234.65
239.23
243.55
247.61
251.48
255.21

53.9
25.67
21.18
18.92
17.52
16.56
15.86
15.32
14.91

15.73
7.15
5.78
5.05
4.58
4.32
4.06
3.87
3.73

75%
---------------------model value increase
203.70
221.15
229.16
235.64
241.37
246.56
251.43
256.04
260.45
264.71

17.45
8.01
6.48
5.73
5.19
4.87
4.61
4.41
4.26

Figure 1 Entries of Biotech Enterprises vs IPOs of Biotech Firms: 1976--1992
80
76
70
63

Number of Birth 59

60

53
Number of firms

50

48

40

39

30

29

37

36
30

28

22

21

20

17

16
10

0

12

1
0
1976

0
1977

Number of IPOs

11

9

0
1978

1

2

1979

1980

9
3

1981

16
13

1982

3
1983

1984
year

1985

6

5

1989

1990

3
1986

1987

1988

1991

1992

Figure 2: Estimated Effect of Number of Star Ties on a Firm's Market Value

700

600

500

400
Model Market Value (in
millions)
300

200

100
0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Number of Ties

25 percentile

50 percentile

7

75 percentile

90 percentile
75 percentile
50 percentile
Firm catergory
25 percentile
8

9

90 percentile

Figure 3:Marginal Increase of Market Value due to Ties as the Number of Ties Increases

60

50

40
Marginal increase of Market
30
value (in millions)
20

10
90 percentile
75 percentile
50 percentile
Firm catergory
25 percentile

0
1

2

3

25 percentile

4
5
Number of ties

50 percentile

6

7

75 percentile

8

90 percentile

9

