                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 PRIVATIZING THE PRIVATIZED

                                              Aaron Tornell


                                          Working Paper 7206
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w7206

                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 1999




Part of this paper was written during my visit to the Center for Research on Economic Development and Policy
Reform at Stanford University. Earlier versions of this paper were presented at the conference: "Economic
Policy Reform: What We Know and What We Need to Know” at Stanford University in September 1998, and
at the NBER conference: “China's Economic Reforms and Development,” held on the Summer of 1998 at
Peking University. I thank Olivier Blanchard, Martin Feldstein, Nick Hope, Anne Krueger, Rafael La Porta
and Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes for helpful discussions. All errors are my own. All opinions expressed are
those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 1999 by Aaron Tornell. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Privatizing the Privatized
Aaron Tornell
NBER Working Paper No. 7206
July 1999
JEL No. D23, H11, L5

                                            ABSTRACT

        In the first part of this paper we argue that three reforms must be implemented if privatization
is to increase efficiency. First, establishing unitary control rights within the firm. Second, making
privatized firms face hard budget constraints. Third, establishing a non-corruptible judicial system and
transparent bankruptcy procedures. The question arises as to what course of action should be
undertaken when these reforms have not been undertaken and privatizers have only a small window
of opportunity? Either they privatize hastily today, or not at all. Should they go ahead with
privatization and hope that the newly privatized firms will create the demand for good laws? In the
case of behemoths, the answer is not clear cut. Privatization without prior implementation of the three
reforms mentioned above will simply replace government bureaucrats with private mafias (i.e., private
groups with the power to extract fiscal transfers). These private mafias might behave more
voraciously than the bureaucrats they are replacing, reducing aggregate efficiency and further
hindering the growth of the competitive private sector. In the second part we address the more
traditional issues of auction design and of restructuring and regulation of monopolies with network
externalities.

Aaron Tornell
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
aaron_tornell@harvard.edu
I. Introduction

       It has become part of accepted wisdom that privatizing state owned enterprises

and introducing competition is socially desirable because private owners will maximize

profits instead of engaging in political patronage. As a result, productive efficiency and

economic growth will increase. Consequently, consumers will enjoy a higher standard of

living, better quality goods and lower prices. During the last decade, however, we have

learned that simply transferring the ownership of state owned enterprises to private hands,

and breaking up state monopolies does not automatically lead to higher efficiency. It is

also necessary to privatize the privatized.

       Privatizing the privatized entails at least three reforms: First, reestablishing

property rights within each firm, so that new owners enjoy full residual rights of control in

their firm. Second, outside the firm, facing new owners with “hard budget constraints,” so

that they do not have the power to either extract fiscal transfers, or obtain bailouts. Third,

establishing a non-corruptible judicial system, and transparent bankruptcy procedures that

are free from political pressures.

       Policy makers can be assured that privatization will increase efficiency only if these

three conditions are satisfied. Unfortunately, not all of these conditions have been satisfied

in many of the countries that have implemented privatization programs. The question

arises as to what course of action should be undertaken in such cases. Should one wait

until the government has the capacity to implement the required reforms? What if

privatizers have only a small window of opportunity? Either they privatize hastily today,

or not at all. Should they go ahead with privatization and hope that the newly privatized

firms will create the demand for good laws?


                                              2
       In order to address these issues it is convenient to classify state owned enterprises

into two groups: small shops and large behemoths. In the case of small shops, such as

restaurants, the power of the State is not necessary to establish unitary control within the

firm. Furthermore, small shops are not big enough to command a soft budget constraint.

Accordingly, it is clear that the best strategy is to privatize the small shop sector as quickly

as possible. This will promote the growth of the competitive private sector, increase the

rate of economic growth and reinforce the demand for laws that protect private property.

       In the case of behemoths, unfortunately, the answers to the above questions are

not clear cut. In this case privatization without prior implementation of the three reforms

mentioned above will simply replace government bureaucrats with private mafias (i.e.,

private groups with the power to extract fiscal transfers). These private mafias might

behave more voraciously than the bureaucrats they are replacing, reducing aggregate

efficiency and further hindering the growth of the competitive private sector.

       Once a decision has been made on whether to privatize before or after

implementing the three reforms mentioned above, the more traditional issues of

privatization must be tackled. In this respect, two major issues are of concern to

policymakers. First, what criteria should be used to transfer state owned enterprises to the

private sector? Should distributive and social justice criteria enter into the objective

function of privatizers? Or should the only objective be to transfer a state owned

enterprise to those agents who value it most, and ensure that the price received is the

highest possible? If so, what type of auction schemes are the most appropriate? The

second set of issues of practical concern relates to state monopolies where network




                                               3
externalities are essential. What principles should guide their restructuring? How should

regulation with regard to pricing and access be designed? What is the best entry policy?

       In this paper we will discuss in more detail the issues we have raised, we will

provide some examples that illustrate some of the trade-offs involved, and we will

enumerate some unresolved questions. The objective is limited: we will neither propose

definitive answers, nor conduct empirical tests of the various hypothesis that have been

proposed. Future empirical and theoretical research on these questions should help

policymakers to make decisions that would facilitate the policy reform process.

       Needless to say the list of issues we will consider is not exhaustive. In particular,

we will consider neither transitional aspects of privatization in Eastern Europe and China,

nor aspects of the privatization of particular sectors such as social security and education1.

Nonetheless, we would like to point out that the framework we propose applies to Eastern

Europe and China.

       The structure of the paper is as follows. In section II we will discuss the

reestablishment of property rights within the firm. In section III we will analyze the

elimination of soft budget constraints and bankruptcy reform. In sections IV and V we will

discuss restructuring and regulation issues as well as auction design. Finally, section VI

contains the conclusions and an agenda for future research.



       II. Property Rights Within the Firm

       In this section we will consider the first necessary condition for privatizing the

privatized. Specifically, we will address the need to ensure that the new owners enjoy full




                                              4
control over their firms. One important case in which this condition might not hold is that

of large corporations in which managers do not own a significant share of the firm. The

agency problems involved and their potential solutions are well known (see Hart (1995)).

In order to concentrate on other mechanisms at work in privatizing countries, we will

disregard this case by identifying managers with shareholders.

          In many state-owned enterprises control of a firm is divided among several

“stakeholders”. The stakeholders of a firm are groups whose payoff depends largely on the

activities undertaken by the firm. These groups often have the power to interrupt the

functioning of the firm. One such group of stakeholders is labor unions. They not only

have the power to control the wage bill, but also have the power to define what tasks must

be performed by each worker. Other stakeholders include the networks of suppliers that

sell inputs with an excessively high markup. A typical example is the case of transport

companies that systematically lose a significant share of the merchandise they transport.

When a state owned enterprise is located in a small city where it is the primary employer,

there is a third class of stakeholders formed by local and state politicians and their allies in

the Central Government. These political rings form patronage networks that help

politicians stay in power.

          An important implication, in the case of behemoths, is that new private owners

typically do not have the ability to eliminate the power of other stakeholders and establish

their control rights. Stakeholders have a vested interest in maintaining the patronage

networks and the inefficiencies of the firm. Thus, eliminating their power entails a severe

political struggle that can only be undertaken by the State. Therefore, in practice, there are

1
    On these issues see Blanchard (1997) and Feldstein (1998).

                                               5
only two possible outcomes: either stakeholders are weakened and property rights within

the firm reestablished prior to privatization, or the newly privatized firm will suffer from

divided control. It is very rare to observe behemoths where new owners have weakened

other stakeholders.

        It follows that if a large state owned enterprise is privatized without reducing the

power of major stakeholders, then the new owners will receive cash flow rights and, at

most, some control rights. Why should this prevent the new owners from implementing

efficient production and investment decisions? In other words, why is it that the Coase

Theorem cannot be implemented?

        A firm with divided control among several stakeholders, who act non-

cooperatively, is equivalent to an economy where all agents have open access to the

capital stock of others. In contrast to a private access economy, agents in a common

access economy have the ability to appropriate a share from the capital stock of others.

This appropriation can be accomplished by outright expropriation, or through the fiscal

process. That is, appropriation occurs by extracting fiscal subsidies, which in turn must be

financed through higher taxes on the rest of the population or through higher inflation. In

the case of a firm, the existence of open access means that each stakeholder has the power

to set the quantities and the prices of the inputs it supplies.

        Two points are worth noting. First, the existence of open access does not imply

that stakeholders will appropriate the entire capital stock at once and drive it to zero. They

will do so at inefficiently high rates but aggregate capital may even still grow, though at an

inefficiently low rate. That is, there is a “milking effect.” Second, when there is open

access, an increase in the physical return to capital does not induce more investment and a


                                                6
higher growth rate. This is because the equilibrium appropriation rate increases and, thus,

the rate of return faced by each agent (after appropriation by others) remains unchanged.

This is the “voracity effect” (Tornell and Lane (1999)).

        To explain the milking and the voracity effects, consider a firm in which there are

only two stakeholders: the union and the owner. The union has the power to set the wage

bill, whereas the owner decides what share of profits to reinvest. If the union were to

increase wages excessively, the owner would reduce the reinvestment rate. Consequently,

future capital and future wages would be smaller than what they would be if the union

followed a less aggressive wage policy. This interplay between wage setting and the

reinvestment decision determines an equilibrium, which is generally characterized by

excessive wages and low investment relative to the unitary control case. Note that in this

equilibrium there is a milking effect, but the firm is not destroyed by stakeholders. The

reason stakeholders do not dismantle the firm and invest their booty outside the firm at the

market rate of return is because the firm has a higher rate of return and there are break-up

costs. However, each stakeholder drives down the other stakeholder to its reservation

level, resulting in a milking effect. That is, at each point in time the union sets the wage bill

at a level that is higher than what labor productivity would indicate. Nonetheless, this

wage level is lower than that which would induce the owner to shut down the firm. Why

does the union not set the wage at a lower level? Given the appropriation policy of the

other stakeholders, such a “sacrifice” would not pay off. Lower wages today will not lead

to greater reinvestment; they will simply leave more resources for the other stakeholders

to appropriate today. For instance, the owner will simply remove more resources in the

form of profits, suppliers will increase their prices, etc.


                                                7
        Suppose the firm enjoys a windfall or its productivity increases exogenously. Will

the owner increase the reinvestment rate to take advantage of the new opportunities? Not

only is the answer no, but the reinvestment rate will actually fall! The reason for this is

straightforward. Suppose the physical rate of return goes up by 10%. This implies that the

union can afford to increase its appropriation rate (i.e., the wage bill) by 10% while still

leaving the owner indifferent between shutting down and keeping the firm alive. Similarly,

the owner will be able to increase his appropriation rate (i.e., reduce the reinvestment rate)

by 10%, while still leaving the union indifferent between devouring the firm with excessive

wage demands, and keeping it alive. Since the physical rate of return of the firm grows by

10%, while the total appropriation rate goes up by 20%, it follows that the growth rate of

the firm will experience a net decrease of 10% as a result of the windfall. This illustrates

the voracity effect.

        An important implication of the voracity effect is that the owner of the firm has no

incentive to adopt new technologies that increase the profitability of the firm. This is

because, ex-post, the union would increase the wage bill so as to leave the firm with the

same rate of return it receives without the innovation. This implies that the existence of

divided control within a firm induces “rational atrophy.” In such a manner, dominant firms

in a given industry systematically fail to adopt technological innovations that have proven

to reduce costs.

        In summary, if a state owned enterprise with control divided among several

stakeholders is privatized without prior reestablishment of property rights, the new owner

will find it optimal to milk the firm. Furthermore, since other stakeholders will appropriate




                                              8
any increases in the raw profitability of the firm, the new owners will not make efficiency

enhancing investments.

        To illustrate that these points are not simply theoretical niceties, we will relate the

experience of the integrated steel producers in the US. This is a striking example of

milking, voracity and rational atrophy in action. Although the integrated steel producers in

the US are not state owned enterprises, analyzing their evolution is relevant for the study

of privatization for two reasons. First, as in many state owned enterprises, there is divided

control within these firms. Second, US integrated steel firms had sufficient political power

to enjoy, at least for a while, soft budget constraints.

        During the 1970’s and 1980’s, the integrated steel industry in the US was

successful in obtaining trade protection. Unfortunately, higher revenues were squandered

in the form of higher wages and investments outside of the steel industry. The wage

premium of steel over manufacturing increased from 24% in 1970 to 57% in 1982, despite

the fact that the ratio of labor productivity in steel to that in manufacturing fell from 0.7 to

0.6 during this period. Furthermore, there was a concurrent fall in the share of profits that

management of big integrated steel producers, such as US Steel, invested in steel. Profits

were increasingly invested in sectors outside of the steel industry (out of unions' reach) or

distributed as dividends. As a result, the ratio of steel-related assets to total assets in US

Steel fell from 56% in 1976 to 19% in 1990.

        The existence of rational atrophy is evidenced by the failure of the integrated steel

firms to adopt, on a timely basis, new technologies that were available and had been

proven to increase productivity. The most important of those technological innovations

were continuous casting and the minimill technology. As a result, trade protection had the


                                               9
unintended effect of inducing the entry of new small steel producers (the minimills) that in

recent years have managed to capture more than 40% of the US steel market. It should be

clear that divided control is at the root of this self-inflicted atrophy. That is, the failure of

established firms to adopt new technologies, and thus allow small entrants to capture a

significant share of the US market.

        Next, we will consider the actions taken by some governments to reestablish

unitary control in state owned enterprises. The most striking examples of the struggles

involved in reestablishing property rights are the cases of British Steel and of British Coal.

Stakeholders in these sectors were so entrenched that even government ministers

attempted to block the restructuring process. In order to restructure these firms, Prime

Minister Thatcher hired a businessman, Sir Ian MacGregor, who had no links to the

political establishment. It took seven years of restructuring before British Steel was

privatized. The case of British Coal was more dramatic: when MacGregor decided to

close some inefficient coal mines in 1984, the head of the miners union, Mr. Scargill,

launched a strike that lasted almost a year. This strike was nationwide and it appeared that

it would spread to other sectors, with the danger of toppling the government as it had

done in 1974. After offering workers severance payments far in excess of that required by

law and helping Scargill’s rivals to create new unions and break the picket line,

MacGregor was able to defeat Scargill. It should be clear that no private agent would have

had the power to do this. These episodes are amply described in MacGregor (1986) and

Thatcher (1993).

        Another well known example of the reestablishment of property rights occurs in

Mexico. Before privatization the steel and mining sectors were heavily unionized.


                                               10
Furthermore, since the state owned enterprises were located in company towns, there was

opposition to the privatization, not only from unions but also from politicians at the local

and national level. The government sought to replace the sole labor contract with five

different contracts, one for each plant Furthermore, it wanted to include in the new

contracts the right of new owners to reduce employment as needed. The union not only

refused to consider these issues but also would not agree to a direct, secret ballot by the

workers on these issues. After months of unwillingness on the part of the unions to make

any concessions, the government used the threat of bankruptcy to induce the union to

accept a secret vote by the workers. To supplement this strategy, the army was called in to

protect the plants and mines and workers were offered a severance package similar to that

of the British Coal miners. Throughout the process, there were several marches to Mexico

City and street blockades. In order to neutralize high ranking opponents of privatization,

the ministry in charge of privatization hired, as an advisor, Sir Ian MacGregor to explain

why those measures were necessary.

       Similar measures were undertaken during the privatization of almost all other

Mexican state owned enterprises. The most dramatic example occurred at the Port of

Veracruz. Although historically Veracruz had been the most important Mexican port, in

the preceding decades it had become next to impossible to import or export any

merchandise through the harbor due to heavy union entrenchment. As a remedy to this in

the early 1990’s, President Salinas called on the army take the port by surprise and secure

it from the unions.

       As a result of these actions, almost all newly privatized firms in the UK and

Mexico experienced an increase in productive efficiency and profitability. These


                                            11
improvements in efficiency have been documented by La Porta and Lopez de Silanes

(1997) in the case of Mexico, and Newbery (1997) and Vickers and Yarrow (1989) for

the UK. Earlier papers that find that privatized firms are more efficient than state owned

enterprises are Boardman and Vining (1989) and Megginson, Nash and Van Randenborgh

(1994).

          The privatization of two Mexican airlines illustrates the milking effect that occurs

when a state owned enterprise is privatized without reestablishing unitary control prior to

privatization (Hanson (1994) and Rogozinski (1997)). Aeromexico and Mexicana were

originally private airlines. However, the government had to take them over as a result of

financial problems in 1959 and 1982, respectively.

          The strongest stakeholders in each of these cases were the unions. In the midst of a

labor contract dispute, the government decided to let Aeromexico go bankrupt in the late

1980s.2 A new company was created with the assets and landing rights of Aeromexico, but

it was free of stakeholders. In 1988 the government sold its 65% stake in Aeromexico for

US$300 million. The other airline, Mexicana, represents the first important privatization of

the administration of President Salinas. In contrast to Aeromexico, it was privatized

without any prior labor restructuring despite the fact that it too had a very strong union

and divided control. The government owned 51% of Mexicana’s shares—the remaining

shares were publicly held. In 1989 the Government transferred 50% of its shares, plus the

control of Mexicana, to a private group. The payment was not in cash but was in the form

of debt to the government. In addition the controlling group committed US$140 million



2
 Aeromexico and Fundidora Monterrey were the first cases in which a large firm was
allowed to go bankrupt since the PRI came to power in the 1930s.


                                               12
dollars to be injected as capital. In light of our previous discussion, the inability of the

government to sell Mexicana for cash can be attributed to the fact that unitary control

within the firm was not reestablished prior to privatization.

       The events that ensued show that divided control leads to inefficient outcomes.

While Aeromexico, which enjoyed unitary control, did quite well in the early 1990s,

Mexicana’s performance was dismal. Aeromexico reduced its work force from 12,000 to

3,000 and succeeded in raising on-time arrival rates from 75% in 1988 to 95% in 1991. In

contrast, Mexicana was only able to reduce employment from 14,000 to 11,000, and

increase its on-time arrival rate from 73% in 1989 to 86% in 1991. What is more

astonishing, however, is that although Aeromexico was initially a much smaller airline than

Mexicana, it became the dominant firm a few years later. Aeromexico increased its share

of the domestic market from around 35% in 1989 to roughly 45% in 1993. In contrast,

during the same period, Mexicana’s share fell from 50% to 30%.

       One important difference during this time is that Aeromexico leased airplanes to

increase their fleet while Mexicana purchased new planes, dramatically increasing its debt.

Some have pointed out that the prudent policy was definitely to lease planes instead of

purchasing them. The result was that in 1993 Mexicana was on the brink of bankruptcy.

       Seizing the opportunity, Aeromexico bough a controlling share in Mexicana. The

controlling group of Aeromexico financed this purchase in part by borrowing. Ex-post,

this purchase was not a good idea because Aeromexico encountered financial difficulties.

To make a long story short, the creditors took control of both airlines, and the debts of

both companies were recently taken over by Fobaproa, the government’s bailout agency.




                                              13
III. Elimination of Soft Budget Constraints

        The term “soft budget constraint” was coined by Janos Kornai to identify a

situation that was prevalent in Communist Europe (see Kornai (1992)). Under the

communist regime inefficiently run firms did not face the threat of bankruptcy. They

simply received fiscal transfers to cover the difference between their revenues and costs.

The existence of soft budget constraints meant that firms were able to induce the

government to finance their deficits.

        Several state owned enterprises throughout the western world have also enjoyed

soft budget constraints. Clearly, there are strong political forces at work behind this

privilege. Thus, it is far from true that a firm’s soft budget constraint will vanish with the

sole act of privatizing it, or by decree. The point we want to emphasize in this section is

that if the privatization of a state owned enterprise is not accompanied by decisive

government actions that eliminate the soft budget constraint enjoyed by a firm, it is not

likely that efficiency in that firm will improve.

        Here we describe ways in which soft budget constraints have manifested

themselves in the aftermath of privatization. We will consider three situations: banks with

low capitalization and implicit government guarantees;           private mafias; and non-

transparent bankruptcy procedures.



        III.1 Banks

        The existence of banks that are poorly capitalized and that enjoy implicit

government guarantees has disastrous effects throughout the economy. First, not only

does it exacerbate the milking effect in firms where there is divided control, but it can also


                                               14
induce inefficient decisions in firms with unitary control. Second, this banking condition

restrains the growth of the competitive private sector.

       In several countries, the privatization of banks has led to lending booms (i.e.,

abnormally high growth of loans during a span of a few years). These lending booms have

been associated with a deterioration of the banks’ loan portfolios, as an increasing share of

loans are allocated to very risky projects with negative expected present value. Another

possibility is that lending booms reflect corruption. In both cases the result is that, after a

few years, a significant share of loans becomes non-performing. Since it is politically very

costly for governments to let banks go bankrupt, a bailout takes place.

       It has not been the case that all countries that have privatized their banking systems

have lacked an adequate prudential regulatory framework. For instance, in Mexico new

regulations were adopted before the privatization was initiated, yet this was insufficient in

promoting prudent lending practices. Thus, the solution cannot simply be “to improve the

regulatory framework.”

       According to some observers, the problem has been caused by the confluence of

two factors. First, the capital owned by the people that control a bank is small relative to

capital of the bank that is at risk. Second, there is an implicit guarantee on the part of the

government to bail out depositors and, in several cases, bank owners too. In these

circumstances it becomes profitable for people who control a bank to allocate loans to

negative expected value projects. These negative expected value projects are profitable

from the perspective of bank owners either because (1) they have high variance returns;

(2) they generate personal benefits (perhaps they are loans to companies with which they

have links); or (3) simply because they are stealing the funds.


                                              15
       In the Mexican case, for instance, although at the time of the privatization the

capital of each bank was equal to 8% of total assets, as required by regulations, the

owners’ capital was quite small. The mechanism at work was the following. Bank A lent

money to the owner of Bank B so that she could meet the required capital adequacy ratio.

Bank B in turn lent money to the owner of Bank C, and so on. As a result, the net

aggregate capital of the Mexican banking system was actually quite small.

       If the privatization of state owned enterprises occurs in a situation where owners

do not enjoy full control rights and banks enjoy implicit bail out guarantees, all hell breaks

loose. First, milking is no longer limited to the assets of the firm. Managers/owners may

borrow using the firm’s assets as collateral, and       appropriate such funds in diverse

manners. A case in point, a manager may buy inputs with a high markup relative to the

market price, and then have the difference deposited in a secret account. As a result, the

firm accumulates debt, while the owner’s private wealth increases. Banks are willing to

lend to such a firm, despite knowing that resources will be used inefficiently, because they

expect a government bail out.

       A second mechanism that has been observed concerns lending by banks to buyers

of state owned enterprises that are being privatized. In some cases, banks’ owners have

acquired the state owned enterprises themselves. In this case the lending spree can

continue virtually unchecked. This cycle was particularly pronounced in Chile during the

second half of the 1970s—at the time, large private conglomerates formed around the big

banks. The unfortunate ending of this episode was the well-known Chilean re-

nationalization of banks that took place in the early 1980s, costing nearly 15% of GDP

(Hachette and Ludders (1993)).


                                             16
        A horror story that illustrates quite clearly the points made above is that of Mr.

Cabal-Peniche, a successful banana grower in the south of Mexico. In 1991 he acquired a

medium-sized bank. At the time, this acquisition was heralded as one of the successes of

the Mexican privatization program in promoting popular capitalism. The bank borrowed

abroad and lent Mr. Cabal money to buy, among other things, Del Monte. Mr. Cabal

continued to borrow money; a few years later he simply disappeared with more than

US500 million dollars. He is still a fugitive. The Mexican government was forced to

absorb all the liabilities and Del Monte, a costly bailout.

        Another consequence of a hasty bank privatization is the formation of “evergreen

accounts.” When banks enjoy government guarantees, and the stake of bank owners is

very small, banks have incentives to make risky loans with high variance and low expected

return. After a few years a significant share of these loans become non-performing. Banks

with low capitalization do not have incentives to officially recognize these bad loans. In

this way they avoid having to inject new capital in order to make the appropriate

provisions. This situation can persist for a long time if there is regulatory forbearance.

When this occurs, banks lend to the non-performing accounts the interest that had to be

paid and the amount that had to be amortized. Given that these accounts never become

performing, the bank is forced to capitalize unpaid interest indefinitely. That is why they

are known as “evergreen accounts.” Since these accounts grow exponentially, over time,

banks have less resources available to lend to new projects. This in turn restrains the

growth of the private sector. The recent Mexican experience is a clear illustration of this

mechanism (Krueger and Tornell (1998)).




                                              17
       The question arises as to why authorities allow the schemes mentioned above to

occur. One possible explanation is that at the time, authorities do not realize that buyers of

banks are not using their own capital. Another explanation that has been given is that

privatizers face strong pressures to complete the privatization process quickly. Otherwise,

the support for privatization would end, and the forces of the past would reorganize to

block further progress.



III.2 Bankruptcy Procedures and Reform of the Judicial System

       If inefficient investment decisions that lead to financial problems are not followed

by bankruptcy, then firm controllers might have incentives to undertake inefficient actions.

We have discussed the circumstances in which such processes will occur. In many

countries judicial systems are heavily influenced by politicians. Furthermore, in some cases

bankruptcy procedures are so convoluted that it is virtually impossible for creditors to

seize the assets of non-performing debtors. Even worse, bankruptcy cases are decided

based on political criteria. It should be clear that in order for privatization to increase

efficiency, it is necessary to implement judicial reform. Unfortunately, we have learned

during the last decade that this is easier said than done.

       The legal systems of many countries developed during the statist era. In fact, they

were a useful tool for political control. Firms knew that political support to the regime

would be translated into favorable future legal decisions in the event that the firm in

question ran into trouble. Interestingly, this convoluted system proved to be very useful

during the pre-privatizing restructuring of state owned enterprises and in negotiations with

stakeholders, as described above.


                                              18
       Legal reform has proven much more difficult to achieve than theory would

indicate. The drawback has been that, in the post-privatization phase, this lack of legal

reform has impeded quick sanctions against inefficient activities undertaken by owners of

newly privatized firms. In almost every instance there has been a sufficiently strong

incentive for politicians to intervene in favor of firms that should have gone bankrupt.

       An efficient bankruptcy procedure should lead to liquidation when the firm is not

viable, and should lead to restructuring when financial distress has been caused by

transitory bad shocks. Furthermore, bankruptcy rules should be sufficiently simple, thus

making it impossible for politicians to induce discretionary decisions.

       It is not clear that countries undergoing reform should adopt the bankruptcy

procedures used in developed countries, such as the US. The U.S. bankruptcy procedures

are quite complicated, and in some instances lead to inefficient decisions: chapter 7

bankruptcy leads to unnecessary liquidation of viable firms, while chapter 11 sometimes

leads to inefficient reorganization under existing management. Recently, there have been

proposals to reform bankruptcy procedures (see Aghion, Hart and Moore (1994)). Under

these proposals all claims of a bankrupt firm would be canceled. The senior claimants

would receive the equity of the new firm, and the other claimants would receive options to

purchase equity. Shares would then be traded among claimants. Finally, the new

shareholders would vote on whether to liquidate or restructure the firm.

       Under this scheme, the only role of the judge is to coordinate the process.

Accordingly, with this type of scheme there is no room for the government to defend

incumbent management. It would be of practical importance to analyze how this type of

procedure might be implemented in specific countries.


                                             19
       Policymakers (at least in Latin America and the UK) have been aware for some

time of these alternative bankruptcy procedures. So why is it that these procedures have

not been adopted yet, or at a different level, why has there been no legal reform? Is it

simply a lack of knowledge on the part of authorities? Or is legal reform something that

cannot be imposed from the top, but rather, a slow process that must start from below?

Perhaps as the private sector develops will it demand a better legal framework. I am not

aware of any cross-country analysis of the evolution of legal systems. In the case of

Mexico, the lack of bankruptcy reform can be explained by the huge stock of non-

performing loans. This implies that a coalition of debtors will veto such reform.



III.3 The Privatization Decision and Private Mafias

       Suppose that the government does not, at present, have the capacity to reduce the

power of stakeholders within state owned enterprises, nor can it implement judicial reform

in the short run. However, the political process has enabled the privatization of some state

owned enterprises. Is the optimal policy to gather a small team of non-corruptible

privatizers, let them do the job as quickly as possible, and then hope for the best? Or, is

more efficacious to wait until the government has the capacity to reestablish property

rights in the state owned enterprises and implement hard budget constraints? These issues

have been at the core of the privatization decision in transition economies, as well as in

market economies. Unfortunately, the answers to these questions are not obvious.

       Suppose it is unlikely that the government will ever be able to eliminate the power

of stakeholders in a given firm. Meanwhile, there is a chance that private agents might

have the incentives and the resources to buy back stakeholders, or neutralize their power.


                                             20
Furthermore, suppose that the firm in question is not powerful enough to enjoy a soft

budget constraint. In this case it is clear that privatizing without prior restructuring is the

right policy.

        In contrast, if several stakeholders are deeply entrenched, and no single

stakeholder has the ability to establish unitary control, then it is not clear that a hasty

privatization is socially desirable. Since it would take the full power of the state to

reestablish private property rights, waiting until the government acquires the capacity to

enforce property rights might be the correct strategy. However, suppose the government

will never attain such power. Then, what is socially preferable, to keep state owned

enterprises in government hands, or privatize them?

        If the private sector has not been privatized, what difference does it make if a firm

is in the State’s hands or in private hands? One viewpoint is that if a firm is in the State’s

hands, it is easier for politicians to induce the firm to undertake inefficient actions, such as

having excess employment. Meanwhile, under private management it is more difficult for

politicians to influence the firm, thus, the firm’s productive efficiency might increase

(Shleifer and Vishny (1994)). A second viewpoint is that since there is divided control

within the firm, the new owners will have incentives to milk it. Meanwhile, if the firm is

kept under government control, the manager will ultimately have to respond to top

government officials. To the extent that top officials internalize part of the future costs

associated with firms’ inefficiency, they will restrain managers from undertaking inefficient

actions. Note also that private owners have the capacity to milk a firm in ‘legal’ ways,

whereas bureaucrats are in some sense restrained by government regulations. We thus

conclude that in the case of behemoths, it is not clear that transferring them to the private


                                              21
sector is socially efficient. This is because privatization might lead to the formation of

“private mafias,” i.e., private groups with the power to extract fiscal transfers.

       This last point is related to the Political Economy concept of encompassing groups

(see Olson (1982), and Tornell and Lane (1999)). Among economies that suffer from the

existence of rent-seeking groups, those with very few encompassing groups tend to

experience less aggregate rent-seeking than those with many powerful groups. This is the

result of two mechanisms. Encompassing groups are de facto claimants to a significant

share of national income. Furthermore, since there are very few encompassing groups in

the economy, they are able to overcome the free rider problem and not induce policies that

would kill the goose that lays the golden egg. In contrast, when there are several groups

with the power to extract fiscal transfers, it is unlikely that these parties will able to

coordinate in limiting their fiscal appropriations. Thus, such an economy will experience

overappropriation and decline.

       A revealing example of how privatization might place state owned enterprises in

the hands of private mafias, who might behave more voraciously than bureaucrats, is the

case of the postal service and airports in Argentina. In the early 1990s the administration

of President Menem initiated the privatization of Airports and Postal Service. The stated

objective was to create an efficient communications infrastructure in order to increase

productivity in Argentina. In a recent book Domingo Cavallo, Minister of the Economy at

the time, describes how forces in the highest echelons of power, both in Parliament and in

the Executive branch, were trying to ensure that these government monopolies ended up

in the hands of Mr. Yabran and his associates. Cavallo (1997) describes the fights waged

in order to impede this transfer of assets, and how this was connected to his dismissal as


                                              22
Minister of the Economy. Mr. Yabran has been associated with several crimes and

political conflicts in Argentina. For mysterious reasons he has recently killed himself.

           Now, we would like to elaborate on how the points we have made relate to

transition economies3. It will be useful to distinguish small shops, such as restaurants, from

behemoths such as oil companies. The former are not likely to either enjoy soft budget

constraints, nor will they suffer from acute divided control within the firm. For the latter,

the opposite is true. Therefore, for the small shops’ sector it is clear that the correct policy

is to privatize as fast as possible. Not only will productive efficiency increase, but it will

also promote the development of a new competitive private sector. However, for large

enterprises privatizing as fast as possible may not be the best policy for the reasons

described above.

           In the early 1990s Russia engineered a massive transfer of state owned enterprises

to the private sector under the so called “voucher” privatization (Boycko, Schleifer and

Vishny (1995)). Privatization vouchers were distributed among the entire population.

Then auctions for almost all state owned enterprises took place. The objective was to

transfer as much State property to the private sector as possible while the window of

opportunity remained opened. In this manner, it would have been impossible for the

communists to ever recreate the status quo ex ante. The privatization was performed with

neither any restructuring of the major state owned enterprises, nor with the elimination of

the stakeholders’ power. It was believed that in the future the population would sell its

shares, and that some big investors would acquire a significant share of firms. These large

groups would then force inefficient management out of the firm and, as a result,

3
    The paper by Scwartz, et. al. (1999) in this volume analyzes in detail economies in transition.


                                                       23
privatization would improve efficiency. In the case of large state owned enterprises, this

was not the outcome4. Instead, preexisting stakeholders and managers increased their

ownership share in these firms. As is well known, the result of the Russian privatization

scheme has been the formation of the infamous oligarchs’ club (Goldman (1998)). These

oligarchs have been quite efficient in extracting fiscal transfers. Of course, this need not

mean that the alternative of not having privatized would have been superior. However, the

answer is not unambiguous as the looting might generate popular discontent, bringing to

power those phantoms that were feared by reformers in the first place.

           Lastly, we would like to comment on the idea often expressed in policy circles

that, in LDCs as well as in transition economies, through time a new competitive private

sector will develop. Thus, the problems posed by state owned enterprise’s stakeholders

and soft budget constraints will disappear if left to themselves. The argument is that an

increasing share of GDP will be produced by the new competitive private sector, and the

old state owned enterprise sector will become minuscule and powerless. The policy

implication of this view is that government efforts should concentrate on promoting new

enterprises, and not expend energy trying to eliminate the power of stakeholders.

           The validity of this statement is far from obvious. If stakeholders are strong to

begin with, it is not clear that the new private sector will be able to grow and render this

oligarchic sector small relative to the economy. As the economy will experience incipient

growth, stakeholders will increasingly demand more fiscal subsidies and also expand their

ownership of fixed factors that confer political power. This in turn will be translated into a

higher tax burden on the competitive new private sector. The result will be either an

4
    This scheme was criticized early on by the head privatizer in Mexico in a provocative article entitled


                                                       24
inhibition of the development of the new competitive private sector or, at best, a growth

path along which the oligarchic sector grows at the same pace as the rest of the economy.

As a result, this economy will be trapped in a low growth trajectory. Tornell and Velasco

(1992) present a model in which the economy evolves along such a path.

       Given that the government does not have the ability to eliminate the power of

stakeholders, when is it more likely that the relative size and power of the state owned

enterprise sector will decline: under privatization or under no privatization? To address

this issue, we must first note that, in the case of large state owned enterprises, the choice

is between leaving the firms and their stakeholders within the State, or converting them

into “private mafias.” In both cases, stakeholders will have the power to extract fiscal

subsidies. The question then becomes: under which regime will the stakeholders have less

power to pillage the State? As we mentioned earlier, at present there is neither enough

cross-country evidence, nor theoretical work to answer the preceding questions.

       In summary, it is not clear whether it is socially optimal to privatize state owned

enterprises before privatizing the privatized. On the one hand, the window of opportunity

for privatizing might not recur. On the other hand, a hasty privatization might leave state

owned enterprises assets in hands of private mafias. It is possible that these mafias

would grow in power and extract even more fiscal resources than what the alternative of

waiting might have entailed. In other words, privatization should not be used as a pretext

to avoid confronting the real problem facing the economy: the existence of strong

stakeholders that face divided control within their firms and soft budget constraints.




“Too Much Vodka” (Rogozinski (1993)).


                                             25
IV. Restructuring and Regulation

       Large state owned enterprises are typically conglomerates that encapsulate almost

all firms in a given industry. During the privatization of these enterprises, the question

arises as to the manner in which they should be broken up as well as into how many units

they should be divided. There are two cases to consider. In one case, there are common

networks which are vital to the industry, such as in electricity, fixed-link telephony, gas,

water, rail, and similar industries. In the other case, such networks are not vital.

       In the case that networks are not vital, there is a general consensus that state

owned enterprises should be broken up into as many independent firms as possible. This

is constrained by the need to avoid a loss of efficiency due to the existence of economies

of scale or scope. Monopolies are dealt with in such a manner. The case of Mexico Steel

is a good example. Five plants comprised the state steel monopoly in Mexico. Some

argued that since steel is a commodity and Mexico an open market, a private

conglomerate of the five would not enjoy monopoly power. They wanted the firm to be

privatized as it was to exploit the synergies across the plants. They claimed that the plants

would fail independent of each other. Others argued that even in the absence of monopoly

power a conglomerate would still command huge political power at the national level.

Since it would be the largest employer in each of the states in which the plants were

located, a conglomerate would be able to influence national elections. This political

power could then be used to extract fiscal concessions or even to induce the

implementation of trade barriers (despite NAFTA). In the end, the steel conglomerate

was broken up and each of the five plants was sold to a different group. Eight years have

passed since this break up; only one of the newly created firms has had financial problems


                                              26
and the controlling group has been replaced. Coincidentally, this firm is the only one that

was not broken up.

         By contrast, in industries where networks are essential, the issues involved are

more complicated and there is no consensus on the most appropriate policy. In fact

different countries have followed diverse privatization strategies in specific sectors.

         An important point is that when a network is essential, there is not much difference

between a state owned enterprise and a private regulated monopoly. This is because it is

extremely difficult to regulate a big conglomerate, both for logistic and for political

reasons. If privatization is to make a difference, it must first separate the network from the

units that form the state owned enterprise. Second, it must ensure the existence of

competition in the newly created units. Finally, privatizers must create a clear framework

to regulate the network company and to establish clear access rules and prices for the new

units.

         An important point to consider is that when a network is essential to an industry,

there is little difference between a state owned enterprise and a regulated private

monopoly. This is a result of the inherent difficulties, both logistic and political in nature,

of regulating a big conglomerate. If privatization is to make any real difference in this

situation, it must first separate the unit that controls the network from the other units that

comprise the state owned enterprise. It must also ensure that there will be competition

among newly created independent firms formed from these units. Finally, those instituting

the privatization must create a clear framework of regulation for the network company

and must establish clear access rules and pricing for the independent firms. These issues

are discussed in more detail by Noll (1999).


                                               27
       Two observations are in order. First, the existence of competition among the new

units eliminates the need for detailed regulation of those units, making the regulatory task

an order of magnitude simpler. Second, there is no clear justification for privatizing the

network company and converting it into a private monopoly, as the gains in efficiency

derive from competition in the new units.

       The privatization of the power industry in the UK clearly illustrates the points just

mentioned (see Newbery (1997) and Vickers and Yarrow (1988)). This industry has three

segments: generation, transmission (from the plants to the consumption centers), and

distribution. The case for having several plants connected to the same network derives

from the notion that if there were a reduction in energy generation in one plant, due to

maintenance or accident, other plants could cover that shortage. However, once various

plants are interconnected, there must be some sort of coordination to ensure that, at the

margin, the cheapest energy is produced. For this reason, electricity generation-

transmission has been traditionally considered a natural monopoly.

       In the UK, as part of the privatization process, the three segments were separated

into different companies. The transmission network was to be controlled in a centralized

manner by one company, while distribution companies and generation plants would be

owned by several firms. In order to allocate access rights to the generating plants, a sort of

a stock market for electricity was created. In this market, each generator submits bids

every day, stipulating the quantity and price of electricity it is willing to supply the next

day. Thus, there is a clearing mechanism that selects the cheapest energy for each hour of

the day.




                                             28
       Another interesting example of the issues involved is the story of the privatization

of the telephone companies in Mexico and Argentina (Rogozinski (1997)). While both

systems were privatized, the phone monopoly was not broken up in Mexico while it was

divided into two companies in Argentina. In each country the options were hotly debated

and the rationales seemed sensible a priori. The phone systems in both countries needed

significant investment in new fiber optic lines and equipment. The Mexican government

decided to grant a six year monopoly over long distance services to the newly privatized

company. At the end of that period, however, the market would be opened to new

entrants. It was argued that the threat of competition would induce Telmex to invest its

profits in new lines and equipment during the monopoly period, so that it would have a

dominant position once the six years had elapsed. It seems the strategy worked since

Telmex complied with its original investment plan by the time the long distance market

was opened in 1997. At present, Telmex is the dominant firm in both local and long

distance telephone service. This has in turn led to complaints of anticompetitive behavior.

       The argument made in Argentina was that splitting the phone company into two

firms would induce competition. As a result, both firms would invest in new lines and

equipment in order to gain a larger market share. Of course, it is not clear how collusion

would be avoided. I am not aware of any study that compares the evolution of privatized

telephones companies in Mexico and Argentina. Furthermore, there is a lack of systematic

cross-country comparisons of the behavior of prices and investment of state owned

enterprises in which networks are essential. Cross-country studies of the industries that

have been privatized during the last decade would be very useful.




                                             29
       Post-privatization regulation is a very important issue in industries with network

externalities. Regulation must cover pricing, access to the network and entry to the

industry. Fortunately, there is a large literature dealing with these issues. See for instance

Armstrong, Cowan and Vickers (1994), Bishop, Kay and Mayer (1994), Noll (1999) and

Viscusi, et. al. (1992). The evolution of regulation is also a very important issue. How do

we ensure, once the privatized firm has made sunk investments, that regulation will not be

changed in order to reduce the ex-post rate of return? How do we prevent a capture of the

regulators by the regulated firms? These and related issues are analyzed by Krueger (1993)

and Noll (1989).



V. Auction Design

       Suppose that the stakeholders’ question has been answered one way or the other.

The next question then is how to transfer a given state owned enterprise to the private

sector. One possibility is to transfer ownership to either stakeholders, or to the population

at large (or to both, as most commonly occurs). The second possibility is to sell part or all

of the state owned enterprise to a strategic group, and place the rest in the stock market.

In any case, the objective should be to transfer a state owned enterprise to those that can

use it most efficiently and profitably, and ensure that the buyers pay as much as possible.

       One difficulty with placing a state owned enterprise in the stock market is that,

with few exceptions, state owned enterprises are loss-making firms. As a result, it is

unlikely that the stock market will place a positive price to those firms. A strategy that has

been followed in some cases is for the government to restructure the state owned




                                             30
enterprise, and after a few profitable years launch a public offering. Such was the case of

British Steel.

         Another alternative is to sell the state owned enterprise to a small group of

strategic buyers. In this case, it is possible to price the state owned enterprise based on

counterfactuals. That is, it is possible to discuss with buyers what the expected income of

the company would be if it were managed under international best practices. Then, by

applying appropriate country and industry risk premiums, an appropriate reference price

could be obtained. Technical advisors and investment banks play a useful role in this

process.

         Suppose the decision was made to sell part or all of a state owned enterprise to a

strategic buyer and that technical advisors calculated a reference price for the firm as an

ongoing business. As our discussion in previous sections suggest, the government should

aim at obtaining all-cash bids and terminating its direct involvement with the state owned

enterprise. Otherwise, it risks having to make transfers to this company in the future.

         If the government limits offers to all-cash offers, it substantially reduces the

number of potential bidders. This can be problematic because, as is well known from

auction theory, when there are few buyers it is very difficult to elicit the reference price.

The maximum price that can be obtained trough an auction equals the second highest

value.

         Thus, if auction rules limit offers to be all-cash, the privatizer might attract only

one or two buyers. As a result, the single bidder will offer only a pittance for the company,

or if there are few bidders they are likely to collude and will similarly pay relatively a few

pennies.


                                              31
       Thus, a question of practical relevance is how to design auctions in cases in which

all-cash bids are desired, but where there are very few bidders able to make cash bids. As

we shall explain below, a one way to achieve this objective is to allow non-cash bids. In

this way the number of bidders will increase, and any of the standard auctions will elicit a

price in the neighborhood of the reference price.

       Permitting non-cash bids opens Pandora’s box. This is because an infinite number

of offers, vectors of deferred payments and guarantees, are now possible. Once the

privatizer moves away from the clear prerequisite of all-cash offers, it is not possible to

prevent bidders from offering any vector of deferred payments. Disqualifying that bidder

ex-post would provoke political pressures, and allegations of corruption.

       It is clear that, in general, different discount rates must be applied to value each of

the bids. When these transactions are performed in countries like the US or the UK,

valuations are done after the bids are handed in by a team of accountants, investment

bankers and lawyers. However, this procedure is politically very dangerous for a

bureaucrat in charge of privatizing a state owned enterprise, as he might be accused of

favoritism. To illustrate this, suppose that bidder 1 offers 100 million cash while bidder 2

offers 1000 million to be paid in 5 years. Who is the winner? Well it depends on the

discount factor used. Of course, bid 2 is more risky and probably the bidder will simply

milk the firm and run away. However, if the bureaucrat sets the discount rate for bid 2 at a

sufficiently high rate so that bidder 2 loses, then bidder 2 will most likely accuse the

bureaucrat of favoring bidder 1. Although this example is a caricature, anyone familiar

with some privatization experiences will see the validity of such an analogy.




                                             32
       The solution implemented in Mexico was to produce valuation rules that were

made public in advance of the auctions. Basically, the discount rate applied to each

payment increased exponentially as the offered payment for a given year converged to the

projected cash flow of the given year.

       Recall that the initial objective was to obtain all-cash bids. In order to effect this

goal, discount rates were set at sufficiently high levels so that bidders would find it

profitable to borrow funds in the capital market in order make an all-cash bid.

       Summing up, if the objective is to obtain all-cash bids, it is sometimes necessary to

allow non-cash bids in order to increase the number of potential bidders so as to escape

the second highest bid principle. However, doing so may thwart the transparency of the

privatization process. Thus, mechanisms different from those used in typical mergers and

acquisitions transactions must be devised. The best way to achieve this objective remains

an open question.

       The second set of questions has to do with the type of auction the privatizer

should adopt. Should there be a sealed bid auction or an open auction? Should bidders be

allowed to know the bids made by the other bidders? Should there be one or multiple

rounds of bids? Should a minimum price be established? Under the standard assumptions

made in the auction design literature, there is a sense in which open and sealed bids are

equivalent. However, when a state owned enterprise is privatized, there are some elements

that do not accurately fit this framework. On one hand, buyers’ values might be positively

correlated, in which case the privatizer would like a bidder to learn what the bids of others

are. On the other hand, there might be few bidders—this increases the danger of collusion.




                                             33
An open auction or a repeated auction in which information is shared, might ameliorate

the first concern. However, these strategies might increase the likelihood of collusion.

       Next, we consider the third question regarding auction design. Typically, state

owned enterprises are big conglomerates, and it is generally optimal to sell the different

parts of the state owned enterprise as independent firms. In this case the questions that

arise are: Should all parts be auctioned simultaneously or sequentially? Should bids for

combinations of parts be allowed? To address these questions, it is important to note that

in many cases state owned enterprises have very profitable units and, concurrently, other

units that need some investment. So, the question arises should there be a rule according

to which: (i) profitable parts will be sold only in conjunction with one of the parts that

needs investment; and (ii) the set of winning bids will be the one that maximizes the sum

of the bids. The latter condition this implies that a given plant might end up in the hands of

someone that did not offer the highest bid for that plant.

       The idea aired in policy circles is that offering all plants simultaneously in a big

auction and using the rules just described is efficient in cases where there are a few

bidders; this approach increases competition and it allows efficient aggregation of plants.

To see this, suppose that there are three bidders and three plants. Bidder 1 is interested in

plant A , bidder 2 in A and B, while bidder 3 only wants C and B. In the absence of rules

(i) and (ii), bidder 3 will offer zero for plant C because zero is the second highest bid.

However, if those rules were imposed, plant C could only be sold in conjunction with A or

B. It then follows that bidder 1 might be willing to make a bid for C. This in turn will

induce 3 to offer a positive price for C, instead of zero.




                                              34
          It is interesting to compare the 1991 auction of the Mexican steel plants with the

auction of the radio spectrum rights occurring in 1994 in the U.S. In both cases, all units

were auctioned simultaneously, not sequentially. In the Mexican case, however, bids for

combinations of units were allowed, but not so in the US. Multiple rounds of bids with

sharing of information were used in the U.S., whereas in Mexico there was a single highest

bid closed-envelope auction (with no sharing of information). The reason for these

differences is that in the US there were many potential buyers and thousands of spectrum

rights to be auctioned, while in Mexico there were less than ten plants and few bidders.

Thus, Mexican privatizers were more concerned with collusion, as the buyers knew quite

well the plants and their potential. In contrast, U.S. privatizers were more concerned with

an efficient transmission of information across bidders. Furthermore, bids for combinations

of licenses were not allowed in the U.S. because, given the high number of licenses to be

auctioned, the complexity of the auction process would have increased immensely.

          The issues that we have enumerated in this section are of interest to policymakers.

A systematic analysis of the trade-offs involved in innovative auction design should help

guide policy in countries that are initiating reform. The following references deal with the

issues we have discussed in this section. Kikeri, Nellis and Shirley (1992), Lopez de

Silanes (1997), McMillan (1994), Milgrom (forthcoming), and Nankani and Vuylsteke

(1988).

          VI. Concluding Remarks and Research Agenda

          Traditionally, the analysis of privatization has dealt with two main issues. The first

concerns the criteria that should be used to transfer a state owned enterprise to the private

sector. More specifically, should the only objective be to maximize the price of the firm?


                                               35
Also what are the most appropriate auction rules? The second issue deals with the

principles that should guide the restructuring of state monopoly and the appropriate

accompanying regulatory framework.

       Although these issues are indispensable in the design of any privatization program,

other issues regarding the existence of well established property rights must also be taken

into consideration. We have identified three reforms that must be implemented if

privatization is to increase efficiency. First, establishing unitary control rights within the

firm. Second, making privatized firms face hard budget constraints. Third, establishing a

non-corruptible judicial system and transparent bankruptcy procedures.

       In this paper we have posed many questions while not providing answers. Further

empirical research is necessary in order to better aid the policy making process and to

guide theoretical research. We have identified in this paper five areas in which future

research would be useful. It has been nearly a decade since a large number of countries

initiated privatization. Therefore it should soon be possible to perform systematic cross-

country empirical studies and produce the data that will be needed to begin to answer the

questions we have raised.

       An initial area of research would involve a cross-country comparison of the

evolution of privatized industries in which network externalities are essential, for instance

telephone and electrical power industries. It would be important to study under which

circumstances the breaking up of monopolies has led to more efficient outcomes. This

would involve comparing regulatory frameworks and measuring social benefits. The main

question would be under which regimes is there the least chance of the regulators being

captured by those they are supposed to be regulating? A second important area that


                                             36
deserves research is the issue of auction design. It would be useful to have insight into

what results have been obtained with different auction schemes over the last decade. Can

we identify which auctions have worked best in specific circumstances? Third, A cross-

country study of the evolution of privatized banking systems is needed. Why is it that in

several countries, such as Chile and Mexico, privatization was followed by severe lending

booms and crises? What lessons have we learned regarding the proper regulation of

banks? Fourth, it would be beneficial to perform a cross country study that identifies the

stakeholders in a certain set of industries and analyze the post-privatization performance

of firms in which unitary control has been reestablished versus those in which it has not.

Case studies describing the creation of private mafias in the aftermath of privatization

would be illuminating. Finally, the construction of indices of the prevalence of soft budget

constraints would allow us to study, across time and across countries, the

interrelationships between privatization and the evolution of fiscal discipline.




                                            37
                                          References
Aghion, P., O. Hart and J. Moore, 1994, “Improving Bankruptcy Procedure,” Washington
University Law Quarterly, Vol. 72, No. 3, 849-872.

Armstrong, M., S. Cowan, J. Vickers, 1994, Regulatory Reform. Cambridge: MIT Press.

Aspe, P. 1993, Economic Transformation the Mexican Way. Cambridge: MIT Press.

Barberis, N, M. Boycko, A. Shleifer, and N Tsukanova, 1996, “ How Does Privatization
Work: Evidence From the Russian Shops,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 104(4)
764-790.

Bishop, M., J. Kay and C. Mayer, 1994, The Regulatory Challenge. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.

Blanchard, O., 1997, The Economics of Post-Communist Transition, Clarendon Lectures.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Boardman, A. and A. Vining, 1992, “Ownership versus Competition: Efficiency in Public
Enterprise,” Public Choice, 73, 205-239.

Boycko, M, A. Schleifer and R. Vishny, 1995, Privatizing Russia. Cambridge: MIT Press.

Cavallo, D., 1997, El Peso de la Verdad, Buenos Aires: Editorial Planeta.

Feldstein, M., ed., 1998, Privatizing Social Security, Chicago: The University of Chicago
Press.

Goldman, M., 1998, “Russian Billionaire’s Club,” The International Economy,
September.

Hachette, D. and R. Luders, 1993, Privatization in Chile, ICS Press.

Hanson, G., 1994, “Antitrust in Post-Privatization Latin America: An Analysis of the
Mexican Airlines Industry,” The Quarterly Review of Economics and Finance, Vol 34,
199-216.

Hart, O., 1995, Firms, Contracts and Financial Structure, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.

Kikeri, S., J. Nellis and M, Shirley, 1992, “Privatization: The Lessons From experience,”
The World Bank.


                                           38
Kornai, J., 1992, The Socialist System: The Political Economy of Socialism, Princeton:
Princeton University Press.

Krueger, A., 1993, Political Economy of Policy Reform in Developing Countries.
Cambridge: MIT Press.

Krueger, A. and A. Tornell, 1998, “The Role of Bank Restructuring in Recuperating From
Crises: Mexico 1995-1998,” mimeo, Harvard University.

La Porta, R. and F. Lopez-de-Silanes, 1997, “The Benefits of Privatization: Evidence
From Mexico,” NBER working paper 6215.

Lopez-de-Silanes, F., 1997, “Determinants of Privatization Prices,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 112(4), 965-1026.

MacGregor, I., 1986, The Enemies Within. London: Collins.

McMillan, J., 1994, “Selling Spectrum Rights,” Journal of Economic Perspectives.

Megginson, W., R. Nash and M. Van Randenborgh, 1994, “The Financial and Operating
Performance of Newly Privatized Firms: an International Empirical Analysis,” Journal of
Finance, Vol. 49(2) 403-452.

Milgrom, P., forthcoming, Auction Theory for Privatization, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

Nankani H. and C. Vuylsteke, 1988, Techniques of Privatization of State Owned
Enterprises. The World Bank.

Newbery, D., 1997, “Privatization, Restructuring and Regulation of Network Utilities,”
The Walras-Pareto Lectures, mimeo, University of Cambridge.

Noll, R., 1989, “Economic Perspectives on the Politics of Regulation,” in Handbook of
Industrial Organization, Amsterdam: North Holland.

Noll, R., 1999, “Telecommunications Reform in Developing Countries,” presented at the
conference: "Economic Policy Reform: What We Know and What We Need to Know” at
Stanford University in September 1998.

Olson, M., 1982, The Rise and Decline of Nations, New Haven: Yale University Press.

Rogosinski, J., 1993, “Too Much Vodka!” The International Economy, March.

Rogozinski, J., 1997, La Privatizacion en Mexico. Mexico: Editorial Trillas.


                                            39
Schwartz, M., E. Lazear and S. Rosen, 1999, “Russia in Transition,” presented at the
conference: "Economic Policy Reform: What We Know and What We Need to Know” at
Stanford University in September 1998.

Shleifer, A. and R. Vishny, “Politicians and Firms,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol.
109(4), 995-1025.

Thatcher, M., 1993, The Downing Street Years, Harper Collins.

Tornell, A., 1997, “Rational Atrophy: The US Steel Industry,” mimeo, Harvard
University.

Tornell, A. and P. Lane, 1999, “Voracity and Growth,” American Economic Review.

Tornell, A. and A. Velasco, 1992, “The Tragedy of the Commons and Economic Growth,
Journal of Political Economy.

Vickers, J. and G. Yarrow, 1989, Privatization. Cambridge: MIT Press.

Viscusi, et. al., 1992, Economics of Regulation and Antitrust, Heath.

</ref_section>




                                            40
