                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                     FISCAL POLICY, PROFITS,
                                        AND INVESTMENT

                                             Alberto Alesina
                                              Silvia Ardagna
                                             Roberto Perotti
                                            Fabio Schiantarelli


                                          Working Paper 7207
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w7207

                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 1999




We are very grateful to participants at the macroeconomic seminar at Harvard and MIT, University of
Bologna, IGIER, the conference, “Empirical analysis of firms’ decisions” in Bergamo and, especially, to
Olivier Blanchard, Glenn Hubbard, and Serena Ng for very useful suggestions. We also thank Giovanni Olivei
for his comments and Miguel Braun for research assistance. This research was supported by an NSF grant
through the NBER; we thank both organizations for their support. All opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 1999 by Alberto Alesina, Silvia Ardagna, Roberto Perotti, and Fabio Schiantarelli. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Fiscal Policy, Profits, and Investment
Alberto Alesina, Silvia Ardagna,
Roberto Perotti, and Fabio Schiantarelli
NBER Working Paper No. 7207
July 1999

                                            ABSTRACT

       This paper evaluates the effects of fiscal policy on investment using a panel of OECD
countries. In particular, we investigate how different types of fiscal policy affect profits and , as a
result, investment.
       We find a sizable negative effect of public spending -- and in particular of its public wage
component -- on business investment. This result is consistent with models in which government
employment creates wage pressure for the private sector. Various types of taxes also have negative
effects on profits, but, interestingly, the effects of government spending on investment are larger than
the effect of taxes. Our results have important implications for the so called “non-Keynesian” (i.e.
expansionary) effects of fiscal adjustments.

Alberto Alesina                                       Silvia Ardagna
Harvard University                                    Boston College
324 Littauer                                          Department of Economics
Cambridge, MA 02138                                   Chestnut Hill, MA 02162
and NBER                                              ardagna@bc.edu
aalesina@kuznets.fas.harvard.edu

Roberto Perotti                                       Fabio Schiantarelli
Columbia University                                   Boston College
Department of Economics                               Department of Economics
New York , NY 10027                                   Chestnut Hill, MA 02162
rp41@columbia.edu                                     schianta@bc.edu
1       Introduction
In the last three decades, fiscal policy in many OECD countries has experi-
enced large swings. In the seventies and early eighties, fiscal profligacy led
to the accumulation of large deficits. Then, from the mid eighties onward,
several countries implemented fiscal adjustments which, with different degree
of success, slowed the growth of public debts.
     Looking at this evidence, a lively recent literature has pointed out the
 importance of the so called "non keynesian" effects of fiscal policy. Starting
 with Giavazzi and Pagano (1990), several authors have noted that some (but
 not all) fiscal contractions have been expansionary, even in the very short
 run, in contrast to the prediction of standard models driven by aggregate
 demand. Even though episodes of rapid fiscal expansions have been relatively
 less studied, Alesina and Ardagna (1998) show evidence of "non keynesian
 effects" in this direction as well, namely they point out that several fiscal
  expansions have been contractionary.
      Most of the empirical literature has focused on the effects of large fis-
  cal contractions (expansions) on private consumption'; however, as noted,
  for instance, by Alesina, Perotti and Tavares (1998), even a cursory look at
  episodes of large swings in fiscal policy suggests that private investment ex-
  plains a disproportionate share of the response of GDP growth to these large
  changes in the fiscal stance.
      The motivation of this paper is that in order to better understand the
  macroeconomic effects of fiscal policy in OECD countries, one needs to shift
  the focus of the analysis to business investments.
      Needless to say, this is not the first paper on the effects of fiscal policy on
   investment. A large and important literature studies the effects of taxes on
   the cost of capital, using either aggregate or firm level data. However, due to
   the amount of information needed to construct a good measure of the cost of
   capital, this approach tends to be country specific2. In the macroeconomic
    'For the theorethical work on "non-Keynesian" effects of fiscal adjustments see Blan-
 chard (1990), Drazen (1990), Bertola and Drazen (1993), Sutherland (1997), and Perotti
 (1999); for empirical work see Giavazzi and Pagano (1990, 1996), Giavazzi, Jappelli and
 Pagano (1998) and Perotti (1999). All these papers focus on consumption.
    2See, for example, Hasset and Hubbard (1996) and Chirinko (1993) for a review. For


                                            3
literature, a recent strand of research uses numerical solutions of real busi-
ness cycles models with perfectly competitive factor and output markets to
evaluate the effects of fiscal policy on investment3. This literature focuses
on the supply-side responses of capital and labor to changes in spending and
taxation and its based on calibration methods.
     In this paper, instead, we do not use calibration but we rely on economet-
ric evidence on a panel of OECD countries to assess the effects of taxation
 and expenditure on investment. We focus on the role of profits as a deter-
 minant of investment and we show below that the composition of changes in
 fiscal policy is particularly important for profits. We share our emphasis on
 profits and the supply-side with Bruno and Sachs (1985), Blanchard (1997)
 and Lane and Perotti (1999). We share the focus on composition of fiscal
policy with Alesina and Perotti (1995), (1997a), Giavazzi and Pagano (1996),
Giavazzi, Jappelli and Pagano (1998), Mc Dermott and Wescott (1996), and
Alesina and Ardagna (1998).
   We reach several conclusions. First, increases (reductions) of public
spending reduce (increase) profits and, therefore, investment. The magni-
tude of these effects is substantial. A reduction by one percentage point in
the ratio of primary spending over GDP leads to an increase in investment
by 0.16 percentage points of GDP on impact, and a cumulative increase by
0.50 after two years and 0.80 percentage points of GDP after five years. The
 effect is particularly strong when the spending cut falls on government wages:
 in response to a cut in the public wage bill by 1 percent of GDP, the figures
 above become 0.51, 1.83 and 2.77 per cent, respectively.
     Second, increases (reductions) in taxes reduce (increase) profits and in-
 vestment, but the magnitude of these tax effects is smaller than those on
 the expenditure side. In accordance to our emphasis on labor markets ef-
 fects of fiscal policy, taxes on labor have the largest effects on profits. For
 instance, an increase of one percentage point of GDP of taxes on labor leads
 to a reduction of the investment over GDP ratio by 0.17 on impact and a
 cumulative effect of about 0.7 in five years. We argue that this effect is due
 to the fact that higher labor taxes imply higher pre tax wages demanded by
 recent contributions using firm level panel data see Devereux, Keen and Schiantarelli
 (1994) for the UK and Chirinko, Fazzari and Meyer (1999) for the US. For international
 evidence see Cummins, Hasset and Hubbard (1995).
    3See Barro (1989) Baxter and King, (1993), Dotsey and Mao (1994), Ludvigson (1996),
  Ohanian (1997), Finn (1998), Olivei, (1998).



                                            4
workers .'
                                                            there may be noth-
    Third, the magnitude of our coefficients suggests that
ing special in the behavior of investment at the time of expansionary fiscal ad-
justments. As shown by Alesina and Perotti (1997) and Alesina and Ardagna
(1998), expansionary fiscal adjustments are on average implemented mostly
                                                       and transfers, while con-
by spending cuts, particularly on government wages
tractionary ones are characterized by tax increases. The estimated effect of
spending and taxes on investment imply that the different composition of the
stabilization package can account for the observed difference in investment
growth rates. We do not find significant "non linearities" or structural breaks
in the reaction of investment around large fiscal consolidations.5 This result
 suggests that we may not need "special theories" to explain episodes of large
 fiscal adjustments.
     This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 develops a model of in-
 vestment, profits and fiscal policy. Sections 3 discusses the data. Section 4
 displays our main results on profits and investment and illustrates the quan-
 titative effects from different types of fiscal policy on investment. Section 5
 discusses the sensitivity and robustness of our results. Section 6 relates our
 results to the empirical evidence on large fiscal adjustments. The last section
 concludes.


 2 Theory
 2.1 Profits, investment and fiscal policy
 We discuss the link between fiscal policy and investment using a standard
 investment model with convex adjustment costs as in Abel and Blanchard
 (1986). A vast literature has investigated the role of the tax code, like de-
 preciation allowances, investment tax credits, and deductability of interest
  payments, etc. on the computation of the costs of capital. Although the
  cost of capital has been found to be significantly related to investment, the
  elasticity tends to be small (see for instance Chirinko and Fazzari (1998)).
  Thus, the effects of fiscal policy through this channel are not likely to be
  large. Moreover, it is far from clear that a careful modelling of tax incentives
     4This effect can occur both in competitive and unionized labor markets. For more
  discussion of this point and for direct evidence, see Alesina and Perotti (1997).
     5This result is consistent with the empirical evidence of Ardagna (1999).


                                          5
makes much difference6. Here we depart from this literature by emphasizing
effects of fiscal policy which operate mainly through the labor market.
   Firms maximize the expected present discounted value of cash flow, Vt:

  = EH(1+rt+8)1(1_Tt+s)[F(Kt+j,Lt+j) — H(K+,I+) —wt+Lt+ —
          t=O s=O
                                                                                     (1)
subject to the capital accumulation equation
                               K = K_1(1 — 5) + I                                     (2)

    K is the capital stock, It the rate of gross investment, L is labor input, Tt
is the one period (expected) market rate of return, t the tax rate on profits,
and S the rate of depreciation. F(K, L) — H(K, i) is the net production
function where H(K, I) describes the cost of adjusting the capital stock
which is convex in I,.
    Equation (1) assumes that the firm is perfectly competitive, capital be-
comes productive immediately, the price of investment goods relative to the
output price is one and investment expenditures at time t are fully tax de-
 ductible.7 We also assume that the gross production function F(K, L) and
the adjustment cost function H(K, i) are linear homogeneous in their ar-
guments so that F(K, L) can be written as Lf(K/L) and H(K, i) as
Kc(I/K), with f', c' > 0, f" <0 and c" > 0. Under these assumptions, it
 is well known that the firm optimal plan satisfies:
                             = i(At — 1); i'()        c'(.) > 0                        (3)

 where:
                                                                    2
    = E {HK(            )t + 3=1 (ñ                                           HK,1 <0 11K,2 > 0
                    t            v=1t+vt+v) HK(3,
                                              t+j                  t+j
                                                                                       (4)
    6See Devereax, Keen and Schiantarelli (1994) for empirical evidence on this point.
 However, Cummins, Hasset, Hubbard (1995) present a more upbeat evaluation of the
 effects of taxation on investment.
    71f investment expenditures are not tax deductable (1 —Tj) should not multiply It. Most
 countries, in reality, are somewhere in between these two extreme cases, with depreciations
 allowances spread over time and with additional deductions for investment expenditures
 allowed in the first year.

                                             6
                              =b(wt); '>O                                          (5)

    The marginal (net) product of capital, HK, is a function of —the cap-
                                                                       =
ital/labor ratio and of the investment rate, because HK = FK HK
f11(K/L)+(It/Kt)C'(1t/Kt)_C(It/Kt)     .Moreover, t+j = (1—)/(1+rt+);
t+j = (1 —   +)/(l   — Tt+_i).
               13t the discount factor and Yt the       corporate tax   factor8.
                                                                     Note
   We will call
that A  eciuals the shadow value of one additional unit of capital in absence
of taxation A divided by (1 — Tt), (i.e.: A = A/ (1
                                                        —
                                                                   shadow value
    Thus, the investment rate is a function of the (tax-adjusted)
of capital, which depends upon the expected present discounted value of is   the
                                                                                a
net marginal product of capital, 11K (see equations (3) and (4)). ilK
            function of the capital labor ratio, which is an increasing function
decreasing
of the real wage rate through the first order condition for labor (see equations
(4) and (5)). Ceteris paribus, an increase        (current or expected) in the real
                                                         investment. The fiscal
wage decreases the shadow value of capital and, hence,
policy channel which we focus on is the effect of public spending and taxes
on labor costs and therefore profits.
    There are several ways to rationalize this "supply-side" link between fiscal
policy and investment. In a competitive labor market increases in taxes on
                                                                       of hours
labor income lead to a decrease in the individual's labor supply
at each level of the gross wage, assuming the substitution effect dominates.
Increases in taxes or unemployment benefits also affect participation decisions
 and reduce total labor supply. Finally, an increase in public employment
 increases total labor demand, and therefore puts upward pressure on the
 equilibrium wage9. The opposite holds for reduction in taxes, unemployment
 benefits or public employment.
    In the context of unionized labor markets, similar effects hold.1° For
 many specifications of the union objective function and of the nature of the
 wage bargain, an increase in income taxes or in social security contributions
 that reduces the net wage of a worker leads to an increase in the pre-tax
 real wage faced by the firm. Moreover, the spending side of the government
                                           of not being employed by a given
 budget influences the reservation utility
    8We assume that the market rate of return r is exogenous in the model. Our economy
 can, thus, be considered a small open economy.
          an analysis of the effect of public employment on investment in a real business
  cycle model, see Finn (1998).
    10See, for instance, Jackman, Layard and Nickell, (1991).

                                             7
firm in more than one way. First, public employment can be an alternative
to employment in the private sector. Thus, higher public wages and/or pub
lic employment increase the reservation utility of union members. Second,
unemployment compensation and various other transfer programs reduce the
costs of unemployment. Therefore, higher public spending (particularly on
government wages, transfers and welfare) increases the real wage demanded
by the unions, thus reducing marginal profits and, hence, investment.
    We can summarize in a simple way the effects of fiscal policy on the
equilibrium wage at each level of the aggregate capital stock KT.

                      wt=W(Kt,X); W,>O, W2>O                                           (6)
   where KT is the total capital stock equal to the capital stock of each
individual firm times the number of firms and XG is a vector of fiscal policy
variables, including labor taxes, unemployment benefits, the public sector
wage rate and public employment'1. In the perfectly competitive model KT
enters the wage schedule because it determines the position of the aggregate
demand for labor at a given wage rate. W in this case equates the demand
and supply of labor, which depends upon fiscal variables'2. Also in a union
model it is reasonable to assume that KTaffects positively the equilibrium
wage13.
   If we assume perfect foresight, we can easily represent graphically the
effect of changes in the fiscal policy parameters on the capital stock through
         Calmfors and Horn (1986) for a model of a centralized union that bargains both for
private and public sector workers and Holmund (1997) for a model with separate unions.
In the latter paper there can be wage differences between private and public wages in
equilibrium.
  '2Using equation (5) total labor demand equals LT =             where LT = NL and
     = NK and N denotes the number of firms. Note that we have assumed for simplicity
a labor supply that depends only upon the contemporaneous wage.
   '3Under constant returns to scale, standard monopolistic union models imply that the
wage is independent of the capital stock of the individual firm for any given level of
alternative income. However, in general equilibrium, it is possible to show that, under
reasonable assumptions, the alternative income to union members, and hence the union
wage, are increasing functions of the capital stock. Note that the solution to the one period
union model is also the time consistent contract in a dynamic game in which the union
has an intertemporal utility function and acts as the Stackelberg leader facing a firm with
convex adjustment costs for capital (see Van der Ploeg (1988)). See also Devereux and
Lockwood (1991), Denny and Nickell (1993) on the determination of the capital stock in
union models.


                                             8
the wage channel. The two equations defining the steady state (from (2),
(3), (4) and (5)) are
                                       i—1)=6                                        (7)


          -f'((w)) - (A - 1)i(A -1) + c(i(A - 1)) + (1- )A =0                        (8)
   Equation (7) is the LK = 0 locus and it implies that in steady state
the aggregate capital stock is constant when A equals 1 + c' (6). For values
of A greater (smaller) than 1 + c'(6) the investment rate exceeds (falls short)
the depreciation rate 8 and the capital stock grows (contracts). Equation (8)
defines the A+1 = 0 locus. Since the wage rate is an increasing function
of the capital stock KT (see (6)) and the marginal product of capital a
decreasing function of the wage, one can show that the A+1 = 0 locus is
downward sloping14. For values of A above (below) the locus, the shadow
value of capital increases (decreases). The LK = 0 and the                           =   0

loci are represented in Figure 1. The steady state equilibrium is saddle-path
stable'5.
    When there is an unanticipated permanent increase in public employ-
ment, public sector wage, unemployment benefits or labor taxes at a given
level of the discount rate, the A+1 = 0 locus shifts downward and the
steady state capital stock decreases from K to K. The investment rate
falls discretely below the depreciation rate, following the discrete fall of A
 (see move from point E0 to D), and then it recovers gradually. The effect of
 anticipated changes in fiscal policy and of unanticipated temporary changes
 can be similarly analyzed.

 2.2 From theory to testing
 In order to take the model to the data, we need to parametrize the adjust-
 ment cost function and to select a proxy for the marginal profitability of
   14
          precisely,
                                  d)   —    f",b'WkT
                                dKT        (i-(+)) < o
 when zK1 = 0 and             = 0 loci intercept.
   '5Note that, given the discount rate, our assumption of full instantaneous deductability
 of investment expenditure, yields the result that capital is neutral with respect to the
 corporate tax rate in the steady state. See Nickell (1978), chapter 9.


                                              9
capital. Finally, we will have to choose how to model empirically the de-
pendence of marginal profitability on fiscal factors. We will assume that
adjustment costs are linear homogeneous and quadratic, i.e. H(K, I) =
              K] where Et is a stochastic shock which is known when firms
[ (- — Et)
decide their inputs16.We will experiment with two proxies for the gross-of-
tax marginal profit of capital, 11KV First, under the assumptions of perfect
competition and linear homogeneity we used so far, marginal profits equals
the marginal product of capital and can be approximated by average profits
per unit of capital.
   More precisely,

   IIK(Kt, I) = [F(K, L) — H(K, I) — wL] /K + HiO(It/Kt)                                (9)
                [F(K, L) — H(K, I) — wtLt] /K itt
    where itt denotes average operating profits. For brevity, we will refer to
this as the "benchmark case". Alternatively, if we assume that the production
function is Cobb-Douglas, and the firm is imperfectly competitive, marginal
profits can be shown to be approximately a multiple of the sales to capital
ratio S/K, i.e.: 11K = (S/K),where 0 equals the elasticity of output with
respect to capital times the markup of prices over marginal costs17. If we use
average gross-of-tax profits to proxy for marginal gross-of-tax profits, and
linearize around sample means of it, i3t+. and         we obtain:


                             +                              +
                                                                1       ()3t+i+i] +,
                                                                                       (10)
where variables with a bar denote sample means. We have omitted additive
constants for ease of notation and we have used the approximations I3t+j
1 — r+   —   and         1 — ('rt+ — Tt+_i)/(1 — r). Thus, the optimal rate
of investment depends on the present discounted value of future cash flow,
of the discount factor, and of the corporate tax factor18.
  '61n the empirical analysis, we allow for different alternative assumptions about the
nature of the error term. In particular, we allow it either to have an AR(l) structure or
to be a random walk. Blundell et al. (1992) find evidence of an AR(1) structure for
using panel data.
  '7See also Gilchrist and Himmelberg (1998).
   '81f gross-of-tax profits are proxied instead by the sales to capital ratio, equation (10)


                                             10
   A particularly simple and illuminating case is when in equation (10) 3t+j
and      are constant over time, with the latter set equal to one (implying
no changes in corporate taxes). In this case, the optimal rate of investment
is:
                                                            +Et                       (11)
                                  K
       Finally, we must specify an estimable system linking government spend-
ing, taxes and profits. Our strategy is to use the estimates of this system
to construct a series for ), which we then use to estimate equation (10)19.
                                             is constant and     is set equal
Starting with the simplest case in which
to one, we use the following profit equation:
                               = a1iv_ + a2ivt_2 + a3Gt + a4Rt + Ut                    (12)

  where C and R are public spending and revenue (or spending and revenue
 components) as a share of trend GDP and IV is gross/net-of-tax profits or
 value added in the business sector as a share of the capital stock. Gross-
 of-tax profits are defined as value added in the business sector minus labor
 costs. On the basis of the previous discussion, we would expect both a3 and
 a4 to be negative. The evolution of revenue and expenditure is described by
 a simple VAR system:
                  R=           d11R_1 + d12R_2 + d13G_1 + d14C_2 +                    (13a)
                           =   d21R_1 + d22R_2 + d23G_1 + d24G_2 + Wt                 (13b)

  In estimation G, and R are cyclically adjusted to eliminate the automatic
  changes in the variable induced by business cycle fluctuations.
     However, there could be a second source of endogeneity between profits
  on one hand, and revenues and expenditures on the other: the discretionary
  would still be valid, with 9t replacing itt. If investment expenditures are not tax de-
  ductable (10) becomes
                                     +                    +
       where       =   (   — r)itt.f denotes average profits net of taxes.

        '9The q theory of investment has not been always empirically successful. Our emphasis
  here, however, is not on a test of q theory versus alternatives. We are interested in
      emphasiszing a link between profits and investment and below we also allow for liquidity
      effects. For an excellent discussion of the "state of the art" of investment theory and
      empirics, see Caballero (1999).

                                                   11
response of the policymakers to business cycle fluctuations. We do not have
any quantitative estimate of this channel of endogeneity, but we believe that,
due to the "long and variable" decision lags in fiscal policy, this source of
endogeneity is unlikely to be too serious. The budget for year t is usually
discussed and approved during the second half of year t — 1. Some additional
fiscal policy measures are sometimes decided during the year, but they usually
represent a small fraction of the budget, and most of the times they become
effective only by the end of the year. Thus, our assumption that cyclically
 adjusted Ct and R do not depend on current profits (or GDP) is likely to
 be a reasonable, although imperfect, approximation to reality.
    For the same reasons, we assume that G and R are known at the be-
ginning of the period. By contrast, we will initially assume that itt is not
in the information set at time t: thus, the first term in the infinite sum that
enters the construction of ) in equation (10) is the expected value of itt
conditional on the values of the variables on the right hand side of (12). We
will routinely check that our estimates of the investment equation are not
unduly sensitive to this assumption. That is, we will also allow for the case
of itt in the information set at time t, so that the actual value of itt can be
 used in constructing )20
    For the more general model with variable discount and corporate tax
 factors, in section 5 we will augment the system of forecasting equations in
 (12) and (13) with:
                      rt = b1rt_1 + b2r_2 + b3G + b4R + Vt                               (14)

 Moreover, we augment the VAR for C and R with the corporate tax rate
                                                       variable to the profit
 Tt. Finally, we will experiment with adding an output
 function and hence to the system of equations generating expectations.


 3      Data
 All our data are from the OECD 1997 Economic Outlook Database. Our
 sample includes 18 countries: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Den-
 mark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Netherlands,
    20Note that, although and Wt are uncorrelated with Ut, they need not be uncorrelated
  with each other. As long as (12) is used to forecast future profits and therefore to construct
                                                                            when we study the
     this is not a problem. We will have to take up this issue again
  impulse responses of investment to spending or revenue shocks.

                                               12
Norway, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom, United States, covering a maxi-
mum time span from 1960 to 199621. The data appendix contains the precise
definition of all the variables we use and some descriptive statistics.
    Each component of revenues — direct taxes on households, business taxes,
indirect taxes, and social security contributions — is cyclically adjusted by
computing the value of the component if GDP were at its trend level instead
than at its actual level, using the GDP elasticities provided by the OECD. We
calculate trend GDP separately for each country in the sample, by regressing
log GDP in real terms on a constant and a quadratic trend22. Hence, for
each component of revenues we compute:
                       RA = R(GDPVTR/GDPV)'                                           (15)
where RA is the cyclically adjusted revenue item, RCA is the actual rev-
enue item, GDPVTR is trend real GDP, GDPV is real GDP, and a2 is the
elasticity of the revenue item i to real GDP. A similar adjustment is applied
to total primary spending and transfers23. We then divide each cyclically
adjusted revenue component and each spending component by trend GDP.
Investment and profits are divided by the capital stock to obtain the invest-
ment and profit rates.
    Unit root tests run country by country on all the variables used in the
equations did not allow us to reject the presence of a unit root for all the
countries. However, given the low power of the Phillips-Perron test in small
sample, we also implemented the unit root test proposed by Tm, Pesaran and
Shin (1995) on the panel. This time, the evidence was in favor of station-
arity24. We first estimate our model in levels, detrending all the variables,
  21Two small OECD countries, Luxembourg and Iceland, are excluded, together with
the new members of this group admitted oniy recently. New Zealand, Portugal, and
Switzerland are excluded because of data problems.
  22Thus, we apply the same cyclical adjustment as the OECD, except that we use trend
GDP as the reference value of output, rather than 'potential output' as calculated by the
OECD. See OECD, Fiscal Position and Business Cycles, Users' Guide for Statistzcs on
diskette, for the values of the tax elasticities. We also used the Hodrick-Prescott filter to
estimate trend GDP, obtaining similar results.
  23The OECD does not provide the values of the transfers elasticities. We used the
elasticities provided for total primary spending and scaled them up by the ratio of transfers
to total primary spending. This is under the reasonable assumption that transfers are the
only cyclically sensitive component of government spending.
  24Note that, by dividing revenues and spending by trend GDP, we implicitly assume
that GDP is trend stationary. It is still possible that the ratio between revenues and
spending and trend GDP contains a unit root if the numerators contain a unit root.

                                             13
allowing for country specific linear and quadratic trends25. In section 5 we
present results of an estimation in first differences and we experiment with
allowing country specific constants to account for country specific drifts. Our
basic results on fiscal policy and investment are unaffected; in fact, in several
respects they are stronger for the model in differences.


4 Empirical results
We consider first the simplest case defined by (11), (12) and (13) above, in
which investment depends only upon future expected marginal profits and
the discount factors and corporate tax factors are constant.26

4.1 The effects of fiscal policy on profits
We begin, in Table 1, by estimating the profit equation (12). Columns 1-3
of this table correspond to different definitions of the dependent variable.
Marginal profit 11K is proxied by average profit gross of corporate tax pay-
ments ic in column 1, by average profit net of taxes lr* in column 2, and by
the sales-to-capital ratio S/K in column 3.
    In all three columns, both primary spending and revenues as a share
of trend GDP have a negative and statistically significant effect on marginal
profits, and their coefficients are quite similar across the three columns. Using
a coefficient of 0.10 which is roughly the average across the columns in Table
1, an increase in government spending by 1 percentage point of trend GDP
decreases profits as a share of the capital stock by about 1/10 of a percentage
point, and an increase in taxes by the same amount has roughly the same
effect on profits. At a first look, these effects may not seem very large.
However, many episodes of fiscal adjustments in recent years have been quite
 sizable. For instance, in Ireland 1986-1989, primary spending as share of
 GDP decreased from 37.9 per cent in 1986 to 29.7 per cent in 1989 and, in
 the same years, taxes were cut by almost 2.5 percentage points from 37.6 to
 35.25. Using the coefficient in Table 1, this change in fiscal policy accounts for
   250LS estimation in levels with country specific effects is appropriate since we have a
 panel with large T.
   26J this case, we assume the corporate tax factor 'y = 1, and the discount factor
      — 6 — r = 0.88, where 6 = 0.1 and r = 0.02, the average value in our sample.
 /3 = 1



                                            14
a ceteris pan bus increase in profits as a share of GDP of almost 2 percentage
points27.
    We now consider the effects of the individual budget items. Since the re-
suits are very similar across the three columns of Table 1, in the next tables
we present our regressions using the average profit rate gross of corporate
tax payments (as in columns 1 of Table 1) as our proxy for marginal profits.
On the spending side of the budget (Table 2) we consider transfers, the wage
and non-wage components of government consumption, and government in-
vestment. On the revenue side of the budget (Table 3), we consider in turn
labor taxes (defined as the sum of direct taxes on households, and social
 security and payroll taxes), taxes on business, and indirect taxes.
    The point estimates of the coefficients of all spending items are negative
 and significant at the 5% level, except non-wage government consumption,
which is significant at the 10% level. The government wage bill has the
strongest negative effect on profits, with a coefficient of -.43 and a t-statistic
of 6.33. Thus, a permanent fall in wage government consumption by 1 percent
of GDP would lead to a cetenis panibus increase in profits as a share of the
capital stock by .42 percentage points and an increase in profits as a share
of GDP by .82 percentage points on impact and of 2.74 percentage points in
the steady state.
    Among the revenue items, labor taxes have the strongest negative effect
on profits, with a coefficient of -.16 and a t-statistics of 4.25. An increase in
labor taxes by 1 percent of trend GDP would lead to a reduction in profits
 as a share of GDP by about .30 percentage points on impact and .98 in
 the steady state. These results are consistent with the labor market models
 discussed above, since the two components of spending and revenues which
 seems to affect profits more are government wages and labor taxation.

 4.2 The investment equation
 Table 4 displays estimates of the investment equation (11). Following Abel
 and Blanchard (1986), and Blanchard, Rhee and Summers (1993), we add
 some dynamic to our equation by letting the first lag of ). also affect in-
 vestment. Moreover, we estimate the equation by GLS to account for the
 presence of a AR(1) error term, with an autocorrelation coefficient that is
   27We convert   the profits/capital ratio into the profits/GDP ratio using the average
 capital/GDP ratio of 1.89 for the whole sample.


                                           15
allowed to vary across countries.
    Columns 1-3 parallel the corresponding columns of Table 1. Thus, marginal
profits are proxied by gross-of-tax average profits in column 1, by net-of-tax
average profits in colunm 2, and by the sales to capital ratio in column 3.
Column 4 is exactly like column 1, except that we compute A assuming that
current profits are known at the beginning of the period, rather than with
one period delay28.
   Contemporaneous A is a significant explanatory variable for investment
in all columns of Table 4, and the one period lagged value is statistically
significant in column 4. The point estimates of the coefficient of contempo-
                                                                         the
raneous A vary between .05 and .1, and are similar to those implied by
estimates in Blanchard, Summers and Rhee (1993) for the United States29.
  28     implies that the actual value of itt is used to construct A. Formally, omitting
constants, if profits are known with one period delay, A is calculated as
       = a'(I — Ap)AXt
  where:

  a'= [100000]
  X = [itt_i G R t—2 G_j Re_i]'
   X, = AX_1 + Et,
   If current profits are known at the beginning of the period
   A = itt + pa'(I — Bp)'BXt
   where:
   X= [ G R          itt_i G_1 Rt_iI', X = BX_1 +         t
   and A and B are the matrices implied by equations (12 and 13).

    29Blanchard, Rhee and Summers (1993) adopt a different specification, in that they
                                                                                          first
 regress the first difference of the logarithm of the investment to capital ratio on the
 difference of the logarithm of A and its first lag, obtaining a coefficient on the contempo-
 raneous A of .91 in the full sample and of .54 in the post-war sample. Using an average
 value for A of 1, and an average value of the investment
                                                             to capital ratio of about 6% in
 the whole period and 8% in the post-war period, an increase of A by 1% would lead to an
  increase in investment as a share of capital by .55 percentage points in the whole period
                                                                   the coefficients of contem-
  and by .43 percentage points in the post-war period. Summing
  poraneous and lagged A, the effect would be .94 percentage points       in the whole period
  and .83 percentage points in the post-war period. These are very close to the effect of 1
  percentage points that we obtain from our estimate in column 1 of Table 4 (note that the
  coefficient of the first lag of A is minuscule).




                                               16
4.3 Fiscal policy, profits and investment
We now provide some quantitative estimates of the dynamic effects of fiscal
policy on investment. We discuss two types of experiments. The first is meant
to give a rough idea of the order of magnitude of the effects on investment.
Suppose primary government spending falls permanently by 1 percent of
trend GDP: what is the effect on investment? We abstract from the equations
for taxes and spending (13a and 13b) and we treat them as if they were set
by the government independently of their own (or other variables') past.
This back-of-the envelope calculation gives an approximate answer. Starting
from the profit equation in column 1 of Table 1, a permanent fall in C by 1
percent of trend GDP causes a permanent fall in profits as share of capital
by .09/(1-.67-.03) .3 percentage points; using a value of 3 of .88, this leads
to a change in A by .3/(1-.88) = 2.5 percent. Using the estimate of column
1 in Table 4, investment increases by .27 percentage points as a share of the
capital stock, and by .55 percentage points as a share of GDP30. This is far
from a trivial effect.
    The second and more precise experiment consists of tracing out the dy-
namic effects of a unit shock to spending or revenues, using the estimates of
the whole system (equations (12) and (13)). Formally, we study the impulse
responses of investment to a shock to spending or revenues.
    In order to do this, we need to solve a preliminary question.3' To obtain
 a meaningful impulse response from the dynamic system ((12) and (13)),
 we need innovations that are mutually orthogonal. While the reduced form
 innovations and Wt are certainly orthogonal to Ut, in general they will be
 correlated with each other. This means that a shock to, say Wt is not really
 a "spending shock", but a linear combination of the underlying structural
 spending and revenue shocks. We are skeptical about the possibility of re-
 covering the structural, orthogonal shocks to revenues and spending. Thus,
 we orthogonalize the innovations in two ways: first, by letting revenues "come
  30Note that here and in what follows, we use the fact that
                                dld(I/K) K
                                dx      dx i—(I/K)
   since K is the end of the period capital stock. Dividing by GDP we obtain the change
 of investment as a percentage of GDP. We set I/K to 0.07 and K/Y to 1.89, the average
 sample values.
   31See Blanchard and Perotti (1999) for a more thorough treatment of this issue.


                                           17
first", i.e. by adding R to the rhs of equation (13b); alternatively, by letting
spending "come first", i.e. by adding G, to the rhs of equation (13a). Both
procedures give orthogonalized spending and revenue shocks by construction;
if the correlation between the reduced form innovations and Wt is small,
then the impulse responses to the two orthogonalized spending shocks ob-
tained with these two procedures will not differ much. In fact, in our sample
the correlation between Wt and rj is indeed low, .13. As an example, we will
present the results obtained when revenues come first32.
     Table 5 displays the changes in investment expressed as a share of GDP,
 due to a unitary shock at time t, to primary spending, revenues, and their
 main components, on impact and up to 5 years, and the cumulative change
 after the first five, ten and twenty years33. For instance, a reduction by one
 percentage point in the ratio of primary spendingto GDP leads to an increase
 in the investment/GDP ratio by .16 percentage points on impact, and to
 a cumulative increase by .50 percentage points after two years and by .80
 percentage points after five years. The effect is also statistically significant34.
 Increases in taxes reduce investment but the magnitude of the tax effects
 is smaller and statistically significant only on impact. For instance, the
  cumulative effect on the investment/GDP ratio is -.18 percentage points,
  compared with - .80 for spending.
      The results on the component of spending are also quite instructive. Con-
  sistently with our results on profits, the largest effect is from government
  wages. For instance, in response to a cut in the public wage bill by one per
  cent of GDP, the impact effect is an increase in the investment/GDP ratio
  by .51 percentage points; the cumulative effect at the end of the fifth year is
  2.77 percentage points. For this reason, if the cut in primary spending were
  concentrate all or' government wages, the magnitude of the effects on invest-
  ment would be much larger than those computed above. Labor taxes also
   have a sizable effect on private investment. An increase of labor taxes by one
   percent of GDP leads to a fall in the investment/GDP ratio by .17 percent-
                                                                                 The
   age points on impact and by .75 percentage points in the steady state.
   effect of a shock to taxes on labor is significant at the 10% level on impact
    32We also checked (and confirmed) that our results are not unduly sensitive to the
  orthogonalization procedure.
    33j other words, the table displays the impulse responses of the investment to GDP
  ratio at different horizons.
    34Standard errors are computed by bootstrapping, based on 500 replications. We fol-
  lowed Runkle (1987). See footnote to Table 5 for details.


                                             18
and after one year.


5 Sensitivity and robustness
Our results are robust to a variety of different specifications. In what follows,
we discuss several extensions to our benchmark regressions. We add each
extension, one by one, to the benchmark case.

5.1 The profit function
5.1.1 Adding GDP
In Table 6 we augment our basic profit regression with a measure of "private
GDP", namely the ratio of total GDP less government consumption divided
by the capital stock. This measure of the volume of sales per unit of capital
is strongly positively associated with the profit rate. This result holds both
in OLS and IV regressions, where the instruments are appropriately lagged
values of the included variables (see list at the bottom of the table).
   Our results on the effects of fiscal policy on profits are virtually un-
changed. If we use this augmented regression of profits to construct ), our
results on investments are also virtually unchanged. The dynamic response
of investment to fiscal policy changes is also very close to the one in Table
5. Consider, for example, augmenting the VAR described by equations (12)
with an equation for "private GDP" and adding its lagged value to the profit
equation. A reduction by one percentage point in spending as a share of
GDP reduces the investment/GDP ratio by .17 percentage points on impact,
and by .61 after five years. In the benchmark model in Table 5 these values
are 0.16 and 0.80, respectively.

5.1.2 Fiscal policy, labor costs and profits
One important fiscal channel which we emphasize is the effect of public wages
and employment on labor costs in the private sector. A different test of this
channel is to regress profits on real private labor cost instrumented by the
government wage bill. This is done in Table 7. The first four columns of
this table use as instruments for private labor costs various combinations of
variables, always including public wage spending. The results are supportive
of our hypothesis and are very robust, (the coefficient of private labor costs is

                                       19
always negative and significant). They hold with and without private GDP
as a share of capital in the profit regression (as shown in the table) and for
several alternative sets of instruments.
    The next four columns use total government spending and/or total rev-
enues rather than public wage spending and/or labor taxes as instruments.
V,,That is interesting is that the coefficient of instrumented wage is lower in
absolute value than in the previous four columns. The first stage regressions,
where the private wages are regressed on alternative sets of instruments, are
quite illuminating. In fact, Table 8 shows that private wages increase with
taxes and public spending. Moreover, private wages are better explained by
public wages rather than by total government spending. Consistently with
our discussion in section 2.2, while total revenues do not have a positive and
statistically significative effect on private wages, labor taxes do. Finally, our
results for the investment regression are virtually unchanged when we use
these alternative formulations for the profit function.

5.2 First differences
We have re-estimated all our regressions with variables in first differences
rather than in levels. In fact, as discussed above, unit root tests country by
country and on the whole panel lead to opposite conclusions about the order
of integration of the series.
    Tables 9 and 10 display the results. In the profit equation (first panel of
Table 9), the coefficient of primary spending is twice and that of revenues is
three times as large as the corresponding coefficients in the regression in levels
(column 1 of Table 1). However, in the investment equation (second panel of
Table 9), the coefficient of contemporaneous A is about one tenth compared
to the one for the model in levels of Table 4. Combining these results,
Table 10 reports the effects, at different horizons, on the investment/GDP
ratio of a unitary shock to primary spending and revenues, using the same
orthogonalization adopted in Table 5. The impulse response to a shock in
spending in the first five years is similar to the one obtained for the model
in levels. The cumulative effect after the first ten years is 1.49 percentage
points for the model in difference and .98 for the model in levels. In the
case of a shock to taxes, the difference with the regressions in levels is more
marked. For instance, after five years, the cumulative effect on investment is
almost five times as large in the model in differences compared to the model
in levels (-0.87 versus -.16). Moreover, it is of the same order of magnitude

                                       20
as the effect of a shock in spending. Therefore, the conclusions concerning
the quantitative effects of fiscal policy and in particular of taxation would be
reinforced if we rely on the model in differences. However, the more powerful
tests of the unit root on the panel tend to support the specification in levels.

5.3 Variable discount and corporate tax factors
So far, we have assumed that the firm's discount factor fl and the corporate
tax rate factor 'y were constant. We now allow these two terms to vary
over time; thus, the investment equation we estimate is now (10) instead of
(11), and we add equation (14) and the equation for the corporate tax rate
to the VAR (13). This allows us to investigate the effects of changes in the
interest rate on investment. Table 11 reports the corresponding regressions,
estimated in the benchmark case of variables in levels and with marginal
profits proxied by average profits gross of taxes. To compute the discount
factor I3,we use the one-period (net of corporate taxes) ex post real interest
rate to measure the term rt , and a value of 0.10 for the depreciation rate

     Column 1 displays the estimate of equation (14) for the real interest rate,
and column 2 of the investment equation (10). In the interest rate equation,
the coefficient of R (i.e. tax revenues) is positive and significant, while the one
on C (i.e. government spending) is negative and significant. These results
are somewhat counterintuitive. However, other authors have also obtained
similarly results. For instance, Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1990) in a panel
study on OECD countries on the effects of fiscal policy on interest rates find
that government deficit is negatively associated with the interest rates in
many specifications.
     In the investment equation, Aprof measures the contribution to changes
 in ) due to changes in average profits, ,\rint captures, instead, changes due
 to the net real rate of interest and Actax changes due to the corporate tax
 rate (given the net of taxes interest rate). Thus, these terms correspond to
 the first, second, and third terms on the rhs of equation (10), respectively.
 As expected the interest rate term has a negative and statistically significant
 coefficient in the investment equation, while changes in the corporate tax
 rate term do not have any statistically significant effect on investments.
     Turning to the impulse responses (not shown), the reaction of investment
  35Results would be very similar if we used the ex-post real interest rate gross of taxes.


                                            21
to a shock in spending is slightly smaller than in the benchmark case. A
positive shock to spending reduces investment through its effects on profits,
but it also has a negative effect on the real interest rate, thus increasing
investment. After the first five years, the cumulative effect on investment as
a share of GDP due to a unitary shock in spending is -.73, against -.80 in
the benchmark case. By contrast, a shock to revenues has a stronger effect
on investment than in the benchmark case. An increase in taxes reduces
investment both through its effect on profits and via the real rate of interest;
after the first five years, cumulatively, investment as a share of GDP decreases
by .3 percentage points, almost twice as much as in the benchmark model.

5.4 Time effects
We added year dummies in the regressions as an additional way of controlling
for common shocks to all countries in the sample. Tables 12 and 13 display
the profit regressions thus obtained, as usual with the average profit gross of
corporate tax as a proxy for marginal profits. In Table 12 the independent
fiscal policy variables are primary spending and total revenues (column 1),
or primary spending and the individual revenue items (columns 2 to 4). In
Table 13, the independent fiscal policy variables are total revenues and the
individual expenditure items. The estimated coefficients on public spending
are lower than those in the benchmark case and in one case (when labor taxes
are used as the tax variable) the coefficient becomes insignificant. The coef-
ficients on the revenue items are unchanged. In Table 13, the coefficients of
transfers and non-wage government consumption are now insignificant, but
the coefficient of wage government consumption and of government invest-
ment are still large and significant. As argued above, taxes on households,
social security taxes, and wage government consumption are the items of the
budget with the strongest impact on unit labor costs and firms' profitability.

5.5 Country by country results
We have re-estimated the profit and investment equations by dropping one
country at a time: none of the resulting 18 regressions for each equation were
significantly different from the regressions we present in the paper.
   We have also estimated the profit and investment equations country by
country. Given the relatively short time series available in each country,
results have to be taken with caution. In any case, the basic picture is

                                      22
encouraging. In the level regression, the effect of government spending on
profits is negative and significant at the 5 per cent level in 10 out of 18 coun-
tries; of the remaining 8 countries, government spending has a negative, but
insignificant coefficient in 4 countries. No country has a significant positive
coefficient. The results on taxes in the profit equation are slightly less strong.
In six countries, the coefficient of revenues is negative and significant (at the
5% level in three countries, at the 10% level in the other three); in seven,
it is negative but insignificant; in no country the coefficient is positive and
significant.
    In the investment equation, in ten countries, contemporaneous and/or
lagged values of ) are statistically significant determinants of investment.
In seven countries, however, neither contemporaneous nor lagged values of
  are significant, and in one country the coefficient on X is positive and
insignificant, but the coefficient on lagged ). is negative and significant at the
10% level.
   We then re-estimated the profit and investment equations country by
country in first differences, and the results are similar to those from the
regressions in levels, in fact, slightly stronger.

5.6 Expectations of profits, financial constraints and
        investment
Our specification for ). includes all the discounted stream of expected future
marginal profits. There are two reasons why the future may not matter so
much. One is financial constraints; some firms may be limited in their access
to credit markets. The other one is that beyond one or two years forecasts
of future marginal profits and of fiscal policy become so unreliable that are
basically not used by the firm36. The focus of the present paper is not the
role of financial constraints (nor the "optimal" time horizon firms use for
investment decisions) and aggregate data are not appropriate to address this
issue as it deserves. However, the existence of financial constraints would be
relevant for our purposes for two reasons. At the theoretical level, it would
reinforce the negative effects of fiscal policy on investment to the extent
that changes in taxes or spending affect the firms' cash flow. Empirically,
it is important to assess whether our constructed ). in reality capture firms'
  36This is, of course, equivalent to discounting the future beyond, say (t+1), at a much
higher rate.


                                          23
availability of internal funds, rather than expected returns to investments.
    Columns 1-2 of Table 14 investigate the presence of financial constraints
by applying a standard methodology in the empirical investment literature.
We add the contemporaneous (column 1) or lagged value (column 2) of the
profit rate net of corporate tax payments to our benchmark investment equa-
tion. When we use current profits as our proxy for financial constraints, we
tackle endogeneity by using as instruments the current value and first lag of
the fiscal policy variables, of A, and of the profit rate. In column (1) the
coefficient on profits is negative but statistically insignificant and the coeffi-
cients on A and A (—1) are virtually unchanged from the estimates in Table 4.
In column (2), the coefficient on lagged profits is 0.07 and significant at the
10% level, consistent with a liquidity effect at work. At the same time, the
coefficient of the contemporaneous value of A falls, relative to the estimates
in Table 4, by 30%, and the one on lagged A by 50%. The overall effect of
a shock to fiscal policy on investment is, however, stronger than in Table 4.
Accounting for financial constraints, investment as a share of GDP increases
approximately by 0.73 percentage points (versus 0.55 in the benchmark case)
in response to permanent decrease in primary spending by 1 percent of trend
GDP.
  Columns 3-5 of Table 14 check whether forecasts of future marginal prof-
its beyond one or two years are indeed relevant for investment decisions.
We construct A including just expected marginal profits at time t (column
3), t and t+1 (column 4), t, t+1 and t+2 (column 5), rather than all the
discounted stream of expected future marginal profits. In colunm 3, the
magnitude of the coefficient on A is three times as big as the one in Table
4. When we extend the forecast horizon used to construct A (column 5),
the magnitude of the coefficient declines and it is approximately equal to the
benchmark case.
    Finally, in column 6 (column 7) expected marginal profits at time t and
all the discounted stream of expected future marginal profits (the discounted
stream of expected future marginal profits at time t+1 and t+2) enter as sep-
arate regressors in the investment equation. Only the coefficient of expected
marginal profits at time t has a statistically significant effect on investment
and its magnitude is more than twice that in the benchmark model in Ta-
ble 4. We also compute the dynamic response of investment to fiscal policy
changes considering the different specifications in column 3-8. Results are
very close to the one in Table 5. In some specifications, changes in public
spending and total revenue have slightly lower effects on investment. In con-

                                       24
clusion, we find that investment is affected mostly by expected profits for
near future. This might be an indication that expectations of profits too
far into the future are too unreliable to be used in computing the present
discounted value of stream of marginal profits. Although interesting, this
finding does not alter our conclusions on the importance of fiscal policy as a
determinant of investment decision of firms.


6 Large fiscal adjustments
In this section we discuss whether the fiscal effects which we estimated above
are enough to explain the behavior of the economy around the time of large
fiscal adjustments. The literature on large fiscal adjustments has highlighted
an important empirical regularity. Fiscal adjustments which rely mostly, or
exclusively, on spending cuts, and particularly on transfers and government
wages, are associated with a surge in growth during and immediately after
the adjustment. The opposite occurs in the case of adjustments which are
tax based37.While most of the literature has focused on consumption, Table
15 shows that in fact, business investment displays a very large amount of
variability around fiscal adjustments. This table shows the surge in invest-
ment during expansionary fiscal adjustments — i.e. those large reductions in
the deficit that are associated with an increase in growth — and the collapse
of investment during the contractionary adjustments38. On average, busi-
ness investment growth rate is -0.36% in the two years before expansionary
fiscal adjustments and it jumps to 5.24% in the two years after the adjust-
ment. In the contractionary episodes, these numbers are respectively 4.59%
and 0.29%. In the two years before the expansionary adjustments, on av-
erage business investment contributes negatively to the (moderate) increase
in GDP growth, while private consumption is responsible for approximately
half of that increase39. After the adjustment, the average contribution from
business investment to the (large) change in GDP growth jumps by almost 24
  37See for example Alesina, Perotti and Taveres (1998) and the related literature cited
therein.
  38The precise definition of expansionary and contractionary fiscal adjustments is given
at the bottom of Table 15.
   39The contribution to GDP growth from each component of aggregate demand weights
its growth rate with the share of each component relative to GDP. This quantity is then
expressed as a proportion of the GDP growth rate. See the notes to Table 15 for details.


                                          25
percentage points, from -6.55% to 17.17%, while the contribution from pri-
vate consumption shows just a slightly increase from 51.37% to 51.82%. The
opposite happens in the contractionary episodes: the contribution to GDP
growth by business investment decrease about 15% while the one of private
consumption is stable. The downturn which accompanies "contractionary"
fiscal adjustments is therefore largely explained by the fall in private business
investments. It is also interesting to note how the share of net exports actu-
ally falls drastically during expansionary adjustments and increases during
contractionary ones. This is evidence against the view that expansionary
adjustments are mainly driven by devaluations. In summary, this evidence
suggests that private business investment is a critical component of domestic
demand in terms of response to fiscal shocks.
    In Table 16 we use our estimated model to see how well we "match" the
behavior of investment around the episodes of fiscal adjustments described
in the previous table. We simply use the fitted value for the investment rate
(I/K) together with actual GDP and capital stock figures to calculate the
"predicted" growth rate of business investment and the "predicted" invest-
ment to GDP ratio for each country. We then average across episodes to
make our results comparable with those in Table 15.
  We present two models, the benchmark and one with GDP in the profit
function and a variable interest rate in the investment equation. Both of
them, particularly the latter, do quite well at matching the actual data, par-
ticularly in terms of comparison between the immediate aftermath of the
fiscal adjustment and the "base" (i.e. immediately before). For instance,
with the richer model we predict a difference in the average rate of growth
of investment before and after "expansionary" fiscal adjustment of 4.13 com-
pared to 5.60 in the data, and of -4.68 against -4.30 in the case of "contrac-
tionary" fiscal adjustments. In some cases the model predicts the "jumps"
of the investment share with one year delay relative to the actual data. A
more thorough analysis of this timing issue would require quarterly data on
fiscal variables, which are not available for many OECD countries.40
    Finally, we investigated whether the behavior of profits and investment is
structurally different following large changes in the fiscal policy stance. We
pursued this investigation in a variety of ways. First we checked whether a
quadratic term on spending and taxes was significant in the profit equation;
it was not. Second, we checked for structural breaks in the profit equation,
  40See Blanchard and Perotti (1998) for a paper using quarterly fiscal data on the US.


                                          26
in the form of significant breaks in the constant or in the coefficients of
spending and taxes in the profit equations. We also explored the possibility
of structural breaks in the investment equations. In both cases, we did not
find any evidence of structural breaks.
    In summary, the evidence presented in this section suggests that the effect
of fiscal policy (and its components) on investment is not different in "nor-
mal" times and around major fiscal adjustments. Since much of the effects of
the latter on the economy go through investments, this evidence casts doubts
on the need of developing special theories on the effects of large adjustments.
    Finally, we have also performed the analogous experiments on episodes
of loose fiscal policies. Our results (available upon request) are very similar,
(with the opposite sign) to those obtained for fiscal adjustments.


7 Conclusions
This paper shows that in OECD countries changes in fiscal policy have im-
portant effects on private business investment. Interestingly, the strongest
effects arise from changes in primary government spending and, especially,
government wages. We provide evidence consistent with a labor market chan-
nel through which fiscal policy influences labor costs, profits, investment and,
as a consequence, growth. Increases in public wages and/or employment and
transfers increase wage pressure in the private sector, both in unionized and
competitive labor markets. Also, workers in the private sector may react to
tax hikes by asking for higher pre-tax real wages (or decreasing labor supply),
once again putting pressures on profits and investment.
   These effects on investment go a long way toward explaining those episodes
of expansionary fiscal contractions that have recently attracted considerable
attention. According to our results, the surge in private investment that ac-
companies the large spending cuts during these episodes is exactly what one
should expect. In fact, we found very little evidence, if any at all, that pri-
vate investment reacts differently during these large fiscal adjustments than
in "normal" circumstances.
    The driving channel of our results is the effect of fiscal policy changes on
current and future expected profits. This suggests that two issues deserve
further examination. One is a more thorough examination on the effects
of fiscal policy on interest rates. Even though we allowed for interest rate
movements, there is certainly still room for further investigation of the effect

                                      27
of changes (especially large ones) of the fiscal stance on interest rates. This
investigation may shed additional light on the role of "credibility effects"
of fiscal adjustments on interest rates. The second issue is the change in
income distribution which follows large changes in the fiscal stance, and par-
ticularly, fiscal adjustments of various types. While there is ample evidence
that spending cuts can be expansionary, our evidence on profits may imply
that spending cuts may increase income inequality. Whether this is the case
or not is an important topic for future research.




                                      28
8 Data Appendix
Variables' definitions
I/K: Business investment as a share of capital stock
ir: Profits gross of corporate tax payments as a share of capital stock Profits
are value added in business sector minus labor costs in the business sector.
lt*: Profits net of corporate tax payments as a share of capital stock Profits
are value added in business sector minus labor costs in the business sector.
S/K: Sales in the business sector as a share of the capital stock
Labor Costs in the business sector: Labor compensation rate in the busi-
ness sector times total employment of the business sector. The number of the
unpaid family workers are deducted from total employment of the business
sector because their output is not measured. We followed Blanchard (1997)
in doing this adjustment. When the number of unpaid family workers is not
available from the beginning of the sample, for each country, we assume that
the ratio of unpaid family workers to total employment is equal to the one
in the first year for which the data are available.
WP: log of real labor compensation rate in the business sector. Labor com-
pensation rate in the business sector (variable WSSE in the OECD database)
includes total social security payments.
r: Short term nominal interest rate net of corporate tax minus one period
 ahead (ex-post) inflation, calculated using GDP deflator
 C: Primary spending (cyclically adjusted) as a share of trend GDP. Primary
 spending = TRAN + GW + CNW + GINV + subsidies + other net cap-
 ital outlays
 R: Total revenues (cyclically adjusted) as a share of trend GDP. Total rev-
 enues = TLAB + TBUS + TIND +other transfers received by gov
 TRAN: Transfers (cyclically adjusted) as a share of trend GDP
 GW: wage component of current government spending on goods and ser-
 vices, as a share of trend GDP
 CNW: non wage component of current government spending on goods and
 services, as a share of trend GDP
 CINV: Government investment as a share of trend GDP
 TLAB: Labor taxes (direct taxes on households + social security and payroll
 taxes, cyclically adjusted), as a share of trend GDP
 TB US: Direct taxes on business (cyclically adjusted) as a share of trend

                                      29
GDP
TIND: Indirect taxes (cyclically adjusted) as a share of trend GDP



   Summary statistics

              Nobs. mean st. dev.
      I/K      635      0.07   0.03
      II       606      0.15   0.12
      fl*      601      0.14   0.11
      S/K      624      0.42   0.22
      r        465      0.02   0.04
      C        653      0.37   0.09
      R        628      0.36   0.09
      TRAN 661          0.14   0.06
      GW       653      0.11   0.03
      CNW 653           0.05   0.02
      CINV 658          0.03   0.01
      TLAB 645          0.20   0.07
      TIND 661          0.13   0.03
      TBUS 640          0.03   0.01

   Source: OECD.




                                      30
References
[1] Abel A., 0. Blanchard, (1986), The Present Value of Profits and Cyclical
    Movements in Investment, Econometrica, vol.54, n.2, pp. 249-273.
[2] Alesina A., S. Ardagna, (1998), Tales of Fiscal Adjustments, Economic
    Policy, October, 27.
[31 Alesina A., R. Perotti, J. Tavares, (1998), The Political Economy of
   Fiscal Adjustments, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring.
[4] Alesina A., R. Perotti, (1997a), Fiscal Adjustments in OECD Countries:
    Composition and Macroeconomic Effects, IMF Staff Papers, June, pp.
    210-248.

[5] Alesina A., R. Perotti, (1997b), The Welfare State and Competitiveness,
    American Economic Review, vol. 87, pp. 921-939.

[6] Alesina A., R. Perotti, (1996), Reducing Budget Deficits, Swedish Eco-
    nomic Policy Review, vol. 3, n.1, Spring, pp.113-138.
[7] Alesina A., R. Perotti, (1995), Fiscal Expansions and Adjustments in
    OECD Countries, Economic Policy n.21, pp.205-240.
[8] Ardagna 5. (1999), Fiscal adjustments: Expectations versus Supply-
    Side, unpublished.
[9] Barro R, (1989), The Neoclassical Approach to Fiscal Policy, in Barro
    R. (ed), Modern Business Cycle Theory, Cambridge, Harvard University
    Press, pp.178-235.
[10] Barro R., X. Sala-i-Martin, (1990) World Real Interest Rtaes, NBER
    Macroeconomics Annual, pp. 15-74.
[11] Baxter M., R. King, (1993), Fiscal Policy in General Equilibrium, Amer-
     ican Economic Review, June, 83, pp.315-334.
[12] Bertola G., A. Drazen, (1993), 'Iftigger Points and Budget Cuts: Ex-
    plaining the Effects of Fiscal Austerity, American Economic Review,
    March 1993, pp.11-26.



                                    31
[13] Blanchard , 0., (1997), The Medium Run, Brookings Papers on Eco-
     nomic Activity, Spring, pp.89-158.
[14] Blanchard, 0., C. Rhee, L. Summers, (1993), The Stock Market, Profit,
     and Investment, Quarterly Journal of Economics, pp.115-136.
[15] Blanchard 0., (1990), Comment on Giavazzi and Pagano, NBER
    Macroeconomics Annual 1990.

[16] Blanchard 0., and R. Perotti (1999), An Empirical Investigation of the
    Dynamic Effects of Changes in Government Spending and Reveneus on
    Output, mimeo, Harvard University.
[17] Blundell R., S. Bond, M. Devereux, F. Schiantarelli, (1992), Investment
     and Tobin's Q: Evidence from Panel Data, Journal of Econometrics 51,
    pp.233-257.
[18] Bruno M., J.Sachs, (1985), The Economics of Worldwide Stagflation.
    Oxford: Blackwell, 1985.

[19] Caballero R., (1997), Aggregate Investment, MIT
[20] Calmfors L., H. Horn, (1986), Employment Policies and Centralized
    Wage-setting, Economica, 53, pp.281-302.
[21] Chirinko R., S.M. Fazzari, A. P. Meyer (1999), How Responsive is Busi-
    ness Capital Formation to Its User Costs? An Exploration with Micro
    Data, Journal of Public Economics (1999), forthcoming.
[22] Cummins J., K.A. Hasset, R.G. Hubbard, (1995), Tax Reform and In-
    vestment: A Cross-Country Comparison", Journal of Public Economics,
    vol 62, pp.237-273.
[23] Daveri F., G. Tabellini, (1997), Unemployment, Growth and Taxation
    in Industrial Countries, Bocconi University.
[24] Drazen A., (1990), Comment on Giavazzi and Pagano, NBER Macroe-
     conomics Annual 1990.

[25] Denny K., S. Nickell, (1992), Unions and Investment in British Industry,
     Economic Journal, 102, pp.874-887.


                                     32
[26] Devereux M, M. Keen and F. Schiantarelli (1994), Corporate Tax, In-
    vestment and the Role of Tax Asymmetries: Evidence form Company
     Panel Data, Journal of Public Economics, pp.395-418.
[27] Devereux M., B. Lockwood, (1991), Trade Unions, Non-Binding Wage
     Agreements, and capital Accumulation, European Economic Review, 35,
     pp. 1411-1426.
[28] Dotsey M., Mao C. S., (1994), The Effects of Fiscal Policy in a Neoclas-
     sical Growth Model, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, working paper
    94-03.

[29] Finn M., (1998), Cyclical Effects of Government's Employment and
    Goods Purchases, International Economic Review, vol. 39, n.3, August
    (1998), pp. 635-657.
[30] Giavazzi F., T. Jappelli, M. Pagano, (1998), Searching for Non-
    Keynesian Effects of Fiscal Policy.

[31] Giavazzi F., M. Pagano, (1996), Non-Keynesian Effects of Fiscal Policy
     Changes: International Evidence and the Swedish Experience, Swedish
     Economic Policy Review, vol. 3, n.1, Spring, pp.67-112.
[32] Giavazzi F., M. Pagano, (1990), Can Severe Fiscal Contractions Be Ex-
     pansionary? Tales of Two Small European Countries, NBER Macroe-
     conomics Annual 1990, pp.95-122.
[33] Gilchrist S., C. P. Himmelberg, (1995), Evidence on the Role of Cash
    Flow for Investment, Journal of Monetary Economics 36, pp. 541-572.
[34] Hasset K., G. Hubbard, (1996), Tax Policy and Investment, NBER work-
     ing paper n. 5683.
[35] Tm K., H. M. Pesaran, Y. Shin, (1995), Testing for Unit Roots in Het-
    erogeneous Panels.
[36] Jackman R., R. Layard, S. Nickell, (1991), Unemployment, Oxford Uni-
     versity Press.
[37] Lane P., R. Perotti, (1999), The Importance of Composition of Fiscal
    Policy: Evidence from Exchange Rate Regimes, mimeo, Columbia Uni-
    versity.

                                     33
[38] Ludvigson S., (1996), The Macroeconomic Effects of Government Debt
     in a Stochastic Growth Model, Journal of Monetary Economics, 38, pp.
    25-45.

[39] Malley J., T. Moutos, (1996), Does Government Employment "Crowd-
     Out" Private Employment? Evidence from Sweden, Scandinavian Jour-
     nal of Economics, 98(2), pp. 289-302.

[40] McDermott J., R. Wescott, (1996), An Empirical Analysis of Fiscal
    Adjustments, IMF Staff papers vol. 43, n.4, pp.725-753.
[41] S.J. Nickell (1978), The Investment Decisions of Firms, Cambridge Uni-
     versity Press, Cambridge 1978.
[42] OECD, Economic Outlook, various years.
[43] OECD, Economic Surveys, various years.
[44] Olivei G., (1998), Fiscal Retrenchments and The Level of Economic
    Activity, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston.

[45] Olivei G., (1998), Anticipated Productivity Shocks, Investment, and the
     Real Interest Rate, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston.

[46] Perotti R., (1999), Fiscal Policy When Things are Going Badly, Quar-
    terly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
[47] Schiantarelli F., (1983), Investment Models and Expectations: Some Es-
    timates for the Italian Industrial Sector, International Economic Review,
    vol.24, n.1, pp.291-312.
[48] Sutherland A., (1997), Fiscal Crises and Aggregate Demand: Can High
    Public Debt Reverse the Effects of Fiscal Policy?, Journal of Public
    Economics 65, 1997, pp.147-162.
[49] Van Der ploeg F., (1987), Trade Unions, Investment, and Employment,
     European Economic Review, 31, pp.1465-1492.




                                     34
</ref_section>
Table 1: Profits: benchmark regressions.

                 (1)        (2)         (3)
  IIK(—1)       0.67       0.64         0.77
              (17.45)    (16.54) (21.17)
  HK(—2)        0.03       0.04       0.005
               (0.94)     (1.49)      (0.18)
  R            -0.09      -0.14        -0.11
              (-3.05)    (-4.73)     (-2.67)
  G            -0.09      -0.08        -0.11
              (-4.31)    (-3.72)     (-3.35)
  2             0.56       0.55         0.71
  Nobs          555         555         565
  Dependent variable: marginal profit ilK.
  Marginal profit proxied by average profit
  gross of corporate taxes as a share of the
  capital stock (7r) in column 1, by average
  profit net of the corporate tax rate as a
  share of the capital stock (ir*) in cohmrn
  2, by sales to capital ratio (S/K) in col-
  umn 3. Variables are in levels, and de-
  trended allowing for couiitry specific lin-
  ear and quadratic term. Revenues (R)
  and primary spending (G) are cyclically
  adjusted and in share of trend GDP. T-
  statistics in parenthesis.




                                   35
     Table 2: Profits: spending components.

__________ (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)
HK(—1) 0.69            0.66       0.71       0.70
            (17.41)    (17.27) (18.29) (18.11)
HK(—2) 0.01            0.04       0.01       0.02
            (0.50)     (1.48)     (0.43)     (0.55)
R           -0.10      -0.10      -0.10      -0.12
            (-3.19)    (-3.27)    (-3.43)    (-3.90)
TRAN -0.11
            (-2.45)
GW                     -0.43
                       (-6.33)
GNW                               -0.22
                                  (-1.91)
CI                                           -0.3
                                             (-3.29)
R2          0.55     0.58      0.55          0.56
Nobs        555      555       555           555
 Dependent variable:      marginal profit 11K•
 Marginal profit proxied by average profit gross
  of corporate taxes as a share of the capital stock
  (7r). See also notes to Table 1 and Appendix A.
  T-statistics in parenthesis.




                                      36
Table 3: Profits: revernie components.

_________      (1)        (2)          (3)
HK(—1)        0.66        0.68       0.68
            (17.03)     (17.45)    (17.54)
HK(—2)        0.03        0.02       0.02
             (1.16)      (0.83)    (0.82)
 C            -0.07      -0.10      -0.10
             (-3.04)    (-4.56)    (-4.70)
 TLAB         -0.16
             (-4.25)
 TYB                      0.02
                         (0.31)
 TIND                              -0.008
                                   (-0.13)

 2            0.57        0.56         0.56
 Nobs         555         555          555
 Dependent variable: marginal profit IlK'
 Marginal profit proxied by average profit
 gross of corporate taxes as a share of the
 capital stock (ir). See also notes to Table
 1 and Appendix A. T-statistics in paren-
 thesis.




                                  37
Table 4: Investment equation: benchmark regressions.

                     (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)
)                   0.10          0.10          0.05          0.06
                   (8.95)        (8.35)        (8.75)        (8.48)
A(—1)              0.007         0.008         -0.005         0.05
                   (0.63)        (0.68)        (-0.89)       (7.35)
R2                  0.52          0.51          0.50          0.56
AR(1)coef. 0.39,0.78 0.49,0.80 0.43,0.77 0.50,0.80
Nob.s                537           537          551           537
     Dependent variable: investment rate (I/K). Marginal
     profit proxied by average profit gross of corporate taxes
     as a share of the capital stock (ir) in column 1 and 4, by
     average profit net of the corporate tax rate as a share of
     the capital stock (ir*) in column 2, by sales to capital ratio
     (S/K) in column 3. Variables are in levels, and detrended
     allowing for country specific linear and quadratic term.
     We allow the AR(1) coefficient to differ across countries.
     The lowest and highest values are reported. T-statistics in
     parenthesis.




                                               38
                 Table 5: Dynamic effects of fiscal shocks.


              0 yr.    lyr.     2 yrs. 3 yrs. 4 yrs. 5.yrs. sum              sum        sum
                                                                   0to5 OtolO 0to20
                                         Effects of a unitary shock
C             _.16**   _.17**   _.16**   _.13** -10 _.07*           _.80**      95**     _.98**
R              Q7*      -.06     -.04     -.01    0.00     0.00      -.18      -.16       -.16

Net effect     -.23     -.23     -.20     -.14     -.10     -.07     -.98      -1.11     -1.14

TRAN          - 22** - 24** - 22** - 19** - 15**           - 11*   -1 13** -1 34**      -1 38**
CW            - 51** - 64** - 58** - 47** - 34**           - 23*   -2 77** 3 08 3 15'
CINV          - 39** - 38** - 32* - 25* - 18*              - 13*    -1 64*    -1 89*     -1 95*
TLAB          -. 17** -. 18** .14* .09*    -.06             -.03    .69*        74*        75*
    See notes to Table 1 and Appendix A. ** (*) indicates that zero is outside the 95% (68%)
    confidence band.




                                                   39
       Table 6: GDP in the profit equation.

                    (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)
                  OLS         OLS        2SLS        2SLS
IIK(—1)            0.51       0.53        0.56       0.55
                 (14.98)     (12.83) (15.76) (15.60)
ITK(—2)           -0.13       -0.07       -0.08      -0.09
                 (-5.11)     (-2.26)     (-2.94)    (-3.33)
R                 -0.08       -0.09       -0.08      -0.08
                 (-3.09)     (-3.28)     (-3.21)    (-3.20)
C                -0.094       -0.11       -0.09      -0.09
                 (-5.27)     (-5.49)     (-5.13)    (-5.18)
GDPP               0.27                    0.19       0.20
                 (16.05)                  (8.45)     (9.39)
GDPP (—1)                      0.15
                              (7.49)
2                  0.70        0.60       0.69       0.69
Nobs               555          555       555         555
Dependent variable: marginal profit ilK. Marginal profit
proxied by average profit gross of corporate taxes as a share
of the capital stock (ir). See also notes to Table 1 and
Appendix A. T-statistics in parenthesis.
GDPP =(GDP-Government Consumption)/K
Instruments in (3) HK(—1), flK(—2), R, C, GDP(—1)
Instruments in (4) flK(—1), flK(—2), R, C, CDP (—1),
R(—1), G(—1).




                                          40
                   Table 7: Profits, labor costs and fiscal policy.


                 (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)         (5)       (6)         (7)        (8)
                2SLS       2SLS        2SLS       2SLS       2SLS       2SLS        2SLS       2SLS
flK(—1)          0.55       0.66       0.54        0.53      0.58        0.66        0.55       0.54
               (12.02)    (16.70) (15.49) (15.40) (12.17) (16.79) (15.65) (15.61)
HK(—2)           0.07      0.03        -0.08      -0.08       0.06       0.02       -0.08      -0.08
                (2.15)    (0.93)      (-2.86)    (-3.02)     (1.86)     (0.83)     (-2.85)    (-3.06)
WP              -0.19      -0.07       -0.08      -0.08      -0.16       -0.07      -0.07      -0.07
               (-6.47)    (-4.62)     (-6.00)    (-6.22)    (-4.88)     (-4.08)    (-5.27)    (-5.14)
CDPP                                    0.18       0.19                              0.18       0.18
                                       (8.56)     (9.04)                            (8.26)     (8.72)
f?2              0.56       0.59        0.71       0.72         0.58     0.59        0.71       0.71
Nobs             555        555         555        555          555      555         555        555
      Dependent variable: marginal profit (fiK). Marginal profit proxied by average profit gross
      of corporate taxes as a share of the capital stock (ir). See also notes to Table 1 and Appendix
      A. T-statistics in parenthesis.
      WP=log of real labor compensation rate of the business sector
      GDPP =(GDP-Government Consumption) /K
      Instruments in (1) flK(—1), HK(—2), GW
      Instruments in (2) HK(—1), HK(—2), GW, WP(—1)
      Instruments in (3) LIK(—1), HK(—2), GW, WP(—l), GDP(—l)
      Instruments in (4) HK(—1), HK(—2), GW, WP(—1), CDP(—1) ,TLAB
      Instruments in (5) LIK(—1), HK(—2), C
      Instruments in (6) HK(—1), flK(—2), C, WP(—1)
      Instruments in (7) HK(—1), HK(—2), G, WP(—1), GDP(—1)
      Instruments in (8) HK(—1), IIK(—2), G, WP(—1), GDP(—1) ,R.




                                                           41
                      Table 8: Labor costs and fiscal policy.


                    (1)          (2)       (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)        (7)         (8)
HKH1)              -0.60       -0.02      0.29        0.31      -0.64       -0.03      0.25        0.24
                  (-5.09)     (-0.21)    (2.91)      (3.16)    (-5.37)     (-0.31)    (2.54)      (2.43)
flK(—2)             0.14        0.08      0.26        0.25       0.20        0.10      0.27        0.27
                   (1.58)      (1.24)    (3.74)      (3.60)     (2.14)      (1.59)    (3.89)      (3.90)
CW                  2.28        0.81      0.92        0.82
                  (11.06)      (4.95)    (5.80)      (5.02)
TLAB                                                  0.20
                                                     (2.47)
C                                                                0.61       0.17       0.19        0.19
                                                                (9.26)     (3.37)     (3.79)      (3.83)
R                                                                                                 -0.04
                                                                                                 (-0.62)
WP(—1)                         0.72       0.75       0.75                   0.74       0.78        0.77
                              (22.46)    (23.96)    (23.79)                (23.22)    (24.56)    (23.88)
CDPP(—1)                                  -0.29      -0.29                             -0.27      -0.27
                                         (-6.27)    (-6.31)                           (-5.76)    (-5.71)
t2                  0.24       0.60        0.63       0.63       0.20       0.60       0.62        0.62
Nobs                555        555         555        555        555        555         555        555
     This table displays the first stage regressions for the corresponsing 2SLS regressions of Table 7.
     Dependent variable: WP=log of real labor compensation rate of the business sector.
     T-statistics in parenthesis. See Table 1 and Appendix A.




                                                         42
Table 9: Profits and investment: estimation in differences.

                           (1)                    (2)
          LITK(—1)        0.28     LA            0.01
                         (7.02)                  (7.97)

          LHK(—2)         0.16     A(—1) 0.003
                         (5.08)                  (2.02)

                         -0.28
                        (-6.61)

                         -0.17
                        (-4.35)
                         0.41   R2                0.12
          Nobs            544   Nobs              507
           Dependent variables: change in marginal
           profit /HK in column 1 and change
           investment rate .A(I/K) in column 2.
           Change in marginal profit proxied by
           change in average profit gross of corporate
           taxes as a share of the capital stock (sir).
           Variables are in first differences. Country
           fixed effects are included. Revenues (R)
           and primary spending (G) are cyclically
           adjusted and in share of trend GDP. See
           also Appendix A. T-statistics in parenthe-
            sis.




                                            43
    Table 10: Dynamic effects of fiscal shocks: estimation in differences.


                0 yr.    lyr.     2 yrs.   3 yrs.   4 yrs. 5.yrs. sum    sum   sum
                                                                   Oto5 OtolO 0to20
                                          Effects of a unitary shock
C               -1       - 13'    - 13**   - 14** - 14** - 14** - 77**           -1 49**   -2 93**
R                        -.14     -. 15** .15** -. 15**           .87**          1.64**

Net effect       -.21     -.27     -.28     -.29     -.29     -.29      -1.64    -3.13      -6.12

TRAN            -.06     -.08     -.08     -.09     -.09      -.09     -.48       -.95      -1.88
CW              - 35**   - 49**   - 52**   - 53**   - 54**    - 55**   3 00       5 79**      39**
GINV            - 21**   - 27**   - 29**   - 3Q**   - 31*     - 31*    -1 69**   3 26**    -6 39*
TLAB            .15**    .20**    .21**    .21**    .22** .22** 1.20** 2.30**
      See notes to Table 9 and Appendix A.
      ** (*) indicates that zero is outside the 95% (68%) confidence band.




                                                      44
    Table 11: Variable discount factor.

           (1)                          (2)

r(—1)      0.45     Aprof               0.08
          (9.78)                       (6.72)

r(—2)     -0.21     ,\prof(—1)          0.03
         (-4.83)                       (2.71)

R          0.27     Xrint               -0.06
          (2.98)                       (-5.76)

C          -0.13    Arint(-1)           -0.05
          (-2.10)                      (-4.28)

                    Actax              -0.007
                                       (-0.58)

                    Actax(-1)         0.01
                                     (1.10)
2          0.20     R2                 0.59
                    AR(1)coef.      0.48,0.80
Nobs       429      Nobs               429
Dependent variables: real ex-post interest rate
run column 1 and investment rate I/K in col-
umn 2. See also notes to Table 1 and Appendix
A. T-statistics in parenthesis.




                                  45
Table 12: Profits: revenue components, with year dummies.

      __________ (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)

      HK(—1)      0.69       0.68       0.70    0.69
                  (17.81)    (17.37)    (17.66) (17.81)

      HK(—2)      0.06       0.06       0.05       0.05
                  (1.95)     (2.05)     (1.72)     (1.71)

       G          -0.04      -0.03      -0.06      -0.06
                  (-1.75)    (-1.21)    (-2.66)    (-2.68)

       R          -0.12
                  (-4.19)

       TLAB                  -0.15
                             (-4.27)

       TYB                              0.02
                                        (0.36)

       TIND                                        -0.12

       R2         0.66       0.66       0.65       0.65
       Nobs       555        555        555        555
       Dependent variable: marginal profit 1TK Marginal
       profit proxied by average profit gross of corporate
       taxes as a share of the capital stock (ir). Year dum-
       mies are included. See also notes to Table 1 and Ap-
       pendix A. T-statistics in parenthesis.




                                              46
Table 13: Profits: spending components, with year dummies.

                        (1)        (2)       (3)         (4)
          HKH1)        0.69       0.67       0.69       0.69
                     (17.84)    (17.51)    (17.92)    (17.71)
          HK(2)        0.05       0.07       0.05       0.05
                      (1.77)     (2.39)    (1.76)      (1.89)
          R            -0.13      -0.12     -0.13      -0.13
                     (-4.50)    (-4.05)    (-4.70)    (-4.76)
          TRAN        -0.006
                      (-0.12)
          GW                      -0.29
                                 (-4.15)
          GNW                              -0.001
                                           (-0.01)
          CI                                           -0.18
                                                      (-2.04)
          R2           0.66       0.67       0.66      0.66
          Nobs         555        555        555        555
      -
          Dependent variable: marginal profit 11K• Marginal
          profit proxied by average profit gross of corporate
          taxes as a share of the capital stock (ir). Year dum-
          mies are included. See also notes to Table 1 and Ap-
          pendix A. T-statistics in parenthesis.




                                               47
            Table 14: Investment equation and financial constraints.


                                   (1)      (2)      (3)         (4)      (5)      (6)      (7)
71*                               -0.04
                                 (-0.54)
71*(1)                                      0.07
                                           (1.78)
A                                 0.09      0.07
                                 (5.73)    (3.69)
A(—1)                             0.03      0.04
                                 (1.64)    (0.40)
E_1 [irt]                                            0.30                          0.25     0.25
                                                    (9.38)                        (3.56)   (2.38)
Lag (E_1 [ITt])                                     -0.005                         0.01     -0.05
                                                    (-0.16)                       (0.18)   (-0.46)
E_1 {a/3ITt+j]                                                  0.18     0.14      0.03     0.04
                                                                (9.26)   (9.14)   (0.85)   (0.52)
LagE_i [=a/3ITt+j]                                              0.002    0.005    -0.006    0.04
                                                                (0.13)   (0.34)   (0.85)   (0.47)
AR(1)coef.                        0.45     0.47      0.46,       0.48,   0.46,     0.41,    0.41,
                                  0.80     0.79      0.73        0.73     0.73     0.78     0.77
Nobs                              537      537        537         537     537       537      537
             Dep. var: Investment rate=(I/K)
             (1) Instruments: G, G(-1), R, R(-1), ), )(-1), 7rK(—1)
             (4) a = O,b= 1
             (5) a=O,b=2
             (6) a = 1, b — cc
             (7) a= 1,b=2
             T-statistics in parenthesis. See Table 1 and Appendix A.




                                                           48
Table 15: Fiscal adjustments: Fiscal policy and macroeconomic indicators.

                                     Expansionary                            Contractionary

                           Bef.     Dur.      Aft.    Aft.-Bef     Bef.      Dur.      Aft.    Aft.-Bef.

Primary Spending          42.96     41.71    41.36      -1.60      40.32    40.24     40.15      -0.17
                                                          *
                          (1.43)    (1.42)   (1.35)                (1.36)   (1.37)    (1.40)
Total Revenue             40.10     41.42    41.57       1.47      36.97    39.03     39.65       2.69
                                                          *                                         *
                          (1.45)    (1.43) (1.41)                  (1.48)   (1.51)    (1.58)
GDP Growth rate    -0.79            -0.45    -0.19       0.60       0.82    -1.12     -0.86      -1.68
                                                                                                    *
(deviation from G7)(0.24)           (0.33) (0.31)                  (0.40)   (0.44)    (0.28)
GDP Growth rate     1.31             2.65     3.41       2.10       3.73     1.34      1.91      -1.82
                                                          *                                         *
                   (0.24)           (0.39)   (0.29)                (0.37)   (0.34)    (0.27)
A Priv.Consumption 1.16              2.30     3.03       1.87       3.76     1.19      1.84      -1.93
                                                          *                                         *
                   (0.36)           (0.38)   (0.30)                (0.55)   (0.45)    (0.31)
A Bus.Investment   -0.36             3.49     5.24       5.60       4.59     -0.39     0.29      -4.30
                                                          *                                        *
                   (0.99)           (1.24)   (1.13)                (1.22) (1.60)      (1.31)

Contribution to real
GDP Growth from

Priv.Consumption          51.37 51.09      51.82      0.45      58.41 48.92 57.78           -0.63
Bus.Investment            -6.55 16.44 17.17          23.72      13.40 -7.22 -0.84          -14.23
Residen.Investment       -23.78 0.19        2.90     26.69       4.88    -7.07      1.15    -3.73
Stockbuilding            -16.08 1.58        7.60     23.68       2.12     2.16 -12.28 -14.39
Net Export                69.36 29.60 4.08          -65.28      -2.33    30.60    37.04     39.37
Gov.Consumption           28.28    6.37    12.71    -15.57      17.95 27.25 20.01            2.06
Gov.Investment            -6.86 -6.94       2.23      9.09       3.54 -10.95 -4.86          -8.40
    Source OECD: Primary Spending and Total Revenue are in share of trend GDP and cyclically
    adjusted. GDP Growth rate(G7) is real GDP growth in deviation from the average (GDP weights)
    G7 real growth rate. zxPriv.Consumption and Bus.Investment are growth rate of real private
    consumption and real business investment. The contributions to real GDP growth from the different


    sh =   .
    GDP components have been calculated using the following formula.
    Let th= the contribution to real GDP growth from the X component:
             [((X—X,_1 )/X_ 1)*X_i /GDP_']

    An episode of fiscal adjustment is expansionary (contractionary) if the primary cyclically adjusted
    balance as a share of trend GDP improves by at least 2% in one year or by 1.25% in two consecutive
    years and the average real GDP growth in each adjustment year and in the two years after is greater
    (lower) than the average real GDP growth in the o years before.
          Table 16: Business Investment around fiscal adjustments.


          _________________                Expansionary                         Contractionary

                                  Bef.     Dur.     Aft.   Duff.       Bef.     Dur.     Aft.     Duff.
                                   (a)     (b)      (c)    (c-a)        (a)      (b)      (c)     (c-a)
                  Data

GDP Growth rate                    1.31     2.65    3.41   2.10        3.73      1.34     1.91    -1.82
                                                             *                                      *
                                  (0.24)   (0.39) (0.29)               (0.37)   (0.34)   (0.27)
  Bus.Investment                  -0.36     3.49    5.24   5.60        4.59     -0.39     0.29    -4.30
                                                             *                                      *
                                  (0.99)   (1.24) (1.13)               (1.22)   (1.60)   (1.31)
Bus.Investment       contribution -6.55    16.44   17.17 23.72 13.40            -7.22    -0.84 -14.23
to GDP Growth

       Benchmark model

  Bus.Investment                   1.01    2.35     4.05   3.04         2.64     4.56    0.08     -2.56
Bus.Investment contribution        7.11    10.03   13.12   6.01         6.97    41.13    -0.06    -7.04
to GDP Growth

   Model with GDP and
  variable discount factor

  Bus.Investment                   0.06    -0.59    4.19   4.13        3.85       2.82   -0.83     -4.68
Bus.Investment contribution -2.50          -4.83    13.12 15.62        11.82     26.79   -5.86    -17.69
to GDP Growth                                                      I



See   Table 15.




                                                   50
                                   Figure 1


Effect of an increase in public employment, labor taxes, or unemployment benefits




x




                                         E0
                                     N                      KT=O




                     KT i            KT0
                                                                            KT
