                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                WHAT DETERMINES FIRM SIZE?

                                          Krishna B. Kumar
                                          Raghuram G. Rajan
                                            Luigi Zingales


                                          Working Paper 7208
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w7208

                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 1999




We thank Eugene Fama, Doug Gollin, Ananth Madhavan, John Matsusaka, Andrei Shleifer, and workshop
participants at Chicago, Copenhagen, Norwegian School of Management-B1 and USC for comments. All
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 1999 by Krishna B. Kumar, Raghuram G. Rajan, and Luigi Zingales. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
What Determines Firm Size?
Krishna B. Kumar, Raghuram G. Rajan, and Luigi Zingales
NBER Working Paper No. 7208
July 1999
JEL No. D23, G30, K40, L20

                                              ABSTRACT

        Motivated by theories of the firm, which we classify as "technological" or "organizational,"
we analyze the determinants of firm size across industries and across countries in a sample of 15
European countries. We find that, on average, firms facing larger markets are larger. At the industry
level, we find firms in the utility sector are large, perhaps because they enjoy a natural, or officially
sanctioned, monopoly. Capital intensive industries, high wage industries, and industries that do a lot
of R&D have larger firms, as do industries that require little external financing. At the country level,
the most salient findings are that countries with efficient judicial systems have larger firms, and,
correcting for institutional development, there is little evidence that richer countries have larger firms.
Interestingly, institutional development, such as greater judicial efficiency, seems to be correlated with
lower dispersion in firm size within an industry. The effects of interactions (between an industry's
characteristics and a country's environment) on size are perhaps the most novel results in the paper,
and are best able to discriminate between theories. As the judicial system improves, the difference in
size between firms in capital intensive industries and firms in industries that use little physical capital
diminishes, a finding consistent with "Critical Resource" theories of the firm. Finally, the average size
of firms in industries dependent on external finance is larger in countries with better financial markets,
suggesting that financial constraints limit average firm size.


Krishna B. Kumar                                   Raghuram G. Rajan
Marshal School of Business                         Graduate School of Business
University of Southern California                  University of Chicago
Los Angeles, California 90089-0001                 1101 E 58th Street
kbkumar@rcf.usc.edu                                Chicago, Illinois 60637
                                                   and NBER
                                                   raghuram.rajan@gsb.uchicago.edu

Luigi Zingales
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
1101 E 58th Street
Chicago, Illinois 60637
and NBER
luigi.zingales@gsb.uchicago.edu
     Why is it that a small country like Finland has such large successful firms such as Nokia?
 This question is not of minor importance. In recent years, a great deal of attention has been
 paid to the process of economic growth. An interesting aspect of growth is that much of it takes
 place through the growth in the size of existing organizations. For instance, in the sample of
 43 countries they study, Rajan and Zingales (1998a) find that 2/3rd of the growth in industries
 over the 1980s comes from the growth in the size of existing establishments, and
                                                                                     only 1/3rd
 from the creation of new ones. What determines the size of economic organizations? Are there
any constraints to size and, hence, any potential constraints to growth?
   Organizational size seems important for various economic phenomena. For example, the
work by Gertler and Gilchrist (1994) suggests that small firms account for a disproportionate
share of the manufacturing decline that follows the tightening of monetary policy. Size has
been found to be an important influence on stock returns (see Banz (1981)). Similarly, various
phenomena in corporatejinance - the extent to which a firm levers up, the quantity of trade
credit it uses, the compensation its top managers get, all seem related to firm size.1 But what
determines firm size?
     The data we have on the distribution of firm size across industries in 15 European countries
are particularly useful for answering this question. These are all fairly well-developed countries,
so the minimum conditions for the existence of firms such as a basic respect for property rights,
the widespread rule of law, and the educational levels to manage complex hierarchies exist. A
number of first order factors such as war, economic system, or respect for basic property rights
that would otherwise affect firm size are held constant in this sample. This enables us to focus
on more subtle economic and institutional factors for which there is some variation across this
sample of countries. We also have a large number of industries, and the variation between indus-
tries in their use of different factors can give us some understanding of the effects of production
technology on firm size. Finally, the interactions between institutional and technological effects
give us perhaps the clearest insights into the determinants of firm size.
    We start by documenting broad patterns in firm size across industries and countries. We
find that, on average, firms facing larger markets are larger. At the industry level, we find firms
in the utility sector are large, perhaps because they enjoy a natural, or officially sanctioned,
monopoly. Physical capital intensive industries, high wage industries, and industries that do
a lot of R&D have larger firms, as do industries that require little external financing. While

   'For the link, between finn size and leverage see the extensive literature cited in Harris and Raviv (1990) or
Rajan and Zingales (1995), for size and trade credit see Petersen and Rajari (1997), and forcompensation, see
Jensen and Murphy (1990), and the literature cited there.


                                                       1
we are not aware of studies that examine these precise correlations, or of studies that examine
these patterns across a number of countries, some of these correlations are not surprising given
the past literature on intra-industry patterns (see Audretsch and Mahmood (1995), Caves and
Pugel (1980), Kiepper (1996), Sutton (1991), for example).
    At the country level, the most salient findings are that countries with efficient judicial
systems have larger firms, and, contrary to conventional wisdom, there is little evidence that
richer countries have larger firms. Interestingly, institutional development, such as greater
judicial efficiency, seems to "level the playing field" and is correlated with lower dispersion in
firm size within an industry. The effects of interactions (between an industry's characteristics
and a country's environment) on size are perhaps best able to discriminate between theories. We
find that the relative size of firms in capital intensive industries diminishes as the judicial system
becomes more efficient. This is in large measure because the average size of firms in industries
that are not physical asset intensive is larger in countries with better judicial systems. Taken
together, our evidence is consistent not only with theories that emphasize the fundamental
importance of ownership of physical assets in determining the boundaries of the firm, but also
with theories that suggest other mechanisms than ownership can expand firm boundaries when
the judicial system improves. Finally, the average size of firms in industries dependent on
external finance is larger in countries with better financial markets, suggesting that financial
constraints may also keep firms small.
    These findings indicate an answer to the question that starts this paper. Assuming our
correlations are indeed evidence of causality, firms in Finland are large despite the country's
small size, probably because it has a very efficient judicial system as compared to say Spain or
Italy, and its financial system, as measured by its accounting standards, is well developed.
    A caveat is in order. The theories are not really comprehensive, and since our proxies are
not detailed enough to allow us to devise precise tests, our empirical work should be viewed
as exploratory analysis motivated by theory, rather than actual tests. We do believe this is a
useful exercise, for the patterns that are discovered can be used to motivate more comprehensive
theory that is amenable to testing. In section 1, we discuss the theories, in Section 2 we
present the data used and discuss their broad patterns. We report partial correlations of size
with industry specific characteristics (section 3), country specific variables (section 4), and
interactions between the two (section 5). We discuss the results in section 6 and conclude with
avenues for future research.




                                                  2
 1 Existing Theories
 We classify theories broadly as technological, organizational, and institutional, based on whether
 they focus on the production function, the process of control, or environmental influences.
 Clearly, the classification will be somewhat arbitrary because some theories combine elements
 of different approaches. Moreover, space constraints do not permit us the luxury of being
 exhaustive, and the theories discussed below should only be viewed as representative.

 1.1 Technological Theories
Adam Smith (1776) suggested that the extent of specialization was limited by the size of the
market. If a worker needs to acquire task-specific human capital, there is a "set-up" cost incurred
every time the worker is assigned to a new task. It is, therefore, reasonable to expect workers to
perform specialized tasks and to expect a firm to hire more workers when its production process
becomes more specialized. Therefore, one would expect not only the extent of specialization
but also the size of firms to be limited by the size of the market that is being served.
   jFrom the perspective of our study, we would expect firm size to be correlated with the
overall size of the market. However, Smith's prediction has not remained unchallenged. Becker
and Murphy (1992) point to the existence of multiple firms serving most markets to argue
that specialization is not limited by the size of the market. In their theory, coordination costs
play a major role in limiting the size of firms before the size of the market becomes binding.2
Given these conflicting predictions, whether market size is relevant for firm size is, therefore, an
empirical question.
    Lucas (1978) uses a neoclassical model to study the size distribution of firms. He assumes
that the "talent for managing" is unevenly distributed among agents, with firm output increasing
in this talent. A firm is identified with a manager, and the capital and labor under the manager's
control. The central aspects of the model are the decision an agent faces between becoming a
manager or an employee, and the decision a manager faces on the optimal choice of the levels of
employment and capital in her firm. In equilibrium, only the most talented become managers,
and the unique size (number of employees) of the marginal manager's firm minimizes average

   21n a world in which contracts are incomplete, the existence of multiple firms does not necessarily imply that
the size of the market is not a constraint on finn size. If employment contracts are incomplete,an individual may
not specialize if he fears being taken advantage of by a monopolist firm. In a manner reminiscent of the literature
on second-sourcing (see Shepard (1987), for example), multiple finns may be required so that an individual in
any one of the firms specializes. The degree of specialization may then be constrained by both the necessity for
competitive alternatives, and the size of the market.


                                                        3
cost. If the elasticity of substitution between capital and labor in the production function is less
than one, average firm size increases with per capita wealth — an increase in per capita capital
raises wages relative to managerial rents, inducing marginal managers to become employees,
and increasing the ratio of employees to managers. Lucas finds a regression of firm size on per
capita GNP (a proxy for per capita capital) based on US time series data reveals a positive
relationship between the two variables. The implication for our study is that more capital
intensive technologies would result in larger firms.
    Rosen (1982) considers a hierarchical organizational structure, where improved labor produc-
tivity at any given level has effects that successively filter through all lower levels. In particular,
there are three layers in the hierarchy — management, supervision, and production. The process
of management involves making discrete and indivisible choices and is therefore subject to scale
economies. However, there are strong diminishing returns in supervision because the manager
loses control as firm size increases. The trade-off between managerial scale economies and the
loss of control results in determinate firm sizes. In equilibrium, persons with the highest skills
are placed in the highest positions of the largest and deepest firms. A key result is that the
multiplicative productivity interactions mentioned above make the equilibrium distribution of
firm size more skewed than the underlying distribution of talent. Rosen notes that this is con-
sistent with data — sizeable concentration ratios are seen even in industries where competitive
conditions might be expected to apply. His result that larger firms have more capable personnel
also suggests a positive correlation between the level of available human capital and firm size.3
    Kremer (1993) focuses more directly on human capital, and less on hierarchies. He models
human capital as the probability that a worker will successfully complete a task. Each task is
performed by one worker, so the output of the firm (a sequence of tasks) depends on the product
of the skill levels of all workers. The hierarchy of managers and subordinates in Lucas (1978)
and Rosen (1982) gives way to an equilibrium with sorting of workers with the same human
capital. Kremer shows that firms using technologies that need several tasks will employ highly
skilled workers because mistakes are more costly to such firms. While Kremer admits that his
model is not a fully worked out theory of the firm, he speculates that the number of tasks and
number of workers are likely to be positively correlated, and the model is therefore consistent
with the stylized fact that richer (higher human capital) countries specialize in complicated

   3k should be noted that the connection in Rosen's model is between the human capital level of managersand
firm size. However, proxies for human capital are available at the general level rather than at the managerial
level. The model of Kremer (1993) discussed below, which has no hierarchy, has a more direct connection between
the general level of human capital and firm size.


                                                       4
 products and have larger firms.
    Another implication of the model is that firm size should be positively correlated with the
wage per worker. This is because a higher wage implies a higher quality worker, and all other
things constant, implies that more workers can be used in the production process. The lack
of a hierarchical structure in Kremer's model makes the relationship between average human
capital of the workforce and average firm size more explicit, unlike the models of Lucas and
Rosen where the human capital of managers, who typically constitute a small fraction of the
workforce, is what matters. But the absence of hierarchy also makes the theory more relevant
to a production process, and less to a firm.

1.2    Organizational Theories
Organizational theories fall into three broad categories. One set of theories often referred to
as Contracting Cost theories (see, for example, Alchian and Demsetz (1972) and Jensen and
Meckling (1976)) — suggest little difference in the contracts at work 'inside a firm' and in the
market. Instead, the firm is simply a particular configuration of contracts characterized by a
central common party to all the contracts, who also has the residual claim to the cash flows.
Centralization helps mitigate problems of metering inputs and controlling agency costs. Since
the contracts in a firm are no different from contracts in the market place, these theories are
silent on whether improvements in contractability — for example, because of improvements in
the legal system - have any effect on the size of firms.
    A second set of theories, loosely grouped as 'Transaction Cost' theories (see Klein, Crawford
and Alchian 1978) and Williamson (1975, 1985)) offer more guidanceas to whether a transaction
should take place between two arm's length entities or within a firm, where a firm can be loosely
defined as an entity with a common governance structure. The advantage of doing a transaction
within a firm is that the firm brings incentives to bear that cannot be reproduced in an arm's
length market. Unfortunately, factors that typically determine the extent of integration in these
theories, such as asset specificity and informational asymmetry, are hard to proxy for even with
detailed data, let alone in a relatively macro-level study such as ours. We will have little to say
about these theories.
    The third set of theories, which can collectively be described as "Critical Resource" theories
of the firm (see Grossman and Hart (1986) for the seminal work in this area and Hart (1995) for
an excellent survey of the early literature), however, offer greater grist for empirical mills. The
starting point of these theories is that transactions can either be fully governed by contracts


                                                5
enforced by courts or by other mechanisms that confer power in non-contractual ways to one
or the other party to the transaction. The non-contractual source of power is usually a critical
resource that is valuable to the production process. A variety of (non-contractual) mechanisms
attach the critical resource to one of the parties in a way that maximizes the creation of surplus.
   For example, the Property Rights approach (see Grossman and Hart (1986), Hart and Moore
(1990)) emphasizes physical assets as the primary critical resource, and ownership as the mech-
anism that attaches this resource to the right agent. According to this view, ownership differs
from ordinary contracts because it confers on the owner the residual rights of control over the
asset (the right to decide in situations not covered by contract). The power associated with
the common ownership of physical assets is what makes the firm different from ordinary market
contracting.
    More recent developments of this theory (see Rajan and Zingales (1998b, 1998c), for exam-
ple) emphasize, first, that the critical resource can be different from an alienable physical asset
and, second, mechanisms other than ownership can help bonds develop between various agents
who participate in the production process. In general, these mechanisms work by fostering com-
plementarities between agents, and between agents and the critical resource. The agent who
controls the critical resource can threaten to destroy the complementarities, and thus gets some
power over other agents. This facilitates transactions even when contracts are inadequate. The
firm then consists of the critical resource and the agents who are tied to it via complementari-
ties. Thus these recent developments (also see Holmstrom (1999) and Holmstrom and Roberts
(1998)) suggest a larger boundary for the firm than the set of commonly owned assets.
   From an empirical perspective, these theories suggest that the quantity of physical assets
over which ownership can be exerted is one determinant of firm size, but the boundaries of the
firm are also expanded by mechanisms other than ownership, some of which are aided by the
law. In particular, Rajan and Zingales (1998c) analyze a stylized model where an entrepreneur
has a critical resource with which she wants to produce. In order to produce, she has to offer
employees access to the resource and its mode of employ. There are constant returns to scale in
production (so that technology does not limit the size of the firm) but extreme increasing returns
to scale in marketing so that a larger firm captures a disproportionate share of the market. The
problem is that the entrepreneur's property rights to the critical resource are not fully secure.
As a result, she has to limit the number of employees who have access to the resource. The
reason is that while she has a "noyeaux dur" of employees who have specialized to the firm's
business, have high switching costs, and are therefore loyal, new unspecialized employees have


                                                6
 low switching costs. If there are a sufficient number of them, they will know that they can
 capture a large market share if they band together and make away with a copy of the critical
  resource. Thus the entrepreneur can employ only a few new employees, and has to wait until
 they specialize and become loyal before admitting new ones. It turns out that not only does
 this fear of expropriation limit the rate of growth of the number of employees in the firm, it also
 limits its eventual size.
     The implications of this model are quite stark. So long as the government respects property
 rights broadly, physical assets are hard to make away with. So the entrepreneur is protected
 against expropriation if the critical resource consists of physical assets. More generally, even
 a modicum of respect for property rights confers substantial power on the owner of physical
 assets, and allows her to exercise control over a large number of employees. Thus physical
 capital intensive firms will typically be larger.
    But as legal institutions improve, the entrepreneur gets other forms of protection. For
example, patent rights protect her intellectual property, while non-compete clauses restrain
employees from departing. Thus firms that rely on other forms of critical resources, such as
brand names, intellectual property, or innovative processes, should become larger as the legal
environment improves.4

 1.3 Institutional theories
There are many channels through which institutions can affect firm size beyond that predicted by
the technological and organizational theories. We group these channels into two main categories:
regulatory and financial.

1.3.1 Regulatory theories
Many costly regulations apply only to larger firms (for example the obligation to provide health
insurance in the United States or Union Laws in Italy). This tilts the playing field towards small
firms. Other regulations, such as strong product liability laws, favor the creation of separate
legal entities that can avail of the protection afforded by limited liability. This should lead to
smaller firms. For instance, each taxi cab in New York is a separate firm. This effect has been
found to be important in explaining the time variation of size of firms in the United States
(Ringleb and Wiggins (1990)).

   40f course, in the limit if there is perfect enforceability, complete contracts can be written, and there is no
distinction between firm and market. In practice, however, we are probably quite far from this utopia.


                                                        7
      High corporate taxes could also drive many economic activities into the informal sector, and
reduce the incentive to create large firms. Some have argued that this is why Italy has so many
small firms (a "fact" we will check).5 Of course, one could also argue that large firms can afford
the staff to indulge in creative tax accounting, thus giving them a comparative advantage in a
high tax environment. This is why the effect of taxes on firm size is potentially ambiguous.
    Also some aspects of the extensive literature on industry market structure (see Caves (1998)
and Sutton (1991, 1997) for excellent surveys) falls under the rubric of regulatory theories.
Anti-trust laws could limit the size of firms. Conversely, by restricting entry and conferring
monopolies, other regulation could increase the average size of firms. For example, in most
European countries, railways are Government owned and are huge, with size only limited by
the market.
    More generally, barriers to entry could be important in determining average firm size. Hopen-
hayn (1992) develops a dynamic model of firm size based on entry costs and firm-level produc-
tivity shocks. He identifies two conflicting effects. Output price increases with entry cost leading
to higher employment, but the threshold productivity level at which firms exit decreases, which
increases the fraction of firms with lower employment. Whether increased barriers to entry
increases or decreases average firm size is therefore an empirical question.

1.4     Financial theories
A potential obstacle to firm growth is also the availability of external funds. If this is an
important issue, firm size should be positively correlated with financial development and, more
generally, with factors promoting the development of financial markets. La Porta et al. (1997a)
find that a country with a Common Law judicial system, and having strict enforcement of the
law, has a more developed financial system. This would suggest that there is an additional,
indirect, channel through which sound laws and judicial efficiency affect firm size - through
their effect on financial market development.
   Rajart and Zingales (1998a), however, find that financial market development affects both
the growth in the average size of existing establishments and the growth in the number of
new establishments in industries dependent on external finance (though disproportionately the
former). Thus, the theoretical effect of the development of financial markets on the average size
of firms is ambiguous. One the one hand, more firms will be born, reducing the average size of

  5For example, Pagano, Panetta, and Zingales (1998) argue that this is a reason why so few Italian firms go
public. By limiting the access to the public equity market, this effect may also limit the size of firms.


                                                     8
 firms. On the other hand, existing firms will be able to grow faster, increasing the average size
 of firms. Whether the average size of firms in industries that rely on external finance is larger.
 thus, is ultimately an empirical question, which we will try to resolve.
    We have attempted in the preceding paragraphs to describe some important technical, legal,
 and institutional influences on firm size. Most of these effects are country specific. Given the
 large number of possible effects and the limited number of countries we have datafor, we will
 not attempt to capture them all, but we will typically control for them by inserting country
fixed effects.


 1.5 Existing Empirical Literature
Much of the evidence we already have comes indirectly from the vast literature on market
structure. One focus of this literature has been on the distribution of firms and their growth
rates in various industries in a country over time. Papers have tried to find evidence for the
Law of Proportional Effects or Gibrat's law, which states that the rate of growth of a firm is
independent of size (in general, the evidence is not consistent with it).
    There have also been studies on the cross-sectional determinants of firm size (see Mata
(1996), for example) but, more typically, studies have been within industry rather than across
industries (Caves and Pugel (1980), for example) or have examined entry and exit (Audretsch
and Mahmood (1995), for example). More important, there have been few cross-country studies
focusing on the effects of institutional differences on firm size. The two most related papers here
are Davis and Henrekson (1997) and La Porta et al. (1997b).
    Davis and Henrekson study whether the institutional structure in Sweden forces a tilt (rela-
tive to the U.S.) towards industries that are dominated by large firms. They find this to be true.
Their interest, however, is in the relative distribution of employment across sectors, not in the
determinants of firm size per Se. In fact, the US establishment coworker mean (number of em-
ployees at the average worker's place of employment) is over twice the corresponding Swedish
value, even though US employment is more heavily concentrated in industries dominated by
smaller production units.
   La Porta et al. (1997b) examine whether an indicator of the level of trust prevailing in a
country affects the share of GDP represented by large organizations (defined as the 20 largest
publicly traded corporations by sales). They find a positive correlation. Their focus, however,
is on the relative importance of large organizations, while our focus is on the determinants of
the absolute size of organizations.


                                                9
2 The Data
In 1988, Directorate-General XXIII of the European Commission and Eurostat launched a
project to improve the collection and compilation of statistics on small and medium enterprises.
This project led to the publication of Enterprises in Europe by the European Commission
in 1994. This data set contains statistics on enterprises, employment, and production for all
economic sectors (except agriculture) in the European Union (EU) and the European Free Trade
Agreement (EFTA) countries.
   One of the explicit purposes of this effort was to assemble "comparable and reliable statistics
which make it possible to identify the relative importance of different categories of enterprises."
(Enterprises in Europe, Third Report, v.1, p. xxii). In spite of the effort to homogenize the
statistical criteria Eurostat warns that several methodological differences in the classification and
coverage of units remain. Thus, the cross-country analysis should be interpreted with caution,
while the cross-sector analysis or interactions, which control for country fixed-effects, are less
sensitive to this problem. With all its limitations this is the first source we know of that provides
comparable data on firm size across countries.

2.1    The Theoretical Unit of Interest and the Empirical Unit.
A problem in studying firm size is that the theories have different approaches to defining the
firm, and this may be at variance with the available data. As we have seen, technological
theories (e.g., Lucas (1978)) focus on the allocation of productive inputs such as physical capital.
managerial talent, and human capital, across various activities and the effect this has on the
size of the production process. They do not focus on the specifics of how hierarchical control
is exerted. These theories would not, for example, make much of a distinction between Toyota
and its supplier network, and General Motors (a much more vertically integrated firm) and its
supplier network, since both feed into broadly similar production processes. More generally.
since technological theories are primarily concerned with the nature of a firm's activity as
captured by variants of the neoclassical production function, in the words of Lucas (1978),
"what we may hope for is not serious organization theory, but perhaps some insights into why
organization theory matters economically."
   Organizational theories (e.g., Aichian and Demsetz (1972), Fama and Jensen (1983), Williamson
(1985), and Grossman and Hart (1986)), on the other hand, focus on how hierarchical control
is exerted. The production function plays, at best, a secondary role in these theories. For ex-
ample, the Property Rights view asserts that control exerted through an arm's length contract

                                                 10
 (General Motors over its suppliers) is not the same thing as control exerted through ownership
 (General Motors over its divisions). According to this view, the economic definition of a firm
 corresponds to the legal view - a firm is a set of commonly owned assets. More recent devel-
 opments (see Rajan and Zingales (1998b,c), for example) go further and suggest that if the
 economic distinction between transactions that are firm-like and market-like turns on whether
hierarchical, non-contractual, control is exerted, common ownership is neither necessary nor
sufficient to define the economic limits of a firm. Toyota may exert much more control over its
suppliers who are tied to it by a long history of specific investment than General Motors, which
puts supply contracts up for widespread competitive bidding. In other words, Toyota and its
suppliers, although distinct legal entities, could be thought of as a firm in the economic sense.
while General Motors and its suppliers are distinct economic and legal entities. In short, with
notable exceptions, the firm described by the theories does not correspond to the legal entity.
    The data that are available, however, are for the legal entity. The unit of analysis is the
enterprise, defined as "the smallest combination of legal units that is an organizational unit
producing goods or services, which benefits from a certain degree of autonomy in decision-
making, especially for the allocation of its current resources. An enterprise carries out one or
more activity at one or more location" (Enterprises in Europe, Third Report, v.11, p. 5).
    The starting point of the definition, thus, is the legal entity. The emphasis on the "small-
est combination of legal units" is important. Conversations with Eurostat managers indicates
that subsidiaries of conglomerates are treated as firms in their own right, as are subsidiaries
of multinationals.6 Some subjectivity, however, is introduced because Eurostat looks also for
autonomy in decision making in drawing the boundary of the enterprise. To this extent, the
enterprise corresponds to the economic entity discussed above — the economic realm over which
centralized control is exercised.
   The definition used for the enterprise is, therefore, a combination of the "legal" and what
we call the "economic" firm. To make some headway, we have to assume that it is also a good
proxy for the length of the production process. All we really need is the plausible assumption
that factors that permit a longer chain of production should also increase the average size of
the autonomous legal entity called the firm.

   6Foreign subsidiaries of a multinational with headquarters in a particular country do not, therefore, add to
the enterprise's size in the country of the parent.




                                                      11
2.2 What Do We Mean by Average Size?
Enterprises in Europe provides us with the size distribution of firms (number of employees) in
each NACE two-digit industry (we use "industry" interchangeably with "sector") in European
countries belonging to the EU and the EFTA.7 We exclude from the analysis Iceland, Luxem-
bourg, and Liechtenstein because of their extremely small size. We also drop Ireland, because
data are not consistently reported. This leaves us with 15 countries. For all these countries.
data are available for either 1991 or 1992. Further details on the data are presented in the data
appendix.
   An immediate question is whether we should measure the size of a firm in terms of its output,
its value added, or the number of its employees. Value added is clearly preferable to output,
because the complexity of the organization has to do with the value of its contribution not with
the value of the output sold. Enterprises in Europe reports that value added per employee is
fairly stable across different size-classes. Thus, a measure of firm size based on the number of
employees is likely to be very similar to a measure based on value-added. Yet, coordination
costs, which are present both in the technological and the organizational theories of the firms,
are in terms of number of employees, not their productivity. Thus, a measure based on the
number of employees is preferable.
    We have data on how many firms and employees belong to each firm size bin (e.g.. there are
30,065 employees and 109 firms in the bin containing 200-499 employees in NACE 16 (Electricity)
in Germany).8 There are a number of ways of summarizing the data. Which measure is more
appropriate depends on the purpose.
   The next question, therefore, has to do with what we are trying to measure. The theories
we have described suggest the determinants of the optimal scale of firms. Yet all the firms in
an industry are not likely to be at that scale. Furthermore, there is entry and exit, firms grow
substantially when young, and there is inter-industry variation in these rates of growth (see
Caves (1998) and Pakes and Ericson (forthcoming)). We have a cross-section, and do not know
how many firms enter or exit from the industry in a typical year. Despite this problem, since we
have countries at relatively similar stages of development, industries should be at similar stages
of the product life cycle across countries (see Klepper (1996) for a formalization of the effects
of the PLC). Hence, the cross-country and interaction effects should indeed re1ect the effects of

   7NACE is the general industrial classification of economic activities within the EU. Two-digit NACE industry
roughly corresponds to two-digit SIC sectors.
   8We use "bin" and "size class" interchangeably.



                                                      12
 institutional differences on average size. More important, Sutton (1997, p52) argues that most
 entry and exit has relatively little effect on the largest firms in the industry (which are likely to
 have achieved the optimal scale). Therefore, while we cannot resolve this problem completely,
 we can minimize its effects by choosing the appropriate measure of firm size.
    This leads us to the last issue, which is what is the most appropriate measure of average
firm size for our data. The simple or firm weighted average, obtained by dividing the total
employment in the country-sector combination by the total number of firms in that combination,
is inappropriate for two reasons. First, it ignores the richness of the dataon the distribution
of firm size. Second, and most important, it could give us a number that has little bearing on
the size of firm that has the greatest share in the sector's production. Consider, for instance,
automobile manufacture in Spain. 78% of the employees in this sector work for 29 firmswhich,
on average, employ 38,302 employees. There are, however, 1,302 self-employed people, who
account for an equal number of firms. Taken together with the intermediate categories, the
simplest measure would suggest that the average firm has only 570 employees.
   Given that our intent is to analyze the determinants of the size of firms that carry out the
bulk of the economic activity in a sector, and also we want to weight large firms more heavily
so as to minimize the effects of entry and exit, we chose instead to compute a weighted average
size as follows; The average firm size in each size bin is first calculated by dividing the number
of employees by the number of firms. The average size for the entire sector is then calculated
as the weighted sum of these bin averages, using as weights the proportion of the total sectoral
employment in that bin. This produces a "employee-weighted" average of firm size.

   Employee Weighted Average Number of Employees =
                                                                                 n/                    / NEmP
                                                                               bin=1      Sector   )
where NmP   is the total number of employees in a bin, N:r is the total number of employees
in the sector, and N(trms is the total number of firms in a bin. In the above example of
automobile manufacture in Spain this measure gives an average firm size of 3,002 employees.
   In contrast to the firm-weighted simple average, the employee-weighted average emphasizes
the larger firms.9 For the remainder of this paper when we refer to firm size withoutqualification,

   °We are not the first to adopt such a convention. Our employee-weighted measure is closer to the Davisand
Henrekson's measure of the coworker mean (number of employees at the average worker's place of employment)
than is an equally weighted average. Also, we do not fully succeed in emphasizing the largest firms since we do
not have the distribution of size within bins, especially the largest. So, for instance, if much of the employment in
an industry is concentrated in a single large firm, but there are 15 smaller firms in the largest bin, our calculated
employee weighted average would tend to understate the true employee weighted average.


                                                         13
we mean the employee-weighted average (or the log of the employee-weighted average in the
regressions).

2.3 Cross-Industry Patterns in Firm Size
Table 1 presents the summary statistics on different measures of size by industry. For now, focus
on employee size measured by the number of employees (the first five columns of Table 1). There
are 55 sectors on which we have data, though from the last column indicating the frequency
of countries reporting, we can see that coverage across countries is not uniform: the coverage
is broadest for "Food and Tobacco" (NACE 41) and most sparse for "Public Administration"
(NACE 91). In this table, each measure of size is obtained by averaging the measure for that
sector across all countries reporting that sector.
    Note first that the simple average and the employee weighted average can present a very
different picture. For example, "Air Transport" has the third largest firms by the latter measure
with an average of 6335 employees, but has only the twelfth largest firms with an average of
135 employees by the former measure. This is because most employees belong to a few large
airlines (hence the higher employee weighted average), but there are also many tiny firms in
the air transport industry providing ancillary services (hence the low simple average). In what
follows, we focus on employee weighted measures.
    The largest sectors, by far, are "Communication", "Railways", "Air transport", and "Elec-
tricity". The sizes of the largest firms in these sectors are also significantly higher than those for
the other sectors. Given the typically high degree of Government ownership and intervention
in these sectors, we collectively label them "Utilities" (although they do not correspond exactly
to the definition of utilities in the U.S.) and present country level statistics with and without
them in Table 2.
   The smallest sectors are "Letting of real estate", "Scrap and waste", "Personal services",
 "Repair of consumer goods", and "Renting, leasing". While one might be tempted to conclude
that firms in the service sector are small, this would be incorrect. Firms in financial services
like Banking or Insurance are about the same size as firms in Motor Vehicles, the non-utility
manufacturing sector with the largest firms.
    The sixth column of Table 1 presents the mean of residuals across countries from the regres-
sion:
                log (Employee weighted average size,3) = cons +         c . d+
where, d is a vector of cointry dummies. The aim is to study the employee weighted average

                                                 14
 size when the country effects are purged. A comparison of the ranking of sectors purged of
 country effects with the ranking of the sectors based on the original average gives us an idea of
 the importance of country effects. Spearman's rank correlation coefficient between the average
 with and without country effect is 0.86 when all sectors are included, and 0.95 when the utility
 sectors are dropped. The ranking of the largest 4 sectors (which include the utility sectors) is
 preserved across both means. These coefficients seem to indicate that while there may well be
 country effects, they are likely to be overshadowed by sectoral effects.
     Indeed, a two-way analysis of variance of the employee weighted average size on country and
 sector shows that close to 63% of the total variation in size comes from sectoral effects while
 about 2.5% comes from country effects. The corresponding numbers when the simple average
 is used are 26% and 1.4%.
     The simple average (or, equivalently, the firm weighted average) is less than the employee
 weighted median for nearly all sectors, suggesting that employees typically belong to larger firms
 in a sector — a right-skewness in the distributions of average size across countries.
     In Table 1 B, we present the dispersion in firm size in the various sectors. The formulas
used in computing this and other statistics are given in the appendix. The weighted coefficient
of variation of firm size within a sector (the employee weighted standard deviation across bins
divided by the employee weighted mean averaged for that sector across countries) is likely to be
small if the industry is concentrated (so that most of the employment is in a few large firms)
or if there is a well-defined optimal scale of operations (so that most firms cluster around that
scale). It is highest for the service industries such as "Personal Services", "Agents", "Hotels
and Catering", "Repair of Consumer Goods" while it is lowest for "Extraction of Solid Fuels",
"Communications", and "Nuclear Fuels". Capital intensive industries seem to be lessdispersed,
though it is hard to tell which of the above forces is responsible.'°
   Finally, the employee weighted skewness is typically negative (39 of 55 sectors negative)
suggesting that even though the mass of employees is concentrated in larger firms, there are
enough employees in small firms to bring the weighted mean down. The industries where
weighted skewness is positive are ones such as "Agents" where most employees are in tiny firms
(most employees are in the bin with firms of average size 2) but there are enough employees in
large firms to take the employee weighted average up to 107.

   '°Yet another possibility is that service industries are less precisely defined - "Agents" could encompass a wide
variety of activities. However, "Hotels and Catering" is quite precise, and this sector also has a high coefficient
of variation.




                                                         15
2.4 Cross-Country Patterns in Firm Size
In Table 2, we present summary statistics on average size by country. Table 2A presents data
for all the sectors, while Table 2B for different subsamples. The broadest coverage is for Italy
and the sparsest coverage for Austria and Denmark. In this table, the "mean" for a country is
the mean across sectors of the average firm size.
   Greece, Portugal, and Austria have firms with the smallest employee weighted average size.
though correcting for industry effects (column six), Norway's firms are also relatively small.
The UK and Italy have firms with the highest average size, in fact, substantially higher than
the remaining countries. Since Italy is reputed to have many small firms, it might come as a
surprise that it has the second highest average size. As we will see, this is partly because of the
composition of industries in Italy.
    When we look at the total number of firms in the country, Italy has by far the most firms.
One must be careful, though, because the number of sectors reported differ by country. This
might explain the relatively low number of firms in Austria and Denmark (beyond the size of
the country). The anomalous observation is Greece, which reports a sizeable number of sectors,
but appears to have very few firms. The reason is that only enterprises with more than 10
employees are reported in Greece. While this biases the average size upwards, our employee-
weighted average minimizes the effect. Nevertheless, we will check that none of our results
depend on this.
   The last column presents the mean of residuals across countries from the regression:

                log (Employee weighted average size,3) = COflS + /3 . d3 + Ec,s

where, d3 is a vector of sector dummies. The aim is to study the employee weighted size in
a country when the sector effects are purged. Spearman's rank correlation coefficient between
the means with and without sector effects is 0.45, significantly lower than the figures presented
above for the sector tables. The ranking is preserved only for UK. Interestingly, Finland which
is ranked sixth in average size falls only marginally to seventh after purging industry effects.
Thus Finland's large firms are not simply because of industry effects.
    As mentioned earlier, the utilities sectors need to be treated differently. The first column in
Table 2B presents the mean for the country distributions when the utilities sectors are excluded.
The mean drops for several countries, with the drop for Italy being the most dramatic (2244
to 545). Spearman's rank correlation coefficient between the means with and without utilities


                                                16
is 0.78. UK, Germany, and France now have the highest averages, while Greece. Portugal. and
Austria continue to have the smallest averages (they do not have coverage for utilities in the
first place and are therefore unaffected by the exclusion).
   Since manufacturing excludes utilities, the means for manufacturing sectors alone are very
similar to those when utilities are excluded. In fact, the Spearman coefficient between themeans
without utilities and for manufacturing alone is 0.89.
    It is hard to discern any obvious patterns in Table 2B. A rich country like Switzerland has
firms of very small average size, while small countries like Denmark have large firms. Remark-
ably, UK has the largest firms according to almost any classification considered. While we
cannot rule out differences in the definition of firms in the United Kingdom, no other country
preserves its rank so consistently.
    Finally, Table 2C indicates that Italy, Spain and Portugal have the highest employee weighted
coefficient of variation for firm size. Austria, Belgium, and the United Kingdom have relatively
low dispersion of firm size.

2.5    Other Summary Statistics
We present in Table 3 the summary statistics of the explanatory variables used in the subsequent
analysis as well as their cross-correlations. The definitions of all these variables is contained in
the Data Appendix.
   Two facts are worth pointing out. First, in spite of the homogeneity of the sample (all the
countries are European and would be classified as developed), there is some variation in most of
the explanatory variables. For example, per capita income varies between $6,783 (Greece) and
$16,245 (Switzerland) and the measure for human capital varies between 3.827years (Portugal)
and 10.382 (Norway).
   The second fact is that some of these measures are highly correlated. For example, judicial
efficiency has a correlation of 0.9 with human capital. This can make it difficult to separate the
effect of the two.


3 Cross-Industry Correlations
We start our analysis by examining the correlation between industry-level factors and firm size.




                                                17
3.1 Predictions and Proxies
As a proxy for the size of the actual market we use the log of total employment in the industry
in that country." There are two problems with this measure. First, theories (e.g., Smith
(1776)) obviously refer to the potential market. Second, and following from the first, there
may be spurious correlation between average firm size and our measure of the market size. For
example, in the case of monopolies, there will be a one-to-one correspondence between average
firm size and our proxy for the size of the market. To correct for this, we instrument our measure
of market size with the logarithm of GDP and country population. These country level variables
should be uncorrelated with industry level constraints, but should be correlated with the size
of the potential market, hence they should be good instruments.
    While we do not have a direct measure of capital stock in an industry to enable us to
calculate physical capital intensity, we have the gross investment in an industry. Dividing this
by the number of workers in that industry, we have investment per worker. In order to obtain
a more exogenous measure, we take the mean of this variable across all the countries for which
we have this data.'2
    The expenditure on Research and Development is not available for the European countries
in our sample; but from Compustat, we obtain the median R&D to sales ratio for U.S. firms
in each industry over the 1980s, and use it as a proxy for R&D investment made by European
firms in the same industry. We calculate wages per worker in the same way as investment per
worker above.
    Finally, Rajan and Zingales (1998a) compute an industry's dependence on external funds as
the fraction of capital expenditure in that industry in the United States funded from external
sources. We use the Rajan and Zingales measure of external dependence and weight it by the
investment per worker in an industry to get the amount per worker that has to be raised from
external sources.
    The maintained assumption in using these proxies is that there are technological character-
istics of certain industries that should carry over countries. Of course, since we are primarily
interested in the sign of coefficients, what we really require is that the relative relationship
between industries carry over rather than the precise levels. In other words, if Drugs and Phar-
maceuticals is more research intensive in the United States than Leather goods, it will continue

   "Whenever we require the logarithm of a variable, we always add one before taking logs.
   '2This includes the United States. As we will see, dropping the United States in the calculation does not change
the results qualitatively. Neither does taking medians. All industry variables are winsorized at the 5%and 95%
levels to reduce the effects of outliers.


                                                        18
to be so in Italy. This is also the maintained assumption in Rajan and Zingales (1998a). While
this assumption allows us to use independent variables that are likely to be truly exogenous.
and also overcome the paucity of data, a failure of this assumption means, of course, that some
of our independent variables are noise and should have little explanatory power.

3.2    Results

We report in Table 4 the estimates for a regression of log firm size on characteristics of the
industry. In the first column we report the estimates from a regression of log employee weighted
average size on industry characteristics where the size of the market (measured as total sec-
toral employment) is instrumented. Robust standard errors are reported and they correct for
clustering of the residuals at the industry level. The effect of market size is positive and highly
statistically significant (henceforth, "significant" will denote significance at the 10% level or
better). An increase in log employment in the industry from the twenty fifth percentile to the
seventy fifth percentile increases log size by about 27% of the inter-quartile range. Thus the
size of the market does matter, perhaps because it affects the extent of possible specialization.
   We also include investment per worker, R&D to sales, wages per worker, and amount financed
externally per worker. The first three explanatory variables are positively correlated with size,
while the amount financed externally is negatively correlated. While we expected investment,
wages, and R&D expenditure to be positively correlated, we had no strong prior on the sign of
the correlation between the amount financed externally and size.
   The magnitudes of the effects are also considerable. According to the estimates in column
I, an increase in investment per worker, R&D to sales, wage per worker, and amount financed
externally from the 25th percentile to the 75th percentile of the variable changes log firm size
by 14%, 13%, 37%, and -29% of its inter-quartile range respectively. The explanatory power of
the regression is also considerable (R2 = 0.32).
   What do we make of all this? If industries are located in specific areas and there is a high
cost to labor mobility, or if agents have industry specific human capital, then Lucas' model
could be applied industry by industry in a country. The positive partial correlation between
investment per worker and size is consistent with Lucas (1978). It is also consistent with Critical
Resource theories of the firm where a firm of larger size is easier to control when the critical
resource is physical capital. Finally, the correlation may reflect a larger minimum economic
scale for physical capital intensive industries (though we have no theoretical argument for such




                                                19
a conjecture).13
   From the perspective of extant technological theories, one would expect investment in R&D
and investment in physical capital to be correlated. Thus we should expect a positive correlation
between size and R&D expenditure. Similarly, from the perspective of Critical Resource theories.
if the critical resource is intellectual property and it is protected to some extent by patent laws.
we should expect such a correlation.14
    The positive correlation between wages per worker and size is consistent with the thrust
of Lucas's (1978) notion that the incentive to become an entrepreneur is relatively small when
wages are high. It is also consistent with Kremer's (1993) view that if wages are a proxy for the
quality of a worker, higher wages should be associated with larger firms.
    Finally, the negative correlation between the amount financed externally and size suggests
the adverse effects on average size of financial constraints on the growth of existing firms dom-
inate the positive effects on average size of reduced entry by new firms in financially dependent
industries (though, of course, the way we measure size is biased towards minimizing the latter
effect).
   The pattern of correlations with size allow us to draw only tentative conclusions about
the effect of entry barriers on firm size. The necessity of large per capita expenditures on
investment and R&D in an industry, which are reasonable proxies for technological barriers to
entry, increase average firm size. One would have expected the cost of externally funding these
investments to also be one of the proxies for barriers to entry. However, the result discussed in
the previous paragraph highlights the weakness of this variable as a proxy — even established
firms are adversely affected by the need for external financing. Thus, based on the quantity of
investment alone we have to conclude that barriers to entry have a positive effect on firm size.
    In summary, the partial correlations are consistent with multiple theories. Nevertheless, the
correlations are useful in that they provide a minimum set of patterns that theories should fit.

3.3 Robustness
Before we turn to cross-country correlations, we check the robustness of our findings. We re-
estimate the regression in Table 4 (column I) dropping one variable at a time so as to check that

  '3We are not the first to find such a relationship. For example, Caves and Pugel (1980) find that size is
correlated with capital intensity within industry.
  '4The relationship between firm size and total firm R&D investment within an industry is well known (see Cohen
and Kiepper (1996) for references). However, our finding is across industries and countries, More important, the
correlation we find is between the intensity of R&D (i.e., per unit) and size, while it has generally been found
(Kiepper (1996), p577) that R&D does not rise more than proportionally with firm size within industry.

                                                      20
the specification is robust. The variables never change sign (estimates available from authors)
though the high correlation of capital intensity with amount financed externally and wages per
worker make the magnitude of its coefficient volatile. The next step is to check that the observed
correlations are robust to the introduction of country effects. If they are not, one would suspect
that the estimated effects do not relate as much to the nature of the technology used in an
industry as to the institutional environment in a particular country. So in Table 4 (II), we
introduce country indicators (coefficients of indicators not reported) in the estimated model.
The one problem with introducing country indicators is that we cannot instrument market size
with country level variables such as log GDP because the instruments will become perfectly
collinear with the country indicators. That we do not instrument perhaps explains why the
coefficient estimate for market size in Table 4 (II) is more than twice what it is in Table 4 (I),
even though all other coefficient estimates are much closer in magnitude to their corresponding
values.
   Recall that we computed investment per worker and wage per worker by taking means for the
industry across a number of countries including the United States. If we drop the United States,
we lose a number of industries for which we have per-worker data only from the United States.
Therefore, the number of observations in Table 4 (III) is smaller. The coefficient estimates
remain qualitatively similar even with the changed explanatory variable and the lower number
of observations. However, both the coefficient estimate for capital intensity and R&D intensity
are measured much more imprecisely, and they become statistically insignificant. The coefficient
of wage per worker is borderline statistically significant.'5
    In summary, the results seems fairly robust. Signs are stable. Using different methods to
calculate the explanatory variables, different dependent variables, or different sub-samples, does
not alter the results significantly.


4 Cross-country correlations
Let us now examine the partial correlations of country level variables with firm size.

  '5We can also compute the median investment and wage per worker for an industry across countries (instead
of the mean). We find that the coefficient estimates are all significant and have the same sign as before.




                                                    21
4.1 Proxies
We include the log of per capita income as a measure of a country's wealth, and human capital,
measured as the average years of schooling in the population over age 25 in the year 1985. The
latter comes from the Barro-Lee database. Our measure of judicial efficiency, is an assessment
by Business International Corporation of the "efficiency and integrity of the legal environment
as it affects business" for each country, coded on a scale of zero to ten.

4.2 Results
In Table 5, we present estimates of the effect of cross-country variables. In all the estimations
we include industry fixed effects and the size of the market, which is instrumented by the log
of GDP.16 The standard errors are not only robust to heteroskedasticity but also corrected for
potential clustering at the country level.
    We start by examining the effect of log per capita income in column I. Per capita GDP
has a positive and significant correlation with firm size. As we shall soon see, when we include
measures of institutional development, the coefficient turns negative and significant.
    In Table 5 (column II), we include human capital. Human capital has a positive and sig-
nificant coefficient, consistent with the theories proposed by Rosen (1982), Becker and Murphy
(1992), and Kremer (1993). Interestingly, the sign on log per capita income becomes negative,
though it is statistically insignificant.
   Next we include the efficiency of the judicial system (column III). The coefficient estimate
is positive and highly significant. An increase in judicial efficiency from the 25th percentile to
the 75th percentile changes log firm size by 52% of its inter-quartile range. The large positive
correlation is consistent with Critical Resource theories, legal and financial theories, and co-
ordination cost theories of the firm: An efficient legal system eases management's ability to use
critical resources other than physical assets as sources of power, which leads to the establishment
of firms of larger size (see Rajan and Zingales (1998c)). It also protects outside investors better
and allows larger firms to be financed (see La Porta et al. (1997a,1998)). Finally, an efficient
legal system reduces co-ordination costs and allows larger organizations (Becker and Murphy
(1992)).
   Note that the coefficient on log of per capita income is now negative and significant at the
5% level. Therefore the "stylized fact" that richer countries have larger firms seems true only

  '60f the two instruments used earlier, log GDP and log population, we can use only one otherwise they would
be perfectly collinear with per capita GDP.


                                                     22
when we examine the obvious difference between the size of firms in really poor countries where
there is little industry to speak of, and those in the rich developed countries, and when we do
not correct for differences in institutions.17 Within the set of industrialized countries, however,
there seems to be little evidence of a significant positive partial correlation between per capita
GDP and size.18
     Recall that the size of firms in Greece is possibly biased upwards. Unlike in Table 4, we
cannot include country indicators in these regressions. Therefore, it is important to check that
our results are robust to excluding Greece. In fact, they are stronger.
  We also inserted (not reported) a number of other variables to our basic specification in
Column III, one at a time. We include Ginarte and Park (1997)'s index of the protection
given to patent rights in different countries, the statutory corporate tax rate in the country
in 1991, and the quality of accounting standards which Rajan and Zingales (1998a) argue is a
good proxy for the extent of financial sector development in a country. We also include proxies
for regulatory constraints and a measure of product liability. It turns out that none of these
variables remains significant when judicial efficiency is included (though accounting standards
comes in positive and significant when on its own, or included with the specification in Column
II), while judicial efficiency always remains positive and highly statistically significant and log
per capita income negative and significant. To some extent, the problem is that some of these
variables are strongly correlated. For example, judicial efficiency has a correlation of 0.90 with
our measure of human capital, 0.65 with accounting standards, and -0.40 with the corporate tax
rate. This is a traditional problem with cross-country regressions - all measures of institutional
and human capital development are typically highly correlated, so it is hard to tell their effects
apart. Nevertheless, it is interesting that judicial efficiency seems to dominate the effects of
other variables.
    This cross-country analysis should be interpreted with caution because it is most sensitive
to differences in the definition of enterprise across countries. Nevertheless, two results seem
to emerge. First, the correlation between per-capita income and firm size is not as clear as
previously thought and may, in fact, be a proxy for institutional development. Second, judicial

        Gollin (1998) for an example of a study that focuses on economic development and firm formation.
  '8One could argue that our dependent variable is a proxy for labor intensity, and high per capita income
countries could be substituting cheap capital for labor. This would yield a negative correlation between size and
per capita income. To check that this is not driving our result, we would need data on sales. Unfortunately, data
on sales present in Enterprsses in Europe are sporadic. Nevertheless, we experimented with the limited sample
available. Even with sales weighted average sales as dependent variable, the coeflicient estimate for per capita
income is never significantly positive.



                                                      23
efficiency seems to have the most clear cut correlation with firm size.


5 Interactions
Not only could cross-country regressions be biased by differences in the definition of the en-
terprise, but also we have very few degrees of freedom. Hence, it is hard to estimate anything
with accuracy, and know whether something is really a proxy for what it purports to be. Rajan
and Zingales (1998a) suggest one way to reduce both these problems: they test predictions that
rely on an interaction between country and industry characteristics, after controlling for both
country and industry effects. By doing so, not only do we use more of the information in the
data, but also we test a more detailed implication of the theory, which helps distinguish theories
that have the same prediction for direct or level effects. Organizational theories which model
the micro mechanisms in greater detail are more amenable to such tests.

5.1     Theoretical Predictions
As we have seen, greater judicial efficiency leads to bigger firms. According to Critical Resource
theories this effect is due to the strengthening of control rights. In all the countries in our
sample, basic property rights over physical assets are protected, and guarantee owners a certain
degree of power. However, the increased protection afforded to intellectual property, manage-
ment techniques, firm-client relationships, etc., by a more efficient judicial system should allow
more resources (even inalienable ones) to come into their own as sources of power. Therefore, we
should expect judicial efficiency to particularly enhance management's control rights for firms
with relatively few physical assets resulting in larger firms in such industries. This will imply
the interaction between judicial efficiency and investment per worker should be negatively cor-
related with size. Note that this is not a direct implication of theories like Lucas (1978), which
emphasize the rents created for workers by physical capital but not its control properties, or
Becker and Murphy (1992) who refer to the co-ordination benefits of a better judicial system
without emphasizing specific channels through which it works.
      We have seen empirically that the average size of firms is negatively correlated with their need
for external finance. This suggests imperfect financial markets constrain size. The development
of financial markets should alleviate such a con'straint. Therefore, we should expect industries
that have to finance more externally will be larger in countries with better developed financial
markets - a positive, coefficient for the interaction term. Moreover, La Porta et al. (1997a, 1998)



                                                   24
suggest that the efficiency of the legal system should affect the financial system. The inclusion of
both the interaction between judicial efficiency and capital intensity, and accounting standards
and external dependence allows us to distinguish the direct effects of judicial efficiency on firm
size (as in the Critical Resource theory) and its indirect effect through financial development
(as in legal and financial theories).

5.2    Results

One of the advantages of looking at interaction effects is that we can include both country and
industry indicators to absorb all the direct effects. Thus we do not need to worry about which
country or industry variables to include. The problem, however, is that we cannot instrument
the size of the market because the instruments are collinear with the country indicators. We
will check that this does not drive the results.
    In Table 6, we report estimates for the interaction variables included individually (along
with market size, country indicators, and industry indicators). Capital intensive industries
have smaller firms in countries with better judicial systems. An increase in judicial efficiency
from its 25th percentile to its 75th percentile causes the difference in log average size between
firms in industries at the 75th percentile of capital intensity and firms in industries at the 25th
percentile of capital intensity to diminish by approximately 12% of the inter quartile range of
size. Put differently, as the legal system improves, the evidence indicates that the difference in
size between automobile manufacturers and consulting firms should decrease.
  Firms in financially dependent industries are relatively larger when financial markets are
more developed. The estimates in column II suggest that an increase in a country's financial
development from the 25th percentile to the 75th percentile results in the difference in log average
size between firms in industries at the 75th percentile amount-financed-externally and firms in
industries at the 25th percentile of amount-financed-externally to increase by approximately 9%
of the inter quartile range of size.
   We also include both interaction variables simultaneously. The coefficients on both terms
increase suggesting that each effect is somewhat obscured when only one term is included.
Finally, recall that with country indicators, we cannot instrument market size. To check that
this does not drive the results, we drop the country indicators, include country level explanatory
variables in column IV, and instrument market size. The interactions that were significant in
column III continue to be significant, and their magnitudes are qualitatively similar.19

  '9We also estimate the coeffidents when investment per worker is calculated only using European data (not


                                                    25
    To summarize, the negative correlation between the judicial efficiency/capital intensity in-
teraction and firm size can be explained by the Critical Resource theories of the firm. We also
find evidence that financial development helps firms become larger, in part because it alleviates
constraints on firms dependent on external finance.
    The importance of the interaction effects lies in giving us greater assurance that the main
effects (such as the effect of capital intensity or judicial efficiency on firm size) are correlated,
at least in part, for the particular theoretical reasons we attribute to them. Perhaps a greater
reason to focus on interaction effects is their value, in distinguishing otherwise hard-to-disentangle
level effects. Specifically, in the cross-country regressions, judicial efficiency swamped the effects
of accounting standards on size. This is a common feature of cross-country regressions where
most indicators of development are highly correlated with each other. By interacting judicial
efficiency with capital intensity, and accounting standards with financial dependence, not only
are we able to use the country-sector data to provide information, but also we distinguish the
effects of judicial efficiency from accounting standards better.

5.3 Why Does a Better Judicial System Reduce the Impact of Capital In-
        tensity on Size?
But we can go still further in evaluating the detailed implications of the Critical Resource
theory. We cannot, as yet, tell whether the interaction effect between judicial efficiency and
capital intensity comes from capital intensive firms becoming smaller, or firms with relatively
few physical assets becoming larger, as judicial efficiency improves. The distinction is important
because it enables us to tell apart some nuances in Critical Resource Theory. We have argued
that improved judicial efficiency will enable management to gain control from legal devices
other than ownership rights over physical assets. This suggests that the effect should largely
come from the increase in size of firms in industries that are not physical capital intensive.
There is, however, another explanation. If the residual rights coming from property rights to
physical assets are what distinguish firms from markets, then as judicial efficiency improves,
contractability improves, and the residual rights associated with physical assets become less
important. Also, physical assets become easier to finance for departing employees, therefore
becoming less unique and well protected, and again residual control rights associated with them
diminish. This implies that capital intensive firms should become smaller with improvements

reported). The interaction coefficients retain their significance and sign even though we lose a number of industries
The results are qualitatively similar when we use medians to aggregate the per worker industry characteristics
across countries rather than means.

                                                         26
in judicial efficiency, which could also explain the result.
    To test this, we replace the interaction variable with judicial efficiency multiplied by indi-
cators if an industry is in the highest or lowest tertile of physical capital intensity in Table 6B.
The coefficient on the interaction between judicial efficiency and the highest tertile indicator is
negative but not significant. Most of the action comes from the lowest tertile indicator which
is positive and significant. This suggests that the effects of improvements in judicial efficiency
come primarily from the growth in the size of firms that are not physical capital intensive.
    However, one last check is warranted. Since judicial efficiency is correlated with per capita
income, perhaps what we are measuring is the growth in the tertiary sector as per capita incomes
improve. Of course, there is no obvious reason why the growth in the tertiary sector should
result in the growth in average size of firms in that sector, given that we control for the size
of the sector. Nevertheless, we also include the indicators interacted with log per capita GDP
in Table 6B (II). The ineraction between judicial efficiency and the indicator for low capital
intensity is still positive and statistically significant. The interaction between judicial efficiency
and high capital intensity is still negative, though now almost significant.
   In sum, we believe that the interaction effect bolsters the explanations Critical Resource
theories offer for the direct influence of capital intensity and judicial efficiency on firm size. While
not conclusive, this suggests these theories are worthy of further investigation. Furthermore,
while Becker and Murphy (1992) do not discuss the precise channels through which increases
in legal efficiency will increase the size of firms, the evidence is broadly consistent with their
theory also.


6 Discussion
This is undoubtedly an exploratory study. Nevertheless, we believe we have uncovered a number
of regularities that can provide some guidance for future empirical and theoretical work. Our
main finding is that firms in capital-intensive industries are larger, as are firms in countries with
efficient judicial systems. More detailed findings can help tell theories apart. In particular, we
find that firms in capital intensive industries are relatively smaller when located in countries
with efficient judicial systems. This suggests that organizational theories may have some hope
of explaining the substantial variation in firm size. Finally, financial constraints do seem to
affect the size of firms.
   Our findings suggest another potential answer, other than industry effects (which are, to
some extent, endogenous) to the question that started this paper. Finland's judicial efficiency

                                                  27
is rated 10, the highest on the scale (a position shared with a number of other countries). Its
accounting standards are rated 77, which put it third in the sample after Sweden and the U.K.
This may explain why the average size of its firms is larger than that of larger countries such
as Italy (judicial efficiency 6.75, accounting standards 62) or Spain (judicial efficiency 6.25,
accounting standards 64) whose standing on these measures places them close to, or in the
bottom quartile.
   The cross-industry results are consistent with the technological theories. This fact is of
considerable importance given that the bulk of the variation in size, as indicated by an analysis
of variance, is due to sectoral effects. However, the cross-country evidence is mixed. For example,
log per capita income has, if anything, a negative correlation with firm size after correcting for
institutional variables that should be irrelevant in technological theories. Similarly, the level of
human capital ha.s an insignificant correlation with firm size after we correct for the efficiency
of the judicial system.
    This result is to be expected, as technological theories often abstract from institutional
features that vary across countries and affect firm formation. They instead focus on the organi-
zation of a typical sector within a given economy, and are thus most likely to be consistent with
time-series evidence, as in Lucas (1978), or cross-industry evidence, as in part of our study.
    One way to get at more detailed implications of technological theories may be to examine the
influences on the dispersion of firm size within industry. For example, Kremer's (1993) results
on assortative matching based on human capital, and higher human capital firms undertaking
more complex processes (larger firms) can be combined to get the implication that greater
inequality in human capital would be correlated with greater dispersion in firm size. Rosen's
(1982) model has a similar implication - with more skilled managers running large firms and less
skilled managers running small firms. As a measure of inequality in human capital we compute
the coefficient of variation in educational attainments.20 In Table 7, we regress the weighted
coefficient of variation of firm size against this measure of inequality. We find, as predicted, the
coefficient on inequality to be positive and highly statistically significant.
    One could, however, argue that institutional development could reduce the importance of
factors like talent and incumbency for the exercise of managerial control, and levels the playing

  20BaJrO and Lee (1993) have data on the % of population over 25 in 4 categories of educational attainment
—
  none, primary, secondary, higher — for each country. They also have years of education attainment of each
type — PYR25, SYR25, and HYR25. We assign the following years of education to the four-category frequency
distribution mentioned above: 0, PYR25, PYR25+SYR25, and PYR25+SYR25+HYR25. The coefficient of
variation is then computed the usual way and used as a measure of human capital inequality. All human capital
data is for the year 1985.


                                                     28
field. For example, greater judicial efficiency could help even small entrants secure their property,
thus ensuring they reach optimal scale for production. Therefore, we would expect measures
of institutional development to be negatively correlated with dispersion. This is. in fact, the
case. When we include judicial efficiency in column II, it is strongly negatively correlated with
the weighted coefficient of variation of firm size, and inequality in human capital. while still
positive, is no longer statistically significant. Finally, the inclusion of per capita in column III
does not change our conclusions.
   Given our cross-sectional data, we could have more convincing tests of technological theories
if we could exploit the way differences in institutional environments across countries affect the
use of particular technologies and organizational structures. Tests for interactions, however,
are hard to tease out of the technological theories since they do not model micro mechanisms
in as detailed a way as organizational theories do. Nevertheless, such tests are possible. For
instance, a more subtle implication of Kremer (1993) is that when the value added in a particular
technology is high, human capital will be more important. So for such technologies, firm size
will be larger when the human capital available in the country is better. This suggests a
positive correlation between firm size and the interaction of human capital in the country with
value added per worker. Unfortunately, the correlation is negative and insignificant when we
include only this interaction together with market size, and country and industry indicators
(coefficients not reported). When we include this interaction in the model in Table 6 A, column
III, neither the interaction term, nor human capital is statistically significant (coefficients not
reported). The variables that were found to be significant in that model continue, however, to
be significant. Accompanied by the usual caveats, the prediction is not borne out.
   A final caveat is in order. Even if one can devise more careful tests that discriminate between
technological and organizational explanations of the size of firms, it is likely that they will be
biased in favor of the latter. The firm in our dataset is defined as the legal entity, and the
focus of some organizational theories is precisely on that entity. Clearly, they should have
more explanatory power. By contrast, technological theories focus more on the technological
limits to production. The unit of observation to test such theories should be the length of a
production process from raw material input to final output. This may extend across several
firms. Unfortunately, we do not have data on the length of processes, hence the bias.




                                                 29
7 Conclusion
It would be overstatement to suggest that we have actually tested theories. What we have done
is found interesting partial correlations. Our search for these correlations has been motivated
by specific theories, and to that extent, we have found evidence consistent with some theories.
In particular, we find that institutional factors such as the efficiency of the judicial system and
the development of financial markets as well as technological factors such as capital intensity
and market size seem to influence the size of firms.
   An important question, which we plan to address in future work, is whether size differences
matter for the level and growth of productivity. If, in fact, the policy variables that we have
found correlated with firm size are causal, they might have implications for growth. Rajan and
Zingales (1998a) suggest that financial development does, in fact, facilitate growth. Since a
substantial part of growth comes from the growth in average size of organizations, one channel
through which financial development helps is by making possible the financing of large firms.
    One could ask whether increases in judicial efficiency have similar effects. A related point
is that judicial efficiency is highly correlated with human capital, and most likely with other
forms of organizational capital. It is likely that the same underlying process of development is
responsible for increases in the efficiency of judicial enforcement as well as other forms of capital.
If this is the case, one might not be able to influence judicial efficiency, and hence firm size,
without paying attention to the underlying causes. In other words, it might be worth exploring
the true nature of the correlation between human capital and judicial efficiency, as well as the
policy variables that might affect them. More research is clearly needed.




                                                 30
                                                     Table 1:


Different Measures of Firm Size by Industrial Sector
    The Sow-ce of the data is Enterprises in Europe which provides us with the distribution of firm size in each
NACE two-digit industry in a number of European countries in 1991-92. The average number of employees
computed weighting the average number of employees per firm in each bin of the distribution by the fraction of
firms in that bin. The employee-weighted mean is computed weighting the average number of employees in each
bin of the distribution by the fraction of total industry employees present in each bin. Employee-weighted mode
is the average number of employees per firm in the bin that contains the most number of employees. Employee-
weighted median is the average number of employees per firm in the bin that contains the median employee in
the industry. Relative size correcting for country effects is the average residual for that sector obtained after
regressing the logarithm of employee weighted size on country indicators after removing a fixed country effect. It
can be interpreted as the relative deviation of the size of firms in that sector after purging country effects.




                                 A: Different Measures (average across countries)
                                                          Employee      Employee     Employee        Relative
                                                           weighted      weighted     weighted            size
                               Average     Number of        average         mode       median       correcting
                             number of     firms in the number of number of number of for country
                             employees          sector    employees     employees    employees          effect    N
 Extraction solid fuels             232             41          987         1,133         1,133           0.09    6
 Coke ovens                         207              5          300           348           348          -1.28    4
 Extraction petroleum               441             19        1,239         1,399         1,398          -0.28    5
 Oil refining                       216             60        1,075         1,314         1,303           0.82    7
 Nuclear fuels                      116              6          365           418           418           0.04    3
 Electricity                        173            826        4,122         4,749         4,391           1.89    8
 Water supply                        41            538          477           858           369          -0.15    5
 Extraction-metal                   150            244          644           859           728          -0.48    7
 Production-metal                   136            714        1,412         2,012         1,936           1.41    10
 Extraction-other                    15          2,556           183          404            65          -0.93    9
 Manufacture-non metal               22          4,924           395          685           302           0.07    13
 Chemical industry                   80          2,295          1,087       1,647         1,438           0.99    12
 Man-made fibers                    224             19           927         1,113        1,113           0.74    6




                                                         31
                                                        Employee    Employee    Employee     Relati
                                                         weighted    weighted    weighted         size
                                 Average    Number of     average       mode      median    correcting
                                number of firms in the number of number of number of for country
                                employees      sector   employees   employees   employees       effect    N
Manufacture- metal                     19      18,972         243         275          68       -0.48    14
Mechanical engineering                 33       8,861         510         995         286        0.24    14
Office machinery                       44         743       1,179       1,602       1,574        0.50    10
Electrical engineering                 41       6,650        960        1,609       1,241        0.91    14
Motor vehicles                        99        1,218       1,938       2,455       2328          1.31   12
Other means transportation            54        1,268       1,414       2,074       1,837         1.32   12
Instrument engineering                 19       5,006         391        865          165        0.00    10
Food and tobacco                      26       17,691        493        1,015         419        0.29    15
Textile                               27        7,761        324         618          273        -0.08   11
Leather goods                         11        2,416        142          189          51        -1.23   10
Footwear and clothing                 17       16,012        234         388           89        -0.52   12
Timber and furniture                  10       21,098        174          130          38        -1.03   12
Paper products and publishing         25       11,654        446         939          267         0.16   15
Rubber and plastic                    29        4,871        477         861         316         0.09    11
Other manufacturing                    9        8,295        140           10         45         -0.99   10
Building and civil engin.             10      112,814        224           10         28         -0.54   12
Wholsaje distrib.                      8       57,289         160         186         31         -0.78   12
Scrap and waste                         5       2,269          30          3          13         -2.45    4
Agents                                 3       84,499        107            2           5        -2.42    8
Retail distribution                     5     254,448        435            2          17         0.07    8
Hotels and catering                     5     100,698         130          3           10        -0.97    8
Repair of consumer goods                7      39,146          64          45          13        -1.81    8
Railways                            1,536       2,319      16,253      14,625      14,630         3.35    6
Other land transport                   6       54,156        320          417          26       -0.13     8
Inland water transport                 21         263        372          788        364         0.02     4
Sea transport                          82         225        910        1,454       1,051        1.04     4
Air transport                         135         140       6,335       7,525       7,525        3.09     5
Supporting services                    23       4,070         849       1,341         937        0.73     6
Travel agents                          12       5,787         236         550          92       -0.53     8
Communication                       2,846         443      27,273      28,256      28,256        4.20     5
Banking and finance                    86       3,929       1,857       2,564       2,564        1.70     7
Insurance                             155        712        1,224       1,642       1,569        1.25     8
Auxiliary services                      5     192,325        325         503           33       -0.44    10
Renting, leasing                        5       6,030         75          135          22       -1.58     7
Letting of real estate                 3       22,350         46           2            6       -2.31     6
Public administration                  6      332,215        544           2           24       -0.48     1
Sanitary services                     18        5,813        508        1,136         166       -0.03     8
Education                              5       16,953        103           3           17       -1.97     6
Research and development              19          881        344         633          182       -0.05     5
Medical   and others                   8       73,263        286         513         291        -0.73     5
Recreational services                  6       36,150        522         725          64         0.23     7
Personal services                      3       48,044         58           2            2       -2.11     8




                                                32
           B: Dispersion in Firm Size (average across countries)
                                                    Employee
                                        Simple       weighted Employee
                                    coefficient    coefficient     weighted
                                   of variation   of variation     skewness
Extraction solid fuels                    1.19           0.12         -0.26
Coke ovens                                0.69           0.32         -0.54
Extraction petroleum                      1.53           0.37         -0.61
Oil refining                              2.02           0.44         -0.56
Nuclear fuels                             1.49           0.26         -0.32
Electricity                               4.53           0.58         -0.73
Water supply                              4.09           0.86         -0.58
Extraction-metal                          1.72           0.50         -0.53
Production-metal                          3.36           0.63         -0.74
Extraction-other                          3.39            1.32        -0.42
Manufacture-non metal                     3.95            1.18        -0.57
Chemical industry                         3.44           0.77         -0.84
Man-made fibers                           1.40           0.37         -0.26
Manufacture- metal                        3.60            1.53         0.25
Mechanical engineering                    4.04            1.19        -0.59
Office machinery                          4.62           0.58         -0.79
Electrical engineering                    4.70           0.86         -0.90
Motor vehicles                            4.27           0.68         -0.52
Other means transportation                5.21           0.68         -0.71
Instrument engineering                    4.60            1.19        -0.98
Food and tobacco                          4.52            1.12        -1.04
Textile                                   3.55            1.14        -0.77
Leather goods                             3.07            1.34        -0.08
Footwear and clothing                     3.82            1.55        -0.11
Timber and furniture                      3.73            1.73         0.32
Paper products and publishing             4.45            1.19        -0.99
Rubber and plastic                        3.94            1.19        -0.29
Other manufacturing                       3.99            1.55         0.60
Building and civil engin.                 5.28            1.99         0.49
Wholsale distrib.                         4.30           1.92          0.09
Scrap and waste                           2.02            1.56         0.60
Agents                                    3.72           2.57          0.42
Retail distribution                       9.08           2.19          0.52
Hotels and catering                       4.86           2.56          0.42
Repair of consumer goods                  3.03           2.52          0.16
Railways                                  5.10           0.38         -0.08
Other land transport                      7.15           1.93         -0.07
Inland water transport                    4.47           0.94         -0.81
Sea transport                             3.77           0.72         -0.91
Air transport                             7.07           0.42         -0.43
Supporting services                       6.09           0.95         -0.68
Travel agents                             4.16            1.55        -0.62
Communication                             8.16           0.24         -0.24
Banking and finance                       5.92           0.59         -0.64
Insurance                                 2.91           0.58         -0.75
Auxiliary services                        7.21           2.06          0.09




                                    33
       B: Dispersion in Firm Size (average across countries)
                                             Employee
                                 Simple       weighted Employee
                              coefficient    coefficient   weighted
                             of variation   of variation   skewness
Renting, leasing                     3.80          1.89        0.20
Letting of real estate               3.27          1.96        0.54
Public administration                9.35          1.72        0.58
Sanitary services                    5.38          1.15        -0.78
Education                            3.75          1.71        0.55
Research and development             4.43          0.96        -0.82
Medical and others                   5.84          1.91        -0.24
Recreational services                9.65          1.65        -0.30
Personal services               — 4.01             2.81        0.34




                                34
                                                      Table 2:


                                 Firm Size by Country
     The source of the data is Enterprises in Europe which provides us with the distribution of firm size in each
NACE two-digit industry in a number of European countries in 1991-92. The simple mean is computed weighting
the average number of employees per firm in each bin of the distribution by the fraction of firms in that bin. The
employee-weighted mean is computed weighting the average number of employees each bin of the distribution by
the fraction of total industry employees present in each bin. Employee-weighted mode is the average number of
employees per firm in the bin that contains the most number of employees. Employee-weighted median is the
average number of employees per firm in the bin that contains the median employee in the industry. Relative
size correcting for industry effects is the average residual for that sector obtained after regressing the logarithm
of employee weighted size on industry indicators. It can be interpreted as the relative deviation of the size of
firms in that country after purging industry effects. Utilities are defined as NACE sector 16 (Production and
distribution of Electricity), 71 (Railways), 75 (Air Transport), 79 (Communication). Manufacturing is defined as
NACE sectors 30 to 49.
                                           A: Different Measures
                                            Employee Employee             Employee          Relative
                                             weighted     weighted         weighted             size    Number
                     Average     Number of    average        mode           median        correcting   of sectors
                   number of firms in the number of number of number of for industry                        with
                   employees     country employees employees employees         effect                       data
  AUSTRIA                   77         8,124            318         427          287          -0.03            8
  BELGIUM                323         177,973          1,317       1,566        1,367           0.16           53
  DENMARK                 22          53,400            528       1,178          303           0,14            8
  FINLAND                 166        199,942          1,197       1,519        1,235           0.03           47
  FRANCE                    40     1,555,064          1,243       1,510        1,222           0.52           29
  GERMANY                   69     2,159,489           951        1,364          949           0.69           33
  GREECE                    47         8,342            254         320          226          -0.81           22
  ITALY                   101      3,242,062          2,244       2,462        2,346          -0.20           54
  NETHER                   32        154,364            482         842          379          -0.09           17
  NORWAY                    96        83,018            350         520          305          -0.44           33
  PORTUGAL                  21       280,185            299         527          234          -0.60           17
  SPAIN                     71     2,373,379          1,050       1,346        1,136          -0.13           49
  SWEDEN                    28       132,662            614         774          509           0.45           16
  SWITZ                     63       268,653          1,316       1,537        1,378          -0.31           50
  UK                        38     1,165,907          2,525       3,183        2,674           0.84           25

                                           B: Different Subsamples
                                                          Mean in    Mean in            Mean in
                                    Mean without manufacturing mechanical              food and
                   Country               utilities          alone engineering             drink
                   AUSTRIA                     318               366           369         194
                   BELGIUM                     631                566          615         363
                   DENMARK                      528              688           823         904
                   FINLAND                      519               555          660         719
                   FRANCE                       706               798          NA          376
                   GERMANY                      900              1007          751         293
                   GREECE                       254               233           73         241
                    ITALY                       545              691           292         290
                   NETHER                       443               556          105         422
                   NORWAY                       347               243          730         403
                   PORTUGAL                     299               341          155         216
                   SPAIN                        558               750          118         292
                   SWEDEN                       576               681          479         635
                   SWITZ                        321               242          581         373
                   UK                          1041              1087         1187        1486


                                                         35
C: Dispersion in Firm Size (average across industries
                                 Employee
                    Simple       weighted Employee
                coefficient     coefficient   weighted
Country        of variation    of variation   skewness
AUSTRIA               1.68             0.94       -0.20
BELGIUM               3.51             0.97       -0.36
DENMARK               4.75            1.27        -0.89
FINLAND               5.59            1.10       -0.51
FRANCE                5.20            1.28       -0.27
GERMANY               4.50            1.31       -0.61
GREECE                 1.72           1.01       -0.07
ITALY                 4.35            1.70       -0.05
NETHER                3.89            1.28       -0.45
NORWAY                3.00            1.15       -0.23
PORTUGAL              4,18            1.32       -0.33
SPAIN                  4,69           1.62       -0.25
SWEDEN                 5.49           1.11       -0.38
SWITZ                  3.73           1.19       -0.22
UK                     7.13           0.97       -0.54




                          36
                                            Table 3:


                              Summary Statistics
A detailed description of all the variables as well as their sources is contained in the data appendix.

                                     A: Summary statistics
Country variables               Mean Median Std. Deviation             Minimum       Maximum            N
Per capita income              12,642    13,281            2,698           6,783            16,245      15
Human capital                   7.949     8.572            1.905           3.827            10.382      15
Inequality in human capital     0.295     0.265            0.135           0.127             0.625      15
Judicial efficiency             8.767     9.500            1.616           5.500            10.000      15
Accounting standards           64,600    64.000          11.488           36.000            83.000      15
Sectoral variables
Investment per worker           0.009      0.006              0.007        0.002             0.025      36
R&D intensity                   0.015      0.005              0.023        0.000             0.078      53
Sector wage                     0.028      0.028              0.010        0.013             0.062      36
External dependence             0.004      0.002              0.004       -0.001             0.015      34

Variables that change
by country and sector
Log of size of firms            5.582      5.643              1.454        0.693             9.697     410
Size of the market             10.584     10.900              2.246        1.099            14.940     410
Judicial efficiency x           0.068      0.049              0.053        0.009             0.254     343
investment per worker
External dependence x            0.220     0.138              0.223       -0.077             1.123     329
financial development



                              B: Correlation across country variables
Country variables                log size Log per capita Human        Inequality in             Judicial
                                of firms          income Capital human capital                Efficiency
Log per capita income             0.423
Human capital                     0.382               0.715
Inequality in human capital      -0.145              -0.572   -0.682
Judicial efficiency               0.467               0.762    0.901               -0.673
Accounting standards              0.553               0.585    0.696               -0.535            0.651



                             C: Correlation across sectoral variables
                Sectoral variables        log size   Capital        R&D Sector
                                          of firms intensity intensity    wage
                Investment per worker        0.135
                R&D intensity                0.177     -0.130
                Sector wage                  0.270      0.632       0.330
                External dependence        -0.095       0.522       0,236 0.526




                                                37
      D: Correlation across variables that change
                both by country and sector
Variables that change      log size Market Jud. eff x
by country and sector of firms           size  cap. mt.
Size of the market           0.349
Judicial efficiency x        0.156    -0.379
investment per worker
External dependence x       -0.055    -0.344      0.495
financial development




                          38
                                                   Table 4:


           Cross-Industry Determinants of Firm Size
     The dependent variable is the logarithm of the weighted number of employees per firm in each NACE two-
digit industry in each country. The size of the market is measured as the logarithm of total employment in a
NACE two-digit industry in a country. Investment per worker is from OECD's ISIS Database. The average
across European countries and the US is used. Wage per worker is from the same database, and the average
across European countries and the US is used. R&D to sales is the median ratio of R&D over sales between 1980
and 1989 computed for U.S. public companies in the same NACE two-digit sector. The source is Compustat-
Business Segment file. Amount financed externally is the product of capital expenditures that U.S. companies
in the same NACE two-digit sector finance externally (see Rajan and Zingales, 1998) and investment per worker
calculated above. Estimates in column I and III have been obtained by instrumental variable estimation, where
the instruments for the size of the market are the logarithm of population and GDP. Column II reports OLS
estimates with fixed country effects. In column III, we compute the per worker explanatory variables using only the
industries for which European data exist. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in parenthesis.
The standard errors are also adjusted for the possible dependence of observations in the same industry across
different countries.




                                                          I             II           III
                     Size of the market                 0.19          0.35          0.24
                                                      ( 0.05 )      ( 0.08 )      ( 0.06 )
                     Investment per worker             40.40         46.37         28.88
                                                     ( 22.62 )     ( 24.69 )     ( 35.34
                     R&D intensity                     12.37          12.42         9.59
                                                      (5.84)        (5.85)        (7.10)
                     Sector wage                       58.03         65.20         67.92
                                                     (19.10 ) ( 20.38 )          ( 39.58 )
                     External dependence              -140.04       -110.29      -122.84
                                                       50.13 )     ( 55.02 )     ( 67.48 )
                     R-squared                          0.32          0.43          0.36
                     N                                  334           334           230




                                                       39
                                                     Table 5:


           Cross-Country Determinants of Firm Size
    The dependent variable is the logarithm of the weighted number of employees per firm in each NACE two-
digit industry in each country. The size of the market is measured as the logarithm of total employment in a
NACE two-digit industry. Per capita income is the log of per capita income in 1990. The data are from the Penn
World Table, Mark 5.6. Human capital is measured as the average number of school years (Barro-Lee. 1993).
Judicial efficiency is an assessment of the "efficiency and integrity of the legal environment as it affects business".
It is an average of the index between 1980 arid 1983. Accounting standards are a measure of the transparency of
annual report produced by the Center for International Financial Analysis and Research. The table reports the
instrumental variable estimates, where the instrument for the size of the market is the logarithm of population.
Heterosckedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in parenthesis. The standard errors are also adjusted for
the possible dependence of the errors of observations in the same countries across different industries. Industry
fixed effects are included in all columns.


                                                           I             II         III
                           Size of the market            0.19           0.36       0.39
                                                       ( 0.09 )     ( 0.08 )     ( 0.05 )
                           Per capita income             0.67        -0.59        -1.00
                                                       ( 0.32 )     ( 0.52 )     ( 0.39 )
                           Human capital                              0.22         0.00
                                                                    (   0.07)    ( 0.09 )
                           Judicial efficiency                                     0.30
                                                                                 ( 0.09 )
                           R-squared                     0.68           0.74       0.75
                           N                             461            461        461




                                                         40
                                                  Table 6:


                                    Interaction Effects
     The dependent variable is the logarithm of the weighted number of employees per firm in each NACE two-
digit industry in each country. The size of the market is measured as the logarithm of total employment in that
NACE two-digit industry in a country. Per capita income is the log of per capita income in 1990 as reported
by the Penn World Table, Mark 5.6. Judicial efficiency is an assessment of the "efficiency and integrity of the
legal environment as it affects business." Accounting standards are a measure of the informativeness of annual
reports in a country as measured by the Center for International Financial Analysis and Research. Investment
per worker is from OECD's ISIS Database. The average across European countries and the US is used. Wage
per worker is from the same database, and the average across European countries and the US is used. R&D to
sales is the median ratio of R&D over sales computed for U.S. public companies in the same NACE two-digit
sector over the period 1980-89. The source is Compustat-Business Segment file. Amount financed externally is
the product of capital expenditures that U.S. companies in the same NACE two-digit sector finance externally
(see R.ajan and Zingales, 1998) and investment per worker calculated above. As in Rajan and Zingales (1998a)
financial development is proxied for by the accounting standards. Columns I-Ill of Panel A and Panel B are
estimated by OLS and contain industry fixed effects and country fixed effects. Column IV of Panel A is estimated
using IV and does not include country fixed effects. In panel B, low investment per worker is a dummy equal
to one for sectors in the lowest tertile of investment per worker. High investment per worker is a dummy equal
to one for sectors in the highest tertile of investment per worker. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are
reported in parenthesis.

                                                   Panel A
                                                    I            II          III         IV
                Size of the market                 0.65        0.58         0.59        0.26
                                                 ( 0.06 )    ( 0.07 )     ( 0.07 )    ( 0.06
                Judicial efficiency X             -12.68                  -20.17       -19.03
                investment per worker            ( 5.99 )                 ( 5.58 )    ( 6.08
                External dependence X                          3.56         5.95        7.20
                financial development                        (1.64 ) (1.59 ) ( 2.08 )
                Judicial efficiency                                                     0.30
                                                                                      ( 0.08
                Accounting standards                                                    -0.02
                                                                                      ( 0.01 )
                R-squared                          0.72        0.72         0.74        0.67
                N                                  348         334          334         334




                                                       41
                     Panel B
                                     I        II
Size of the market                 0.60      0.60
                               (0.07) (0,07)
Judicial efficiency x              -0.09     -0.17
high investment per worker     ( 0.07 )     ( 0.11 )
Judicial efficiency x              0.23       0.18
low investment per worker      (   0.07 )   ( 0.10 )
GDP per capita x                              0.71
high investment per worker                  ( 0.75 )
GDP per capita x                             0.48
low investment per worker                   ( 0.60   )
External dependence x              4.78       4.74
financial development          ( 1.53 )     (1.53    )
R-squared                          0.74      0.74
N                                  334       334




                       42
                                                   Table 7:


       The Determinants of Dispersion in Firm Size
     The dependent variable is the weighted coefficient of variation of the number of employees per firm in
each NACE two-digit industry in each country. Inequality in human capital is measured as the product of the
percentage of the population with the highest educational achievement and percentage of the population with
the lowest educational achievement. The numbers are from Barro-Lee, 1993. Judicial efficiency is an assessment
of the "efficiency and integrity of the legal environment as it affects business." Per capita income is the log of
per capita income in 1990 as reported by the Penn World Table, Mark 5.6. All estimates are obtained by OLS
and contain industry fixed effects. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. The
standard errors are also adjusted for the possible dependence of the errors of observations in the same countries
across different industries.

                                                               I          II          III
                    Inequality in human capital               1.22       0.25        0.09
                                                            ( 0.51 )   ( 0.56 )    ( 0.45 )
                    Judicial efficiency                                  -0.12       -0.19
                                                                       ( 0.03)     ( 0.05 )
                    GDP per capita                                                   0.60
                                                                                   ( 0.24 )
                    R-squared                                0.68        0.71        0.72
                    N                                        463         463          463




                                                       43
A Formulas for Statistical Measures
Let e denote the employment in bin i, and ndenote the number of firms in bin i for any given country-
sector combination. Omit country-sector subscripts for convenience. Let E denote the total employment
for the country-sector and N the total number of firms. The simple average is given by:
                                            —..(n\ (e1'\ E
                                          av=))                  7ç7


The employee-weighted average is given by:

                                          ewav = >
                                                         () (a).
The simple variance is given by:

                                             —fTZ1\ (e\
                                                                        2
                                    var    = 2.—)
                                                N I—I—av
                                                    \n1J
                                     sd =
The analagous quantity for the employee-weighted variance is:

                                 ewvar     =        fe;\ ((e\
                                                    (— J   —J    —   ewav
                                                                            12
                                                \EI \n1J
                                   ewsd    = /ewvar.
The simple coefficient of variation is given by:
                                                          sd
                                                   cv   = —.
                                                         av
The analagous one for the employee-weighted measure is:
                                                         e wsd
                                                ewcv =
                                                         ewav
    The "employee-weighted mode" is defined by:

                                   ewmode
                                                     (fej\
                                               = argmax -) (e2
                                                           —
The average size of the modal bin is reported.
   The employee-weighted median will be the first i for which                    () (.)   becomes   0.5.
    Pearson's measure for employee-weighted skewness is

B Data Appendix
In this appendix, we discuss the data sources andthe construction of our regression variables, In the
interest of brevity, we present only the main points on the construction of a unified database from dis-
parate sources. More comprehensive notes are available from the authors.

Employee-weighted average firm size:



                                                        44
   • Data source(s): Enterprises zn Europe (1994), which provides us with the distribution of size of
     firms in each NACE two-digit industry (sector) of selected European countries. Data is available
      for either 1991 or 1992 for all countries.
   • Construction of variable: The average firm size (number of employees) in each size class is first
      calculated by dividing the number of employees by the number of firms. The average size for the
      entire sector is then calculated as the weighted sum of these bin averages, using as weights the
      employees in the size class as a fraction of total sectoral employment.
   • Scope of Variable: Country-sector
   • Notes:
        —   The size classification varies considerably across countries, as does coverage. All sectors for
            which the bin employment does not add up to total employment are eliminated.
        —   When data for multiple, related sectors are combined in the source, we attribute the combined
            figures to the smallest sector number. For instance combined data for Chemical industry
            (NACE 25) and Man-made fibres industry (NACE 26) are presented as the former.
        —   Total employment numbers are used. If data for total employment is either not available or
            sparsely available, we use salaried employment.
Size of the market:
   • Data source(s): Enterprises in Europe (1994).
   • Construction of variable: The logarithm of the total employment in a NACE two-digit industry
     is used.
   • Scope of Variable: Country-sector
Investment per worker:
   • Data source(s): OECD: Industrial Strvcture Statistics (ISIS) (1997), which provides us with
     data on production, value added and investment in each ISIC sector of selected OECD countries.
     Data is available from 1970 to 1995, though coverage is not uniform. Employment data used to
     calculate per worker quantities is also from the same database.
   • Construction of variable: The total sectoral investment (gross capital formation) from ISIS is
      divided by total employment from Enterprises in Europe to get the investment per worker, and
     adjusted by the exchange rate to get the figure in US dollars. The average value across all countries
     is computed for each sector, to get a sector-level variable.
   • Scope of Variable: European & U.S. Sector
   • Notes:
        —   The use of investment per worker for capital per worker is based on the assumption that
            the economies studied were at their steady states. Direct data on capital per worker, at the
            sectoral level, is difficult to obtain for the countries being studied.
        —   The investment data is for the year closest to the one for employment data.
        —   Data for ISIC — Revision 2 classification is used wherever available; else, the data is for ISIC
            — Revision 3. These ISIC codes were translated to NACE codes; the translation used is

            available upon request. The ISIC data is available at the 3-digit level, and sometimes even
            at the 4-digit level; this facilitates a fairly complete translation of codes.
        —   The market exchange rate (average over the year) provided by ISIS is used to convert invest-
            ment in local currency to US dollars.
Value added per worker:
   • Data source(s): OECD: Industrial Structure Statistics (ISIS) (1997).

                                                    45
   • Construction of variable: The total value added from ISIS is divided by total employment from
      Enterprises in Europe to get the value added per worker, and adjusted by the exchange rate to get
      the figure in US dollars. The average value across all countries is computed for each sector, to get
     a sector-level variable.
   • Scope of Variable: European & U.S. Sector
   • Notes:
        —   While the exact details on how value added is computed for each country varies, the general
            definition is the difference between gross output and industrial input. Industrial input consists
            of industrial materials, industrial services and fuel and power used in the production of output.
        —   The items on year of data, classification conversion, and the use of market exchange rates
            mentioned under "capital intensity" apply here as well.

Wages per worker:
   • Data source(s): OECD: Industrial.Strtjcture Statistics (ISIS) (1997).
   • Construction of variable: The total wages from ISIS is divided by total employment from
     Enterprises in Europe to get the wages per worker, and adjusted by the exchange rate to get the
     figure in US dollars. The average value across all countries is computed for each sector, to get a
     sector-level variable.
   • Scope of Variable: European & U.S. Sector
   • Notes:
        —   The items on year of data, classification conversion, and the use of market exchange rates
            mentioned under "capital intensity" apply here as well.
R & D intensity:
   • Data source(s): COMPUSTAT - Business Segment File.
   • Construction of variable: The median ratio of R & D over sales is computed for the analogue
     of the NACE 2-digit sectors among publicly traded U.S. companies.
   • Scope of Variable: US Sector
   • Notes:
        —   We use only single-segment firms and we map three-digit SIC codes into NACE sectors.
            These data, as well as the program to compute them, are available from the authors.
External dependence:
   • Data source(s): COMPUSTAT — Business Segment File, OECD: Industrial Structure Statistics
     (ISIS) (1997).
   • Construction of variable: The fraction of capital expenditures that is financed externally for
     the analogue of the NACE 2-digit sectors among publicly traded U.S. companies is multiplied by
     the investment per worker in that sector for the European country. In other words, this is an
     estimate of external financing per worker in the given country-sector combination.
   • Scope of Variable: Country-sector
   • Notes:
        —   See   Rajan and Zingales (1998a) for further details.
Utility & Transport sector:

                                                    46
   • Data source(s): Enterprises in Europe (1994).
   • Construction of variable: This is a dummy variable that is set to 1 if the NACE sector is
     one of Production and Distribution of Electricity (16), Railways (71), Air Transport (75), or
     Communication (79).
   • Scope of Variable: Sector dummy
Per capita income:
   • Data source(s): Penn World Table (Mark 5.6), which provides us with country level data on real
      GDP, goverment expenditure, and human capital.
   • Construction of variable: The logarithm of per capita GDP ("RGDPCH" in PWT) is used for
      the relevant year.
   • Scope of Variable: Country
Human capital:
   • Data source(s): Barro and Lee's dataset for a panel of 138 countries (1994).
   • Construction of variable: The average schooling years in the total population over age 25, for
      the year 1985, is used ("human85" in Barro and Lee).
   • Scope of Variable: Country
   • Notes:
        —   This is an attainment variable that changes very slowly over time. Therefore, the use of 1985
            data is not seen as a serious limitation.
Human capital inequality:
   • Data source(s): Barro and Lee's dotaset for a panel of 138 countries (1994).
   • Construction of variable:
     Barro and Lee (1993) have data on the
   • Scope of Variable: Country
Judicial efficiency:
   • Data source(s): Business International Corporation.
   • Construction of variable: This variable is an assessment of the "efficiency and integrity of the
     legal environment as it affects business." Data is found in a scale form, with scores ranging from
     zero to ten, where the lower scores mean lower efficiency levels.
   • Scope of Variable: Country
   • Notes:
        —   It is an average of the index between 1980 and 1983.
Tax rate:
   • Data source(s): Corporate Taxes: A Worldwide Summary.
   • Construction of variable: This is the corporate tax rate in each country in the year 1991.
   • Scope of Variable: Country
Patent protection:
   • Data source(s): Ginarte and Park (1997).

                                                    47
   • Construction of variable: This is an index that combines several dimensions of patent protec-
     tion.
  • Scope of Variable: Country
   • Notes:
       —   See   Ginarte and Park (1997).
Financial development:
  • Data source(s): Center for International Financial Analysis and Research.
  • Construction of variable: Financial development is proxied by a measure of accounting stan-
     dards. This variable measures the transparency of annual reports.
  • Scope of Variable: Country
  • Notes:
       —   See   Rajan and Zingales (1998a) for further details.




                                               48
                                  References
AUDRETSCH, DAVID B. AND TALAT MAHMO0D 1995, "New Firm Survival and the Tech-
   nological Regime" , Review of Economics and Statistics 77:1, 97-103.
ALCHIAN, A. AND H. DEMsETz, 1972, "Production, Information Costs and Economic
   Organization", American Economic Review 777-705.
BANZ, ROLF W., 1981, "The Relationship Between Return and the Market Value of
   Common Stocks", Journal of Financial Economics 9, 3-18.
BARRO R. AND J. LEE, 1993, "International Comparisons of Educational Attainment,"
   NBER Working Paper.
BECKER, GARY S., AND MURPHY, KEVIN M. (1992). "The Division of Labor, Coor-
   dination Costs, And Knowledge," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, November
     1992, 1137-1160.                                                   -


CAVES, RICHARD E. (1998). "Industrial Organization and New Findings on the Turnover
    and Mobility of Firms," Journal of Economic Literature, December 1998, 1947-1982.
CAVES, RICHARD E. AND THOMAS A. PUGEL (1980). Intra-Industry Differences in Con-
    duct and Performance Monograph Series, New York University.
C0ASE, R., 1937, "The Nature of the Firm," Economica 4:386-405.
CoHEN, WESLEY M. , AND KLEPPER, STEVEN (1996). "Firm Size and the Nature of
    Innovation within Industries: The Case of Process and Product R&D," The Review
    of Economics and Statistics
DAVIS, STEVEN J., AND HENREKSON, MAGNUS. (1997). "Explaining National Differ-
    ences in the Size and Industry Distribution of Employment," Working Paper, August
    1997, The University of Chicago Graduate School of Business.
FAMA, E. AND M. JENSEN (1983). "Separation of Ownership and Control," Journal of
    Law and Economics , June.
GERTLER, MARK AND SIMON GILCHRIsT (1994). "Monetary Policy, Business Cycles.
    and the Behavior of Small Manufacturing Firms," Quarterly Journal of Economics,
    109: 309-341.
GINARTE, JUAN CARLOS AND WALTER G. PARK (1997). "Determinants of Patent Rights:
    A Cross-National Study," mimeo, American University, Washington D.C.
GOLLIN, DOUGLAS. (1998). "Nobody's Business but My Own: Self Employment and
    Small Enterprise in Economic Development," Working Paper, June 1998, Williams
    College.
GROSSMAN, S. AND HART, 0. 1986, "The Costs and the Benefits of Ownership: A The-
    ory of Vertical and Lateral Integration" Journal of Political Economy 691-719.
HARRIS, MILTON AND ARTuR RAVIv 1990, "The theory of capital structure" Journal
    of Finance 46, 297-355.
 Hart, Oliver, Firms, Contracts, and Financial Structure, (Oxford: Clarendon Press,
     1995).
HART, 0. AND J. MOORE 1990, "Property Rights and the Nature of the Firm" Journal
   of Political Economy 1119-1158.
HOLMSTROM, BENGT, 1999 "The Firm as a Subeconomy" Journal of Law, Economics
   and Organizatiorz,15, no 1, 74-102.

                                        49
HOLMSTROM, BENGT AND J.R0BERTs 1998 "The Boundaries of the Firm Revisited.
    Journal of Economic Perspectives , 12: 73-94.
HOPENHAYN, HUGO A. (1992). "Entry, Exit, and Firm Dynamics in Long Run Equi-
    librium," Econometrica, September 1992, vol. 60, no. 5, 1127-1150.
ISLAM, NAZRUL. (1995). "Growth Empirics: A Panel Data Approach," The Quarterly
    Journal of Economics, November 1995, 1127-1170.
KLEPPER, STEVEN (1996). "Entry, Exit, Growth, and Innovation over the Product Life
    Cycle," American Economic Review, 86:3, 562-583.
KREMER, MICHAEL. (1993). "The 0-Ring Theory of Economic Development.' The
    Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 1993, 551-575.
JENSEN M. C. AND W. MECKLING. 1976, "Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior.
    Agency Costs and Capital Structure", Journal of Financial Economics 3: 305-360.
JENSEN,M. AND K.J. MURPHY 1990, "Performance Pay and Top-Management Incen-
    tives", Journal of Political Economy 98, 225-264.
LA PORTA, R., FLORENCIO, LOPEZ DE SILANES, ANDREI SHLEIFER, AND ROBERT VISHNY
      1997a, "The Legal Determinants of External Finance," Journal of Finance, 52,
     113 1-1150.
LA PORTA, R., FLORENCIO, LOPEZ DE SILANES, ANDRE! SHLEIFER, AND ROBERT VISHNY
     1997b, "Trust in large organizations," American Economic Review, 87:2, 333-338.
LA PORTA, R., LOPEZ-DE-SILANES, F., SHLEIFER, A. AND R. VISHNY , 1998, "Law
    and Finance", Journal of Political Economy, 106, 1113-1155.
LUCAS, ROBERT E., JR. (1978). "On the Size Distribution of Business Firms," Bell
    Journal of Economics, vol 9, 508-523.
MATA, JOSE. (1996). "Markets, Entrepreneurs, and the Size of New Firms," Economic
    Letters, 52:1, 89-94.
PAGANO, MARCO, AND F. PANETTA AND L. ZINGALES, , 1998, "Why Do Companies
    Go Public? An Empirical Analysis"] Journal of Finance, 53: 27-64
PAKES, ARIEL, AND RICHARD ERICSON, ,forthcoming, "Empirical Implications of Al-
    ternative Models of Firm Dynamics", Journal of Economic Theory.
PETERSEN, M. AND R. RAJAN, 1997, Review of Financial Studies, 10:1, 661-691.
RAJAN, R. AND L. ZINGALES, 1995, "What Do We Know about Capital Structure?
    Some Evidence From International Data" Journal of Finance , 50: 142 1-1460.
RAJAN, R. AND L. ZINGALES, 1998a, "Financial Dependence and Growth" The Amer-
    ican Economic Review 88: 559-586.
RAJAN, R. AND L. ZINGALES, 1998b, "Power in a Theory of the Firm," Quarterly Jour-
    nal of Economics CXIII: 387-432.
RAJAN, R. AND L. ZINGALEs, 1998c, "The Firm as a Dedicated Hierarchy: A The-
    ory of the Origins and Growth of Firms," University of Chicago working paper.
    http: / /gsblgz.uchicago.edu.
RAJAN, R. AND L. ZINGALES, 1999, "Politics, Law, and Financial Development," Uni-
    versity of Chicago working paper. http://gsblgz.uchicago.edu.
RINGLEB AND WIGGINS (1990) "Liability and Large-Scale, Long-Term Hazards," Jour-
    nal of Political Economy 98.

                                         50
ROSEN, SHERWIN. (1982). "Authority, Control, and the Distribution of Earnings." Bell
    Journal of Economics, Autumn 1982, 3 11-323.
SHEPARD, ANDREA. (1987). "Licensing to Enhance Demand for New Technologies."
    Rand Journal of Economics, 18, 360-368.
SUTTON, JOHN, 1991, 'Sunk Costs and Market Structure: Price Competition, Advertis-
    ing, and the Evolution of Concentartion, MIT Press, Cambridge: MA.
SUTTON, JOHN (1997). "Gibrat's Legacy," Journal of Economic Literature, 35:1, 40-59.
WILLIAMSON, 0., 1975, 'Market and Hierarchies: Analysis and Antitrust Implications.
    The Free Press, New York.
WILLIAMSON, 0., 1985, 'The Economic Institutions of Capitalism, The Free Press, New
     York.




                                        51
</ref_section>
