NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

UNDERSTANDING THE DETERMINANTS
OF MANAGERIAL OWNERSHIP AND
THE LINK BETWEEN OWNERSHIP
AND PERFORMANCE
Charles P. Himmelberg
R. Glenn Hubbard
Darius Palia

Working Paper 7209
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7209
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 1999

We are grateful for helpful comments and suggestions from two anonymous referees and from Anup Agrawal,
George Baker, Sudipto Bhattacharya, Steve Bond, Charles Calomiris, Harold Demsetz, Rob Hansen, Laurie
Hodrick, Randy Kroszner, Mark Mitchell, Andrew Samwick, Bill Schwert (the editor), Scott Stern, Rob
Vishny, and Karen Wruck, as well as participants in seminars at Boston College, Columbia, University of
Florida, Harvard, London School of Economics, M.I.T., Oxford, Virginia Tech, the 1998 Western Finance
Association meetings, and the National Bureau of Economic Research. All opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 1999 by Charles P. Himmelberg, R. Glenn Hubbard, and Darius Palia. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Understanding the Determinants of Managerial Ownership
and the Link Between Ownership and Performance
Charles P. Himmelberg, R. Glenn Hubbard, and Darius Palia
NBER Working Paper No. 7209
July 1999
JEL No. G3
ABSTRACT
Both managerial ownership and performance are endogenously determined by exogenous (and
only partly observed) changes in the firm’s contracting environment. We extend the cross-sectional
results of Demsetz and Lehn (1985) and use panel data to show that managerial ownership is
explained by key variables in the contracting environment in ways consistent with the predictions of
principal-agent models. A large fraction of the cross-sectional variation in managerial ownership is
explained by unobserved firm heterogeneity. Moreover, after controlling both for observed firm
characteristics and firm fixed effects, we cannot conclude (econometrically) that changes in
managerial ownership affect firm performance.

Charles P. Himmelberg
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
606 Uris Hall
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027
cph15@columbia.edu

Darius N. Palia
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
413 Uris Hall
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027
darius.palia@gsbpop.uchicago.edu

R. Glenn Hubbard
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
609 Uris Hall
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
rgh1@columbia.edu

1.

Introduction
Since Berle and Means (1932), the conflict between managers and shareholders has been

studied extensively by researchers seeking to understand the nature of the firm. When
shareholders are too diffuse to monitor managers, corporate assets can be used for the benefit of
managers rather than for maximizing shareholder wealth. It is well known that a solution to this
problem is to give managers an equity stake in the firm. Doing so helps to resolve the moral
hazard problem by aligning managerial interests with shareholders’ interests. Therefore, Jensen
and Meckling (1976) suggest that managers with small levels of ownership fail to maximize
shareholder wealth because they have an incentive to consume perquisites. In a similar fashion,
some commentators have decried low levels of managerial ownership in U.S. corporations, and
the theme has even appeared in discussions by compensation specialists and boards of directors.
In this paper, we propose an equilibrium interpretation of the observed differences in
ownership structures across firms. Rather than interpret low ownership levels as per se evidence
of suboptimal compensation design, we argue that the compensation contracts observed in the
data are endogenously determined by the contracting environment, which differs across firms in
both observable and unobservable ways. In particular, low levels of managerial ownership might
well be the optimal incentive arrangement for the firm if the scope for perquisite consumption (or
more generally, the severity of the moral hazard problem for managers) happens to be low for
that firm. We do not deny the importance of agency problems between stockholders and
managers, but rather emphasize the importance of unobserved heterogeneity in the contracting
environment across firms.
We begin by examining the observable determinants of managerial ownership. This

1

investigation builds upon Demsetz and Lehn (1985), who use cross-sectional data to show that
the level of managerial ownership is determined by the riskiness of the firm, measured by the
volatility of the stock price. They argue that the scope for moral hazard is greater for managers
of riskier firms, which therefore means that those managers must have greater ownership stakes
to align incentives. They also point out that riskiness makes it costlier for managers to hold
nondiversified portfolios (assuming that equity holdings in the firm are not easily hedged), so the
relation between managerial ownership and nondiversifiable stock price risk is not necessarily
monotonic.
To document the extent to which managerial ownership is endogenously determined by
the contracting environment, we extend the empirical specification used by Demsetz and Lehn by
including a number of additional explanatory variables other than stock price variability (see also
Kole, 1996). Most important, we include variables (such as firm size, capital intensity, R&D
intensity, advertising intensity, cash flow, and investment rate) designed to control for the scope
for moral hazard. To the extent that our additional explanatory variables proxy for moral hazard,
our specification clarifies the role of stock price variance as an explanatory variable for
managerial ownership. We also use panel data that allow us to estimate the importance of
unobserved (time-invariant) firm effects. These results show that a large fraction of the crosssectional variation in managerial ownership is “explained” by unobserved firm heterogeneity. In
our subsequent analysis of the determinants of firm value, we argue that this unobserved
heterogeneity generates a spurious correlation between ownership and performance.
The second goal of this paper is to reexamine theoretical explanations of the empirical
link between managerial ownership and firm performance. Mørck, Shleifer, and Vishny (1988)

2

estimate a piecewise-linear relation between board ownership and Tobin’s Q and find that
Tobin’s Q increases and then decreases with managerial ownership. McConnell and Servaes
(1990) examine a larger data set than the Fortune 500 firms examined by Mørck, Shleifer, and
Vishny and find an inverted U- shaped relation between Q and managerial ownership, with an
inflection point between 40% and 50% ownership. Hermalin and Weisbach (1991) analyze 142
NYSE firms and find that Q rises with ownership up to a stake of 1%; the relation is negative in
the ownership range of 1-5%, becomes positive again in the ownership range of 5-20%, and turns
negative for ownership levels exceeding 20%. The pattern identified by Mørck, Shleifer, and
Vishny has been corroborated for a cross-section of U.S. firms from 1935 by Holderness,
Kroszner, and Sheehan (1999). Kole (1995) examines the differences in data sources used in
several recent studies and concludes that differences in firm size can account for the reported
differences between those studies. These studies generally interpret the positive relation at low
levels of managerial ownership as evidence of incentive alignment, and the negative relation at
high levels of managerial ownership as evidence that managers become “entrenched” and can
indulge in non-value-maximizing activities without being disciplined by shareholders. However,
these studies do not address the endogeneity problem that confronts the use of managerial
ownership as an explanatory variable, a problem noted early by Jensen and Warner (1988, p. 13).
We investigate the degree to which this heterogeneity makes managerial ownership an
endogenous variable in models of firm performance. Following in the tradition of Demsetz and
Lehn, we describe the contracting problem faced by the firm and develop a simple empirical
model to illustrate the econometric issues that are encountered when estimating the relation
among managerial ownership, its determinants, and its effect on firm performance. Distinct from

3

Demsetz and Lehn, and in contrast to previous papers that attempt to measure the impact of
managerial ownership on firm performance, we use panel data to test for the endogeneity of
managerial ownership in models linking ownership to performance (measured by Tobin’s Q). In
particular, we use panel data to investigate the hypothesis that managerial ownership is related to
observable and unobservable (to the econometrician) firm characteristics influencing contracts.
If the unobserved sources of firm heterogeneity are relatively constant over time, we can treat
these unobserved variables as fixed effects, and use panel data techniques to obtain consistent
estimates of the parameter coefficients. This approach provides consistent estimates of the
residuals in the Q regression, which we use to construct a test for correlation between managerial
ownership and unobserved firm heterogeneity.
Our principal findings are threefold. First, proxies for the contracting environment faced
by the firm (i.e., observable firm characteristics) strongly predict the structure of managerial
ownership. We substantially extend the set of explanatory variables examined by Demsetz and
Lehn, and we show that many of our results are robust to the inclusion of observed determinants
of managerial ownership, industry fixed effects, or firm fixed effects. Second, we show that the
coefficient on managerial ownership is not robust to the inclusion of fixed effects in the
regression for Tobin’s Q. Our formal statistical test rejects the null hypothesis of a zero
correlation between managerial ownership and the unobserved determinants of Tobin’s Q, thus
supporting our conjecture that managerial ownership is endogenous in Q regressions. That is,
managerial ownership and firm performance are determined by common characteristics, some of
which are unobservable to the econometrician. Third, we explore the use of instrumental
variables as an alternative to fixed effects to control for the endogeneity of managerial ownership

4

in the Q regression. We find some evidence to support a causal link from ownership to
performance, but this evidence is tentative because of the weakness of our instruments. We
argue that future progress will require a more structural approach to the model.
Kole (1996) also argues that managerial ownership is endogenous; she further argues that
causality operates in the opposite direction, from performance to ownership. Using a panel-data
vector autoregression, we corroborate Kole’s reverse causality evidence (results available upon
request). Our research, however, supports the idea that both ownership and performance are
determined by similar (observed and unobserved) variables in the firm’s contracting
environment. Thus, our interpretation is different from Kole’s interpretation. That is, we find
evidence of endogeneity caused by unobserved heterogeneity, as opposed to reverse causality.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we outline a simple model of
managerial ownership and explain why it is difficult to estimate the relation between managerial
ownership levels and firm performance, particularly in the context of cross-sectional data.
Section 3 describes the sample selection criteria and the data we use in our empirical analysis of
managerial ownership and firm performance. In Sections 4 and 5, respectively, we present
empirical evidence on the determinants of managerial ownership and on the relation between
managerial ownership and firm performance. Section 6 concludes.

2.

An empirical framework for analyzing executive contracts
A common approach for estimating the impact of managerial ownership on firm value is

to regress Tobin’s Q on such variables as the percentage of equity held by managers. In this
section, we argue that this regression is potentially misspecified because of the presence of

5

unobserved heterogeneity. Specifically, if some of the unobserved determinants of Tobin’s Q are
also determinants of managerial ownership, then managerial ownership might spuriously appear
to be a determinant of firm performance. To motivate our focus on the endogeneity of
managerial ownership, we provide three examples of likely sources of unobservable
heterogeneity, and in each case, we discuss their econometric consequences for cross-sectional
regressions. We follow this discussion with a more formal exposition, in which we assume that
the unobserved heterogeneity is a “firm fixed effect,” and we show how, under this assumption,
panel data can be used to mitigate the endogeneity problem. In Section 5, we return to this model
to describe a test for the endogeneity of ownership in regressions for Tobin’s Q.
For our first example of unobserved heterogeneity, consider two firms that are identical
except that the owner of one of the firms has access to a superior monitoring technology. Under
the optimal contracting regime, the owners with access to the superior monitoring technology
will choose a lower level of managerial ownership to align incentives, and this firm will have a
higher valuation because fewer resources will be diverted to managerial perquisites. If measures
of the quality of the monitoring technology are omitted from the specification, a regression of
firm value on managerial ownership will spuriously (and falsely) indicate a negative relation,
because ownership is a negative proxy for the quality of monitoring technology.
Intangible assets provide a second example of unobserved firm heterogeneity. Suppose
two firms are identical except that one of the firms operates with a higher fraction of its assets in
the form of intangibles. Under the optimal contracting regime, the owners of this firm will
require a higher level of managerial ownership to align incentives because the intangible assets
are harder to monitor and therefore subject to managerial discretion. This firm will also have a

6

higher Q value because the market will value intangibles in the numerator (market value), but the
book value of assets in the denominator will understate the value of intangibles (because Tobin’s
Q is measured as the ratio of the market value of the firm’s outstanding debt and equity divided
by the book value of assets). In this example, the unobserved level of intangibles induces a
positive correlation between managerial ownership and Tobin’s Q, but this relation is spurious,
not causal.
A third example of unobserved heterogeneity is variation in the degree of market power.
Suppose there are two firms competing in a market with differentiated products and that one firm
enjoys a competitive advantage because (for some historical reason) it has been able to locate its
products in such a way that confers more market power. If this market power insulates
managerial decision-making from the discipline of competitive product markets, then the optimal
contract for managers will call for higher levels of managerial ownership. Hence, unobserved
heterogeneity in the form of unobserved differences in market power will (spuriously) induce a
positive relation between ownership and performance. Alternatively, causation could run the
other way; stockholders might design the manager’s compensation to implicitly encourage
collusive outcomes in the product market (Fershtman and Judd, 1987). Attempting to test this
proposition using regressions of Tobin’s Q on managerial ownership suffers from the same
econometric problems we study here. The ownership decision is endogenous because of
unobserved firm heterogeneity.
It is possible to generalize these examples in a simple analytical framework. We assume
that within the general set of contracts agreed to by the firm, the owners of the firm choose a
simple management compensation contract that includes a share of the firm’s equity. This equity

7

share (or “managerial stake”) is chosen to maximize the owners’ equity return subject to
incentive compatibility and participation constraints. For this purpose, we assume that gains
from other means for reducing agency costs have been maximized, so that we examine the
residual agency cost to be addressed by managerial ownership (we revisit this assumption in
Section 5 below). Let xit and uit, respectively, denote observable and unobservable characteristics
for firm i at time t related to the firm’s contracting environment (including, e.g., proxies for the
potential for moral hazard). In addition to unobserved firm characteristics, we implicitly assume
a profitability shock that is observable to the manager, but not to outside shareholders. This
shock cannot be contracted upon, giving rise to moral hazard.
The firm’s owners must decide how much equity to give to managers in order to align
incentives for value maximization. This equity share mit depends on such factors as the potential
for moral hazard and managers’ exposure to risk, which we assume are partly measured by xit,
but are otherwise unobserved and included in uit. We assume that the functional relation is linear,
and that uit = ui is time-invariant for the firm, so that:
mit = 1xit + 1 ui + eit.,

(1)

where eit represents independent measurement error.
Faced with this contract, managers choose an optimal “effort level,” yit, which could
include a range of participation in non-value-maximizing activities. This effort choice depends
on the managerial ownership stake, mit, and, like the optimal contract itself, depends on both
observed and unobserved characteristics of the firm, xit and ui. Assuming a linear functional
form, we can represent the manager’s effort choice by the following relation:
yit =  mit + 2 xit + 2 ui + vit.

8

(2)

Using firm value as a summary measure of expected firm performance, we assume that
firm value depends on managerial effort plus the vector of observed and unobserved firm
characteristics. Denoting the value of firm i at time t by Qit , we assume that
Qit =  yit + 3 xit + 3 ui + wit.

(3)

We can now combine Eqs. (2) and (3) to derive the following relation among firm
managerial ownership, firm characteristics, and firm performance:
Qit = mit + (2 + 3)xit + 2 + 3)ui + vit + wit.

(4)

Simplifying the notation reveals the regression specification commonly used in the empirical
literature:
Qit = a0 + a1 mit + a2 xit + it .

(5)

In a cross-section of firms, as long as the error term -- it = 2 + 3)ui + vit + wit -- is
uncorrelated with both mit and xit, one can consistently estimate the reduced-form coefficient on
managerial ownership in the regression for firm value. However, because the choice of
managerial ownership depends on unobserved firm characteristics, mit depends on ui, and is
therefore correlated with i . Specifically,
Emitit ) = E((1xit + 1ui) (2 + 3)ui) = 1(2 + 3) 2 .

(6)

In general, the expectation in (6) will be zero only in the unlikely event that the optimal contract
does not depend on observed firm characteristics (1 = 0), or in the event that neither effort nor
Qit do (2 = 3 = 0). Hence one cannot estimate Eq. (5) using ordinary least squares. A natural
solution to this problem would be to use instrumental variables for ownership, but this approach
is difficult in practice because the natural instruments -- the observed firm characteristics xit -are already included on the right-hand side of the equation for firm valuation in Eq. (5). Hence it

9

is difficult to identify instrumental variables that would permit identification of a1. With panel
data, however, one can use a fixed-effects estimator, assuming that the unobserved heterogeneity
is constant over time.
In contrast to the model for Tobin’s Q, the model for the optimal choice of managerial
ownership levels in Eq. (1) is more easily identified because it requires only the much weaker
assumption that the unobserved firm characteristics are uncorrelated with observed
characteristics. Hence the focus of our results in Section 4 is on Eq. (1).
The above discussion suggests four lines of empirical inquiry. First, we explore whether
the observed firm characteristics (proxies for the potential for moral hazard and risk) influence
managerial ownership in ways that are consistent with theoretical predictions. Second, we
investigate the importance of unobserved characteristics as determinants of managerial
ownership. Third, we investigate the extent to which the empirical relation between managerial
ownership and firm performance (measured by Tobin’s Q) can be explained by the omission of
observed and unobserved firm characteristics (i.e., by uncontrolled-for or unobserved
heterogeneity). Fourth, we explore the possibility of using instrumental variables to recover the
parameter values in Eq. (5). We describe these results in Sections 4 and 5 after describing our
sample and data in Section 3.

3.

The data
Our sample consists of firms from the Compustat universe. We restrict ourselves to firms

that have no missing data (on sales, the book value of capital, and the stock price) over the
three-year period 1982-1984. (We cannot avoid this conditioning because we cannot use firms

10

with missing data or fewer than three years of data for the variables of interest.) We then select
600 firms by random sampling, and we collect data for all subsequent periods. Our panel is
therefore balanced at 600 firms from 1982 through 1984, but the number of firms declines to 551
by 1985, and falls to a low of 330 by 1992, the last year in the sample. Because of this attrition
from Compustat (principally due to mergers and acquisitions), our panel is systematically less
random over time. However, we avoid exacerbating the scope for sampling bias by not
requiring a balanced panel.
For this unbalanced panel of firms, we attempt to collect the following additional data for
each firm-year observation: the number of top managers and directors (as reported in the proxy
statement), the percentage of the firm’s shares owned by those managers and directors, and the
date of the proxy statement from which these two numbers are collected. For those observations
for which we can locate proxy statements, we collect the managerial ownership variables and
merge this information with the Compustat data. Because smaller firms (in terms of the number
of shareholders) are not required to file proxies with the Securities and Exchange Commission,
we are unable to obtain proxy information for all firms. We end up with managerial ownership
information for about 70 % of the Compustat firms. Table 1 summarizes the number of firms in
our sample as a result of the sample selection process.
Despite the problems of attrition and proxy availability (which are not unique to our
study), our sample provides several distinct advantages over datasets used in previous studies.
First, in contrast to studies that focus on the Fortune 1000, our sample includes a much larger
number of small firms and is more representative of the typical firm in Compustat. Second, we
have a panel of firms rather than a single cross-section. This allows us to control for firm-level

11

fixed effects. Third, we deliberately construct our panel in such a way that we can control for
sample selection bias because of lack of data (for ownership) and attrition. In fact, it is possible
to describe the significance of the bias imposed on the level of managerial ownership by a
requirement that the panel be balanced; looking over the 1982-1992 period, the average
ownership share varies from 16.2 % to 19.4 %, and for the balanced panel, for the firms removed
by the balancing criterion, the ownership share varies between 22.4 % and 25.3 %. The
availability of data on managerial ownership is well predicted by variables such as firm size and
fixed capital intensity, but as we explain in our discussion of empirical results, controlling for
this “missing data bias” does not qualitatively affect our results. While our sample design allows
us to estimate and control for the effects of attrition bias, exit from Compustat due to mergers
and acquisitions or bankruptcies is, in practice, difficult to predict using observable firm
characteristics. A simple probit model for exit reveals that size is the principal explanatory
variable; many more firms exit because of mergers than because of failure. When we include the
inverse Mills ratio in our Q regressions, we find no statistically significant effect of selection
bias. We therefore decide not to correct formally for attrition bias.
To illustrate differences between small and large firms, Table 2 shows, by size class, the
average number of managers per firm and the percentage of shares outstanding owned
collectively by those managers in 1982. The frequency distributions of managerial ownership
and the number of managers are reported in Figure 1. Note that the percentage of shares owned
by insiders is much higher for small firms, measuring 32 % on average for firms in (roughly) the
bottom third of the size distribution of firms. By contrast, existing studies typically oversample
large firms, and report average ownership shares of approximately 10 %. This figure is

12

consistent with the ownership stakes in firms in the top third of our size distribution (for
comparison, the sales cutoff for Fortune 1000 firms is approximately $1 billion).

4.

Determinants of managerial ownership: empirical evidence

4.1

Firm characteristics
The simple model outlined in Section 2 indicates the need to identify observable variables

that relate to potential moral hazard and influence optimal managerial stakes. If the scope for
managerial discretion differs across firms according to observable differences in the composition
of assets, then a prediction of the theory is that firms with assets that are difficult to monitor will
have higher levels of managerial ownership. The specification used by Demsetz and Lehn (1985)
to explain ownership concentration includes stock price volatility and industry dummies, but
does not include proxies for the scope for managerial discretion (though managerial discretion is
one interpretation offered for stock price volatility). We extend their specification by adding a
large number of explanatory variables designed to proxy for the scope for managerial discretion,
namely, size, capital intensity, cash flow, R&D intensity, advertising intensity, and gross
investment rates. As we show below, this expanded variable set dramatically improves the R2
statistic, and the coefficient estimates are all statistically different from zero with the predicted
signs.
Size. Firm size has an ambiguous effect a priori on the scope for moral hazard. On the
one hand, monitoring and agency costs can be greater in large firms, increasing desired
managerial ownership. In addition, large firms are likely to employ more skilled managers, who
are consequently wealthier, suggesting a higher level of managerial ownership. On the other

13

hand, large firms might enjoy economies of scale in monitoring by top management and by rating
agencies, leading to a lower optimal level of managerial ownership. We use the log of firm sales,
LN(S), and its square, (LN(S))2, to measure size.
Scope for discretionary spending. To the extent that investments in fixed capital are
observable and more easily monitored, firms with a greater concentration of fixed or “hard”
capital in their inputs will generally have a lower optimal level of managerial ownership (Gertler
and Hubbard, 1988). We use the firm’s capital-to-sales ratio, K/S, and its square, (K/S)2, as
measures of the relative importance of hard capital in the firm’s technology.
Beyond hard capital, other firm spending is more discretionary and less easily monitored.
The greater the role of these “soft capital” inputs in the firm’s technology, all else being equal,
the higher is the desired level of managerial ownership. By including the capital-to-sales ratio,
we have controlled (inversely) for soft capital, but some soft capital is “softer” than others and
hence more vulnerable to managerial discretion. To refine our proxies for the scope for
discretionary spending, we use the ratio of R&D spending to capital, (R&D)/K, the ratio of
advertising spending to capital, A/K, and dummy variables for whether the firm reports R&D
spending (RDUM) and advertising spending (ADUM) in that year. We include dummy variables
when R&D and advertising are missing to control for the possibility that nonreporting firms are
discretely different from reporting firms. By far the most common reason for not complying with
the disclosure requirement is that the level of R&D or advertising expenditure is negligible.
Simply eliminating observations with missing values for these variables is undesirable because it
significantly reduces the sample size and biases the sample in favor of R&D-intensive and
advertising firms.

14

As a proxy for the link between high growth and opportunities for discretionary projects,
we use the firm’s investment rate measured by the ratio of capital expenditures to the capital
stock, I/K. Finally, we use the ratio of operating income to sales Y/S to measure market power or
a firm’s “free cash flow” (the difference between cash flow and spending on value-enhancing
investment projects). As suggested by Jensen (1986), the higher is a firm’s free cash flow, all
else being equal, the higher is the desired level of managerial ownership. While free cash flow is
itself unobservable, it is presumably correlated with operating income.
Managerial risk aversion. Because higher managerial ownership levels, all else being
equal, imply less portfolio diversification for managers, the optimal contract involves a tradeoff
between diversification and incentives for performance. The higher is the firm’s idiosyncratic
risk, the lower is optimal managerial ownership. Demsetz and Lehn (1985) offer a second
interpretation of this relation, suggesting that higher volatility indicates more scope for
managerial discretion and thereby increases equilibrium managerial ownership levels. Unlike
their specification, ours includes measures of intangible capital to control for managerial
discretion. We therefore focus on the first interpretation of risk. As an empirical proxy for
volatility, we use the standard deviation of the idiosyncratic component of daily stock prices
(constructed from residuals from a standard CAPM regression), denoted by SIGMA, although our
results are not qualitatively changed by the substitution of total stock return variance for our
definition of SIGMA. Analogous to our treatment of missing values of (R&D)/K and A/K, we set
missing values of SIGMA equal to zero, and then also include in the regression a dummy variable
SIGDUM equal to unity when SIGMA is not missing, and zero otherwise.
To deal with zero-volume trading days in the daily data, we construct n-day returns by

15

summing the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP) daily returns over the days in the
period to create an approximate n-day return. We then divide this return (as well as n-day returns
created by weekends and holidays) by the number of days in the period to obtain an average daily
return. The variance of this average return will equal the variance of the daily return, and the
same will be true for the idiosyncratic variance in a CAPM regression. Converting n-day returns
to average daily returns thus removes the heteroskedasticity introduced by combining n-dayreturn observations with daily returns. Out of our initial universe of 600 firms for the 1984
period, the CRSP NYSE/AMEX and NASDAQ daily files contains 525 firms reporting returns in
1984. Of these, there are 502 firms with enough data to construct at least 20 observations on
daily returns using only days for which trading volume is positive.
In addition to the problem of days with zero trading volume, there are days for which
closing prices are not available, or days for which CRSP uses the average of the closing bid-ask
spread instead of the closing price. This introduces nonclassical measurement error into the
return calculation, which could bias our ordinary least squares (OLS) estimates of beta, return
variance, and residual variance. To check the robustness or our results, we experiment with
smaller samples that include only firms for which we can construct at least 20 observations based
on (i) positive trading volume and (ii) transactions prices rather than the average of bid-ask
prices. This substantially reduces the sample in 1984 to 328 firms (from 502). In practice,
however, the results do not differ qualitatively from the larger sample. Hence, we report results
in the paper using the larger sample, which, for many firms, relies on the closing average of the
bid-ask spread rather than an actual closing price.
While we have addressed the most obvious examples of nonsynchronous trading (namely,

16

days on which no trading occurs or on which CRSP cannot obtain a valid transaction price), there
remain days on which CRSP calculates returns using the last price transacted rather than the
closing price. As Scholes and Williams (1976), among others, point out, the inclusion of
nonsynchronous trading days produces biased OLS estimates of beta. To check the robustness of
our results against the possibility of biased beta estimates due to nonsynchronous trading days,
we follow the approach recommended by Dimson (1979) by including leads and lags of the
market return in the beta regression. These additional regressors are occasionally significant for
some firms in some years, but using the alternative estimates of the idiosyncratic variance does
not materially affect our results.
Summary. Combining these observable variables associated with moral hazard yields the
following reduced-form expression for managerial ownership:
mit = f (LN(S)it , (K/S)it , (R&D/K)it , RDUMit , (A/K)it , ADUMit , (I/K)it ,
(Y/S)it ,SIGMAit, SIGDUMit)+ ui + it,

(8)

where i and t represent the firm and time, respectively, ui is a firm-specific effect, and it is a
white-noise error term. Our list of variables is summarized in Figure 1.

4.2.

Evidence
Table 4A reports our estimates of the determinants of managerial stakes. The dependent

variable in each case is LN (m/(1-m)). Each of the specifications includes year dummies (not
reported). In specifications including fixed firm effects, we control for the unobserved firm
heterogeneity represented by ui in Eq. (6).
The first column reports results from a baseline specification using pooled data for all firm-

17

years. Increases in firm size, all else being equal, are associated with a reduction in managerial
stakes. Increases in fixed capital intensity (which we associate with lower monitoring costs) also
lead to a decline in managerial stakes. Among our proxies for discretionary spending (R&D,
advertising, investment rates, and operating income relative to capital), R&D intensity appears to
have a negative effect on ownership stakes, while advertising intensity, operating income, and the
investment rate appear to have positive effects on ownership stakes. Increases in idiosyncratic
risk, as measured by SIGMA, raise the cost of managerial ownership in terms of reduced portfolio
diversification and also reduce managerial ownership.
The specifications reported in the second and third columns of Table 4A control for
unobserved heterogeneity at the industry level and firm level, respectively. The second column
includes fixed three-digit SIC effects; the third column includes fixed firm effects. Demsetz and
Lehn (1985) included controls for certain (regulated) industries. By including fixed industry
effects (and, in some cases, fixed firm effects), we control for industry influences generally. The
inclusion of fixed effects changes the estimated coefficients significantly in some cases. For
example, if we do not control for unobserved industry-level or firm-level heterogeneity, the
estimated coefficients on size and investment rate are significantly larger in absolute value, and
the estimated coefficient of the ratio of R & D spending to capital. changes sign. These
differences suggest that the unobserved firm characteristics are correlated with the observed
characteristics, and therefore bias the estimated coefficients in a cross-sectional or pooled
regression. For example, in a univariate regression, if there were a strong positive equilibrium
relation between R&D intensity and managerial ownership, excluding firm fixed effects would
bias downward the estimated coefficient on R&D/K in a pooled regression.

18

The fourth and fifth columns of Table 4A report results from splitting the sample according
to whether the firm is in the Fortune 500 in the given year (including firm-level fixed effects).
Some subsample differences emerge. The negative effect of idiosyncratic risk (measured by
SIGMA) on ownership is traced to non-Fortune 500 firms, consistent with our earlier
interpretation. Effects of capital intensity, operating income, R&D intensity, advertising
intensity, and the investment rate are larger in absolute value for larger firms.
Because theoretical models generally emphasize managerial ownership levels relative to the
managers’ wealth and not simply the fraction of firm equity held by managers, we present in
Table 4B results from the same models presented in Table 4A, but with the dependent variable
being the log of managerial equity per manager. (We do not observe managerial wealth, so we
focus only on managerial equity.) Broadly speaking, the patterns we identified in Table 4A carry
over to the estimates in Table 4B. One difference is that the estimated coefficient on the capitalto-sales ratio is everywhere positive and statistically significantly different from zero. This could
reflect the fact that capital-intensive firms employ relatively fewer workers and managers, but
have higher levels of value added per worker, and hence derive larger incentive benefits from
higher levels of managerial ownership.
Taken together, the results presented in Tables 4A and 4B suggest strongly that observable
firm characteristics in the contracting environment influence managerial ownership. In addition,
unobserved firm characteristics are correlated with observed characteristics, making coefficients
estimated using panel data more reliable than those estimated using cross-sectional data. The
beneficial ownership data include options exercisable within 60 days, but omit recent awards that
are not yet vested. Because we lack data on all of the stock options granted to all top managers,

19

we do not investigate the substitutability of direct ownership stakes and stock options as
mechanisms to align incentives for value maximization. In the ExecuComp data over the
1992-1996 period, however, the correlation between the pay-performance sensitivity for
managers using the "stock" definition and the pay-performance sensitivity using the stock plus
options definition exceeds 0.95.1 Thus our focus on the beneficial ownership data appears
warranted.

5.

Managerial ownership and firm performance

5.1. Evidence on the exogeneity of managerial ownership
Thus far, we have emphasized that managerial stakes are part of a larger set of equilibrium
contracts undertaken by the firm to align incentives for value maximization, and we have shown
that managerial ownership can be explained by observable characteristics of the firm's
contracting environment, such as stock price volatility and the composition of assets, as predicted
by the contracting view. These results also show, however, that even when industry dummies
are included, many important features of the firm's contracting environment remain unobserved.
Specifically, including firm-level fixed dummy variables raises the adjusted R2 from 0.584 to
0.884. These results cast doubt on the assumption that managerial ownership is exogenous in
regressions that attempt to measure the impact of ownership on performance by regressing
variables like Tobin's Q on managerial ownership without controlling for fixed effects.
In this section, we use panel data techniques to investigate more directly the question of
whether managerial ownership can be treated as exogenous in the performance regressions. We

1

We are grateful to Andrew Samwick for this calculation.
20

use Tobin’s Q as our measure of firm performance, but our results are robust to using return on
assets as the dependent variable (tables are available upon request). To investigate the impact of
managerial ownership on Q, we use variants of the reduced-form model in Eq. (3), in which Q
depends upon managerial ownership, m, observable firm characteristics, x, and unobserved firm
characteristics, u. We use two specifications of managerial ownership in the Q regression. The
first includes m and m2 (see McConnell and Servaes, 1990). The second includes three
piecewise-linear terms in m (as in Mørck, Shleifer, and Vishny, 1988). Specifically,

m1

= managerial ownership level if managerial ownership level < 0.05,
= 0.05 if managerial ownership level .05;

m2

= zero if managerial ownership level < 0.05,
= managerial ownership level minus 0.05 if 0.05  managerial ownership
level < 0.25,
= 0.20 if managerial ownership level  0.25;

m3

= zero if managerial ownership level < 0.25,
= managerial ownership level minus 0.25 if managerial ownership 
0.25.

For observable characteristics, we use the same vector of x variables used in the model for
managerial ownership. We report results including and excluding arguably endogenous
“investment” variables (R&D, advertising, and fixed capital).

21

Our empirical analysis of the effects of managerial ownership and firm characteristics on Q
is summarized in Table 5A and 5B. Table 5A reports estimated coefficients for cases in which
managerial ownership is represented by m and m2. Table 5B reports estimated coefficients for
cases in which managerial ownership is represented by the piecewise-linear terms, m1, m2, and
m3. For both of the above specifications, we report estimated coefficients for (1) regressions
with managerial ownership alone (pooled, SIC3 industry effects, and firm effects), (2) the
regressions including the full set of x variables (pooled, SIC3 industry effects, and firm effects),
and (3) the regressions including the non-investment set of x variables. All specifications include
year effects (not reported).
Turning first to the quadratic specifications of managerial ownership in Table 5A, we note
that the managerial ownership variables are statistically significant only in the pooled model with
no other variables and in the model with only industry effects. In other specifications, the
managerial ownership coefficients are virtually never statistically significantly different from
zero. (The Wald test for the joint significance of m and m2 is reported at the bottom of the table.)
Once we control for observed firm characteristics (x), or for unobserved firm characteristics (in
the firm-fixed-effect version of u), there is no effect of changes in managerial ownership on Q.
Though not reported in Table 5A, these results hold for both the Fortune 500 and non-Fortune
500 subsamples considered earlier.
Turning to the spline specifications for managerial ownership in Table 5B, the pooled
results are consistent with those of Mørck, Shleifer, and Vishny (1988), who find that the impact
of m on Q increases at a decreasing rate, and thereafter declines. In contrast to the quadratic
specification for managerial ownership, the Mørck-Shleifer-Vishny specification is robust to the

22

inclusion of observable contracting determinants and industry dummies. Once we control for x
variables and for u (via firm fixed effects), however, changes in managerial ownership levels
have no statistically significant effect on Q. These results hold both for the Fortune 500 and
non-Fortune 500 subsamples investigated earlier.
The results reported in Table 5A and 5B confirm the intuition of the contracting example
sketched in Section 2. First, the results obtained when observed characteristics (x) are included
suggest that previously asserted relations between Q and m in part reflect equilibrium relations
among Q and firm characteristics in the firm’s contracting problem. Second, to the extent that
firm characteristics unobserved by the econometrician influence the firm’s contracts and the
equilibrium level of managerial ownership, the coefficient on m in a Q regression (when no
attempt is made to incorporate the unobserved heterogeneity) is biased. Third, in keeping with
our emphasis on contracting, the relations we estimate suggest that no inference can be made
about the effect of “exogenous” local increases in managerial ownership on firm performance.
One can formalize this evidence against the exogeneity of managerial ownership by testing
for a correlation between the fixed effect and managerial ownership. We could use a Hausman
(1978) test, but this test would tend to over-reject the null hypothesis of zero correlation because
it would tend to reject if any of the explanatory variables were correlated with the fixed effect.
To reduce this Type I error, we construct a more precise “conditional moment” test, which is in
the spirit of a Hausman test, but tends to reject only if managerial ownership is the source of the
specification error (Greene, 1997, p. 534; and Newey, 1985).
The test is constructed as follows. Let the performance model be
Qit = 0 + zit+ ui + it ,

23

(9)

where zit includes the managerial ownership variables and the x variables described earlier, and
ui is the firm fixed effect. The formal hypothesis we want to test is whether the unobserved fixed
effect, ui, is correlated with managerial ownership, an element of zit . That is, H0 : E(mit  ui) = 0,
where mit is an r × 1 vector of variables measuring the effect of managerial ownership. The idea
of the test is to construct the simple analogue to the population moment, s = E(mit wit ), and then
to test whether it is statistically significantly different from zero.
Using a consistent “within” estimator of , we can construct consistent estimates of the
N

Ti

residual wit = ui + it. Our test statistic is s = ∑ ∑ m it w it / N Ti , where Ti is the number of
i =1 t = 1

observations for firm i. Under standard regularity conditions and under the null hypothesis that
E(mit  ui) = 0,

N s will be asymptotically distributed N(0,). Therefore the statistic

 is a consistent
k = N s ∑ −1 s is asymptotically chi-squared with r degrees of freedom, where ∑
estimate of  (for more details, see Greene, 1997).
The p-values for this test statistic are reported in Tables 5A and 5B. In both tables, the

p-

values tend to be lower for the tests based on industry-level fixed-effects estimator. This
presumably reflects the higher test power generally implied by the greater efficiency of the slope
estimates. The rejection of the null hypothesis of exogeneity of managerial ownership is
particularly strong for the spline specification reported in Table 5B. These results strongly
suggest that reported results using such a specification are subject to endogeneity bias.
An important caveat to all empirical work using fixed effect estimators on panel data is that
the “within” estimator can, under a range of certain circumstances identified by Griliches and
Hausman (1986), exacerbate the bias toward zero caused by measurement error. If our
ownership variable were measured with classical error, then this would reduce the power of our
24

Wald test for the joint significance of the ownership variables, and would invalidate the
distributional assumptions for our test statistic due to the inconsistency of the residual estimates.
While it is always possible to make an a priori case for measurement error, there is little
empirical evidence that measurement error is a serious problem in our data. Tables 4A and 4B
show, for example, that the within variation in managerial ownership is significantly correlated
with the explanatory variables, a result that does not square with serious measurement error. In
addition, the within-firm point estimates of the ownership coefficients in Tables 5A and 5B are
not obviously biased toward zero, as measurement error would suggest. Finally, the conditions
identified by Griliches and Hausman might not hold. If the variance of the measurement error
were primarily cross-sectional rather than within, then the within estimator would actually tend to
reduce the bias effects of measurement error. We nevertheless recognize the limitations of the
within estimator, and in the next section, we report instrumental variables estimated as an
alternative approach to deal with the endogeneity of ownership variables.

5.2. Toward a more structural interpretation of contracting relations
The strength of the empirical evidence against the exogeneity of managerial ownership
suggests that more model structure is required to identify the impact of managerial ownership on
firm value. A standard remedy would be to use an instrumental variable in the regression for
firm value. In a related paper, Hermalin and Weisbach (1991) recognize a similar endogeneity
problem and use lagged explanatory variables as instruments for managerial ownership. They
find that the instrumental variable estimator increases the magnitude of the ownership effect on
firm value. Hermalin and Weisbach report that a Hausman specification test rejects the

25

exogeneity assumption. While this rejection provides evidence of endogenous ownership, it does
not validate their choice of instruments. If omitted firm characteristics are the source of the
endogeneity (as we have argued above), and if these unobserved firm characteristics change
slowly over time (as we have also argued above), then lagged explanatory variables will suffer as
much from the endogeneity problem as do contemporaneous ones.
Instrumental variables for managerial ownership are difficult to find. The basic problem is
that for any variable that plausibly determines the optimal level of managerial ownership, it is
also possible to argue that the same variable might plausibly affect Tobin's Q. For example, our
results in Tables 4A and 4B showed that market power (as measured by operating margins) is a
candidate instrument. However, even though it is correlated with managerial ownership, it also
determines the equilibrium value of Tobin's Q, and therefore must appear independently in this
regression. Additional candidates suggested by these results, such as the capital-to-sales ratio,
advertising, R&D, and fixed investment, are also invalid because of links between investment
and Q and because intangible assets are conservatively valued on the balance sheet, therefore
influencing the level of Tobin's Q.
A more plausible case can be made for using firm size and stock price volatility as
instruments. It is possible to construct arguments under which either variable could be correlated
with Tobin's Q. For example, suppose that high Q values reflect future growth opportunities.
Such firms might generally be smaller (or larger), and might also have more volatile stock prices
due to the greater uncertainty about future growth prospects. However, these arguments seem
weaker than the arguments against operating margins, the capital-to-sales ratio, advertising,
R&D, and investment. Moreover, in studies of fixed investment, it is generally argued that

26

deviations of Tobin's Q from its equilibrium value are explained by the costs of adjusting the
capital stock, and that these adjustment costs are proportional to the rate of investment.
Therefore, the inclusion of advertising and R&D intensity and the investment rate should control
for future growth opportunities. This argument eliminates the a priori case for including the size
and volatility variables in the Q equation, and thus provides an argument for omitting these
variables from the Q equation and using them as instruments for managerial ownership instead.
The results using LN(S), (LN(S))2, SIGMA, and SIGDUM as instruments are reported in
Table 6. We use the more parsimonious quadratic specification for managerial ownership to
reduce the number of instruments required for identification. The first column of Table 6 reports
the results of pooling without controlling for industry or firm effects. In contrast to Table 5A,
these results confirm a large and statistically significant inverse-U relation between ownership
and firm value. The coefficients of 6.29 and -10.8 on m and m2, respectively, imply an inflection
point of about 0.58. Given the distribution of managerial ownership shown in Figure 1, Tobin's
Q is generally an increasing, concave function of m.
The second and third columns of Table 6 show that these results are robust to the inclusion
of three-digit industry effects, but not to firm effects. In both specifications, the standard errors
rise substantially, rendering the coefficients statistically indistinguishable from zero. However,
this need not be interpreted as bad news for the results reported in the first column. One cannot
reject the hypothesis that the firm effects are jointly zero, though one can reject that the industry
effects are jointly zero (the p-values on the associated Hausman tests are 0.208 for the test of
pooled versus the inclusion of firm effects and 0.00002 for the test of pooled versus the inclusion
of industry effects). This conclusion has intuitive appeal because, by using instrumental

27

variables, we have presumably controlled for the endogeneity that was the motivation for
including firm fixed effects. However, it is more likely that the combined effect of using
instrumental variables and controlling for fixed effects has reduced the precision of estimates to
the point at which such a test would have little power. We believe that the results in Table 6
represent a promising step toward the construction of more complete models of the relation
between managerial ownership and firm performance.

6.

Conclusions
Firms are governed by a network of relations representing contracts for financing, capital

structure, and managerial ownership and compensation, among others. For any of these
contractual arrangements, it is difficult to identify the correspondence between the contractual
choice and firm performance (e.g., measured by accounting rates of return or Tobin’s Q) because
contractual choices and performance outcomes are endogenously determined by exogenous and
only partly observed features of the firm’s contracting environment.
We confront this endogeneity problem in the context of the firm’s compensation contract
with managers. Because managerial equity stakes are an important and well-known mechanism
used to align the incentives of managers and owners, we examine the determinants of managerial
ownership as a function of the contracting environment. We extend the cross-sectional results of
Demsetz and Lehn (1985) and use panel data to show that managerial ownership is explained by
variables describing the contracting environment in ways consistent with the predictions of
principal-agent models.
We find that a large fraction of the cross-sectional variation in managerial ownership is

28

explained by unobserved firm heterogeneity. This unobserved heterogeneity in the contracting
environment has important implications for econometric models designed to estimate the effect
of managerial ownership on firm performance. Our empirical analysis shows that existing results
are not robust to controls for endogeneity induced by time-invariant unobserved heterogeneity.
Moreover, once we control both for observed firm characteristics and firm fixed effects, it
becomes difficult to conclude that changes in firm managerial ownership affect performance.
Our instrumental-variables results, however, suggest a promising step toward the construction of
more complete models of the relation between managerial ownership and firm performance.
To take these observations one step further, we believe that the Q model results reported in
Tables 5A and 5B can be interpreted as supporting more generally the notion that the firm
chooses among alternative mechanisms for minimizing agency costs. This is, of course, the
concept articulated in Alchian (1969), Fama (1980), Fama and Jensen (1983), and Demsetz and
Lehn (1985); more recently, see Crutchley and Hansen (1989) and Agrawal and Knoeber (1996).
Suppose, for example, that Q capitalizes the market’s expectation of the effect of agency
costs on firm value. The loss in value reflects residual agency costs, or agency costs remaining
after corporate control mechanisms are chosen. In addition to managerial ownership choices
emphasized here, alternative means of reducing agency costs include leverage ( Jensen, 1986;
Gertler and Hubbard, 1993), increased reliance on outside directors ( American Law Institute,
1982; Baysinger and Butler, 1985; Millstein and MacAvoy, 1998), large shareholders ( Shleifer
and Vishny, 1986; Zeckhauser and Pound, 1990), institutional investors, dividend policy
(Easterbrook, 1984), and radical changes in corporate control (Kaplan, 1989).
One can interpret the results in Tables 5A, 5B, and 6 as reduced-form exercises in which

29

the x variables and the firm fixed effects are determinants of the use of these mechanisms. For
example, Gertler and Hubbard relate leverage in this context to the relative importance of
firm-specific and aggregate risk and proxies for the scope for moral hazard (variables captured by
R&D and advertising intensity, year dummies, and firm effects.) Benefits from large
shareholders likely depend on size or the relative importance of R&D ( Zeckhauser and Pound,
1990); these channels are proxied through size, R&D intensity, and firm effects. Institutional
shareholdings likely depend on firm size and whether the firm is listed on the New York Stock
Exchange (variables accounted for in part by firm effects). The degree to which dividend policy
can reduce agency costs depends on the importance of the scope for moral hazard (perhaps
measured by idiosyncratic risk, R&D, or advertising) and the tax costs of paying dividends
(measured in part by year and firm effects). Net benefits of a major restructuring also are
reflected in proxies for moral hazard and firm effects.
Two other possible strategies are tasks for future research. The first involves identifying
large, arguably exogenous changes in ownership levels arising from shifts in tax policy,
regulation, or fixed costs in the market for corporate control (Kaplan, 1989; Hubbard and Palia,
1995; Cole and Mehran, 1997), though care must be taken because even certain “natural
experiments” are endogenous in that they affect performance directly. The second involves
designing a dynamic structural model of firm contracting decisions, possibly permitting
identification from economically reasonable assumptions about functional form (Margiotta and
Miller, 1991). This strategy is particularly desirable given the lack of easily identified
instrumental variables.
While our findings are consistent with the proposition that firms choose strategies to reduce

30

agency costs optimally over the long run, at least two issues remain. First, the simultaneous
choice of individual mechanisms or some subset needs to be modeled; subsets of these choices
have been considered in a reduced-form setting, as in Hermalin and Weisbach (1991), Jensen,
Solberg, and Zorn (1992), Moyer, Rao, and Sisneros (1992), Holthausen and Larcker (1993), and
Agrawal and Knoeber (1996). Second, the choice of mechanisms likely involves some fixed
costs or “costs of adjustment” so that firms are not always at their long-run contractual optimum.
Exploring these costs and how they might have changed over time for different
agency-cost-reducing mechanisms is a particularly interesting task for future research.

31

REFERENCES
Agrawal, A., Knoeber, C., 1996 . Firm performance and mechanisms to control agency
problems between managers and shareholders. Journal of Financial and Quantitative
Analysis 31, 377-397.
Alchian, A., 1969. Corporate management and property rights. In Henry Manne, (Ed.),
Economic Policy and Regulation of Corporate Securities. American Enterprise Institute for
Public Policy Research, Washington, D.C.
American Law Institute., 1982. Principles of Corporate Governance and Structure: Restatement
and Recommendations. ALI, New York.
Baysinger, B., Butler, H., 1985. Corporate governance and the board of directors: performance
effects of changes in board composition. Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 1,
102-123.
Berle, A., Means, G., 1932. The Modern Corporation and Private Property. Macmillan, New
York.
Cole, R., Mehran, H., 1997. The effect of changes in ownership structure on performance:
evidence from the thrift industry. Mimeograph, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System.
Crutchley, C., Hansen, R., 1989. A test of the agency theory of managerial ownership, corporate
leverage, and corporate dividends. Financial Management 18, 36-46.
Demsetz, H., Lehn, K., 1985. The structure of corporate ownership: causes and consequences.
Journal of Political Economy 93,1155-1177.
Dimson, E., 1979. Risk measurement when shares are subject to infrequent trading. Journal of
Financial Economics 7, 197-226.
Easterbrook, F., 1984. Two agency-cost explanations of dividends. American Economic
Review 78, 650-659.
Fama, E., 1980. Agency problems and the theory of the firm. Journal of Political Economy 88,
288-307.
Fama, E., Jensen, M., 1983. Separation of ownership and control. Journal of Law and
Economics 26, 301-325.

Fershtman, C., Judd, K., 1987. Equilibrium incentives in oligopoly. American Economic
32

Review 77, 927-940.
Gertler, M., Hubbard, R.G., 1988. Financial factors in business fluctuations. Financial Market
Volatility: Causes and Consequences. Federal Reserve Bank, Kansas City.
Gertler, M., Hubbard, R.G., 1993. Corporate financial policy, taxation, and macroeconomic risk.
RAND Journal of Economics 24, 286-303.
Greene, W., 1997. Econometric Analysis. Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, N.J.
Griliches, Z., Hausman, J., 1986. Errors in variables in panel data. Journal of Econometrics 31,
93-188.
Hausman, J., 1978. Specification tests in econometrics. Econometrica 46, 1251-1271.
Hermalin, B., Weisbach, M., 1991. The effects of board compensation and direct incentives on
firm performance. Financial Management 20, 101-112.
Holderness, C., Kroszner, R., Sheehan, D., 1999. Were the good old days that good?: evolution
of managerial stock ownership and corporate governance since the great depression.
Journal of Finance 54, 435-469.
Holthausen, R., Larcker, D., 1993. Organizational structure and financial performance.
Unpublished working paper. The Wharton School.
Hubbard, R.G., Palia, D., 1995. Executive pay and performance: evidence from the U.S. banking
industry. Journal of Financial Economics 39, 105-130.
Jensen, G., Solberg, D., Zorn, T., 1992. Simultaneous determination of insider ownership, debt,
and dividend policies. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 27, 247-263.
Jensen, M., 1986. Agency costs of free cash flow, corporate finance, and takeovers. American
Economic Review, 76, 323-329.
Jensen, M., Meckling, W., 1976. Theory of the firm: managerial behavior, agency costs and
ownership structure. Journal of Financial Economics 3, 305-360.
Jensen, M., Warner, J., 1988. The distribution of power among corporate managers,
shareholders, and directors. Journal of Financial Economics 20, 3-24.
Kaplan, S., 1989. Effects of management buyouts on operating performance and value. Journal
of Financial Economics 24, 217-254.
Kole, S., 1995. Measuring managerial equity ownership: a comparison of sources of ownership
33

data. Journal of Corporate Finance 1, 413-435.
Kole, S., 1996. Managerial ownership and firm performance: incentives or rewards? Advances
in Financial Economics 2, 119-149.
Margiotta, M., Miller, R., 1991. Managerial compensation and the cost of moral hazard.
Unpublished working paper. Carnegie Mellon University.
McConnell, J., Servaes, H., 1990. Additional evidence on equity ownership and corporate value.
Journal of Financial Economics 27, 595-612.
Millstein, I., MacAvoy, P., 1998. The active board of directors and improved performance of
the large publicly-traded corporation. Columbia Law Review 98, 1283-1322.
Mørck, R., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R., 1988. Management ownership and market valuation. Journal
of Financial Economics 20, 293-315.
Moyer, R., Rao, R., Sisneros, P., 1992. Substitutes for voting rights: evidence from dual class
recapitalization. Financial Management 21, 35-47.
Newey, W., 1985. Generalized method of moments specification testing. Journal of
Econometrics 29, 229-256.
Scholes, M., Williams, J., 1976. Estimating betas from nonsynchronous data. Journal of
Financial Economics 5, 309-327.
Shleifer, A., Vishny, R., 1986. Large shareholders and corporate control. Journal of Political
Economy 94, 461-488.
Zeckhauser, R., Pound, J., 1990. Are large shareholders effective monitors?: an investigation of
share ownership and corporate performance.” In Hubbard, R.G. (Ed.), Asymmetric
Information, Corporate Finance, and Investment. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

34

</ref_section>

Table 1: Sample of Compustat Firms By Year. We start out with 600 firms randomly sampled from
the universe of Compustat firms with data available over the period 1982-1984 on sales, book value of
capital, and stock price. The number of firms declines after 1984, principally due to mergers and
acquisitions. The number of available ownership observations represents firms for which we are able
to obtain proxy statements with the number of top managers and directors and their collective
percentage share ownership.
Year

Number of Available
Compustat Observations

Number of Available
Ownership Observations

1982

600

398

1983

600

425

1984

600

427

1985

549

408

1986

518

385

1987

482

359

1988

442

330

1989

422

329

1990

396

300

1991

382

296

1992

330

293

Table 2: Managerial Ownership Stakes by Firm Size, 1982. For the 398 Compustat firms for
which we have data on sales, book value of capital, stock price, number of top managers and directors,
and collective equity ownership of top managers and directors, we report the average number of
managers and their average collective ownership stake by firm size.
Number of
firms
Firm Size Class

Average Number
of
Managers
per Firm

Average Total
Managerial
Ownership
Stake

Sales < $22 million

111

7.2

32.0%

$22 million  Sales  $188 million

147

12.4

25.4%

Sales > $188 million

140

22.3

13.4%

36

Figure 1: Frequency Distribution of Managerial Ownership and Number of Managers, 1982

Table 3: Variable Descriptions
Q

m
m2
m1
m2
m3
e

LN(S)
(LN(S))2
K/S

(K/S)2
Y/S
SIGMA

SIGDUM

R&D/K

RDUM
A/K

ADUM
I/K

Tobin’s Q, that is, the ratio of the market value of the firm divided by the
replacement value of assets. For firm value, we use the market value of common
equity plus the estimated market value of preferred stock (roughly estimated as ten
times the preferred dividend) plus the book value of total liabilities, and for
replacement value of assets we use the book value of total assets. This definition
is closely related to the market-to-book ratio, which is easily seen by subtracting
total liabilities from both the numerator and denominator.
The total common equity holdings of top-level managers as a fraction of common
equity outstanding.
The square of m, included to allow for nonlinearities.
Equals m if 0.00 < m < 0.05; 0.05 if m  0.05
Equals m – 0.05 if 0.05 < m < 0.25; 0.00 if m  0.05; 0.20 if m  0.25
Equals m – 0.25 if 0.25 < m < 1.00; 0.00 if m  0.25
The average common equity holdings per manager. This number is calculated as
the market value of common equity times the fraction held by top managers
divided by the number of top managers.
The natural log of sales, used to measure firm size.
The square of LN(S), included to allow for nonlinearities in LN(S).
The ratio of tangible, long-term assets (property, plant, and equipment) to sales,
used to measure the alleviation of agency problems due to the fact that such assets
are easily monitored and provide good collateral.
The square of K/S, included to allow for nonlinearities in K/S.
The ratio of operating income to sales, used to proxy for market power and
measure the gross cash flows available from operations.
The standard deviation of idiosyncratic stock price risk, calculated as the standard
error of the residuals from a CAPM model estimated using daily data for the
period covered by the annual sample.
A dummy variable equal to unity if the data required to estimated SIGMA is
available, and otherwise equal to zero (if SIGMA is missing). To maintain sample
size and reduce the risk of sample selection bias, we set missing observations of
SIGMA equal to zero, and then include this dummy variable to allow the intercept
term to capture the mean of the SIGMA for missing values.
The ratio of research and development expenditures to the stock property, plant,
and equipment, used to measure the role of “R&D capital” relative to other nonfixed assets.
A dummy variable equal to unity if R&D data were available, and otherwise equal
to zero (see the definition of SIGDUM).
The ratio of advertising expenditures to the stock of property, plant, and
equipment, used to measure the role of “advertising capital” relative to other nonfixed assets.
A dummy variable equal to unity if R&D data were available, and otherwise equal
to zero. For usage details, see the definition of SIGDUM.
The ratio of capital expenditures to the stock of property, plant, and equipment.

Table 4A: Determinants of Total Equity Ownership by Top Managers. The specifications
reported in this table all model the fraction of common equity held by top managers, m, by regressing
the transformed dependent variable LN(m/(1-m)) on the explanatory variables indicated below.
Intercept terms and year dummies are included for all regressions, but not reported. Fixed effects are
the industry or firm level are included where indicated, but not reported. Variable definitions for the
acronyms are given in Table 3.
All Firms
All Firms
All Firms
Fortune 500
Non-500
Variable
(Pooled)
(SIC3 effects)
(Firm effects)
(Firm effects)
(Firm effects)
LN(S)
-0.195
-0.182
0.058
-1.288
0.252
(0.050)
(0.053)
(0.095)
(0.697)
(0.121)
(LN(S))2

-0.027
(0.005)

-0.027
(0.005)

-0.038
(0.010)

0.040
(0.045)

-0.067
(0.016)

K/S

-1.131
(0.250)

-0.826
(0.274)

-0.826
(0.259)

-1.05
(0.543)

-0.448
(0.296)

(K/S)2

-0.023
(0.157)

-0.011
(0.145)

0.301
(0.122)

0.440
(0.228)

0.143
(0.141)

SIGMA

-5.20
(1.96)

-3.84
(1.86)

-5.13
(1.43)

-0.707
(13.3)

-4.84
(1.38)

SIGDUM

0.098
(0.098)

0.142
(0.092)

0.083
(0.111)

1.49
(0.568)

-0.092
(0.090)

Y/S

0.143
(0.240)

-0.020
(0.232)

0.219
(0.178)

0.683
(0.678)

0.191
(0.175)

(R&D)/K

-1.084
(0.197)

-0.239
(0.206)

0.502
(0.284)

3.08
(1.21)

0.546
(0.289)

RDUM

-0.191
(0.061)

-0.056
(0.090)

0.332
(0.105)

0.665
(0.322)

0.242
(0.105)

A/K

0.227
(0.217)

0.953
(0.332)

0.184
(0.438)

3.60
(1.19)

-0.067
(0.413)

ADUM

0.143
(0.061)

-0.082
(0.067)

0.042
(0.072)

0.033
(0.215)

-0.037
(0.077)

I/K

0.440
(0.156)

0.114
(0.152)

0.157
(0.099)

0.280
(0.191)

0.144
(0.106)

2630

2630

2630

764

1866

0.407

0.584

0.884

0.884

0.831

#Obs.
2

Adj. R

Notes: Estimated standard errors (reported in parentheses) are consistent in the presence of
heteroskedasticity. The adjusted R2 statistics reflect the inclusion of fixed effects (where
included).

Table 4B: Determinants of Average Equity Ownership per Manager. The specifications reported in
this table all model the average equity owned by top managers, e, by regressing the dependent variable
LN(e) on the explanatory variables indicated below. Intercept terms and year dummies are included for
all regressions, but not reported. Fixed effects are the industry or firm level are included where
indicated, but not reported. Variable definitions for the acronyms are given in Table 3.
All Firms
(Pooled)

All Firm
(SIC3 effects)

All Firm
(Firm effects)

Fortune 500
(Firm effects)

Non-500
(Firm
effects)

LN(S)

0.334
(0.056)

0.387
(0.067)

0.066
(0.112)

-0.328
(0.742)

0.053
(0.145)

(LN(S))2

-0.008
(0.005)

-0.012
(0.006)

0.030
(0.011)

0.032
(0.049)

0.041
(0.018)

K/S

1.044
(0.255)

1.629
(0.302)

0.830
(0.300)

0.510
(0.600)

0.888
(0.355)

(K/S)2

-0.783
(0.154)

-0.892
(0.160)

-0.188
(0.137)

-0.095
(0.256)

-0.253
(0.161)

SIGMA

-18.5
(2.14)

-18.3
(2.12)

-14.5
(1.68)

-24.6
(15.3)

-12.6
(1.67)

SIGDUM

0.089
(0.101)

0.915
(0.100)

0.598
(0.115)

1.63
(0.526)

0.412
(0.107)

Y/S

1.58
(0.326)

1.14
(0.335)

1.80
(0.242)

4.63
(0.830)

1.56
(0.235)

(R&D)/K

-0.174
(0.201)

0.154
(0.223)

0.380
(0.348)

3.79
(1.48)

0.282
(0.353)

RDUM

0.212
(0.065)

0.003
( 0.100)

0.430
(0.116)

0.597
(0.315)

0.379
(0.125)

A/K

-0.139
(0.225)

0.834
( 0.418)

0.235
(0.658)

3.34
(1.08)

0.121
(0.662)

ADUM

0.314
(0.067)

-0.080
(0.076)

0.030
(0.082)

0.276
(0.261)

0.012
(0.090)

I/K

1.429
(0.174)

1.06
(0.173)

0.575
(0.117)

1.04
(0.251)

0.525
(0.128)

#Obs.

2628

2628

2628

763

1865

Adj. R2

0.300

0.446

0.818

0.838

0.770

Variable

Notes: Estimated standard errors (reported in parentheses) are consistent in the presence of
heteroskedasticity. The adjusted R2 statistics reflect the inclusion of fixed effects (where
included).

Table 5A: Determinants of Firm Value (Tobin’s Q), Quadratic Specification. The specifications reported in
this table all model firm value, Q, as a linear function of the explanatory variables indicated below. In this table,
the influence of m enters as a quadratic function. Intercept terms and year dummies are included for all
regressions, but not reported. Fixed effects are the industry or firm level are included where indicated, but not
reported. Variable definitions for the acronyms are given in Table 3.
Variable

Pooled

SIC3
Effects

Firm
Effects

Pooled

SIC3
Effects

Firm
Effects

Pooled

SIC3
Effects

Firm
Effects

m

0.539
(0.219)

1.25
(0.338)

0.573
(0.402)

-0.460
(0.218)

-0.031
(0.277)

0.125
(0.395)

-0.395
(0.234)

-0.061
(0.281)

0.293
(0.392)

m2

-1.123
(0.317)

-1.649
(0.457)

-0.582
(0.559)

-0.062
(0.304)

-0.579
(0.393)

-0.438
(0.507)

-0.235
(0.317)

-0.571
(0.401)

-0.577
(0.522)

LN(S)

--

--

--

-0.251
(0.052)

-0.239
(0.062)

-0.890
(0.147)

-0.329
(0.053)

-0.260
(0.063)

-0.896
(0.152)

(LN(S))2

--

--

--

0.015
(0.004)

0.010
(0.005)

0.073
(0.012)

0.021
(0.004)

0.012
(0.005)

0.075
(0.012)

K/S

--

--

--

0.621
(0.152)

0.277
(0.192)

-0.482
(0.289)

0.469
(0.155)

0.342
(0.208)

-0.504
(0.303)

(K/S)2

--

--

--

-0.391
(0.084)

-0.420
(0.120)

0.040
(0.123)

-0.403
(0.087)

-0.454
(0.131)

0.048
(0.124)

SIGMA

--

--

--

-5.06
(1.25)

-4.82
(1.26)

-4.26
(1.28)

-4.47
(1.25)

-5.40
(1.27)

-4.62
(1.29)

SIGDUM

--

--

--

0.260
(0.051)

0.241
(0.056)

-0.044
(0.066)

0.258
(0.054)

0.275
(0.057)

-0.036
(0.067)

Y/S

--

--

--

0.652
(0.279)

0.713
(0.305)

1.44
(0.269)

0.782
(0.292)

0.664
(0.317)

1.43
(0.264)

(R&D)/K

--

--

--

0.543
(0.227)

0.497
(0.271)

0.391
(0.410)

--

--

--

RDUM

--

--

--

0.156
(0.046)

0.264
(0.071)

0.191
(0.125)

--

--

--

A/K

--

--

--

-0.066
(0.125)

-0.423
(0.209)

0.082
(0.448)

--

--

--

ADUM

--

--

--

0.166
(0.041)

0.144
(0.056)

0.148
(0.095)

--

--

--

I/K

--

--

--

0.799
(0.121)

0.723
(0.115)

0.340
(0.103)

--

--

--

2630

2630

2630

2630

2630

2630

2630

2630

2630

Adj. R

0.012

0.127

0.584

0.130

0.213

0.630

0.073

0.178

0.626

p-value

--

0.038

0.194

--

0.008

0.156

--

0.008

0.084

Wald

20.125

13.142

2.501

23.254

15.599

1.897

36.348

15.034

1.588

pwald

--

0.001

0.286

--

--

0.387

--

0.001

0.452

#Obs.
2

Note: Estimated standard errors (reported in parentheses) are consistent in the presence of heteroskedasticity.
The adjusted R2 statistics reflect the inclusion of fixed effects (where included). (The “p-value” is the probability
of observing the test statistic for endogeneity described in the text. Low p-values suggest that ownership is
endogenous.) Wald and pwald, report, respectively, the Wald statistic and associated p-value for a test that the
managerial ownership variables are jointly zero.

Table 5B: Determinants of Firm Value (Tobin’s Q), Spline Specifications. The specifications reported in
this table all model firm value, Q, a linear function of the explanatory variables indicated below. The influence
of m enters as a spline function. Intercept terms and year dummies are included for all regressions, but not
reported. Fixed effects are the industry or firm level are included where indicated, but not reported. Variable
definitions for the acronyms are given in Table 3.
Variable

Pooled

SIC3
Effects

Firm
Effects

Pooled

SIC3
Effects

Firm
Effects

Pooled

SIC3
Effects

Firm
Effects

m1

4.678
(1.127)

7.379
(1.727)

0.772
(1.820)

2.88
(1.34)

3.75
(1.53)

1.62
(1.73)

3.691
(1.334)

3.724
(1.555)

2.097
(1.736)

m2

-0.070
(0.312)

0.428
(0.365)

0.122
(0.395)

-0.587
(0.295)

-0.150
(0.338)

-0.214
(0.387)

-0.689
(0.314)

-0.201
(0.342)

-0.167
(0.386)

m3

-0.567
(0.167)

-0.546
(0.201)

0.171
(0.257)

-0.446
(0.168)

-0.703
(0.218)

-0.225
(0.247)

-0.636
(0.173)

-0.712
(0.228)

-0.152
(0.250)

LN(S)

--

--

--

-0.263
(0.054)

-0.247
(0.062)

-0.896
(0.147)

-0.345
(0.055)

-0.268
(0.064)

-0.903
(0.152)

(LN(S))2

--

--

--

0.017
(0.005)

0.012
(0.005)

0.074
(0.012)

0.023
(0.005)

0.013
(0.005)

0.075
(0.012)

K/S

--

--

--

0.648
(0.154)

0.297
(0.193)

-0.475
(0.289)

0.492
(0.156)

0.359
(0.208)

-0.493
(0.304)

(K/S)2

--

--

--

-0.395
(0.084)

-0.427
(0.120)

0.036
(0.123)

-0.404
(0.087)

-0.459
(0.130)

0.042
(0.125)

SIGMA

--

--

--

-4.83
(1.25)

-4.66
(1.24)

-4.24
(1.27)

-4.23
(1.25)

-5.24
(1.25)

-4.61
(1.28)

SIGDUM

--

--

--

0.243
(0.051)

0.219
(0.054)

-0.044
(0.066)

0.242
(0.054)

0.254
(0.056)

-0.035
(0.067)

Y/S

--

--

--

0.661
(0.279)

0.725
(0.303)

1.448
(0.269)

0.790
(0.292)

0.675
(0.315)

1.441
(0.264)

(R&D)/K

--

--

--

0.551
(0.225)

0.499
(0.268)

0.384
(0.409)

--

--

--

RDUM

--

--

--

0.158
(0.046)

0.273
(0.072)

0.202
(0.125)

--

--

--

A/K

--

--

--

-0.046
(0.125)

-0.402
(0.205)

0.083
(0.451)

--

--

--

ADUM

--

--

--

0.159
(0.041)

0.142
(0.055)

0.144
(0.095)

--

--

--

I/K

--

--

--

0.776
(0.123)

0.713
(0.115)

0.339
(0.103)

--

--

--

2630

2630

2630

2630

2630

2630

2630

2630

2630

0.016

0.135

0.584

0.131

0.215

0.630

0.075

0.181

0.626

0.004

0.126

0.001

0.037

0.002

0.018

#Obs.
2

Adj. R

p-value

--

--

--

Wald

34.641

23.729

1.379

25.396

20.928

1.984

41.12

20.133

1.937

pwald

--

--

0.71

--

--

0.576

--

--

0.586

Note: Estimated standard errors (reported in parentheses) are consistent in the presence of heteroskedasticity.
The adjusted R2 statistics reflect the inclusion of fixed effects (where included). (The “p-value” is the probability
of observing the test statistic for endogeneity described in the text. Low p-values suggest that ownership is
endogenous.) Wald and pwald, report, respectively, the Wald statistic and associated p-value for a test that the
managerial ownership variables are jointly zero.

Table 6: Ownership-Performance Model with Instrumental Variables. The specifications
reported in this table all model firm value, Q, as a linear function of the explanatory variables
indicated below. Intercept terms and year dummies are included. Instruments are LN(S), LN(S)2,
SIGMA, and SIGDUM. Fixed effects at the industry or firm level are included where indicated, but
not reported. Variable definitions for the acronyms are given in Table 3.
Variable

Pooled

SIC3
Effects

Firm
Effects

m

6.29
(1.27)

8.38
(1.78)

-10.7
(10.6)

m2

-10.8
(2.61)

-12.3
(3.48)

-4.88
(10.8)

K/S

1.45
(0.220)

0.736
(0.376)

1.25
(1.01)

(K/S)2

-0.738
(0.119)

-0.587
(0.171)

-0.611
(0.396)

Y/S

0.414
(0.273)

0.603
(0.300)

1.003
(0.637)

(R&D)/K

0.739
(0.242)

0.718
( 0.339)

0.687
(1.11)

RDUM

0.178
(0.049)

0.256
(0.115)

-0.230
(0.805)

A/K

0.169
(0.164)

-0.735
(0.290)

0.007
(1.262)

ADUM

0.140
(0.043)

0.251
(0.076)

0.301
(0.234)

I/K

0.990
(0.140)

0.937
(0.151)

0.478
(0.202)

#Obs.

2630

2630

2630

Adj. R2

-0.197

-0.057

0.192

Wald

67.576

55.659

1.310

pwald

--

--

0.519

Notes: Standard errors are in parentheses. Wald and pwald report, respectively, the Wald statistic and
associated p-value for a test that the ownership variables are jointly zero.

