                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                  SAMPLE SELECTION IN THE
                                   ESTIMATION OF AIR BAGS
                                AND SEAT BELT EFFECTIVENESS

                                             Steven D. Levitt
                                               Jack Porter


                                          Working Paper 7210
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w7210

                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 1999




We would like to thank Gary Chamberlain, Austan Goolsbee, and Lawrence Katz for helpful comments. All
remaining errors are our own. Financial support of the National Science Foundation and the John Lee Fund
are gratefully acknowledged. Previn Mankodi provided outstanding research assistance. All opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 1999 by Steven D. Levitt and Jack Porter. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Sample Selection in the Estimation of
Air Bag and Seat Belt Effectiveness
Steven D. Levitt and Jack Porter
NBER Working Paper No. 7210
July 1999
JEL No. C20, R40

                                            ABSTRACT

        Measurement of seat belt and air bag effectiveness is complicated by the fact that systematic
data are collected only for crashes in which a fatality occurs. These data suffer from sample selection
since seat belt and air bag usage influences survival rates which in turn determine whether a crash is
included in the sample. Past researchers either ignored sample selection or adopted indirect
estimation methods subject to other important biases. We propose a simple, but novel, solution to
the selection problem: limiting the sample to crashes in which someone in a different vehicle dies.
Under relatively weak conditions, consistent estimates can be obtained from this restricted sample.
Empirically, we find seat belts to be more effective in saving lives than most previous estimates. Air
bags, however, appear to be less effective than generally thought. If our coefficients can be
generalized to all crashes, the cost per life saved with seat belts is approximately $30,000, compared
to $1.6 million for air bags.


Steven D. Levitt                                             Jack Porter
Department of Economics                                      Department of Economics
University of Chicago                                        Harvard University
1126 E. 59th St.                                             Cambridge, MA 02138
Chicago, IL 60637                                            jporter@harvard.edu
and NBER
slevitt@midway.uchicago.edu
I. Introduction

        Over 40,000 Americans were killed in traffic accidents in 1997, making road fatalities the

leading cause of death among those aged 6-34 in the United States. As large as this death toll is,

Figure 1 demonstrates that the number of traffic deaths has declined dramatically over the last two

decades from a peak of over 54,000 in 1972 to roughly 40,000 in recent years. The decline in

fatalities per vehicle mile traveled is even more dramatic: the 1994 rate (1.7 fatalities per 100

million vehicle miles traveled) is less than one-third as high as the level in the late 1960's.

        Increased seat belt usage (e.g., Graham et al. 1997, NHTSA 1984, Orsay et al. 1988) and

proliferation of airbags (e.g., Graham et al. 1997, Lund and Ferguson 1995, NHTSA 1996) are

two factors that have been identified as contributing to the declining death toll on the roads.1 As

of December 1995, every state except New Hampshire had some form of mandatory seat belt use

law on the books. NHTSA (1996) estimates seat belt usage rates of 58-68 percent in recent

years, up from 11 percent in 1980. Air bags, first available on passenger vehicles in the 1987,

diffused quickly. By 1992, over half of all new cars sold were equipped with at least one air bag

(NHTSA 1996). Dual air bags are mandatory under federal law in all 1998 model year passenger

cars and all new 1999 model year light trucks. Even in advance of federal requirements, however,

air bags have been standard equipment on almost all vehicles in recent years. Consumer demand

for air bags appears strong, despite their cost ($410 for dual airbags according to Graham et al.

(1997)). The annual cost of equipping all new vehicles with dual air bags is roughly $4 billion.


        1
         Other factors that have been identified as contributing to reduced fatalities are reductions
in drunk driving due to increased enforcement, changing attitudes, and changes in the minimum
legal drinking age (Grossman et al 1993, Ruhm 1996, Saffer and Grossman 1987, Zobeck et al.
1987), lower speed limits (NHTSA 1989, although Lave and Elias 1997 disagree), child-safety
seats (NHTSA 1998), and mandatory helmet laws for motorcycle riders (NHTSA 1996).

                                                   1
        While there is little question that seat belts save lives, past estimates of the magnitude of

the effect span a wide range. Robertson (1976), for instance, cites nineteen studies on belt

effectiveness with estimates ranging from 8-86 percent.2 NHTSA (1984) concludes that seat belts

are 45-55 percent effective in reducing fatalities. Although different methodologies are

sometimes used, the standard approach to measuring seat belt effectiveness is to identify a sample

of crashes and compare outcomes among those with and without seat belts (e.g. Kaplan and

Cowley 1991, Marine et al. 1994, Orsay et al. 1988, Robertson 1976). One important

shortcoming of this approach, which we discuss at length below, is the possibility of sample

selection. Typically, only particular kinds of crashes are included in a sample (for example crashes

with fatalities or crashes involving injuries that require an ambulance). If seat belt usage reduces

injury severity, then such sample selection will tend to bias downward the measured benefits of

seat belts.

        Although it is recognized that air bags pose risks of both injury (Hollands et al. 1996,

Morris et al. 1998) and death (NHTSA 1996), recent research and government evaluations

continue to support the effectiveness of air bags. NHTSA estimates that air bags saved over

3,000 lives between their introduction and September 1998. Graham et al. (1997) concludes that

the cost-effectiveness of air bags is on par with other medical and public-health interventions.

        Studies of air bags have generally used one of two empirical approaches. The first

approach analyzes fatality rates per registered vehicle for vehicles with and without airbags (e.g.

Lund and Ferguson 1995; Ferguson, Lund, and Greene 1995). An important potential weakness



        2
          Not all of these studies focus on reductions in fatalities. It is generally agreed that seat
belts are more effective in preventing death than in preventing injury.

                                                   2
of this approach is the endogeneity of vehicle choice. Faced with an option, those consumers who

value safety most highly may disproportionately purchase vehicles with air bags.3 This form of

selection emerges clearly in the data. For example, in our data set, comparing drivers with and

without air bags who are involved in fatal two-vehicle crashes, those with air bags are 19 percent

less likely to be reported to be drinking by the police, 11 percent less likely to have a recent

speeding ticket or accident, 14 percent less likely to have been convicted of driving while

intoxicated or to have had a license suspension, 12 percent less likely to be male, and 13 percent

less likely to be under the age of 25.4 All of those characteristics (driving while intoxicated, bad

past driving record, being young or male) are associated with greater likelihoods of fatal crash

involvement (e.g. Fell and Nash 1989, Levitt and Porter 1999, NHTSA 1998). Thus, this

approach is likely to exaggerate any causal impact of air bags on fatality reductions.

       The second approach that is frequently used to measure air bag effectiveness involves

comparing ratios of the number of deaths in frontal versus non-frontal collisions for vehicles with

and without air bags. This approach is known as a “double pair comparison” and is a form of

difference-in-difference estimator. Air bags are designed to protect occupants only in frontal

crashes. If the ratio of deaths in frontal versus non-frontal crashes is lower for vehicles with air

bags relative to those without air bags, this difference is interpreted as lives saved due to air bags.



       3
          In theory, the opposite type of selection could also occur. The most dangerous drivers
might disproportionately choose cars with air bags because they will obtain the greatest reduction
in death rates. Empirically, however, this does not appear to be the case.
       4
           In addition to selection of drivers based on observable characteristics such as sex, there
is likely to be selection on unobservables as well. For instance, among men of a given driving age
and similar previous driving records, those valuing safety most highly may be more likely to
choose vehicles with air bags.

                                                   3
Using variations on this approach, researchers have found air bags to be 20-35 percent effective in

reducing death rates in frontal crashes (Braver et al. 1997, Kahane 1996, NHTSA 1996, Zador

and Ciccone 1993).

        Because this analysis is based on ratios of numbers of deaths rather than crash survival

rates, it relies critically on the assumption that the proportion of frontal crashes is constant for

drivers with and without air bags. This assumption, however, appears to be false. As noted

above, “safe” drivers (i.e. sober, female, over 25 and having a good past driving record) are

disproportionately represented among those with air bags. “Safe” drivers, however, are more

likely to “be hit” than to hit another vehicle, and thus are under-represented in frontal crashes.

For instance, in two-car crashes in our data set, being sober is associated with a 72 percent

reduction in the proportion of frontal to non-frontal crashes, wearing a seat belt, having a

previous drunk driving conviction or license suspension, and being female are associated with 25,

33, and 28 percent reductions respectively. These observable driver characteristics which are

related not to differential survival rates in frontal and non-frontal crashes, but rather to the

frequency of such crashes, yield estimates similar to or larger than those for air bags.5 Thus, it

appears that the “double pairs” approach confounds differences in crash survival rates with the

frequency with which frontal crashes occur, leading to exaggeratedly large estimates of the

benefits of air bags.6 Previous researchers have employed these indirect approaches to


        5
          These lower instances of death in frontal crashes for safe drivers is not attributable to the
fact that more of the safe drivers have air bags. Similar results are obtained when controlling for
air bag status.
        6
         On the other hand, if air bags provide benefits in non-frontal crashes (or there is
classification error so that some frontal crashes are reported as non-frontal), this approach will
underestimate the true effectiveness of air bags.

                                                   4
measuring the impact of seat belts and air bags due to an important data limitation. The most

comprehensive data set is the Fatality Analysis Reporting System (FARS) which provides

extensive information on all passengers in virtually all U.S. crashes, but only in accidents where a

death occurs. The obvious problem in using these data to analyze the benefits of air bags and seat

belts is sample selection. Seat belts and air bags influence the probability of death which in turn

determines whether or not a crash is included in the data set.7 As economists have long

understood in other contexts, (e.g. Heckman 1979, Heckman et al. 1996, Heckman 1999), sample

selection leads to biased estimation. Empirically, the extent of sample selection in the fatal crash

data is enormous. Crashes with a fatality account for only 0.5 percent of all reported crashes and

less than two percent of reported crashes with injuries (NHTSA 1998). Moreover, in almost 90

percent of fatal crashes, there is a single fatality. If that individual had not died, the crash would

be excluded from the data set.

        In this paper we use a simple, but novel, identification strategy that allows us to directly

estimate the impact of seat belts and air bags on crash survival rates despite sample selection in

the data. Sample selection arises because a given individual’s seat belt usage affects his

probability of death, which in turn influences whether the crash is included in the data. The key

insight is that as long as anyone else dies in the crash, it is included in the fatal accident data

regardless of what happens to others in the crash. We propose to restrict the sample to cases




        7
         There are other data sets available, but the problems posed by these data sets are even
more severe. The crashes included in these data are a representative sample of crashes reported
to the police, not of all crashes. Crashes in which injuries occur are more likely to be reported,
leading to sample selection if the probability and extent of injury is a function of seat belts and
airbags. In addition, much less information is available for these accidents.

                                                    5
where anyone dies in another vehicle in the crash. By focusing on this subset of crashes, sample

selection is eliminated under the conditions derived in Section II.8 Ironically, the sample selection

problem, which arises because observations are excluded from the data set, is overcome by further

restricting the data that are used.

        Table 1 demonstrates how sample selection distorts the data. The top row of the table

presents the probabilities of death in the raw data as a function of the total number of individuals

occupying all vehicles in the crash.9 By definition, when there is only one vehicle occupant the

probability of death is equal to one; if the individual did not die, the crash would be excluded from

the data set. As the number of occupants increases, sample selection becomes decreasingly severe

as evidenced by the steady decline in the probability of death. When five motorists are involved in

a crash, each individual’s probability of death is 26.9 percent. The falling death rates in the top

row are not a consequence of decreasing crash severity as demonstrated by the bottom two rows

of the table. Restricting the sample to cases in which anyone else dies in a crash results in a

probability of death that is nearly constant at 15 percent as the number of occupants increases.

Conditional on anyone dying in a different vehicle, individual death rates hover around 7 percent

regardless of the number of total motorists.

        Failing to account for sample selection leads to estimates that systematically understate the



        8
          One could include any individual who is involved in a crash in which someone else dies,
but the required identifying assumptions are difficult to justify within a vehicle due to the
correlation of fatality outcomes even after controlling for observables and crash severity.
        9
          Unlike later results which are restricted to two-vehicle crashes, these results are for all
crashes regardless of the number of vehicles. Only crashes in which some vehicle occupant dies
are included (there are some crashes in the data where the only fatality is a pedestrian, bicyclist, or
motorcyclist).

                                                  6
benefits of effective life-saving devices. Part of the intuition for this result is that on average it

takes a more severe crash to kill someone who is protected by a safety device. Since crash

severity is not directly observed by the econometrician, the positive correlation between crash

severity and the safety device is likely to lead to an underestimate of the device’s value.

Unobserved crash severity, however, is not the whole story. A downward bias persists even when

crash severity is held constant.10 Thus, the sample-selection problem is more pernicious than it

might initially appear to be.

        Empirically, using data on fatal crashes in the United States from 1994-97, we find that

correcting for sample-selection bias as much as doubles the measured effectiveness of seat belts.

We find seat belts to be more effective than has generally been the case in past research. Wearing

a seat belt reduces the risk of death in our sample of crashes by well over fifty percent. Air bags

are 16 percent effective in lowering death rates in direct frontal crashes; averaging over all types

of crash impacts, air bags are roughly 9 percent effective. Our air bag estimates are lower than

those typically obtained via the indirect approaches used by previous researchers.

        The outline of this paper is as follows. Section II develops the theoretical model and

identification strategy. Section III uses data on fatal crashes to estimate the impact of seat belts

and airbags on probabilities of death and injury, correcting for sample selection. Section IV offers

interpretation of the coefficients in terms of lives saved and cost-benefit ratios. Section V

concludes.




        10
           Evans (1986) attempts to correct for unobserved crash severity in seat belt
effectiveness estimation.

                                                    7
II. Theoretical Model and Identification Strategy

       Our goal is to estimate the effectiveness of seat belts and air bags in preventing death in

motor vehicle crashes. In this section we summarize the intuition underlying our estimation

approach. The appendix provides a rigorous derivation of our results in a fully general setting.

       For ease of notation and exposition in presenting the intuition, we adopt four simplifying

assumptions. First, we limit our attention to a single safety device (for concreteness we call this

device a seat belt). Incorporating multiple safety devices (e.g. seat belts and air bags) is

straightforward. Second, we focus on two-car crashes where only the two drivers and no

passengers are involved.11 Third, we impose linearity on the problem in what follows. Ad

demonstrated in the appendix, linearity is in no way integral to identification of the effectiveness

Finally, we assume that after conditioning on both observable factors of a particular driver, as well

as both observable and unobservable characteristics of the crash, the other driver’s characteristics

do not help to explain the first driver’s outcome. The model can be readily expanded to handle

the more complicated case, but at a substantial notational burden.

       Given these simplifying assumptions, the relevant model of crash survival is as follows:




       11
           This simplification is purely for notational convenience, allowing us to avoid an
additional layer of subscripts.

                                                  8
yjc= α + βsjc + γx' xjc+ γhhjc+ εjc whereE[εjc|sjc,xjc,hjc,skc,xkc,hkc] = 0
                                                                                                  (1)




and yjc is an indicator variable as to whether individual j dies in crash c, sjc is an indicator for

seatbelt usage, xjc is a vector of observed individual, vehicle, and crash characteristics, hjc is

unobserved crash severity, and åjc is a residual. Note that all of these characteristics, including

unobserved crash severity, are allowed to vary across different individuals (denoted j and k) in the

same crash.

        It is useful to make a distinction between the unobservables h and å. In our framework h

captures all of the unobserved crash-related characteristics (e.g. the precise angle of impact,

velocity at impact, distance from a hospital, etc.) and å incorporates unobserved characteristics of

the driver or vehicle (e.g. whether the driver has a heart condition, a defect in the way the steering

column is attached, etc.). Another way of thinking about the distinction between h and å is that å

reflects those factors that could in theory be characterized when a driver pulls out of the garage,

whereas h is only determined when the crash actually occurs. Given these definitions, it is likely

that for drivers j and k in a particular crash, hjc and hkc will be correlated, whereas it is plausible


                                                    9
that åjc and åkc will be uncorrelated.12

        The parameter â from (1) represents the decrease in the probability of dying associated

with wearing a seatbelt. In what follows, we present conditions for interpreting this parameter

causally. Ultimately, our focus will be on â normalized by the probability of dying without a seat

belt (denoted p0):

r ≡ − β / p0                                                                         (2)

This ratio r is the fraction of deaths that would have occurred without seat belts that are saved

through their usage.

        In practice, there are two important data limitations that preclude estimating equation (1)

above. First, only crashes involving a fatality are observed. Second, crash severity h is

unobservable. A naive attempt at estimating (1) in the available data would take the following

form:




        12
           In practice, we require only that the å terms be uncorrelated conditional on all observed
characteristics and crash severity.

                                                 10
yjc= α + βSjc + γx' xjc+ λjc for al crashes uchthat yjc + ykc > 0
                                                                    (3)




     λ jc = γ hhjc + ε jc




                                         11
then sample selection will tend to understate the device’s effectiveness.13 The intuition for this

result is that all of the cases in which a seat belt fails to prevent a death are included in the data

set, but only a subset of the cases where a life is saved are recorded. If exactly one person would

have died in a crash, but because of seat belt use the life is saved, then the crash is not included in

the data set. By excluding this saved life from the sample, seat belts appear less effective than

they actually are.

        Sample selection bias can be eliminated by limiting the sample to the set of individuals

who are involved in two-car crashes in which someone in the other car dies. Dependence

between driver j’s outcome and inclusion in the sample must be eliminated. As long as driver k

dies (or more generally someone in driver k’s vehicle), driver j’s outcome has no impact on

whether the observation is included in the sample. Formally, we require conditional independence

across the å’s for different drivers in the same crash:

( A1)        ε jc ⊥ ε jkc | sjc , skc, xjc, xkc, hjc, hkc

If after conditioning on the observed characteristics and the unobserved crash severity, the other

driver's survival outcome is independent of own survival, then this sub-sampling method will

eliminate the sample selection bias. By conditioning on the whole vector (s,x,h) we allow for

many types of non-random mixing of drivers in crashes. For example, it does not pose a problem

to our identification if trucks tend to travel on the same roads, drunks tend to hit safe drivers, or

teenagers are more likely to drive at night. Here the fact that unobserved crash severity is


        13
           The direction of the sample selection bias in r can be derived more formally by
considering a set of crashes with h and x fixed. For this set of crashes, r has a probability limit of
1-C(á+â)/á where it can be shown that if â<0 then C<1. Thus, the safety device effectiveness
will be biased downward.

                                                            12
included in the conditioning set is crucial. If only observed crash characteristics were included,

then it would be likely that survival outcomes would still be dependent, i.e. the other driver dying

would be correlated with higher unobserved crash severity which would be correlated with a

higher probability of death for the first driver.

        Omitted variable bias

        The lack of observability of h leads to a standard omitted-variable problem. If those who

wear seat belts in the sample are on average involved in more (less) severe crashes, then the

impact of seat belts will be understated (overstated). We require, therefore, that the following

condition hold

( A2) hj ⊥ sjc | xjc, ykc = 1

Assumption A2 states that for the sub-sample of crashes with characteristics x and someone in the

other vehicle dying, crash severity and seat belt use are independent.14,15 Thus, although crash

severity is unobserved, the survival probability is being estimated at the same average crash

severity level for both seatbelt and non-seatbelt wearers. Consistent seatbelt effectiveness

estimates are the result.

        Conditional independence in A2 may be violated in one of two ways. First, if drivers feel


        14
            Limiting the sample to crashes where someone in the other vehicle dies is critical here.
In the full sample of fatal crashes, assumption A2 is unlikely to hold because it takes a harder
crash on average to kill someone wearing a seat belt. In other words, there is an interaction
between sample selection and omitted variable bias that distorts naive estimates even more than
might initially be apparent. If the sample selection correction implied by A1 is effective, this
interaction is eliminated.
        15
           In fact, the condition implies that for the subsample with characteristics x the
distribution of crash severity is the same for both seatbelt wearing and non-seatbelt wearing
drivers.

                                                    13
safer when wearing seat belts, this may induce them to drive more recklessly. This may lead to an

increased number of crashes for those wearing seat belts (Peltzman 1975), as well as more severe

accidents on average. While the “Peltzman effect” itself (more crashes) does not pose a problem

for consistent estimation, if seat belt wearers have more severe crashes on average then the

estimation of the causal impact of seat belts conditional on a crash will be biased downward.16 On

the other hand, one might expect safety conscious people to both wear a seatbelt and to drive

more cautiously, resulting in a negative correlation between seatbelt status and crash severity.

However, note that it is conditional independence that is assumed in A2. For example if we

condition on safety consciousness, then the assumption becomes more believable. Of course,

safety consciousness is not directly observable. But age, gender, and past driving record are

among the variables observed, as are vehicle type, time of day, urban vs. rural, and speed limit.

These characteristics might reasonably control for such factors. The more such characteristics are

observed, the more believable the conditional independence assumption becomes, justifying the

"kitchen sink"-type approach we employ.17

         It must be noted, however, that there is an important limitation to the approach that we

         16
          In the presence of a Peltzman-type moral hazard problem, seat belt wearing influences
the number of crashes, so from a public policy perspective, we might be interested in more than
the impact of a seat belt conditional on a crash.
         17
          If assumptions A1 and A2 hold, then we obtain consistent estimates of the impact of
safety devices on survival rates. In order to obtain a causal interpretation of the parameters,
safety device usage must be “as good as randomly assigned” (see Heckman 1999, Imbens and
Angrist 1994):
( A3) sjc ⊥ ε jc | xjc, hjc
 i.e. conditional on the other covariates, seat belt usage must be independent of the error term in
equation (1). This independence is a stronger version of the standard orthogonality between the
error term and regressor.


                                                 14
adopt. The best we can do, given that h is unobserved, is to estimate the mean seat-belt

effectiveness conditional on a given vector of characteristics x and averaged over h in the sample.

Note, however, that the subset of crashes in which someone in the other vehicle dies may have a

distribution of crash severity that is very different from the universe of crashes. How well safety

devices work is likely to be a function of crash severity. For example, tn the most gentle crashes,

even unbelted occupants will not die, so seat belts are completely ineffective (with respect to

preventing fatalities); in the most severe crashes (e.g. a convertible plunging off a cliff), seat belts

may also be useless. Thus, the estimate we obtain on seat-belt effectiveness may not be readily

generalizable outside our sample.



III. Estimating the Impact of Air bags and Seat belts

        We estimate the model of the previous section using FARS data for fatal crashes occurring

in the years 1994-1997. These data contain detailed information on virtually every crash in the

United States in which a fatality occurs among either vehicle occupants or pedestrians. The

sample of vehicle occupants actually used in the estimation that follows is limited in a number of

ways. First, we exclude back-seat passengers, both because of low death rates for such

passengers and the absence of air bags. Second, we exclude children in car seats. The risks

posed by air bag deployment when car seats are placed in the front seat are well established

(NHTSA 1996). As this fact became public knowledge, the prevalence of car seats placed in the

front seat declined dramatically. In terms of predicting future effectiveness of air bags, excluding

car seats is likely to provide a more accurate measure. Third, the sample is limited to two-vehicle

crashes. One-vehicle crashes are not included because the sample-selection correction requires a


                                                   15
fatality in another vehicle. Crashes with three or more vehicles (seven percent of all fatal crashes)

are not included because of concerns that crash severity may vary dramatically across vehicles in a

manner that is difficult to control for.   Fourth, crashes in which the only fatalities are

motorcyclists, bicyclists, or pedestrians are also dropped since such accidents are likely to pose

little risk to vehicle occupants. Fifth, we exclude occupants of large trucks from the sample as

well as vehicles of model years prior to 1991. In both cases, air bag installation is extremely low.

Note, however, that if a newer vehicle crashes into a large truck or an older vehicle, the occupants

of the newer vehicle are included in the sample. None of the basic results are sensitive to these

exclusions.

        There are serious data quality concerns in the FARS data, especially for the variables

measuring seat belt and air bag status. Eight percent of the individual-level observations are

missing information as to whether a seat belt was worn. Those individuals are excluded from the

sample. As we later report, the results are not particularly sensitive to their inclusion under

different sets of assumptions. There is also substantial measurement error in reporting the

presence of air bags in the data set. For makes and model years where air bags are standard

equipment, air bags are often reported as present less than 50 percent of the time. On the other

hand, when air bags are not available, false positives are occasionally reported. In order to

address this problem, we code all vehicles of a given make, model, year, and seating position (i.e.

driver or front-seat passenger) as having air bags if more than ten percent of the observations

report the presence of an air bag. In order to increase the reliability of this calculation, we limit

the sample to makes and model years for which there are at least 20 vehicles involved in fatal




                                                   16
crashes in our data (this excludes about 10 percent of the observations in the sample).18 After we

correct the air bag data in this way, the fraction of vehicles equipped with air bags by model year

and seat position correspond closely to those reported in NHTSA (1996).

         Our baseline sample after these exclusions includes about 40,000 individuals. Means and

standard deviations for this sample are reported in columns 1 and 2 of Table 2. A more complete

description of variables as well as information about the way they were constructed is available

from the authors.

        As the model in the preceding section demonstrates, it is necessary to correct for sample

selection. We do so by further restricting the data set to occupants of vehicles in which anyone in

the other vehicle dies in the crash. Summary statistics for the selection-corrected samples are

presented in the remaining columns of Table 2. This restricted sample has roughly 20,000

observations. There are a few important differences between the full sample and the selection-

corrected sample. First, death rates in the full sample are four times higher. This is primarily due

to the artificial inflation of death rates due to sample selection. Second, passengers in vehicles

with frontal impact and in larger vehicles are over-represented in the restricted sample. Vehicles

that strike other vehicles head-on are more likely to inflict fatalities, as are larger vehicles. Since

the effectiveness of seat belts and air bags may be a function both of vehicle size/type and the

manner of impact (e.g. air bags are designed to protect occupants only in frontal crashes), we

present separate estimates for automobiles and other vehicles, and divide crash impacts into


        18
           Our results are not sensitive to either the choice of twenty or more crashes or ten
percent air bag presence. Nearly identical results are obtained when the crash cutoff is raised to
100 or an air bag cutoff of thirty percent is used. For the air bag data, there is a clear demarcation
in the data, with many makes and models very close to zero and most others at or above forty
percent.

                                                   17
direct-frontal, partial-frontal, and non-frontal collisions. A direct-frontal impact is one in which

the principal vehicle impact is a twelve on the clock face. A partial-frontal impact is one in which

either the initial or principal vehicle impact is between ten and two on the clock face, excluding

those crashes that qualify as directly frontal.

        Before turning to the regression analysis, we first present results based on the raw data

without any other control variables in Table 3.     The values in the table are the fraction of lives

saved/lost through the use of seat belts and air bags relative to passengers who are not wearing

seat belts and do not have air bags, i.e. the parameter r defined in equation (2). The first three

columns are estimates based on the full sample; the last three columns correct for sample selection

by restricting the sample to cases where someone dies in the other vehicle. The table also reports

the probability of death for occupants with neither seat belts nor air bags.

        Focusing first on automobiles in the top panel of Table 3, in the first three columns that

ignore sample selection, death rates for those with neither safety device are between sixty and

seventy percent. Seat belts reduce death rates by 20-35 percent. As expected, air bags are most

effective in head on collisions, reducing death rates by 22 percent in direct frontal crashes,

compared to 10 percent in partial frontal crashes, and a small negative impact in non-frontal

crashes. Controlling for sample selection (columns 4-6) roughly doubles the estimated

effectiveness of seat belts and slightly reduces the impact of air bags.

        For larger vehicles (the second panel of Table 3), seat belts appear even more effective.

Correcting for sample selection once again increases the impact of seat belts. Air bags, however,

look less effective in larger vehicles relative to autos, particularly in frontal crashes. Seat belts

appear to be ten times more effective than air bags in saving lives in larger vehicles.


                                                   18
        There are many reasons why the simple analysis of Table 3 may yield misleading results.

For instance, seat belts usage varies across individuals along dimensions that also affect the

likelihood of surviving crashes (e.g. by sex or age). Since air bags are not randomly distributed

across vehicles (they are more common in newer and more expensive vehicles), the raw

tabulations may not accurately reflect the causal impact of air bags. To explore these possibilities,

we run regressions of the following form:

yjvc = α + β 1Seat _ beltjvc + β 2 Air _ bagjvc + XjvcΓ + VvcΘ + ZcΛ + ε jvc
                                                                                        (4)

where j indexes individual vehicle occupants, v corresponds to a given vehicle, and c reflects a

particular crash. The dependent variable y is an indicator variable equal to one if the occupant is

killed and zero otherwise. In addition to the seat belt and air bag measures, we include a vector

of individual-level characteristics X (age, sex, seat position), vehicle-level controls V for the

driver’s vehicle and/or the other vehicle in the crash (the type of vehicle that is crashed into,

vehicle weight, measures of the weight differential between the vehicles and the squared weight

differential, model year, driver’s past driving record, other driver’s past driving record), and

crash-level factors Z (year of crash, a speed limit indicator, urban vs. rural, time of day

indicators).19 All of the results presented are based on linear probability models with robust

standard error corrections for heteroskedasticity and within-vehicle correlation. Probit and logit

estimation yield similar results.


        19
           We have also experimented with including an interaction between seat belts and air
bags that would allow a differential impact of air bags depending on whether a seat belt is worn.
No systematic patterns emerged, although the interaction term was frequently statistically
significant. The estimated overall impact of seat belts and air bags is not affected by the inclusion
of the interaction, therefore we have omitted the interaction term for the sake of simplicity of
exposition.

                                                   19
       Table 4 presents the regression results. The structure of the table mirrors that of the

earlier table. Only the seat belt and air bag coefficients are reported (the other variables in the

regression are discussed below). In spite of the extensive list of controls included in the

estimation, the measured effectiveness of seat belts and air bags is largely unchanged from the

simple summary statistics presented in Table 3. Seat belts again appear between 50 and 75

percent effective in saving lives once sample-selection bias is eliminated. Air bags are 16-17

percent effective in direct frontal crashes, and 6-13 percent effective (though not statistically

different than zero) in partial frontal crashes. Although air bags appear to have a large negative

impact in non-frontal crashes in the corrected sample, the coefficients are imprecisely estimated

due to the small number of non-frontal crashes and cannot be distinguished from zero.

       The other covariates in the regressions underlying Table 4 are plausibly estimated. Full

regression results corresponding to column 4 of Table 4 are reported in Table A-1 in the

appendix. Full results for all specifications are available on request from the authors.20 Drivers

are two to three percentage points more likely to die than right-front-seat passengers. Gender is

not an important predictor, but the probability of death is an increasing function of age. Even

controlling for the weight differential of the vehicles involved in the crash (occupants of heavier

vehicles fare better), survival probabilities are greater when crashing into an automobile than a

utility vehicle, van, or small truck. The chance of death is higher during the night, in rural areas,

and on roads with posted speed limits of 55 miles per hour or more. Bad previous driving

records, both for your own driver and for the driver of the other vehicle are associated with



       20
        The signs and magnitudes of the covariates are generally similar across different types of
crash impacts. The air bag coefficient is the only one that is highly sensitive to crash type.

                                                  20
slightly higher death rates. There does not appear to be a systematic trend in death rates for later

model-year vehicles once seat belts and air bags are controlled for, suggesting that other vehicle

safety design innovations between 1990 and 1997 have not had a dramatic impact on crash

survival.

        Returning to the effect of seat belts and air bags, Table 5 presents sensitivity analysis from

a range of alternative specifications. Only selection-corrected specifications are included in Table

5. Non-frontal crashes, which are imprecisely estimated, are not shown. Results are once again

broken down by automobiles versus other vehicles and by direct and partial frontal crashes. The

top row of the table shows the baseline estimates taken from columns 4 and 5 of Table 4. The

next two rows add indicator variables to soak up potential unobserved heterogeneity. Adding

make and model dummies to the regressions has little impact on the results. Including vehicle-

fixed effects reduces the measured effectiveness of both seat belts and air bags somewhat in most

specifications. The precision of the estimates decreases substantially since over seventy percent of

the vehicles in the sample have only a single passenger and thus provide no information when

vehicle-fixed effects are included.

        The next seven rows of Table 5 focus on subsets of the data in order to isolate potential

differences in safety device effectiveness across population sub-groups or types of crashes.

Comparing the results for drivers and front-seat passengers, seat belts look equally effective, but

air bags appear more beneficial to passengers than drivers in three of the four specifications. This

result appears plausible in light of the fact that the air bag deploys from the dashboard rather than

the steering wheel for front-seat passengers. The greater distance between the air bag and the

occupant both increases the likelihood that the air bag will have inflated in time to be of use, and


                                                  21
lessens the chance that the occupant will be close to the explosion that triggers the air bag with

potential negative consequences. Our results also provide some suggestive evidence that air bags

are more effective in protecting men than women. This is true in three of the four specifications,

but in the remaining specification the pattern is reversed. This result would be consistent with

existing evidence that air bags pose the greatest danger to people of small stature. Excluding

those under the age of sixteen does not substantially change the results, but it is important to bear

in mind that children in car seats are excluded from our baseline sample. There does not appear

to be a strong relationship between safety device effectiveness and the posted speed limit or as a

function of the weight differential between the vehicles involved in the crash.

       As noted earlier, eight percent of the individuals have missing values for seat belt usage.

In the results presented thus far, these observations were dropped. The bottom two rows of the

table present results if the missing values are included under the assumption that all of these

individuals were wearing seat belts, or that none were wearing seat belts. The estimated seat-belt

effectiveness falls only slightly under each of these assumptions. The air bag coefficients are not

greatly affected.

       It is useful to compare the magnitude of our estimates for seat belts and air bags to

previous values in the literature. The commonly accepted range of seat belt effectiveness in

reducing fatalities is 45-50 percent (Evans 1986, Graham et al. 1997, Kahane 1996, NHTSA

1996). Our estimates correcting for sample selection range from 50-76 percent. Thus, we find

seat belts to be substantially more effective than previous estimates. This result does not appear

to be an artifact of the sample we use. Ignoring sample selection, we actually obtain lower

benefits of seat belts than previous studies.


                                                 22
       Our estimates for air bags, however, are lower than previous values. We find air bags to

be roughly 16-17 percent effective in direct frontal crashes. In comparison, NHTSA (1996)

reports a value of 31 percent and Zador and Ciccone (1993) finds a 28 percent reduction. Braver

et al. (1997) find a 20 percent effectiveness for right-front passengers when excluding those under

the age of 10 (which makes their sample comparable to ours). As with seat belts, the difference

between our results and previous research is not due to a difference in samples. When we apply

the standard “double-pair comparison” methodology to our sample of crashes, we obtain

estimates of air bag effectiveness of 42 percent in direct-frontal crashes – higher than any of the

studies cited above. Extrapolating our coefficients to all fatal crashes, taking into account the

relative frequencies of frontal and non-frontal crashes, we obtain an overall air bag effectiveness

of 9 percent. Graham et al. (1997) surveys the literature and concludes that 13 percent is the best

available estimate for adults based on the previous literature – an estimate that is forty percent

higher than ours.



IV. Calculating the number of lives saved by seat belts and air bags

       In terms of understanding the value of seat belts and air bags, it is useful to translate the

effectiveness estimates into numbers of lives saved. Calculations of lives saved do not require

estimates of the fraction of drivers wearing seat belts (or driving vehicles equipped with air bags),

but rather depend solely on r reported in the tables and the number of actual deaths with and

without the safety device.21 Let DS and D0 equal respectively the number of individuals who die


       21
          As a sidelight, we note that it is possible given r and the number of deaths with and
without seat belts to back out an estimate of the fraction of front-seat passengers wearing a seat
belt. That fraction is equal to (DS/(1-r))/(DS/(1-r))+D0). Based on all front-seat occupants dying

                                                 23
with and without a given safety device. The number of lives saved as a result of the current level

of usage of that safety device is equal to ( r / (1 − r ))D S . The number of cases where seat belts

failed to save lives provides the key to how many lives they actually saved, for a given r. Using

0.60 as an overall estimate of seat belt effectiveness and extrapolating our estimates out of sample

to the set of all fatal crashes, we calculate that slightly more than 15,000 lives of front-seat

occupants were saved by seat belts in 1997 alone. Given that there were almost 50,000 motor-

vehicle related fatalities (including pedestrians, back-seat passengers, etc.), our estimates suggest

that without seat belts, total fatalities would have been at least thirty percent higher. As important

as seat belts are in saving lives, however, increased usage can explain less than half of the

observed decline in fatality rates per vehicle mile traveled between 1980 and 1997.

        Lives saved due to air bags are substantially lower. Using an effectiveness of .16 for air

bags in direct frontal crashes and .09 in partial frontal crashes yields an estimate of 623 lives saved

in 1997, or less than five percent of the number of lives saved by seat belts.

        Given the comparatively limited effectiveness of air bags, the possibility that seat belt

usage declines with the availability of an air bag becomes an important public policy concern. If

one in six seat belt wearers decided not to buckle up because of a mistaken notion that the air bag

would provide complete protection, then the net impact of air bags on saving lives would be

negative. There does not appear to be any evidence for this kind of behavioral response, either in

survey data (Williams et al. 1990) or in our sample. In the raw data, seat belt usage is higher



in fatal crashes in 1997 (not just our limited sample of two-vehicle crashes), we estimate a seat
belt usage rate of 58 percent. This number is lower than estimates based on survey responses, but
virtually identical to values obtained in observational studies in which researchers actually tallied
seat belt usage by the roadside (NHTSA 1996).

                                                   24
                                                                                                      Chart6




                                                                                Figure 1: Motor Vehicle Fatalities 1966-1994

                                                 6                                                                                       60000




                                                 5                                                                                       50000
Deaths per 100 million Vehicle Miles Travelled




                                                                                                                                                 Number of Motor Vehicle Fatalities
                                                 4                                                                                       40000




                                                 3                                                                                       30000




                                                 2                                                                                       20000




                                                 1                                                                                       10000




                                                 0                                                                                       0
                                                     1966   1970   1974       1978          1982      1986         1990           1994
                                                                                     Year
                                                                     Fatalities per 100 Million VMT            Total Fatalities



                                                                                                      Page 1
among those with air bags. After controlling for an extensive set of observable variables,

including whether other front-seat occupants in the vehicle are wearing seat belts, there does not

appear to be any systematic relationship between the availability of air bags and seat belt usage.

        In addition to calculating the number of lives saved, one might also be interested in the

additional number of lives that would be saved if occupants who currently do not use seat belts

and air bags were to use them. This value is given simply by rD0 . If all front-seat occupants had

worn seat belts in 1997, almost 11,000 further deaths would have been averted. If all vehicles

were equipped with dual air bags, an extra 1,900 lives would have been saved.

        Given the estimates above, it is clear that seat belts are an extremely good investment from

the perspective of cost-benefit analysis. The annual expenditure on equipping vehicles with seat

belts is roughly $500 million, yielding a crude estimate of the cost per life saved of roughly

$30,000.22 In comparison over $4 billion dollars are spent annually on air bag installation and

maintenance. If all vehicles had dual air bags, approximately 2,500 lives would be saved annually,

for an average cost per life saved of $1.6 million. Note that the above estimates understate the

true benefits of both seat belts and air bags because they focus solely on deaths prevented,

ignoring any impact the safety devices have in reducing injury severity. Nonetheless, at least

based on these rough calculations, air bags do not appear to be a particularly effective investment

in public health.23

        22
          This calculation assumes a steady state in the number of vehicles on the road, so that
the flow of new vehicles offsets the number of vehicles retired annually. If this is the case, than
the annual investment in seat belts is constant over time, allowing one to calculate the cost per life
saved by simply dividing the annual expenditure on seat belts by annual lives saved.
        23
            Graham et al. (1997) performs a much more careful cost-benefit analysis that includes
reductions in injuries. Their conclusion with respect to air bags is somewhat more favorable than

                                                 25
V. Conclusion

        This paper presents estimates of the effectiveness of seat belts and air bags in saving lives

that overcome sample-selection bias inherent to fatal-crash data. We find that wearing a seat belt

reduces the likelihood of death by roughly 60 percent. Air bags reduce the probability of death by

approximately 16 percent in direct-frontal impacts and 9 percent in partial-frontal impacts. Based

on our estimates, seat belts are more effective than is generally thought, whereas air bags are less

effective. If our estimates are correct, roughly 15,000 lives were saved by seat belt usage in 1997,

along with over six hundred lives saved by air bags. The benefit-cost ratio of seat belts is more

than fifty times greater than that of air bags.

        More generally, this paper presents an example of how creative use of data can provide

useful estimates even when naive estimation provides coefficients that are clearly biased. The key

to our identification is the ability to selectively keep or discard observations based on other

agents’ outcomes. This allows us to separate “good” and “bad” (i.e. biased by sample selection)

variation in the data, similar to the way that a valid instrument identifies a parameter using only

that part of the variation that is uncorrelated with the error term.




ours, both because injuries are considered and because they assume a higher effectiveness rate of
air bags. In the sample of crashes we examine, seat belts and air bags are not nearly as successful
in eliminating injuries or reducing their severity than they are in averting death. It may be the
case, however, that in less severe crashes injury reduction is more effective.

                                                  26
                                           References

Braver, E.R., S. A. Ferguson, M..A. Greene, and A.K. Lund, 1997, “Reductions in Deaths in
        Frontal Crashes among Right Front Passengers in Vehicles Equipped with Passenger Air
        Bags,” JAMA 278:(17, Nov. 5):1437-1439.
Evans, L., 1986, “The Effectiveness of Safety Belts in Preventing Fatalities,” Accident Analysis
        and Prevention 18:229-241.
Fell, James C., and Carl E. Nash, 1989, “The Nature of the Alcohol Problem in U.S. Fatal
        Crashes,” Health Education Quarterly 16(3) Fall: 335-343.
Ferguson, S. A., A. K. Lund, and M. A. Greene, 1995, Driver Fatalities in 1985-1994 Air Bag
        Cars, Arlington, VA: Insurance Institute for Highway Safety.
Graham, John D., Kimberly Thompson, Sue Goldie, Maria Segui-gomez, and Milton Weinstein,
        1997, “The Cost-effectiveness of Air Bags by Seating Position,” JAMA (November 5)
        278(17): 1418-1425.
Grossman, Michael, Frank J. Chaloupka, Henry Saffer, Adit Laixuthai, 1993, “Effects of Alcohol
        Price Policy on Youth,” NBER Working Paper No. 4385.
Heckman, James, 1979, “Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error,” Econometrica
        47(1):153-161.
Heckman, James, 1999, “The Economics and Econometrics of Active Labor Market Programs,”
        in Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 3, edited by Orley Ashenfelter and David
        Card, Chapter 31, Elsevier.
Heckman, James, Hidehiko Ichimura, Jeffrey Smith, and Petra Todd, 1996, “Sources of Selection
        Bias in Evaluating Social Programs: An Interpretation of Conventional Measures and
        Evidence on the Effectiveness of Matching as a Program Evaluation Method,” Proc. Natl.
        Acad. Sci. USA 93(November): 13416-13420.
Hollands, C. M., F. K. Winston, P. W. Stafford, and S. J. Shochat, 1996, “Severe head Injury
        Caused by Airbag Deployment,” Journal of Trauma 41(5; Nov): 920-922.
Imbens, Guido, and Joshua Angrist, 1994,”Identification and Estimation of Local Average
        Treatment Effects,” Econometrica 62 (March): 467-75.
Kahane, C., 1996, Fatality Reduction by Air Bags: Analyses of Accident Data Through Early
        1996, Washington, DC: National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.
Kaplan, Burton, and R. Adams Cowley, 1991, “Seatbelt Effectiveness and Cost of
        Noncompliance among Drivers Admitted to a Trauma Center,” American Journal of
        Emergency Medicine 9(1; January):4-10.
Larkin, Gregory L., and James E. Weber, 1998, “Letter to the Editor,” JAMA 279(7;February
        18): 506.
Lave, Charles, and Patrick Elias, 1997, “Resource Allocation in Public Policy: The Effects of the
        65-MPH Speed Limit,” Economic Inquiry 35(July): 614-620.
Levitt, Steven, and Jack Porter, 1999, “Estimating the Effect of Alcohol on Driver Risk using
        only Fatal Accident Statistics,” NBER Working Paper No. 6944.
Lund, A. K., and S. A. Ferguson, 1995, “Driver Fatalities in 1985-1994 Air Bag Cars,” Journal of
        Trauma 38:49-475.
Marine, William, Edward Kerwin, Ernest Moore, Dennis Lezotte, Anna Baron, and Michael
        Grosso, 1994, “Mandatory Seatbelts: Epidemiologic, Financial, and Medical Rationale
        from the Colorado Matched Pairs Study,” Journal of Trauma 35(1; January): 96-100.
Morris, Michael S. , and Leticia Borja, 1998, “Letter to the Editor,” Journal of Trauma: Injury,
        Infection, and Critical Care,” 44(January): 238-239.
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 1984, Final Regulatory Analysis: Amendment to
        FMVSS No. 208, Passenger Car Front Seat Occupant Protection, Washington, DC, July.
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 1989, The Effects of the 65 MPH Speed Limit
        through 1988: A Report to Congress, Washington, DC, October.
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 1996, Effectiveness of Occupant Protection
        Systems and Their Use (Third Report to Congress), Washington, DC, December.
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 1998, Traffic Safety Facts 1997, Washington
        DC.
Orsay, Elizabeth, Timothy Turnbull, Mary Dunne, John Barrett, Patricia Langenberg, and Charles
        Orsay, 1988, “Prospective Study of the Effect of Safety Belts on Morbidity and Health
        Care Costs in Motor-Vehicle Accidents, JAMA 260 (Dec23/30): 3598-3603.
Peltzman, Sam, 1975, “The Effects of Automobile Safety Regulation,” Journal of Political
        Economy 83 (August): 677-725.
Robertson, L.S., 1976, “Estimates of motor vehicle seat belt effectiveness and use: implications
        for occupant crash protection,” American Journal of Public Health
        66(September):859-64.
Ruhm, Christopher, 1995, “Alcohol Policies and Highway Vehicle Fatalities,” Journal of Health
        Economics 15(August): 435-454.
Saffer, Henry, and Michael Grossman, 1987, “Drinking Age Laws and Highway Mortality Rates:
        Cause and Effect,” Economic Inquiry 25(July):403-417.
Williams, A. F., J. K. Wells, and A. K. Lund, 1990, “Seat Belt Use in Cars with Air Bags,”
        American Journal of Public Health 80(12; Dec): 1514-1516.
Zador, Paul L. and Michael A. Ciccone, 1993, “Automobile Driver Fatalities in Frontal Impacts:
        Air Bags Compared with Manual Belts,” American Journal of Public Health 83(5;
        May):661-665.
Zobeck, Terry S., Gerald D. Williams. Bridget F.Grant, and Darryl Bertolucci, 1990, “Years of
        Potential Life Lost and Other Trends in Alcohol-Related Fatal Traffic Crashes: 1977-
        1987, Alcohol Health and Research World 14(1):63-68.

       </ref_section>
                               Table 1: Probability of Death as a Function of Number of Occupants in Crash


                                 Total number of occupants in all vehicles involved in the crash:
 Sample                          One         Two            Three        Four          Five
                                 occupant    occupants      occupants    occupants     occupants
 All crashes                     1.000       0.538          0.393        0.318         0.269


 Anyone else dies in crash       ----        0.142          0.157        0.150         0.138
 Anyone dies in a different       ----        0.068           0.074       0.070         0.070
 vehicle
Notes: Values in table are computed using all passengers in all vehicles for crashes in which at least one vehicle occupant dies. Crashes in
which the only fatality is a pedestrian, motorcyclist, or other non-motorist are excluded. Unlike later tables, the sample used in this table
are not limited to front-seat passengers in two-vehicle crashes. Data are for crashes over the period 1994-1997 as reported in FARS.
                                           Table 2: Summary Statistics
                                               Full sample           With sample selection correction
                                                                      (anyone dies in other vehicle)

 Variable                           Mean             Standard       Mean             Standard
                                                     deviation                       deviation

 Individual-level characteristics

 Die in crash                       .386             .487           .090             .287

 No seat belt; no air bag           .190             .392           .154             .361

 Seat belt only                     .385             .487           .412             .492

 Air bag only                       .108             .310           .082             .274

 Both seat belt and air bag         .317             .465           .352             .477

 Driver                             .705             .456           .734             .472

 Male                               .577             .494           .635             .482

 Age                                41.1             20.7

 Vehicle-level Characteristics

 Model year                         1992.8           1.9            1993.0           1.9

 Vehicle weight                     4480             2536           5208             2734

 Difference in vehicle weights      2911             10712          1597             3628

 Direct frontal impact              .540             .498           .729             .444

 Rear impact                        .025             .156           .023             .149

 Right impact                       .188             .391           .101             .302

 Left impact                        .232             .422           .137             .344

 Other impact                       .015             .122           .010             .099

 Vehicle type: automobile           .591             .492           .434             .496

 Driver previous minor              .358             .479           .380             .485
 violations

 Driver previous major              .070             .256           .072             .258
 violations

 Crash-level characteristics

 Year                               1995.7           1.1            1995.7           1.1

 Speed limit 55 mph or greater      .576             .494           .571             .495

 Time of day: 6am to 8 pm           .716             .451           .707             .455

 Time of day: 8pm to 1 am           .218             .413           .229             .420

 Rural                              .607             .488           .608             .488
Notes: Summary statistics are for front-seat occupants involved in two-vehicle crashes in which a
motorist is fatally injured between 1994 and 1997. Occupants of large trucks and vehicles built
prior to 1990 are excluded from the sample. For other sample restrictions and precise variable
definitions, see the text or data appendix.
            Table 3: Mean Probabilities of Death by Seat Belt and Air Bag Status
                  Percent reduction relative to no seat belt, no air bag case

                                        Full sample                       With sample selection correction
                                                                           (anyone dies in other vehicle)

                            Direct      Partial       Non-frontal   Direct frontal    Partial       Non-
                            frontal     frontal                                       frontal       frontal

                            (1)         (2)           (3)           (4)               (5)           (6)

 Automobiles

    Seat belts              .35         .28           .20           .49               .60           .66
                            (.01)       (.02)         (.01)         (.03)             (.05)         (.06)

    Air bags                .22         .10           -.03          .20               .07           -.09
                            (.01)       (.02)         (.02)         (.03)             (.06)         (.08)

   Probability of death     .615        .679          .698          .255              .291          .337
   with no seat belt, no
   air bag



 Utility vehicles, vans,
 and small trucks

    Seat belts              .65         .58           .54           .69               .75           .78
                            (.01)       (.02)         (.02)         (.03)             (.04)         (.08)

    Air bags                .06         .06           -.01          .07               .07           -.11
                            (.02        (.03)         (.04)         (.04)             (.07)         (.12)

    Probability of death    .345        .506          .596          .117              .155          .228
    with no seat belt, no
    air bag



 Any covariates             No          No            No            No                No            No
 included?
Notes:Values in table are the fraction of lives saved relative to a vehicle occupant with no
seat belt or air bag based on the raw data without any control variables. The sample is
limited to front-seat occupants of vehicles involved in two-vehicle crashes in which a
motorist dies. The values in the table are computed from linear probability regressions of
an indicator variable for death on seat belt and air bag dummies. The raw probability of
death for individuals with neither a seat belt nor an air bag are also reported. For precise
variable definitions, see the data appendix. Table A-1 reports the full set of coefficients
for columns 1 and 4 of this table.. The first three columns correspond to the whole
sample; the last three provide sample-selection corrected estimates. Direct frontal crashes
are those in which the principal point of impact is completely frontal (12 on the clock
face);partial frontal crashes are those in which either the initial or principal point of impact
is between 10 and 2 on the clock face (excluding crashes qualifying as direct frontal).
White standard errors accounting for within-vehicle correlations in parentheses.
                  Table 4: Baseline Regression Estimates of the Effectiveness
                       of Seat Belts and Air Bags in Reducing Fatalities
                   Percent reduction relative to no seat belt, no air bag case

                                         Full sample                       With sample selection correction
                                                                            (anyone dies in other vehicle)

                           Direct       Partial        Non-frontal   Direct frontal    Partial       Non-
                           frontal      frontal                                        frontal       frontal

                           (1)          (2)            (3)           (4)               (5)           (6)

 Automobiles

    Seat belts             .33          .28            .21           .50               .59           .70
                           (.01)        (.02)          (.01)         (.03)             (.06)         (.07)

    Air bags               .18          .13            -.01          .16               .06           -.16
                           (.02)        (.02)          (.02)         (.04)             (.08)         (.12)

 Number of observations    11,049       4,785          7,585         6,123             1,592         869



 Utility vehicles, vans,
 and small trucks

    Seat belts             .51          .52            .48           .64               .71           .76
                           (.02)        (.02)          (.02)         (.03)             (.05)         (.10)

    Air bags               .13          .18            .13           .17               .13           -.15
                           (.03)        (.04)          (.04)         (.06)             (.10)         (.20)

 Number of observations    10,149       3,249          2,416         8,156             1,938         879



 Full set of covariates    Yes          Yes            Yes           Yes               Yes           Yes
 included?
Notes: Values in table are the fraction of lives saved relative to a vehicle occupant with no
seat belt or air bag. The sample is limited to front-seat occupants of vehicles involved in
two-vehicle crashes in which a motorist dies. The values in the table are computed from
linear probability regressions that include controls for the following: seat position, sex,
age, principal point of impact, interactions between seat position and principal point of
impact, the type of vehicle crashed into, speed limit, vehicle weight, weight differential
between vehicles, squared weight differential, past driving record of both drivers, time of
day, rural, model year of vehicle, and year of crash. For precise variable definitions, see
the data appendix. Table A-1 reports the full set of coefficients for columns 1 and 4 of
this table.. The first three columns correspond to the whole sample; the last three provide
sample-selection corrected estimates. Direct frontal crashes are those in which the
principal point of impact is completely frontal (12 on the clock face);partial frontal crashes
are those in which either the initial or principal point of impact is between 10 and 2 on the
clock face (excluding crashes qualifying as direct frontal). White standard errors
accounting for within-vehicle correlations in parentheses.
                     Table 5: Sensitivity Analysis of the Reduction in Death Estimates for Seat Belts

                                        Automobiles                  Utility vehicles, vans, and light trucks

                       Direct frontal          Partial Frontal    Direct frontal          Partial Frontal

 Sub-group             Seat        Air         Seat       Air     Seat        Air         Seat         Air
 analyzed              belts       bags        belts      bags    belts       bags        belts        bags

 Baseline              .50         .16         .59        .06     .64         .17         .71          .13
                       (.03)       (.04)       (.06)      (.08)   (.03)       (.06)       (.05)        (.10)

 Add make and          .51         .15         .52        .19     .64         .10         .73          .02
 model dummies         (.03)       (.05)       (.06)      (.09)   (.03)       (.08)       (.06)        (.14)

 Add vehicle-fixed     .38         .09         .35        .07     .53         .07         .57          .12
 effects               (.10)       (.10)       (.13)      (.11)   (.11)       (.13)       (.18)        (.22)

 Driver                .50         .12         .62        .01     .64         .15         .70          .12
                       (.03)       (.04)       (.06)      (.09)   (.04)       (.07)       (.03)        (.05)

 Front-seat            .52         .28         .59        .10     .60         .23         .66          .12
 passenger             (.05)       (.08)       (.10)      (.19)   (.08)       (.21)       (.06)        (.15)

 Males                 .54         .12         .54        .11     .65         .20         .69          .17
                       (.04)       (.06)       (.08)      (.12)   (.04)       (.07)       (.03)        (.05)

 Females               .48         .20         .65        .02     .61         .01         .64          -.01
                       (.04)       (.05)       (.06)      (.10)   (.07)       (.13)       (.06)        (.10)

 Exclude age<16        .49         .16         .59        .07     .63         .16         .67          .13
                       (.03)       (.04)       (.06)      (.08)   (.03)       (.06)       (.03)        (.05)

 Speed limit $55       .47         .15         .62        .02     .58         .17         .65          .14
                       (.03)       (.04)       (.06)      (.09)   (.04)       (.08)       (.03)        (.06)

 Vehicles of           .48         .19         .60        -.00    .51         .08         .57          .13
 similar weight        (.03)       (.05)       (.07)      (.10)   (.07)       (.12)       (.06)        (.08)

 Missing data          .48         .15         .59        .07     .60         .19         .68          .11
 coded as wearing      (.03)       (.04)       (.06)      (.08)   (.03)       (.06)       (.05)        (.10)
 seat belt

 Missing data          .46         .17         .50        .10     .60         .21         .70          .14
 coded as not          (.03)       (.04)       (.06)      (.09)   (.03)       (.06)       (.05)        (.10)
 wearing seat belt
Notes: Specifications in this table are variations on the results reported in column 4 of Table 4. The
values in the table are the fraction of lives saved by safety devices relative to occupants with no seat
belt or air bag. For fuller description, see notes to Table 4 and the data appendix. Direct frontal
crashes are those in which the principal point of impact is completely frontal (12 on the clock
face);partial frontal crashes are those in which either the initial or principal point of impact is between
10 and 2 on the clock face (excluding crashes qualifying as direct frontal). White standard errors
accounting for within-vehicle correlations in parentheses.
        Table A-1: Full Estimates of the Raw Regression Coefficients for Direct Frontal Crashes
                                                    Automobiles              Utility vehicles, vans, and light trucks

Variable                                  Coefficient    Standard error   Coefficient          Standard error

Seat belt                                 -.131          .013             -.075                .007

Air bag                                   -.042          .011             -.020                .007

Driver                                    .027           .009             .022                 .007

Male                                      -.013          .008             -.001                .006

Age 16-40                                 .008           .017             .013                 .009

Age 41-65                                 .071           .019             .046                 .010

Age 65+                                   .216           .026             .161                 .021

Crash into utility, van or small truck    .058           .015             .048                 .007

Speed limit less than 55 mph              -.095          .010             -.034                .006

Vehicle weight (x103)                     -.031          .007             .001                 .003

Weight differential * lighter (x103)      .012           .006             .015                 .007

(Weight differential)2*lighter (x108)     -.049          .017             -.035                .026

Weight differential * heavier (x103)      -.057          .010             -.013                .003

(Weight differential)2*heavier (x108)     1.020          .017             .036                 .010

Previous minor incidents (own driver)     .002           .009             .007                 .005

Previous major incidents (own driver)     .007           .016             .002                 .005

Previous minor incidents (other driver)   .014           .010             .001                 .004

Previous major incidents (other driver)   .011           .017             .034                 .012

Time of day: 6 am to 8 pm                 -.094          .020             -.049                .016

Time of day:8 pm to 1 am                  -.068          .021             -.026                .017

Rural                                     .044           .010             .018                 .006

Model year=1996                           -.020          .034             -.017                .016

Model year=1995                           .008           .033             -.010                .016

Model year=1994                           .003           .033             -.015                .017

Model year=1993                           .000           .034             -.013                .018

Model year=1992                           -.018          .033             -.017                .018

Model year=1991                           -.007          ,034             -.017                .018

Model year=1990                           .006           ,034             -.021                .018

Crash year: 1997                          -.015          .014             .009                 .008

Crash year: 1996                          -.008          .014             -.002                .008

Crash year: 1995                          -.009          .014             .000                 .008

Constant                                  .400           .051             .138                 .028

Number of obs.                            6,123          ----             8,156                ----

R2                                        .127           ----             .111                 ----
Notes to Table A-1: Values in the table are the raw regression coefficients underlying the
specifications reported in column 4 of Table 4, i.e. direct frontal crashes with the sample selection
correction. See notes to Table 4 or data appendix for a fuller description of the sample. White
standard errors accounting for within-vehicle correlations in parentheses.
                                         DATA APPENDIX
               (Not for inclusion in paper; just to be available to send out if necessary)


All data used in this study are taken from the Fatality Analysis Reporting System (FARS) collected
by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA). FARS provides detailed data on
all occupants and non-motorists involved in motor-vehicle accidents resulting in at least one fatality.
Crashes from calendar years 1994-1997 were included in the analysis. In the description below, we
include the FARS variable names. Programs and log files are available on request from the authors.

The following exclusions were made from the data set:

1) All non-motorists and motorcyclists and other non-standard vehicles (body_typ>79).

2) Occupants of all vehicles in which only a non-motorist, motorcyclist, or occupant of a non-
standard vehicle dies.

3) All large trucks (body_typ>49&body_typ<79).

4) All vehicles with model years prior to 1990 (mod_year<90).

5) All vehicle occupants not in the driver’s seat (seat_pos=11) or in the right-front passenger’s seat
(seat_pos=13). Also, if there were multiple individuals in any one seating position, all were
excluded. If there were more than two people in the front-seat, all were excluded (this was a small
number of individuals).

6) All vehicles of a make and model-year with fewer than twenty front-seat occupants in the data set
over the four-year period covered by our data. This excluded about 10 percent of the observations,
but was done to provide a better match on the air bag imputation.

7) Observaations were dropped when the injury severity was unknown (inj_sev==9), when an
occupant died prior to the accident (inj_sev==6), or when there was no value given for injury
severity (inj_sev==.).

8) Observations where it was unknown whether a restraint was used (rest_use==99), and
observations where a value was not coded (rest_use==.) were dropped. If a child safety seat
(rest_use==04 or rest_use==14), a motorcycle helmet (rest_use==05 or rest_use15),
or a bicycle helmet (rest_use==06) was used the observation was also dropped. Only if no restraint
was used (rest_use==0) was the occupant viewed as not having used a seatbelt, otherwise he/she
was counted as having worn a seatbelt. Thus, if the passenger was wearing a lap belt, shoulder belt,
or a lap and shoulder belt they were considered to have been belted.

9) Air bag availability was assumed whenever more than ten percent of occupants of a given make,
mode, year, and seat position were reported as having an air bag (either deployed or undeployed) at
least ten percent of the time.

10) Only two-vehicle crashes were included in the data set.

11) In the regressions, any observation with missing data for any of the covariates were excluded.
Other variable definitions

If whether a driver had a previous accident, previous speeding violation, previous moving violation,
previous license suspension or previous DWI was not known, it was assumed that the driver did not
have that particular violation. A driver was said to have a previous minor violation (rec_min==1) if
he/she had a previous accident (prev_acc>0), a previous speeding violation (pre_spd>0), or a
previous moving violation (prev_oth>0). A driver was said to have a previous major violation
(rec_maj==1) if he/she had a previous license suspension (prev_sus>0) or a previous DWI
(prev_dwi>0). Dummy variables were generated for if the driver of my car had a previous minor or
previous major offense (rec_min or rec_maj), and for if the driver of the other car involved in the
accident had a previous major or previous minor offense (rec_omin or rec_omaj).

Principle point of impact variables were generated for direct frontal impact (cc2front=impact2==12),
passenger's side impact (cc2left=(impact2>=7&impact2<=11)), driver's side impact
(cc2right=(impact2>=1&impact2<=5)), and rear impact (cc2back=(impact2==6)). If information on
the principle point of impact was missing (impact2==.) the observation was dropped. Furthermore,
interaction variables were generated for observations where there was a passenger side principle
point of impact and the observation was that of a passenger, and similarly when there was a driver's
side principle point of impact and the observation was that of a driver. Partial frontal crashes were
defined as those that were not direct frontal, but had some frontal component (impact1>9 or
impact1<3 or (impact2>9& impact2<12) or impact2<3).

A discrete choice variable was generated for cases where the speed limit was less than 55 miles per
hour (sp_limit>00&sp_limit<=55), unknown (sp_limit==99), or if there was no mandatory speed
limit (sp_limit==00). Observations were dropped if the speed limit variable was not coded
(sp_limit==.).

Two discrete choice variables were generated for the time of the crash: daytime and nightime.
Daytime was considered to be after 5am and before 7pm (hour>=05&hour<19), while nighttime was
considered to be later than 7pm and earlier than 1am (hour>=19 &hour<=24 |hour>=00&hour<01).
Observations were dropped if the hour of the crash was missing (hour==.).

Three variables were generated for 3 of the 4 different years of data included in this study
(year==95, year==96 and year==97).

Variables for the model year of the car were created for model years 1990-1996 (mdyr90. .
.mdyr96). Variables for model year 1997 and 1998 were not created because of the high degree of
collinearity these variables would have with the 1997 year variable and cars of model years before
1990 were dropped because very few had airbags.

A variable was generated for if the road was a rural road (road_fnc<10). A variable was generated
for cases where all deaths occurred in one car.

Body type variables were divided into two categories: automobiles and all other (utility vehicles,
vans, and light trucks). Automobiles included all types of standard automobiles
(body_typ>00&body_typ<=11). All other is defined as body_typ>11&body_typ<50.

A control variable was created that was equal to one if the vehicle crashed into was not an auto
(including the other body types above and large trucks).

Various variables taking account of weight were included in the regressions. Since specific weights
for trucks were not given, the midpoint of the interval which they were within was used. For
instance, if a truck's weight was given to be within the interval of 10,000 to 14,000 lbs, it was
assumed that its weight was 12,000lbs. This was done for all intervals except the last weight class
which specified only that the truck weighed over 33,001lbs. In this case, the weight was assumed to
be 40,000 lbs.

Five variables were taken into account when considering weight: dif_wgtl, dif_wgth, dif_squl,
dif_squh and dif_actu. Dif_wgtl is how much less in weight (lbs) your vehicle weighed compared to
the other car in the wreck; if your vehicle is heavier, than dif_wgtl is coded as zero. Dif_wgth is the
how much more your vehicle weighed in lbs compared to the other vehicle in the wreck; if your
vehicle is lighter, this variable is coded as zero. Dif_squl is simply dif_wgtl squared, and similarly
dif_squh is dif_wgth squared. The actual weight of the vehicle was also included in the regression..
Observations were dropped if the weight of the vehicle was not coded.

Three discrete choice variables for age were generated. Agee1640 (age>=16&age<=40) included
persons aged 16 to 40 inclusive. Agee4165 (age>=41&age<=65) included persons 41 to 65 years of
age. Finally, agee65 (age>65) included only those over the age of 65. Observations for which age
was either not coded or unknown were dropped.

A variable for sex of the passenger was defined as (sex==1) and takes on a value of one if the
passenger is male. If the sex variable was unknown or not coded the observations was dropped.
