NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

POLITICAL CONTAGION
IN CURRENCY CRISES
Allan Drazen

Working Paper 7211
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7211
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 1999

Paper prepared for an NBER conference on Currency Crises. I wish to thank Paul Masson, Carmen Reinhardt,
conference participants, and seminar participants at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem for helpful comments,
as well as Esteban Vesperoni for able research assistance. Support from the National Science Foundation, grant
SBR-9413355 is gratefully acknowledged. All opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 1999 by Allan Drazen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Political Contagion in Currency Crises
Allan Drazen
NBER Working Paper No. 7211
July 1999
JEL No. F30
ABSTRACT
Existing models of contagious currency crises are summarized and surveyed, and it is argued
that more weight should be put on political factors. Towards this end, the concept of political
contagion introduced, whereby contagion in speculative attacks across currencies arises solely
because of political objectives of countries. A specific model of “membership” contagion is presented.
The desire to be part of a political-economic union, where maintaining a fixed exchange rate is a
condition for membership and where the value of membership depends positively on who else is a
member, is shown to give rise to potential contagion.

We then present evidence suggesting that

political contagion may have been important in the 1992-3 EMS crisis.

Allan Drazen
Department of Economics
Center for International Economics
4118 Tydings Hall
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
drazen@econ.umd.edu

1. Introduction
The possibility of contagion in currency crises across countries is highly topical, to say the
least. Though the phenomenon is widely discussed, and is supported by solid empirical evidence1,
construction of convincing theoretical models of contagion is still in its infancy. Moreover, in
existing models of contagion, political aspects of the decision of whether or not to defend a
currency against attack, central to the “new generation” crisis models, do not play an important
role. In this paper I argue that political factors of two sorts may be key to understanding some
examples of apparent contagion, most importantly the EMS crisis of 1992-3. First, the political
nature of the decision to devalue, combined with incomplete information about government
objectives in making this decision, is often crucial to the appearance of speculative pressures.
Second, when one of a country’s principal objectives in maintaining a fixed exchange rate is
(explicit or implicit) political integration with its “neighbors”, a devaluation by one of those
neighbors will increase speculative pressures on the country. This argument is especially relevant
to the EMS, but is not limited to it.
In the next section, models of speculative attack are summarized, to make clear the
political nature of the devaluation decision. In section 3, existing models of contagion are
summarized, as is the concept of political contagion introduced in this paper. In section 4, a very
simple model is presented, along with a discussion of how it may be easily extended to a
multiperiod framework. Section 5 suggests why, on the basis of varied types of evidence,
political contagion may have been important in the 1992-3 EMS crisis. Section 6 concludes.

1

See, for example, Eichengreen and Wyplosz (1993), Gerlach and Smets (1995), and,
especially, Eichengreen, Rose, and Wyplosz (1996).
1

2. Models of Speculative Attack
In Krugman’s seminal 1979 paper on exchange rate collapse, an inconsistency in
fundamentals induces a steady loss in reserves, ending in an abandonment of fixed rates. For
example, the government is running a deficit, and is financing it by printing money. The rate of
monetary expansion is inconsistent with the fixed exchange rate in the long run; in the short run,
individuals do not want to hold the higher level of domestic currency and exchange it for foreign
currency denominated assets.) The peg rate must be abandoned when reserves hit a minimum
level, which is common knowledge to all market participants. However, the peg collapses not at
the date implied by simply extrapolating the steady decline of reserves, but in a speculative attack
at some earlier date, namely the first date at which optimal investor behavior implies such an
attack will succeed.
Krugman’s model of the inevitable abandonment of an unsustainable peg was a major step
in understanding how currencies collapse, and it has been extended in a number of directions. It
has been criticized, however, because of its description of the decision to abandon a fixed
exchange rate which is clearly unrealistic in some cases. In the Krugman model policymakers are
passive, sticking with current mutually inconsistent policies and abandoning the fixed rate
reflexively when the critical minimum level is reached. They neither take an aggressive role in
defending the current exchange rate policy, nor do they adjust their commonly known policy
objectives in light of external economic and political developments.
Though it may be accurate in some instances to argue that a devaluation reflected the
technical infeasibility of continuing current policy, a more accurate characterization of the
behavior of policymakers in many cases is that the decision on whether or not to devalue reflect
2

balancing conflicting objectives. Deteriorating fundamentals are an important part of the story,
but the decision to devalue is taken not because it is literally unavoidable, but because of a the
importance of other objectives given external developments. Hence, devaluation is a political
decision in that it is technically feasible to maintain the peg (especially when a central bank can
borrow reserves), but seen by the government as no longer optimal in light of the costs of doing
so and the importance of other objectives.
Krugman (1996) and others have applied the term “New Crisis Model” to models of
currency crises which gives a central role to government optimization and which characterize the
devaluation decision in terms of choosing between conflicting objectives. As Krugman puts in
characterizing the New Crisis Model. (p, 350): “A government -- no longer a simple mechanism
like that in the classical model, but rather an agent trying to minimize a loss function -- must
decide whether or not to defend an exogenously specified exchange rate parity.” To the extent
that weighing conflicting objectives is key to the decision of how to respond to respond to
speculative pressures, political considerations are central to the New Crisis model. Examples of
this approach include Obstfeld (1994), Drazen and Masson (1994), Masson (1995), Ozkan and
Sutherland (1995), Obstfeld (1996), and Bensaid and Jeanne (1997).2
In these models, however, the treatment of speculators is far less meticulous than the
treatment of policymakers; the latter are modeled as solving an explicit, well-formulated
optimization problem; the former act optimally, but the optimization problem is generally either

2

A model based on an optimizing government is not identical to one with multiple
equilibria and the resultant possibility of self-fulfilling crises. A “new” crisis model can have a
unique equilibrium, as in Drazen and Masson (1994), whereas a non-optimizing model can have
multiple equilibria, as discussed by Krugman (1996).
3

left implicit or quite simplified. The problem of formulating devaluation expectations is stressed,
but the information structure under which this takes place is quite simple. In Obstfeld (1994,
1996), for example, speculator behavior is summarized by their expectations of a devaluation,
rationally conditioned on the government’s optimal response to a single underlying shock and on
the common knowledge distribution of that shock. Drazen and Masson (1994), and Masson
(1995) add uncertainty about the policymakers objectives (his “type”), and consider how it will
interact with uncertainty about fundamentals.
A more realistic model of speculators optimal behavior should have them solving a more
complicated, dynamic signal extraction problem in which there are several types of shocks.
Bensaid and Jeanne (1997) is more satisfactory in this respect, with the probability of devaluation
being derived via Bayesian updating on the policymaker’s type. Drazen (1998) considers a
dynamic model which allows for several types of shocks, where the rational expectations of
devaluation are formed by Bayesian updating based on the history of policies and the current
shock. In that model what is crucial in forming expectations of devaluation is not simply what
policies were previously observed, but also the circumstances in which they were observed. Not
surprisingly, the information-based model of contagion presented here will be based on that
model, though in a simplified form.

3. Contagious currency crises
“Contagion” appears to be the latest buzzwords in foreign currency markets and in asset
markets more generally. However, carefully-reasoned explanations of the causes of contagion, or

4

even of what constitutes contagion, are as rare as discussions of the phenomenon are common.3 I
will use the term applied to currency crises to refer to the phenomenon whereby a currency crisis
itself in one country makes a currency crisis (or currency weakness) in another country more
likely. The emphasis is meant to differentiate true contagion from a common shock (other than a
currency crisis) which affects countries differentially because of their differential susceptibility to
infection. When differential vulnerability to an unobserved common shock reflects unobserved
characteristics, we may get what looks like true contagion, since a crisis in one country will be
followed by a crisis in another, with no apparent explanation other than the original crisis itself.
This is an identification problem well known in epidemiology. Following the very clear discussion
in Masson (1998), we call this “monsoonal effects.”4
Masson makes a further distinction, arguing that contagion should be applied only to the
case “where a crisis in one country may conceivably trigger a crisis elsewhere for reasons
unexplained by macroeconomic fundamentals” (p.2, italics mine). When a crisis in one country
affects the fundamentals in another country (for example, because a devaluation reduces the
competitiveness of other countries and thus makes them more likely to devalue), he uses the term
“spillover.” I will use the term “contagion” more generally.
3.1 Three general models of contagion
The best developed general model of contagion is that of information “cascades”, in which

3

For example, the most common reason by far that market traders gave for devaluation
contagion within the ERM in the Eichengreen and Wyplosz (1993, p. 98) survey was that
“markets ‘tasted blood’ (realized that there were profits to be made)”.
4

Masson focusses on shocks from industrial countries affecting Asian emerging markets,
hence the terminology. We will use the term a bit more generally.
5

asymmetrically informed investors acquire information sequentially by observing the actions of
others who precede them. (See, for example, Bikhchandani, Hirshleifer, and Welch [1992].)
Agent 2 on the basis of his own information may prefer action A to action B, but he observes
agent 1 choosing B. He thus infers that agent 1 has information favoring B, and this may push 2
to choose B as well. Agent 3, observing two previous choices of B, may also conclude that B is
optimal, although his private information alone would imply choosing A. And so on. The general
informational cascade model may be more relevant for differentially informed investors in a given
market, than for contagion across foreign exchange markets. Two basic assumptions for an
information cascade would not appear to be satisfied in foreign exchange markets: the cascade
model relies on significant differences in private information across agents, but it is far from clear
that there are such informational differences across large investors for major currencies; and, the
cascade model relies on significant transaction costs in order to generate sequential behavior, but
foreign exchange markets are not characterized by such high transaction costs. Moreover, in
discussions of the applicability of cascades to contagious currency crises, it is not clear what is the
relevant information transferred across currency markets.
Less formally, the idea of information externalities has been applied to foreign exchange
markets as follows. It is argued that with uncertainty about policymakers’s commitment to
defend a fixed exchange rate, the collapse of the exchange rate in one country may provide
information that another country in similar macroeconomic circumstances is more likely to
abandon its fixed parity. Though the argument is often heard, the logic is often incomplete. One
could justify it in terms of a common unobserved shock which affects countries differentially due
to different macroeconomic circumstances, but this is a “monsoonal effect”, rather than true
6

contagion. As a contagion story, one must make clear what new information that is relevant to
the second currency is being provided by the collapse of the first currency. Since devaluation in
the first country provides no new information either about macroeconomic conditions per se (but,
see the arguments about “spillovers” below) or about the policymaking process in the second
country (but, see the discussion of political contagion in section 3.2 below) a less direct
mechanism of contagion may be present.
More specifically, the argument that the collapse of the exchange rate in one country
implies that another country in similar macroeconomic circumstances is more likely to abandon its
fixed parity may be probabilistic or statistical. Market participants envision a collapse scenario
which could occur under certain circumstances, but assign it a low probability until it actually
occurs in such circumstances. They then raise the probability of it occurring in similar
circumstances elsewhere, perhaps increasing their speculation against those other countries.
Hence, a crisis in one country, previously assigned low probability, may raise the probability of
devaluation elsewhere. This is not herding to a currently faddish theory of contagion (a
phenomenon which may itself be present), but statistical updating on the basis of drawing another
observation favorable to a theory.
Another type of contagion model is a “spillover” model (to use Masson’s terminology),
focussing on trade linkages. This has been modeled formally by Gerlach and Smets (1995) and
Eichengreen, Rose, and Wyplosz (1996). An attack-induced devaluation in one country enhances
its competitiveness, leading to trade deficits and declining reserves for its trading partners, making

7

their currencies more vulnerable.5 If one looks simply at bilateral trade linkages, the idea may be
relevant for some cases (as in the effect of the floating of the Finnish markka on September 8,
1992 on speculation against the Swedish krona, as discussed by Gerlach and Smets), but it
doesn’t appear to be a general explanation. The magnitudes seem wrong, as “contagious” attacks
hit currencies where the bilateral trade volumes just aren’t large enough. However, this bilateral
view is probably too limited, for we should consider multilateral linkages, whereby two countries
compete against one another in the same third-country market. Theoretically, this appears
relevant for Asian countries with significant exports to Japan or the United States. However, the
trade magnitudes are probably still too small to explain contagion beginning in Thailand, even
when both bilateral trade and “third-market” trade are included.
An analogous argument is that spillovers occur via financial markets, as third-country
investors liquidate their positions in one country to cover crisis induced losses in another. It is far
harder to assess empirically how important this was in the recent Asian crisis. In any case, this
vehicle for contagion seems of little relevance for the ERM crisis of 1992-3.
A third line of argument is that contagion is linked to the possibility of multiple equilibrium
and self-fulfilling speculative attacks. Masson (1998), in fact, argues that only models of this sort
are capable of producing true contagion, reflecting his view (see above) that contagion, by
definition, refers to the simultaneous occurrence of currency crises not linked to macroeconomic
fundamentals. In his model, a crisis is the result of a deterioration of the current account,
reflecting in turn extremely high debt service. Interest rates include a devaluation premium, so

5

An alternative argument is that changes in the trading partners price levels reduce
demand for money, leading to a depletion of reserves.
8

that the expectation of a devaluation can be self-fulfilling. Masson’s argument concentrates on
the simultaneity of a number of such episodes, rather than a causal link between them. Similarly,
Eichengreen and Wyplosz (1993) suggest that high unemployment leads market participants to
anticipate a future loosening of monetary policy, inducing speculation against the currency. The
costs of defending the currency rise, due in part to the induced upward pressure on interest rates,
so that a country may in fact devalue where they would not have in the absence of speculative
pressure. Hence the expectation of monetary loosening becomes self-fulfilling. This argument, as
will be argued in section 5 below, is close to but not identical to the one presented here.
3.2 Political contagion
In the previous subsection, we summarized three general models of contagious currency
crises. Each type of model is structured along the lines of the second generation models of crisis
which stress the balancing of conflicting objectives in the devaluation decision, leading us to
characterize these models as “political”. The objectives themselves, however, are basically
economic, and the nature of the contagion is thus economic as well. In this paper, I want to
introduce a fourth type of contagion which is inherently political, in that the objectives which give
rise to contagion are primarily political. Contagion will be intrinsically political, for in the absence
of the political objective, devaluation in one country would not affect speculative pressure on
another country’s currency.
First, what does one mean by primarily political objectives in economic policy?
Economic decisions are often made on the basis of largely political goals. Income distribution
programs are a good case in point: transfers are made with the aim of maximizing votes for the
incumbent party. The objective of a decision is clearly “primarily” political when it supports a
9

political objective which is in conflict with an economic objectives. Hence, holding the exchange
rate fixed for the purpose of enhanced political integration at a significant economic cost is a
“primarily political” decision. As many have argued, this characterization describes the impetus
towards fixed exchange rates in the move towards EMU. (Feldstein [1997] argues quite strongly
on the primarily political nature of decisions surrounding EMU.)
More generally, the point that the decision to keep a fixed parity may be primarily political
can be put as follows. One component of increased political-economic integration with other
countries is often the maintenance of a fixed exchange rate with respect to their currencies. This
may reflect the desire to form some sort of explicit currency area or trading bloc, as, for example,
in the case of the EMU. Or, it may be less explicit, in the sense that “cooperative behavior”
means refraining from competitive devaluations. Hence, one may think of membership in a
“club,”6 whether explicit or implicit, where the benefits of membership are heavily political and the
condition for membership is the maintenance of a fixed exchange rate. (We consider in section 5
below the specific institutional details which describe the EMU as such a club.)
The concept of political contagion in speculative attacks follows as an implication of the
desire for political integration where maintenance of a fixed exchange rate is a condition on each
potential member for membership in the integrated unit. One must make one further assumption,
namely that the value of membership in the arrangement depends positively on who else is or may
be a member. Hence, if a country learns that other potential members of the arrangement place
less weight on meeting the conditions required to join, and hence, are less likely to participate, it
6

I use the term “club” for lack of another term which is concise rather than cumbersome.
One should note, however, that the role of clubs in providing public goods is not central to the
argument here.
10

will find it less advantageous to join as well. It will therefore assign a lower value to maintaining
a fixed exchange rate, especially when doing so requires sacrificing domestic goals.
To complete the argument, suppose that speculators are uncertain about a country’s
commitment to a fixed rate, because they are uncertain of the weight the country’s policymakers
put on conflicting objectives. Speculators know, however, that the desire for integration subject
to the no-devaluation membership condition is an important objective. Rational behavior on their
part will then imply that a successful attack on one currency (or perhaps even speculative pressure
on the currency), revealing a weaker commitment than previously believed, creates an externality
in the form of a lower commitment of all other potential members. They will therefore be more
vulnerable to attack.7 We term this contagious effect membership contagion.

4. A Model of Membership Contagion
In this section we present a simple model of membership contagion, and discuss the
underlying concept in greater detail in section 4.3. The possibility of a contagious currency crisis
depends on incomplete information about government intentions, allowing revelation of
information about the intentions of other countries to affect the probability of a devaluation. This
probability is derived under rational expectations, where it is shown how this probability depends
on history, on the country’s current circumstances, and on the actions of other countries.

7

This contagion argument should be distinguished from the earlier argument about the
spillover of competitive pressures via real exchange rate effects in implicit trading arrangements.
The previous argument concerned the trade effect of a lower real exchange rate following a
nominal devaluation, which induces a trading competitor to devalue. Here, the argument focusses
on the contagious nature of “breaking the rules,” independent of any effects on the real exchange
rate.
11

To make things as simple as possible, we consider a single-period model, based on the
more general multi-period model presented in Drazen (1998). The more general model allows for
an explicit discussion of how rational devaluation probabilities evolve over time as a function of a
country’s current circumstances and the history of policy, specifically, how information from the
history of policy and the circumstances in which those policy decisions were made affects the
current information set. Here, this updating of the past will be implicit, but it will be clear how
the model is easily extended to a dynamic framework.
The sequence of events in the model is as follows. A country which has maintained a
fixed exchange rate experiences a stochastic shock ç, which is observed by both government and
speculators. Speculators then choose a level of speculation against the currency, given ç and the
probability they assign to a devaluation (of known size) at the end of the period. Specifically,
speculators borrow domestic currency to be repaid at the end of the period, and use it to buy
foreign currency reserves. Since maintaining the fixed parity requires that reserves remain above
some critical level, speculative demand for reserves determines a minimum interest rate i which
must be maintained if the government is to defend the fixed parity. On the basis of ç and i, the
government then decides whether to defend the fixed exchange rate (denoted by choice of policy
F) by holding the interest rate at i, or not to defend the parity and devalue (a policy D), consistent
with a lower interest rate. At the end of the period speculators sell their reserves back to the
government and pay off their borrowing. Though speculators use a range of information in
deciding whether to attack a currency, there are basically three types of shocks of interest which
we consider here: a country-specific factor which is unobservable to speculators, (the country’s
unobservable “type”); a country-specific shock, which is observable to both government and
12

speculators; and, to model contagion, a cross-country observable shock.8 Different types of new
information relevant to speculators will generally fall into one of these categories.
4.1 Speculator Behavior
As already indicated, key to speculators’ behavior is their borrowing of domestic currency
in order to buy foreign currency reserves. Speculators are assumed to be atomistic, but the total
cost of borrowing is assumed to be an increasing, convex function of the quantity borrowed.9
This assumption allows us to maintain the simplicity of working with an parametric interest rate,
rather than an interest rate schedule, but at the same time prevent speculators from taking infinite
speculative positions. Under these assumptions, one can easily show (see Drazen [1998]) that
total demand for reserves by profit-maximizing speculators is increasing in the probability p that
speculators assign to a devaluation and decreasing in the cost of borrowing funds. For simplicity,
we make the further reasonable assumption that the cost of borrowing funds is such that demand
for borrowing goes to zero as i approaches infinity and goes to zero as p goes to zero.
Suppose that maintaining the fixed exchange rate requires that foreign currency reserves
are above some minimum level. For given devaluation expectations, defending the fixed rate then
requires keeping the interest rate high enough so that total demand for reserves is no greater than
this minimum level. (Speculators’ beliefs about the probability of a devaluation are fully

8

In a multi-period version of the model, the country-specific unobservable “type” would
be time-invariant, while the observable country-specific shock would be time varying.
9

In a multi-period model, assuming that speculators can adjust their position period-byperiod allows one to retain the feature that in deriving their optimal position, risk-neutral
speculators would need only to consider the probability of devaluation in the current period, and
wouldn’t need to form expectations of the probability of devaluation in future periods. See
Drazen (1998).
13

summarized by p, where we discuss below how rational beliefs are formed, conditional on
available information.) This determines the lowest interest rate consistent with maintaining the
fixed parity (the “minimum required interest rate”), which, given our assumptions is an increasing,
continuous function of p, namely i(p).
4.2 The Government’s Choice Problem
We now turn to the decision problem of a social-welfare maximizing government, which
has an announced commitment to a fixed exchange rate. If the government is to maintain the
fixed parity (policy F), it must raise the interest rate to the level i(p) consistent with maintaining
sufficient foreign currency reserves, with the associated welfare loss due to the detrimental effect
of high interest rates on the domestic economy. Four areas of negative impact are generally
mentioned: negative impact on economic activity, especially when the economy is seen as
depressed; negative impact on mortgage interest rates, especially when these rates are directly
indexed to money market rates and defense of the exchange rate requires holding market rates
high for significant periods (as in the case of the United Kingdom); impact of interest rates on
increasing the budget deficit; and, possible destabilization of the banking system. We represent
these losses by a function H(i,ç), where H is an increasing and concave in both the domestic
interest rate i and the shock ç, and where H(@) = 0 if the government chooses to devalue rather
than defend the fixed parity (policy D). The shock ç is observed by both government and
speculators. ç is meant to represent any currently observed factor known to affect the value the
government may assign to maintaining a fixed exchange rate, such as changes in the level of
foreign currency reserves or changes in domestic unemployment rates.
Not defending the fixed parity and devaluing has both benefits and costs. Since our
14

interest is in the latter, we assume the benefits are subsumed in the function H. Whereas the
benefits of devaluation are generally purely economic, the cost of not defending a fixed exchange
rate are of a more political nature in that they are costs associated with reneging on a
commitment. In a multi-period model loss of reputation would be foremost among these.
Membership effects, as discussed in section 3.2, present another example of this sort of cost when
devaluing creates a bar to participation in a cooperative arrangement. Two aspects of this cost
are important for our modeling of contagion: first, that the cost the government assigns to
devaluing is asymmetric information, known to the government, but not fully known to
speculators; and that this cost depends, among other things, on (at least partially) known
information about the commitment of other countries to cooperative arrangement or “club” of the
sort discussed in section 3.2 above.10 We consider them in turn, both in some detail.
Asymmetric information about a government’s intentions is modeled as an element x
which affects the loss from a devaluation is then æ, where x is known with certainty only to the
policymaker himself (his “type”). Speculators, on the other hand, know only the distribution of
possible types as summarized by a distribution G(x), defined over [ x , x̄ ] . The information
summarized by the distribution and its supports could reflect learning about the government on
the basis of past observation of its policies and of the circumstances in which these policies were
undertaken, as will be discussed below.
The second is summarized by a parameter Z, an index of the value to the country of being

10

There is no contradiction between saying that saying that the country’s commitment to
the fixed rate is not fully known and the commitment of other countries to a cooperative
arrangement, which may itself depend on their maintaining fixed rates, is at least partially known.
If this point is not clear here, it will be below.
15

in the club. Z could be simply the number of other countries that satisfy the membership criteria,
or it could be a weighted sum, with weights depending on the importance for the home country of
a given country’s participation. More generally, Z could encompass the probability of the club
arrangement coming into being, as a function of the behavior of other countries. We present a
fuller discussion of the determinants of Z in the next section. The loss æfrom a devaluation will
equal xZ if the policymaker devalues and will equal zero otherwise.
The trade-off that a social-welfare maximizing policy maker faces if the currency is
attacked, that of maintaining the fixed exchange rate against maintaining low interest rates, may
then be represent by the loss function:
L ' H( i , ç ) % æ( x Z ) ,

(1)

where the last two terms are zero if the government defends the fixed exchange rate, while the
first term is zero if it does not.11
The government’s policy choice, given the realization ç and the interest rate i(p) required
to maintain the fixed exchange rate consistent with speculator’s beliefs, as summarized by p, will
be summarized by a cut-off type x̂ who is just indifferent between devaluing and not devaluing.
All types with x less than x̂ will devalue; all types with x equal to or greater than x̂ will maintain
the fixed parity. To see why, first derive the cut-off x̂ by equating the value of L in (1) under the
policy of F (so that L = H) and the policy of D (so that L = æ), so that :

11

In a multi-period framework the government would minimize a discounted loss function
in which each term would take the form of (1), where the cost æ(xZ) would be interpreted as a
one-time cost. Optimization would be forward-looking, in that the implications of a policy of F or
D in any period on future trade-offs would be considered. See Drazen (1998).
16

x̂ '

H( i[p] , ç )
Z
.

(2)

' x̂( p, ç , Z )
The cut-off x̂' x̂( p, ç , Z ) is continuous and increasing in p and ç, continuous and decreasing in Z.
For a type with x $ x̂ , xZ $ H, so that it will be optimal to defend the fixed parity rather than
devalue; for a type with x < x̂ , xZ < H, so that it will be optimal to devalue. Hence, the cut-off
rule fully characterizes a government’s optimal behavior, and the probability of a devaluation
depends on x̂( p, ç , Z ) , given x and G(x). For future use it is useful to denote by ç the value of
ç such that x̂' x , for given p and Z. That is, ç is the value of ç such that even the government
type with the lowest cost of devaluation finds it optimal to maintain a fixed exchange rate, so that
the probability of a devaluation is zero.
The nature of the optimal policy should be intuitive. Other things equal, the higher is
speculation against the currency (summarized by p), the more likely a government will find it
optimal to devalue, rather than keep interest rates high. (That is, an increase in x̂ means that the
probability that x lies below x̂ increases.) The realization of an exogenous shock ç will affect the
government’s incentive to devalue, and, as we shall see, the equilibrium level of speculation itself.
Finally, the fewer countries which are potential members of the “association” (or the less
important are the other qualifying countries, or the less likely for the association to come into
being), the lower is Z, the higher is x̂ , so the higher is the probability of a devaluation.
The determination of x̂ , and its implications for possible policy choices, also indicates how
updating would take place in a multi-period model. Suppose x̂ is above x in period t-1, as it will

17

be for sufficiently high ç and a the government chooses to defend the currency. This policy
choice implies that the government’s x is above x̂ , so that the lower support of the distribution at
the beginning of t will be x̂ > x , the lower support in t-1. This is simply Bayesian updating, with
the implied updating of the distribution of G(x). If the realization of the current shock ç was
sufficiently low that x̂ # x , all possible types would defend the fixed rate and the observation of
the policy F would provide no information, so the lower support of the distribution at the
beginning of t+1 would remain x . Hence, the current lower support x and the associated
distribution G(x) summarizes what has been learned about the government’s type prior to the
current period on the basis of past observation of its policies and of the circumstances in which
these policies were undertaken. The dynamics of speculative attacks based on such learning is the
main focus of Drazen (1998) and this inference problem is one of the two key features
distinguishing the multi-period model presented in that paper from the single-period example
presented here. (The other is the government’s intertemporal optimization problem when they
know speculators are solving such an inference problem.)12 Although we solve only a static
problem, this discussion, combined with the discussion of the government’s multiperiod objective
in footnote 11, indicate how the model can be easily made dynamic.
4.3 The determinants of the value of membership
The heart of the model of membership contagion is the parameter Z, indicating the value
of membership in a “club,” which depends on who else is, or is not, in the club. The extent of
membership contagion will then depend on the specification of the club for which no devaluation

12

A very similar multiperiod inference problem, as applied to the information conveyed by
a policy of capital account liberalization, is presented in Bartolini and Drazen (1997b).
18

is the key membership criterion. As already indicated, this club may be a formal arrangement,
such as an explicit common currency area or a trading bloc, or a far less explicit arrangement. To
the extent that governments see such clubs as important, the political nature of the decision of
whether or not to devalue may be seen in part as the decision of which club to join, the club of
devaluers or the club of non-devaluers. Furthermore, if one views such clubs broadly, the club
may be defined by politicians at the time devaluation decisions are being debated, rather than
simply pre-existing or previously agreed upon arrangements. Hence, the concept of membership
effects, and the possibility of contagion which arises from it, should be seen as including, but more
broad, than simply explicit currency or trading arrangements.
The easiest case is that of explicitly defined clubs with no devaluation as an explicit
membership criterion, as is the case of EMU as discussed in section 5. The link, however, from
the no-devaluation membership criterion to contagion may be simple and direct or it may be more
subtle. The simplest link is where a devaluation disqualifies one country from joining the club for
at least some period of time, and where the value to other potential members depends positively
on that country being a member. A less direct link is one in which devaluation by one country
doesn’t literally disqualify it over the relevant time horizon, but makes its participation, or perhaps
the existence of the arrangement itself, discretely less likely, thus lowering the value of
membership to other potential members, making them more likely to devalue. This may be a
more accurate description of the possible causal link from eventual membership in the EMU and
the contagious currency crises in the EMS in 1992-3. An unanticipated devaluation by one
potential member will reveal a lower commitment to fixed exchange rates than previously
believed, not only to speculators, but also to other potential members. This raises the probability
19

they assign to that country devaluing in the future, and thus lowers the probability they assign to
her meeting the membership criterion when it becomes effective.
In the context of an explicit currency union like the EMU with a specific membership
criterion of no devaluation over a given horizon, there may be an even more subtle form of
membership contagion. A devaluation by a country that other potential members view as
important may lead to a weakening of the membership rules themselves. Suppose there is the
desire to maximize the likelihood that EMU will come into being with, let’s say, Italy as a
member. An Italian abandonment of the fixed parity in a way that might disqualify it because of
failure to meet the membership criterion may lead to the criterion being will lead the nodevaluation rule being weakened, though not scrapped entirely. The weaker criterion would
make other countries more likely to devalue, as this would no longer disqualify them as
previously. If several countries can’t “clear the bar”, one might anticipate the bar will be lowered,
so that others that could have will put less effort into maintaining fixed rates. One should be
careful, however, in distinguishing between the argument that contagion may result from a
devaluation-induced weakening of a no-devaluation criterion, and the far stronger argument that a
country that devalued believed ex ante that this would have no membership consequences. There
is no real evidence that ERM countries that abandoned their fixed parities in 1992-3 did so with
the anticipation that the criteria would be changed in such a way that this would have no political
costs, nor that a devaluation by a potential EMU member left the probability of EMU unchanged.
A related, though less formal, argument is that once a major player devalues and deviates
from a previously solid arrangement, other players suddenly realize, “It can be done!” This is a
variant of the argument in section 3.1 whereby contagion across countries in similar
20

macroeconomic circumstances may reflect a probabilistic calculation, whereby seeing the
phenomenon once significantly raises the probability that market participants assign to it occurring
elsewhere.. Replacing “probability” by “possibility” and replacing “market participant” by
“government” shows how the analogy can be made. It has been argued (see, for example,
Eichengreen and Jeanne [1998]) that the Britain’s leaving the gold standard in 1931 may have had
contagious effects on other countries for this reason.
What about less explicit clubs? More specifically, what sort of less explicit clubs might
generate membership effects? And, how might membership be defined? On a regional basis,
politicians may attach weight to being “lumped together” in the eyes of international investors
with neighbors whose economic performance is especially good, while differentiating themselves
from countries in the same region whose performance is seen as poor. To the extent there is a
correlation between perceived performance and the exchange rate regime, more specifically, fixed
exchange rates, one obtains no-devaluation clubs. Such a club effect may be relevant for Asia or
Latin America.13 One possibility for membership contagion then comes the argument in the
previous two paragraphs, by which a devaluation by one club member weakens the membership
criterion and makes other members more likely to devalue. That is, if one “success story” that

13

It seems quite relevant for France as well in the early part of the EMS period. In
contrast to the strongly expansionary policies that the socialist government followed after coming
to power in May 1981, there was an important change in behavior in June 1982, reinforced in
March 1983, when France shifted to far tighter fiscal and monetary policies, the politique de
rigueur. The purpose of this change in policy, which had a serious cost in terms of significantly
higher unemployment, was to convince investors of a change in underlying government
objectives. France made this change credible by accepting high unemployment without devaluing.
There were no realignments for a three-year period, despite unemployment rising above 10
percent. For a fuller discussion, see Drazen and Masson (1994).
21

previously maintained fixed rates suddenly devalues under specific circumstances, governments
may perceive that avoiding devaluations under all circumstances is no longer a criterion in the
eyes of investors to be part of the favored group. Of course, when devaluation itself is seen as
revealing weakness, a “reverse contagion” may result. If devaluations by its neighbors are seen as
revealing economic problems which may have a regional component, a country’s commitment to
fixed exchange rates may be strengthened, as it wants to make clear it still belongs the nodevaluation club. The strength with which China and Hong Kong defended their exchange rates
in the recent Asian turmoil would appear to reflect reverse membership contagion.
4.4 Speculator inference and rational devaluation beliefs
In section 4.2 we derived the optimal behavior of speculators on the basis of their beliefs
about the probability of a devaluation p. On the basis of speculators’ behavior, we derived
optimal behavior of the government in deciding whether or not to defend the fixed exchange rate.
To close the model, we must ensure that the beliefs of speculators are consistent with government
optimal behavior, that is that they are rational. Hence, we must calculate the true probability of
devaluation, call it ð, based on the beliefs p and equate them.
Given the cut-off nature of the government’s optimal decision problem, the probability of
a devaluation should reflect beliefs over government types. These beliefs are fully summarized by
the set [ x, x̄] , and the conditional cumulative distribution associated with this set, G(x). The
actual probability of a devaluation, call it ð, can then be calculated using G(x) and the cut-off type
x̂ , namely as G( x̂ ) for states where x̂ > x (that is for by ç > ç , as defined above) and zero
otherwise. With the actual probability of devaluation ð so defined, we may relate it to the
perceived probability p using the definition of x̂' x̂( p, ç , Z ) in (2). Since our focus is not on the
22

role of history, as summarized, by x , we will suppress the dependence of ð on x , and concentrate
on the role of ç and Z. The rational equilibrium devaluation probability, for a given values of ç
and Z, is then given by:

ð ' G( x̂ ( ð , ç , Z ))
' 0

for ç > ç ( Z )
(3)

for ç # ç ( Z )

where ç ( Z ) is defined by (2) for x̂( 0, ç , Z ) ' x . Equation (3) will always be satisfied for ð = 0,
as x̂( 0 , ç , Z ) < x . There will be at least one interior solution for sufficiently high ç, given Z (that
is ç > ç ( Z ) ), or, for sufficiently low Z, given ç. Given the characteristics of x̂( p, ç , Z ) from (2)
and the definition of ð(ç, Z) in (3), it is clear that the equilibrium level of speculation ð is
increasing in ç and decreasing in Z. The solution ð(ç, Z) is central to our analysis of the dynamics
of contagious speculative attacks.
The model admits the various types of contagion discussed above. An information
cascade depends on what information is being transmitted; membership contagion discussed
below will provide an example. Contagion via spillover of fundamentals can be represented by a
change in fundamentals in another country inducing an increase in ç, and hence in ð. Contagion
arising from multiple equilibrium follows from the possibility of multiple solutions to (3). There
will always be a solution ð = 0, namely where speculators believe there is no probability of a
devaluation, do not speculate against the currency (due to the interest cost of borrowing), so that
the government finds it costless to defend the currency. There may also be multiple interior
solutions. (In this case, we take the highest value of ð which satisfies the first part of (3) as the
interior solution for the discussion of other types of contagion, so that equation (3) will have one
23

positive and one zero solution.)
Our focus is on political contagion in speculative attacks, more specifically, the possibility
of membership contagion, as discussed section 4.3. This would be characterized by the positive
dependence of ð on Z, the (possibly weighted) index of other potential members of the club. (A
crucial assumption is that Z is known to both speculators and the government, as is the fact that
æ(xZ) is increasing in Z.) Hence, as long as no devaluation is a membership criterion and a
devaluation provides new information about Z, one obtains true contagion: a successful
speculative attack on one potential member country will increase the probability of attack on
other potential members.

5. Membership Contagion in the 1992-3 EMS Crisis
We now turn to the question of whether there is any evidence relating speculative attacks
in the 1992-3 EMS crisis to “membership contagion”. (As argued above, the concept is also
applicable to the desire for membership in less formal cooperative arrangements, but we focus
here on the EMS.) We present no formal econometric tests, but evidence of a more “case study”
nature, culled from other sources, suggesting that the concept may in fact be relevant. This will
concern the answer to two questions: first, is there evidence that a devaluation in one country
affected the probability of a devaluation in other countries; second, if the answer to the first
question is positive, is there evidence that this contagion may reflect membership effects.
On the first question, there seems to be general agreement that Britain’s abandonment of
its defense in September 1992 did put pressure on some other European currencies. One can see
this using the Eichengreen-Rose-Wyplosz index of crisis. More simply, looking at forward rates
24

(measured as DM per unit of domestic currency), one can see a sharp fall in the rates for the
Italian Lira, the Spanish Peseta, and the Irish Punt, and a less sharp fall for the Danish Krona and
the French Franc on September 14, 1992.14 The Swedish abandonment of its defense of the
Krona in November appears to have had similar contagious implications.
The far harder question is whether membership effects were involved. This may be itself
divided into two questions. First, as far as immediate causation, does a devaluation by one
potential member lower the perceived probability of EMU? Second, does the a lower probability
of EMU actually taking place lower the political resolve of potential members to defend their
fixed parity?
The first question is largely one of institutional detail, though not entirely, as the
discussion in section 4.3 should make clear. As is well known, one of the convergence criteria
required to qualify for EMU is that a country maintains exchange rate stability: it must keep its
currency within their EMS fluctuation bands “without severe tensions” for at least two years
before joining the monetary union. A devaluation, even one-time, outside the ERM bands may
thus prevent a country from joining the EMU. This formal membership criterion could then lower
the perceived probability of EMU either directly, if the devaluation occurred within two years of
when the criterion would be relevant, or indirectly, whereby a devaluation at some point lowers
the perceived probability of a wide EMU coming into being in the more distant future. This

14

The model would predict that not all currencies would be equally affected by contagion.
For strong currencies with ð = 0 originally, the increase in Z would still leave x̂ < x , so that
equilibrium ð(ç, Z) will still equal zero, and no change in speculative pressures will be observed.
For other currencies, however, a successful speculative attack elsewhere will increase already
speculative pressures, or will introduce them if absent (that is, where the increase in Z pushes x̂
above x , so that ð rises from zero to G( x̂( ð, ç , Z ) ) > 0 ).
25

second linkage, more relevant when discussing the connection between the EMS crisis of 1992-3
and later implementation of EMU, is discussed in section 4.3. Given the uncertainty about
whether some countries would be able to meet the no-devaluation-for-two-years criterion when it
would become binding, a current devaluation would lower the perceived probability of EMU
coming into effect.
One caveat concerns the previously discussed possibility that the failure of a large country
to meet the convergence criteria might lead to the expectation that the criteria themselves will be
changed so much that the devaluation had no effect on the perceptions that there would be an
EMU. As discussed above, there appears to be no evidence for this extreme view. When Italy or
the United Kingdom withdrew in September 1992, the perception was quite the opposite, namely,
raising serious question about the future of EMU. Hence, in terms of the model, the EMU
convergence criteria imply that a devaluation by one potential EMU country will lower Z for all
other potential EMU members.15
Will the reduced possibility of EMU lower the “political resolve” of countries who have
maintained the fixed parity and make them more likely to devalue? There is much to suggest that
this may be the case. First, there seems no doubt that the desire to play a role, preferably an
important one in EMU, was a factor in decisions not to devalue. For example, in his discussion of
monetary policy in the EMS during this period, Mélitz (1995) asks why many countries
(especially France) followed Germany’s lead in adopting tight monetary policy though they were
going through a recession. Given France’s lower inflation than Germany and its high

15

Moreover, as discussed in section 4.3, the perception that membership criteria would be
significantly changed could lead to membership contagion via a different linkage.
26

unemployment, there is no reason a devaluation would have led markets to question Frances
monetary discipline. To explain the policy choice, Mélitz argues (p. 26),
“The French official behavior can best be explained on the basis of long-run
political goals. By maintaining the policy of the franc fort, the French authorities
wished to promote the aim of monetary union and, in addition, assure themselves
an important place, along Germany’s side, in future European monetary control.”
An even stronger statement of how new information about the political “will” in one
country affects currency values in other countries can be found in Eichengreen and Wyplosz
(1993). Speaking about the relation between speculative pressures and the prospects for EMU,
they write (p. 52):
“... until the summer of 1992, anticipations of a smooth transition to monetary
union had stabilized expectations and hence the operation of the EMS. At that
point, the protracted process of negotiation and ratification allowed doubts to
surface about whether the treaty would ever come into effect. This altered the
costs and benefits of the policies of austerity required of countries seeking to
qualify for European monetary union, leading the markets to anticipate that those
policies would ultimately be abandoned.”
They go on to argue that this may have played a role in the fall 1992 crisis. They suggest, as I
have, that in making policy decisions, these governments traded off the costs of high
unemployment against the benefits associated with qualifying for monetary union. Were the
benefits of the latter reduced, the government’s calculations would be affected. They write:
“An implication of this trade-off is that the stability of exchange rates should be
correlated with the prospects for European monetary union. This was clearly the
case in 1992. The weakness of the lira dated from the day the negative outcome of
the Danish referendum was known. The lira, the British pound, the Danish krone,
and the French franc all fell on June 3, the first day after the referendum. The
Danish nej was a surprise; it had not been forecast by the opinion polls. Initially,
reports stated that legal experts saw no way the Maastricht treaty, or even parts of
it, could be approved and enacted by only eleven EC members. Doubts were
compounded by press reports that confusion about the treaty’s viability would
stoke German concerns about the wisdom of pressing ahead with European
27

monetary union. Italian businessmen voiced fears that Danish rejection would
undermine Italy’s resolve to comply with the convergence criteria laid down at
Maastricht.”16
The Eichengreen-Wyplosz argument is clearly close to the argument about membership
contagion presented here, though it is not a contagion story per se, whereby weakness in one
currency weakens another via the political decisionmaking mechanism. It is more accurately
characterized as a non-devaluation, common shock -- the negative outcome of the Danish
referendum, and, more generally, the process of protracted negotiations mentioned in the first
quote -- hitting all currencies before any one of them is attacked. But the arguments are similar,
each stressing how what are termed here membership effects can weaken the currencies of
potential members in a club. The argument in this paper takes the Eichengreen-Wyplosz
argument one step further, showing how membership effects can induce contagion in currency
crises.

6. Conclusions
The argument here was not meant to suggest that membership contagion explains the
EMS crisis of 1992-3 to the exclusion of other factors. German monetary policy had
“monsoonal” effects, and spillovers of competitiveness clearly played a role in some of the EMS
devaluations, as they have in other contagious currency crises. The purpose of the paper was to
highlight a political mechanism for contagion which may play a role in recent currency crises, but
has received no careful discussion in the literature. The discussion of the previous section should

16

For references on these, especially quotes in the Financial Times, June 4 and June 23,
1992 on Italy, see footnote 43 of article.
28

make clear the importance of external political events on currency crises in general, and the
possibility of contagious membership effects in particular. Moreover, such effects need not be
limited to explicit monetary unions. The next step is to find stronger evidence of such
membership effects, both in explicit and implicit cooperative arrangements. It will not be easy,
but it may be quite worthwhile.

29

References
Barro, Robert J. and David Gordon (1983), “A Positive Theory of Monetary Policy in a Natural
Rate Model,” Journal of Political Economy 91, 589-610.
Bartolini, Leonardo, and Allan Drazen (1997a), “Capital Account Liberalization as a Signal,”
American Economic Review 87, pp.
_______ (1997b) “When Liberal Policies Reflect External Shocks, What Do We Learn?,”
Journal of International Economics 42, pp.
Bensaid, Bernard and Olivier Jeanne (1997), “The Instability of Fixed Exchange Rate Systems
When Raising the Nominal Interest Rate is Costly,” European Economic Review 41,
1461-78.
Bikhchandani, S., D. Hirshleifer, and I. Welch (1992), “A Theory of Fads, Fashions, Customs,
and Cultural Change as Informational Cascades,” Journal of Political Economy 100, 9921026.
Drazen, Allan (1998), “Interest Rate Defense Against Speculative Attacks: An Asymmetric
Information Model,” working paper.
Drazen, Allan and Elhanan Helpman (1987), “Stabilization with Exchange Rate Management,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 102, 835-55.
_______ (1988), “Stabilization with Exchange Rate Management under Uncertainty,” in E.
Helpman, A. Razin, and E. Sadka, editors, Economic Effects of the Government Budget,
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Drazen, Allan and Paul Masson (1994), “Credibility of Policies versus Credibility of
Policymakers,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 109, 735-54.
Eichengreen, Barry and Olivier Jeanne (1998), “Currency Crises and Unemployment: Sterling in
1931,” paper presented at the NBER Currency Crises Conference.
Eichengreen, Barry and Charles Wyplosz, (1993), “The Unstable EMS,” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity 1, 51-143.
Eichengreen, Barry, Andrew Rose, and Charles Wyplosz, (1995), “Exchange Market Mayhem:
The Antecedents and Aftermath of Speculative Attacks,” Economic Policy 21, 249-312.
_______ (1996), “Contagious Currency Crises,” NBER Working Paper 5681.

30

Feldstein, Martin (1997), “The Political Economy of the European Economic and Monetary
Union: Political Sources of an Economic Liability,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 11,
23-42.
Flood, Robert and Peter Garber (1984), “Collapsing Exchange Rate Regimes: Some Linear
Examples,” Journal of International Economics 17, 1-13. .
Gerlach, Stefan and Frank Smets (1995), “Contagious Speculative Attacks,” European Journal of
Political Economy 11, 5-63. .
Krugman, Paul (1979), “a Model of Self-Fulfilling Balance of Payments Crises,” Journal of
Money Credit and Banking 11, 311-25.
_______ (1996), “Are Currency Crises Self-Fulfilling?” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 345-78.
Masson, Paul (1995), “Gaining and Losing EMS Credibility: The Case of the United Kingdom,”
The Economic Journal 105, 571-82.
_______ (1998), “Contagion: Monsoonal Effects, Spillovers, and Jumps Between Multiple
Equilibria,” working paper, IMF Research Department.
Mélitz, Jacques (1995), “Comment” in C. Bordes, E. Giardin, and J. Mélitz, editors, European
Currency Crises and After, Manchester: Manchester Univ Press.
Obstfeld, Maurice (1986), “Rational and Self-Fulfilling Balance-of-Payments Crises,” American
Economic Review 76, 72-81. .
_______ (1994), “The Logic of Currency Crises,” Cahiers Économiques et Monétaires (Banque
de France, Paris) 43, 189-213.
_______ (1996), “Models of Currency Crises with Self-fulfilling Features,” European Economic
Review 40, 1037-48.
Ozkan, F. Gulcin and Alan Sutherland, (1995) “Policy Measures to Avoid a Currency Crisis,”
Economic Journal 105, 510-19.
.
</ref_section>

31

